<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880907-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Timely Rally: Friday Bond Rebound Aided Plan to Rescue Unit of Financial Corp. --- Threat of Bankruptcy Filing Also Was Factor in Accord Reached With Bass Group --- The Critical Call From Kenya </HL><AUTHOR> David B. Hilder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FIN GOVMT F </CO><IN> BNK BON TNM </IN><TEXT>   Done in by real losses, American Savings andamp; Loan Association of Stockton, Calif., is finding rescue in a package made possible in part by paper gains from a one-day surge in the bond market Friday.    At 2 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time Saturday in Washington, D.C., Federal Home Loan Bank Board officers, some dressed in blue jeans and T-shirts, waited wearily in the Bank Board's office for a critical telephone call from Kenya. Board member Lawrence White was traveling there, and his vote was needed for an agreement with Robert M. Bass Group Inc. to finance the rescue of the Sandamp;L, Financial Corp. of America's main subsidiary. When the call finally came, cheers went up.    Nobody cheered the country's bond traders and institutional investors. Yet they seem to have been unwitting catalysts of the weekend's events. Only hours before, Texas billionaire Robert M. Bass, the head of the group, had called off negotiations, rejecting a demand that the group come up with a way to cut the Bank Board's contribution to the rescue financing by $200 million.    Bond traders and investors were unaware of the drama in Washington. But sensing relief from the market's recent malaise, they were busily buying on Friday, creating the strongest bond rally in seven months. The one-day pop shrank the paper losses on American Savings' portfolio of fixed-income securities by about $100 million. That, along with several last minute recalculations helped make the numbers come out right on the cost of the rescue package, satisfying the board as well as the Bass Group. Wherever the bond market heads now (yesterday it was down a fraction), the financial terms of the rescue agreement remain fixed.    The agreement announced Labor Day evening still needs Internal Revenue Service and California regulatory approvals. But if it is completed in a few weeks as the parties hope, it will close a major chapter in the Sandamp;L industry's inglorious decade of the '80s. With $30 billion in assets, American Savings was for years the nation's largest thrift institution. Its troubles have come to symbolize the failings of aggressive, high-risk Sandamp;L managements around the country.    Yesterday, the Bank Board took a step toward completing the transaction by stripping American Savings away from Financial Corp. and pumping in $250 million in cash. Until the Bass Group acquisition is completed, the Sandamp;L will be controlled by federal regulators. The action means that Financial Corp.'s shareholders and debt holders probably will be wiped out, because the thrift represents essentially all the company's operations.    If a one-day paper surge made it easier to finance the rescue, the advantages to the Bass Group are both tangible and long-term. For injecting $550 million in new capital into American Savings, it will largely own and control an institution to which the Bank Board has committed as much as $2 billion in assistance. A provision of the agreement permits the Bass Group to employ up to $1.5 billion in American Savings assets in leveraged buy-outs and other potentially money-making merchant-banking transactions.    The Bank Board hasn't disclosed all the details of the agreement, but detractors have already emerged. Some members of Congress are irked by the Bank Board's insistence right to the end to negotiate exclusively with the Bass Group and to exclude Ford Motor Co., which had tried and failed to acquire the Sandamp;L repeatedly.    Others will probably attack the provision adding to the takeover clout of the Bass Group, an increasingly active takeover player in recent years. The group is now pressing a $1.75 billion tender offer for Macmillan Inc., the New York publishing and information-services company. In the past it has participated in buy-outs of Taft Broadcasting Co. and Bell andamp; Howell Co.    Still, the fact remains that the Bass Group -- headed by publicity-shy Robert Bass -- will remove a huge cloud from over the heads of federal regulators. American Savings continues to be highly sensitive to interest-rate swings, and its core deposit base has been weakening.    Now, in return for its extra financial leverage, the problem of strengthening operations belongs to the Bass Group. Besides getting into takeover and merchant banking, it may manage American Savings' other investment operations more aggressively. The Sandamp;L's hands have been tied in recent months by restrictive agreements with federal regulators. On the retail side, American Savings with its huge branch network also is still a major force in the California market if skittish depositors and employees can be reassured.    The Bank Board's approval of the deal over the Labor Day weekend didn't come easily. It was the culmination of intense pressure to finally resolve a problem that had been festering in the public eye for more than four years. According to officials, executives and advisers familiar with the negotiations and with the troubled thrift, a variety of forces converged on the Bank Board in recent weeks to help bring matters to a climax.    These included:   --The threat of a possible bankruptcy filing by FCA as early as this week. Such a filing, which was to be considered by Financial Corp.'s board today, wouldn't have hurt American Savings' depositors, who are fully insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. But a bankruptcy filing by FCA could have touched off a run at American Savings that ultimately could have forced the FSLIC to borrow cash from the Federal Reserve.    --A walkout last Friday by the Bass negotiating team after Bank Board Chairman M. Danny Wall insisted on the $200 million in concessions from the Bass Group. Mr. Bass, who had flown in from Fort Worth hoping to strike a final deal, told Mr. Wall he was heading home, although some of his aides would remain in Washington. Bank Board spokesmen sought to portray the situation as a &quot;break&quot; in negotiations. The talks resumed only after the Bank Board found other ways to reduce its cost estimate.    --An intense last-minute lobbying campaign by Ford to reopen talks with the Bank Board. Ford had been close to buying American Savings three times in the past year, but each time the deals fell apart for reasons that remain in dispute. A Ford lobbyist was waiting in the Bank Board building in Washington late Friday, apparently seeking an audience he never got.    For the Bank Board, last weekend's rescue effort was the second time around with American Savings. After the Sandamp;L reported a huge loss and sustained a $6.8 billion deposit run in 1984, then-Bank Board Chairman Edwin J. Gray forced out parent company Financial Corp.'s chairman, Charles W. Knapp, who had become famous for aggressive lending and accounting policies in the early 1980s.    Mr. Gray installed William J. Popejoy, a veteran thrift-institution executive and former board official who began a four-year effort to turn around Financial Corp.    It didn't work, and by early 1987 Mr. Gray was scouting for a buyer. Results were being dragged down by delinquent loans and foreclosed real estate. And the growth strategy that Mr. Gray had endorsed -- involving the purchase of billions of dollars of mortgage-backed securities funded by short-term borrowings -- was in trouble. That provided big profits while interest rates were falling, but by April, rates were headed upward.    A short list of those with some interest was drawn up, and prominent on it was Ford Motor -- ironically, the Bass Group wasn't yet in the game. And, some who have been close to the scene now show that Ford probably would own American Savings today if not for a perverse twist of events caused by last fall's stock-market crash. Surprisingly, the crash relieved the pressure on the Bank Board to complete a deal with Ford, allowing the problem to go unresolved for almost another full year.    One of the nation's most profitable companies, Ford badly wanted American Savings. Ford could use the tax deductions generated by the billions of dollars of unrealized losses in the Sandamp;L's portfolio. And American Savings' network of 185 branches, all in California, would greatly expand Ford's thrift-institution unit, First Nationwide Bank. The $1 billion capital infusion required would have been pin money to Ford.    For a while, things went Ford's way, too. As Anthony M. Frank, then chairman of the Ford unit, and Mr. Martin of the Bank Board negotiated last fall, interest rates were rising and the bond market was falling, creating ever bigger paper losses in American Savings' portfolio. When the sides met in New York on Friday and Saturday, Oct. 16 and 17, the paper loss had hit $2.6 billion.    Bank Board officials were scared. They feared American Savings might be hit with a wave of collateral calls on Monday from Wall Street firms that had lent it about $14 billion based on earlier values of the securities.    In that tense atmosphere, Mr. Martin and Mr. Frank shook hands on the outline of a deal and agreed that lawyers for both sides would meet in Washington the following Tuesday to draft the necessary documents. The deal was also subject to approval by the other board members. Meanwhile, on Sunday, Oct. 18, representatives of all the federal banking and thrift regulatory agencies -- including the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Dept. -- drew up a still-secret contingency plan in case Wall Street immediately demanded repayment of about $200 billion of similar loans to other banks and Sandamp;Ls if American Savings missed its collateral calls.    But collateral calls weren't the issue on Monday -- Wall Street was frantic with the now-infamous Black Monday crash. Then the next day, as officials of the Bank Board and First Nationwide met in Washington, the bond market staged one of its biggest one-day rallies ever. No longer faced with an imminent crisis, the Bank Board officials wanted to renegotiate.    Mr. Martin contends that he had agreed only on &quot;a format&quot; for the deal with Mr. Frank, not on exact terms. Whatever the reason, no deal was signed, and negotiations broke off in about 10 days.    Talks began again with Ford in November. And twice in the next two months -- just before the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays -- Ford and the Bank Board were close to a deal. Each time, however, Ford's accountants feared that because the FSLIC had been declared insolvent by its auditor, any FSLIC notes (promises that FSLIC would cover future losses on certain American Savings assets) couldn't be carried without qualifying footnotes in Ford financial statements.    On Jan. 7, this newspaper reported that Ford and the Bank Board had again agreed on all terms except the FSLIC credit issue. The same day, the Bank Board declared it had broken off talks with Ford over several major unresolved issues. Mr. Frank maintains the Bank Board broke off talks because it believes Ford leaked news of the near-agreement. &quot;Roger {Martin} told me that he had been ready to do a deal the night before {the story appeared}, but that now he wasn't,&quot; Mr. Frank says. Mr. Martin denies making such a statement. &quot;That's news to me,&quot; he says.    Ford reopened talks with the Bank Board in March, after Mr. Frank resigned to become Postmaster General. And it submitted one more proposal in April. But by then the Bank Board had another serious bidder, and Ford officials felt their final offer was used as more of a stalking horse than anything else.    The other bidder was the Bass Group, the main investment vehicle of Robert Bass, a soft-spoken 40-year-old who has emerged as a major deal maker in his own right since setting up the Bass Group in 1983.    Ironically, the Bass Group initially wanted only the American Savings subsidiary that manages the Sandamp;L's troubled loans and real estate. But after hearing late last year that talks with Ford were floundering, one of Mr. Bass's close associates, Bernard J. Carl, approached Mr. Popejoy, the Financial Corp. chairman, about a possible bigger deal. Mr. Carl, a former Washington lawyer and Salomon Brothers executive familiar with the Bank Board and Financial Corp. from previous jobs, soon found himself talking to Mr. Martin at the Bank Board.    A new dance began even as Ford continued to come calling. Mr. Carl and Mr. Martin began exchanging letters and meeting face to face. Mr. Carl advanced several proposals; Mr. Martin rejected them as too costly for the FSLIC. Responding to one Bass proposal in January, Mr. Martin said, &quot;Christmas is over and Santa Claus has gone home.&quot; For effect, Mr. Martin dated another rejection letter Feb. 14 -- Valentine's Day -- though it was actually written on Feb. 12.    But within a week Mr. Carl was back, and this time Mr. Martin made a pivotal decision. He gave a team of four experts -- two lawyers and two economists -- authority to negotiate with the Bass Group. Working primarily with Mr. Carl and David Bonderman, a former Washington trial lawyer who spearheads many of Mr. Bass's negotiating efforts, they drafted a &quot;term sheet&quot; of about 10 pages outlining the structure of a deal and its basic economic terms.    The negotiations were intense, but not without light moments. Aware of Mr. Bonderman's penchant for bright pink or yellow socks with his dark blue or gray business suits, three Bank Board negotiators at one particularly tense moment slapped their feet up on the table in unison, displaying their own brightly colored footwear. The atmosphere eased -- Mr. Carl burst out laughing; Mr. Bonderman took a moment to get the joke.    Mr. Carl used antics to make a point or two, also. The Bank Board had entertained the notion that an acquirer of American Savings might pay as much as a 10% premium for the thrift's retail deposits -- about double what buyers pay for branches of healthy thrift institutions. It seemed excessive given American Savings' troubles, but Mr. Martin kept asking. Mr. Carl finally pulled a small black sound-effects box and gave his answer: At the push of a button, the sound of a bomb whistling through the air and exploding filled the room.    But the issue wasn't quite dead. Ultimately, the Bass Group agreed to pay a 5% premium as part of an arrangement in which the FSLIC will receive a warrant equal to a 30% interest in the recapitalized American Savings.    After the exclusive negotiating agreement was signed April 21, the Bass Group and Bank Board spent months trying to translate the relatively brief term sheet into official documents. Some disputes arose over ambiguities in the term sheet, others because various units within the Bank Board had conflicting goals. Such intramural disputes often broke out when it came to trading exemptions from certain Bank Board operating rules for reduced FSLIC assistance -- with FSLIC officials arguing cost and regulatory staffers wanting tight rule enforcement.    Twice, in late June and late July, the original 75-day exclusive negotiating agreement with the Bass Group was extended, and still the final Sept. 1 deadline was closing in. On Thursday, Aug. 25, the Bank Board decided by telephone conference not to include the various rule exemptions it would grant to the Bass Group in the assistance contract. That means the rule exemptions could be changed by a future Bank Board.    The next day, the Bass Group had its own conference-call marathon to go over the deal, including Mr. Bonderman from a yacht in the Mediterranean. Last Wednesday, Bass Group representatives, who called themselves &quot;The Home Team,&quot; met another 12 hours in Washington. This time Mr. Bonderman jetted in from Europe on the Concorde, limping from a motorcycle accident in Greece. Mr. Bass came up from Fort Worth.    The Bank Board met all afternoon, too, but primarily to finish a plan to consolidate 14 failed thrifts in Oklahoma. Negotiators missed a scheduled 4 p.m. meeting with the Bass Group. Finally it began at 8 p.m., and after four hours of sometimes heated discussions, several issues remained in dispute. The sides adjourned until Thursday morning, Sept. 1.    But by then there was a new problem. Financial Corp. had set a board meeting for Sept. 7, and Bank Board officials learned that among the things directors were expected to discuss was whether to place Financial Corp. into voluntary bankruptcy instead of spending nearly all its remaining cash on a single interest payment due Sept. 15.    The Bank Board could immediately take over American Savings, but officials feared that would cause a run that could strain the FSLIC's cash resources and force it to borrow from the Federal Reserve. That, in turn, could have shaken public confidence in the FSLIC and caused ripple effects throughout the financial system.    Clearly, both sides felt they would have to reach an agreement by midnight, the publicly announced target. Mr. Bass huddled with Mr. Martin during the afternoon Thursday. The rule exemptions were one issue, but not likely to derail the deal. A bigger problem was Bank Board last-minute objections to the cost of the transaction. The Bass Group gave up about $160 million in future tax benefits. Bass representatives pointed out an additional $230 million in benefits the FSLIC hadn't counted.    Still, when the Bank Board met again from about 5:30 p.m. until 8 p.m., its position hardened. Ford had been lobbying hard to crack the Bass Group's exclusive negotiating license and get back in the game. Criticism from influential congressmen was adding wattage to the spotlight on the board. In essence, the Bank Board decided it needed an additional $200 million in concessions from the Bass Group.    Bass Group negotiators were outraged. &quot;The deal has hit the wall,&quot; one Bank Board official said. The meeting adjourned quickly. The target deadlines passed and the Labor Day weekend was approaching.    The Bass Group team members, looking as if they had slept little, returned Friday morning. Mr. Bass met privately with Mr. Wall, conferred with his lieutenants and left. Mr. Bonderman agreed that the Bass Group would concede all remaining legal and technical points, but couldn't concede an additional $200 million.    Mr. Wall then suggested that each side review its figures and meet at 2 p.m. The Bass team caucused in the Washington office of one of its law firms, and drew up a bold contingency plan. If a deal wasn't struck over the weekend, the Bass Group would sue Ford on Tuesday in a Texas court, probably in Houston, alleging wrongful interference by Ford in Bass Group's exclusive negotiating agreement with the Bank Board.    The model for the suit would have been Pennzoil Co.'s successful suit against Texaco Inc. over the acquisition of Getty Oil Co., in which Pennzoil ended up winning a $3 billion settlement. Some members of the Bass team argued that the lawsuit might be more profitable than owning American Savings.    But after a brief meeting at 2 p.m., the Bank Board staff went back to its calculators, and by refiguring a number of elements in the deal were able to satisfy themselves they wouldn't need the disputed $200 million in cost concessions. The Bank Board was unaware of the Bass Group's idea to sue Ford, but feared being sued itself if the deal fell through.    Messrs. Bonderman and Carl eventually went into a final meeting that ended around 10 p.m. with one financial detail still in doubt. The Bass people went to sleep that night still not knowing whether they had a deal. After that, for the Bank Board it was simply the long wait for the call from Kenya. </TEXT></DOC>