<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880719-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Federal Pay System Doesn't Work </HL><AUTHOR> Alan B. Krueger </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR GOVMT </CO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   Election-year politics strike again. This time the beneficiary is the federal work force; the loser is the American taxpayer. I refer to the 4% pay raise that the House and Senate voted to give most federal workers, and that the president is unlikely to veto when it emerges from conference even though he previously proposed only a 2% raise.    The Federal Pay Comparability Act of 1970 is supposed to remove politics from federal pay-setting, but it has not done so for many years. The act requires that, except in times of &quot;national emergencies,&quot; the wages established for federal white-collar jobs equal those of comparable jobs in the private sector. Every year since 1977, however, the president and Congress have approved an alternative to the official recommendations because it was feared they were so high they would lead to a national emergency of their own.    Federal workers are paid more than private-sector workers in many areas of the country and in many occupations, while in other areas and occupations the federal wage is too low to attract qualified individuals. Reform is needed.    The main reason for the failure of the comparability process revolves around the method the government uses to evaluate pay. The Survey of Professional, Administrative, Technical and Clerical Pay (PATC survey) matches 25 government jobs to similar jobs in the private sector. Selected employers are then surveyed each year to gauge private-sector pay, and a committee recommends across-the-board pay raises to bring about equality. The recommendations can be set aside only by the action of Congress and the president.    There is reason to doubt the comparability survey. In the early 1970s, the survey found that wages were virtually equal in the federal and private sectors. In contrast, a careful analysis of Census data by economist Sharon Smith found that federal workers were paid as much as 20% more than private-sector workers with similar education and experience. Moreover, Ms. Smith's finding was replicated by several other researchers who analyzed a variety of data sets. Although this analysis is admittedly cruder than the detailed occupation-by-occupation comparisons of the PATC survey, it suggests that something is amiss with the comparability process.    In 1980, the PATC survey found that federal workers were paid 14% less than private-sector workers in comparable jobs, and most recently the survey indicates that federal workers are paid 24% less than private-sector workers. Yet studies by academic economists and other researchers continue to find that on average federal workers are paid more than private-sector workers with similar training and experience.    To resolve this conflict, I examined the wage changes experienced by workers who move between government and private-sector jobs. The results show, for example, that workers who join the federal government and continue in the same occupation in one year earn about 12% more than they would have if they had stayed in the private sector. My estimates imply that making federal pay equal to that in the private sector would cut the federal budget by $6 billion.    Recent studies of employee turnover and recruitment further support the conclusion that the general level of federal pay is too high. If federal government workers were underpaid, it would be difficult to recruit such workers and to retain them. This is not the case.    On average, federal workers are significantly less likely to quit their jobs than are private-sector workers. And more workers apply to job openings in the federal government than in the private sector. While there is no doubt the government has difficulty attracting workers to some positions, the statistics indicate that a healthy number of job seekers apply for most federal job openings. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) records indicate that last year an average of 8.6 people applied for each competitive position filled by the federal government.    How can the PATC survey be so much at odds with this array of evidence? First, the survey omits small businesses, which tend to pay relatively low wages compared with other firms. As a result, the survey overestimates the private-sector wage. Second, the survey does not represent the entire range of occupations in the federal government. Finally, the survey may inaccurately match government and private-sector jobs.    Besides the technical shortcomings of the PATC survey, there is a more fundamental conceptual problem with the wage comparability principle. Why should wages be the only dimension along which federal and private-sector jobs are compared? There is wide agreement that such benefits as pensions and job security are typically more generous in government than in the private sector. If the goal is to compensate government employees equitably and efficiently at minimum cost to the taxpayer, then clearly these aspects of compensation should be taken into account.    Another flaw in the process is the government's uniform pay schedule across all regions of the country. Is it fair or cost-efficient to pay a clerk in Waco, Texas, the same wage as one in New York City?    Greater flexibility is needed to efficiently compensate employees across regions, localities, agencies and grades of work, and to reward outstanding performance. The government needs an approach that tailors wages to local labor market conditions and occupational demand.    Specifically, OPM or individual agencies could rely on available turnover and application data to set pay locally. If, as seems to be the case, it is difficult to attract and retain engineers, medical personnel and senior executives, these positions should be given greater-than-average pay raises. This approach is superior to the rigid across-the-board raises that Congress annually legislates.    Serious consideration should also be given to letting unions bargain over wages with individual agencies. Evidence suggests that unions have not abused their rights to bargain collectively over wages in the state and local government sectors. For instance, my study of job changes finds that the wages of state and local government employees are equivalent to, or slightly less than, those of private-sector workers.    Given the problems inherent in administering the wage comparability standard, it is not surprising that the wage-setting process is politicized. Flexibility is needed to bring respectability and cost-efficiency to federal wage determinations.    ---   Mr. Krueger is assistant professor of economics and public affairs at Princeton and a faculty research fellow of the National Bureau of Economic Research. </TEXT></DOC>