<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880223-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AND SOVIETS MOVED to speed the pace of arms-control talks.    Shultz and Shevardnadze said arms negotiators in Geneva were told to draft within a month verification and other provisions of a new superpower agreement so a treaty to reduce the number of long-range missiles could be signed by Reagan and Gorbachev this spring. A Kremlin official also said that Moscow would begin withdrawing shorter-range missiles from East Germany and Czechoslovakia later this month.    Shultz, who also met with Gorbachev, reported progress on human rights, and said he was certain that Moscow would withdraw its forces from Afghanistan.    ---   WEBB RESIGNED as Navy secretary and faulted Pentagon budget cuts.    Ending a 10-month stint as the Navy's leader, Webb abruptly tendered his resignation to Reagan, protesting deep cuts in the Navy budget. The Marine veteran of Vietnam combat said he was &quot;unable to support&quot; the administration's decision to defer its goal of building a 600-ship fleet. Webb had frequently scrapped with the Pentagon leadership, especially Defense Secretary Carlucci.    Reagan plans to announce today that he will nominate William Ball, an assistant to the president, to become the new Navy secretary, officials said.    ---   THE SUPREME COURT AGREED to review the independent-prosecutor law.    The justices, who set an expedited schedule for the case, said they would rule on the validity of the federal law that provides for court-appointed prosecutors to investigate alleged wrongdoing by top officials. In a separate case, the court rejected an appeal by seven Tennessee families who said their religious freedom was violated when their children were exposed to &quot;godless&quot; public school textbooks.    Justice Kennedy made his first appearance on the Supreme Court, giving the court its full complement of nine justices for the first time since June.    ---   A 1985 memo to Meese described a confidential &quot;arrangement&quot; by backers of an Iraqi oil-pipeline project to give Israel as much as $700 million over 10 years, with some of the funds going directly to the Labor Party. Meese has said he doesn't recall reading the reference in the document about payments.    ---   Kidnappers in Lebanon released a videotape of U.S. Marine Lt. Col. Higgins. The U.N. peacekeeper recited certain demands, including an Israeli withdrawal from a &quot;security zone&quot; in southern Lebanon. The U.S., which again said it wouldn't negotiate with the abductors, said the tape hadn't any validity because it was made under duress.    ---   Palestinians held memorial services for 61 Arabs killed in recent unrest in the Israeli-occupied territories, and Israel's attorney general faulted Defense Minister Rabin's policy of allowing soldiers to use force against protesters. Meanwhile, Palestinian moderates asked the PLO for permission to discuss peace with Shultz later this week.    ---   The State Department is expected to notify Congress in mid-March that it plans to proceed with a $2 billion project to produce M-1 tanks jointly with Egypt. An administration official said the 10-year project would be part of U.S. efforts to deepen defense cooperation with Cairo.    ---   A former Panamanian official met in Washington with federal prosecutors investigating the Iran-Contra affair. Jose Blandon, an ex-aide to Noriega, presumably was questioned about the Panamanian military chief's agreement to train Nicaraguan rebels at the request of Lt. Col. North.    ---   The U.S. is investigating whether a computer shipped to Yugoslavia by a Los Angeles-based company was diverted to the Soviet Union in violation of federal export restrictions, State Department officials said. The sophisticated computer apparently had both military and civilian applications.    ---   South Africa's military said two of its French-built Mirage fighter jets were downed in southeastern Angola during raids Saturday on Angolan and Cuban forces. The pilot of one of the aircraft was missing. The Luanda government said there was &quot;violent combat&quot; in the region, and about 200 Pretoria-backed rebels were reported killed.    ---   About 100 Kanak separatists battled Paris-based gendarmes in New Caledonia, taking nine of the officers hostage and injuring 17 others. The hostages were later freed. It was considered the worst clash in the French South Pacific territory in about three years. The Kanak extremists are seeking independence from France.    ---   Explosions rocked a nursery school and a morgue in Paris, hours before the leader of the French urban guerrilla group Direct Action went on trial on charges of armed robbery. The blasts, apparently caused by firebombs, caused extensive damage, but injuries weren't reported. A previously unknown leftist group claimed responsibility.    ---   A U.S. warship fired warning shots at a pair of fishing boats in the Persian Gulf. The boats, which approached the Navy ship and ignored radio warnings, initially were believed to be attack vessels. Neither was hit by the machine-gun fire. </TEXT></DOC>