<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0047 </DOCNO><HL> The SEC's Case Against Drexel -- Tough Choice: Drexel Faces Difficulty Whether It Settles Case Or Gambles on a Trial --- Milken Future Is in Question, As Is Junk-Bond Business, Despite a Sizable Cushion --- Warning of Criminal Action </HL><AUTHOR> Steve Swartz and Bryan Burrough (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GE WIX </CO><IN> STK SCR BON </IN><G> JUS SEC </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. is flush with cash and getting the support of the overwhelming majority of its clients. But the government's extensive civil charges against it are threatening to drain its management, subject it to continuing bad publicity and confront it with the difficult choice of either settling or fighting the charges.    All that combines to leave the securities firm -- despite its financial muscle -- facing a difficult and uncertain future regardless of whether it settles the case or fights a long court battle.    If Drexel settles the case, it probably would be hit with multimillion-dollar fines and have to agree to at least the temporary suspension from the securities business of Michael Milken, the key player who built up the firm's lucrative high-yield, &quot;junk bond&quot; business.    But if it fights, it would be taking a calculated gamble. The avalanche of day-to-day bad publicity from a court trial could seriously hurt the firm, Wall Street executives and lawyers explain. In addition, the firm would face heavy legal bills.    Moreover, if Drexel fights and loses, it might well get hit with penalties much more severe than those arising from any settlement, the Wall Streeters add. And the firm still would probably lose Mr. Milken's services.    Further complicating such calculations is the prospect of a criminal case. Mr. Milken and others have been formally notified by the U.S. attorney in Manhattan that federal prosecutors are soon likely to seek criminal charges against them from a grand jury.    Mr. Milken and his operation were at the center of a 184-page complaint, which was filed Wednesday by the Securities and Exchange Commission in federal court in Manhattan. It alleged insider trading, stock manipulation, fraud, keeping false books and records, and other securities-law violations. Named along with the firm were Mr. Milken, his brother and two other Milken aides.    The investigations themselves already have distracted Mr. Milken from the junk-bond and investment-banking business.    However, Drexel itself is well prepared for the fight, for which it has been getting ready for almost two years. The firm has $2.3 billion in capital, a cushion that could allow it to finance tremendous litigation costs and to more than top rival salary offers that might be dangled before wavering employees whom it wants to keep. Drexel's chief executive, Frederick H. Joseph, took so many calls of support from clients and employees yesterday that he joked to an aide, &quot;I should spend every day like this.&quot;    In a letter to clients yesterday, Drexel said the potential civil fine arising from the SEC case &quot;is in the range of $100 million.&quot; But others familiar with the case say that estimate may be conservative.    Moreover, a criminal prosecution could lead to prison terms, and any fines resulting from a conviction could be greater than civil fines. Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani recently showed in a case involving a former Drexel employee and a Drexel client that he won't hesitate to seek triple damages under the federal anti-racketeering statute. Drexel is believed to have recently increased its reserve for the litigation to $650 million from $500 million. Its officials decline to comment on it.    The SEC's charges also raise questions about the role Mr. Joseph and Chairman Robert Linton played in supervising Mr. Milken's operation. Wall Street executives and attorneys say that if the SEC succeeds in proving major aspects of its case, it would be likely later to bring charges of supervisory failures against senior executives. If the SEC prevails on such charges, the result could be the officials' suspension or removal from the firm.    In a brief telephone interview yesterday, Mr. Joseph said he remains in full control of Drexel. Regarding questions about his and Mr. Linton's supervision of Drexel, Mr. Joseph said, &quot;I think our compliance systems {for detecting wrongdoing} are as good as any on the Street.&quot; Mr. Linton couldn't be reached for comment.    Mr. Joseph declined to say whether any further settlement talks with the SEC are planned; talks earlier this summer collapsed. But people familiar with Drexel's thinking say the firm doesn't believe other securities firms that have settled with the government in recent major cases have fared very well.    E.F. Hutton Group Inc. was crippled by its 1985 decision to plead guilty to 2,000 counts of criminal mail and wire fraud in a check-kiting scheme. Former Hutton Chairman Robert Fomon has called the guilty plea the biggest mistake of his career. Hutton subsequently was taken over by Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., an American Express Co. unit.    Last year, General Electric Co.'s Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. unit settled insider-trading and other charges with the SEC by paying a $25.3 million fine and by agreeing to replace the firm's chairman, president and general counsel. Says one Drexel official: &quot;I wasn't impressed by the way GE treated its people. The results haven't been great.&quot;    Counters Kidder President Max C. Chapman Jr.: &quot;We made a decision, which I fully support, to settle the case against us, and doing that allowed us to put the issue behind us and go on to build our business.&quot;    Meanwhile, Drexel itself is doing quite well with its own business. Mr. Joseph says the firm is &quot;nicely profitable in the year to date, and our market share is up in virtually all our businesses.&quot; He adds that he hasn't detected any slippage in the firm's business due to the SEC charges. Last year, the firm made $117 million and, in 1986, $545.5 million, believed to be the highest profit ever made by a securities firm.    While Drexel has used its success in recent years to build up trading in government and corporate bonds and stocks; municipal finance; research and retail brokerage, the firm still isn't a Wall Street power in any of those businesses. Drexel currently ranks ninth in municipal bond offerings and sixth in both corporate debt and equity offerings, according to IDD Information Services Inc.    Drexel's strength lies in its ability to raise money for clients for takeovers and leveraged buy-outs, and it gets most of that money from underwriting clients' junk bonds, which are sold mainly to institutional investors. Drexel now controls a strong 50% share of the junk-bond market and ranks third among merger advisers in 1988's first half, according to IDD.    Most takeover professionals and corporate executives predict that Drexel would retain its share of this business, noting the amazing loyalty of its clients, who have made lots of money with Drexel's help. Still, they say the SEC charges put additional pressure on Drexel to complete the financing of deals already announced in order to prove its fund-raising abilities haven't been hurt by the SEC case.    &quot;This will be a time when it will be important for Drexel Burnham to demonstrate that {these charges} won't have an effect on their business,&quot; says James McCloskey, vice president for finance at Concurrent Computer Corp. in Tinton Falls, N.J. Drexel is helping finance Massachusetts Computer Corp.'s $230 million merger with Concurrent. Mr. McCloskey adds, &quot;I expect this to have very little, if any, effect on our transaction.&quot;    Numerous other executives involved in Drexel deals expressed similar confidence in the securities firm. And other clients also rallied to Drexel's defense. &quot;Drexel's high-yield bonds and its other investment-banking activities are important resources for emerging growth companies,&quot; said Ernest A. Bates, the chief executive of American Shared Hospital Services, a San Francisco company working with Drexel on a note offering.    Similarly, Wickes Co., one of two companies that Drexel is alleged by the SEC to have defrauded, stood by the firm in a statement issued yesterday. A Wickes spokesman said: &quot;Obviously, if the charges are ultimately proven, this would be distressing. However, based on our current knowledge, we would not anticipate that the filing of this complaint will have any negative impact on our relationship with Drexel Burnham or any of its people with whom we work. More importantly, we have no reason to expect that these charges will have any impact on our current LBO.&quot;    A group including Drexel and Wickes senior managers has proposed to take the Santa Monica, Calif., company private in a buy-out valued at $478.2 million.    A spokesman for MCO Holdings Inc.'s Maxxam Group, the other Drexel client allegedly defrauded, had no comment on the charges.    Still, the formal announcement of charges is likely to hamper Drexel's ability to grow, particularly by adding new investment-banking clients. &quot;I wouldn't use Drexel,&quot; said Tod Hamachek, the chief executive of Penwest Ltd., a Bellevue, Wash., diversified maker of food and flavoring ingredients. In the past, the company, whose sales totaled $136 million in its Aug. 31, 1987, fiscal year, has used several investment bankers, but not Drexel. &quot;Until they're cleared, I want to deal with someone who I can be sure will keep our confidence,&quot; Mr. Hamachek says.    Meeting its current takeover commitments has become crucial to Drexel's efforts to convince Wall Street of its continued viability as a major source of takeover financing, investment bankers and arbitragers say. At the moment, Drexel's most visible deal is the Rales brothers' $2.47 billion hostile tender offer for Interco Inc., of St. Louis.    &quot;Interco becomes a critical deal for Drexel,&quot; a major arbitrager says. &quot;They have to prove their 'highly confident' {financing} letter is still good. If they don't, and the deal craters, they're out of business.&quot;    The Rales camp expresses confidence in Drexel's ability to furnish financing for its bid, which is set to expire Monday but probably will be extended. &quot;We don't believe these charges will have any effect on us,&quot; says Michael Goldberg, a Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom attorney representing the Raleses.    Merger professionals generally play down the chance that the Drexel charges might hurt the climate for takeovers. Drexel junk bonds have fueled an unprecedented number of hostile takeovers in the past five years, but competing firms such as First Boston Corp. and Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. have become big junk-bond suppliers as well. The junk-bond market was calm yesterday despite the SEC move.    &quot;The impact of any fallout from the Drexel charges would be seen in the junk market,&quot; says Robert Cotter, co-head of mergers at First Boston. &quot;To the extent it hurt the junk market, that would hurt the mergers and acquisitions market. But no one around here really believes that anything the SEC can do to Drexel would have a dramatic effect on the junk market.&quot;    Meantime, Drexel has been pondering damage control for its public image. The firm considered, but discarded, new TV commercials addressing the charges. A marketing executive familiar with Drexel's plans says it discussed starring Mr. Joseph in a spot in which he would say that an &quot;open forum&quot; was finally at hand and that Drexel welcomed the opportunity to air the truth. Another ad would have used the same message, in print scrolling across an otherwise-blank screen.    Drexel's ad agency, Chiat/Day, went so far as to visit the networks during the summer to talk about possible campaigns, some network executives say. Chiat/Day executives couldn't be reached for comment.    But Drexel has decided to continue with its current ad campaign, which profiles companies that it has helped with junk bonds -- particularly those in small towns, which allow for plenty of shots of doe-eyed children and barren landscapes. The tag line on every commercial: &quot;Drexel Burnham. Helping finance America's future.&quot;    Network executives suggest that Drexel may not have had much choice; Drexel would have had difficulty persuading networks to air commercials on anything so controversial as insider-trading charges. But a Drexel spokesman says Drexel decided to keep the current ads because &quot;we think they're pretty effective. We've been getting good feedback, and I think they tell the story of what we're doing.&quot;    And the combative spirit that in the past decade propelled Drexel from a medium-sized company to an industry power was on display at its lower-Manhattan headquarters yesterday. Some employees wore T-shirts with the inscription: &quot;When the going gets tough, Drexel gets going.&quot;    ---   Joanne Lipman contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>