<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880801-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Dukakis and Deweyism </HL><AUTHOR> Mark Helprin </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   I recently read in an otherwise sober newspaper, this one, that Michael Dukakis &quot;is tough and bright, and if the election were held today he would win.&quot; This is but the softest echo of a sudden explosion of predictiveness. The Democrats, we have been told by virtually everyone who uses a wordprocessor or a microphone, &quot;smell victory.&quot; They do not merely think they smell it, they actually smell it. Evidently the press has never recovered from Deweyism, but should it not be more cautious and attempt a cure?    After all, in 1948 as in 1988 a man who had been elected only to the second-highest office was stepping from the shadow of a patriarchal president, and the party out of power was convinced that the voters would insist upon a change of the guard. Thus, the Republicans' precise imagination of victory enabled them to achieve a state of self-mesmerization infectious to almost everyone except, of course, the majority of voters. Their certainty became arrogance, and arrogance became defeat.    They relied on opinion polls as if these were elections. In much the same way that a clergyman querying his flock is likely to have an unrealistically elevated impression of its purity, opinion polling all too often reflects what is in vogue rather than what is truly desired. That the ballot, like the bedroom, is private can be a source of surprise for any party that, convinced of its righteousness, excels in social compulsion. Buttons and bumper stickers may speak loudly, but never do they speak as loudly as the electorate at the polls.    And, then, the Republicans and the press in 1948 did not sufficiently credit the fundamentals, as people frequently fail to do when the fundamentals seem counterintuitive or when one party deliberately chooses to ignore them and oversight becomes the fashion. In the election we have before us, the potential for Deweyism exists, and can be seen most vividly in the recent -- virtually uniform -- analyses of the Democratic convention. Democrats were more or less unanimous that they gave a flawless performance, and most Republicans agreed, lying down on the highway as if to accept their destiny as road-kills of the invincible Dukakismobile.    Those who have either surrendered or begun to celebrate should keep in mind certain historical disappointments that arose from what any Harvard-educated presidential candidate of Greek extraction will know as hubris. Though the Hindenburg was the ultimate in luxury and safety, the Maginot Line could not be breached or turned, and the Titanic was unsinkable, the faults that led to disaster were apparent. There are similar grave and obvious flaws in a Democratic convention that has been to journalism what electromagnetic pulse would be to ATandamp;T.    The first mistake was for the Democrats to imagine that Jimmy Carter has already prevailed in his grim battle with history. After eight years of Ronald Reagan, a dozen new or incipient democracies in South America, the Philippines, and South Korea; after Russian or proxy withdrawal in process in Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia, the winding down of the Iran-Iraq War, half-a-dozen treaties and summits with a marvelously chastened Soviet Union; after the longest peacetime economic expansion in American history, record employment and a two-point drop in the unemployment rate, a significant drop in the crime rate, a 12-point drop in the prime rate, and a 10-point drop in the rate of inflation, not to mention tax reform and an economy that has succeeded in making the stock market crash almost inconsequential, the Democrats trotted out Jimmy Carter to say &quot;I told you so.&quot;    That they could ignore such strong and fundamental evidence of both peace and prosperity is simply a sign that they look to other criteria in assessing the state of the union -- primarily the deficit and various overmanaged and overcooked D.C. scandals. They have to, because it's hard to run against peace and prosperity.    Sen. Edward Kennedy said that &quot;we&quot; (meaning, as far as I can tell, he) cannot take four more years of what we've had for the past eight. Certainly four more years of economic growth, high employment, low inflation and peace would be a further blow to the party that has been chasing the sleigh through eight years of bright moonlight and fast horses. The common wisdom is that voters vote their pocketbooks. This is just an ungracious way of saying that the voters vote the fundamentals. Of the desiderata of a party at the reins, there has been a flood. Though even, or perhaps especially, Jimmy Carter cannot command this tide to recede, at the Democratic convention he tried to do so as the whole world was watching.    When I think of Jesse Jackson, I think of the divine afflatus. This in turn causes me to reflect that the hydrogen that filled the Hindenburg not only held it up but also burned it down. Inspirational rhetoric, especially if it is simplistic and imprecise (never mind wrong), is powerful but inflammable. Jesse Jackson can be as suddenly quiet and surprisingly self-disciplined as he likes, but he is still a rhino. He got where he is by lowering his horn, and the chances are that he will lower it again, to Michael Dukakis's dismay. But even if he doesn't, who will not remember?    Though the press has given him a laissez-passer, he is not yet respectable. He is a classic demagogue, not an orator. Winston Churchill was an orator. Martin Luther King Jr. was an orator. Even Edward Kennedy, despite the content of what he says, is an orator. Jesse Jackson has little to suggest that does not find its origins in class warfare or economic masochism. He hobnobs with America's enemies (lest you have forgotten, Hafez Assad, Yasser Arafat, Moammar Gadhafi, Daniel Ortega and Fidel Castro), begging for favors and forgiveness. And he speaks in silly rhymes and chants that, were he George Bush, would rocket him into oblivion.    Despite Mr. Jackson's one accomplishment -- bringing blacks to the forefront of American electoral politics -- he is an unstable radical as potentially crippling to his host as Pat Robertson might have been to George Bush, or as the various hard-bitten political crazies were to Hubert Humphrey, George McGovern and Walter Mondale. And yet, in a fever of wishful thinking, makers of opinion have decided that his prominent inclusion in the Democratic equation will not unbalance or discredit it. This is a social nicety and little more.    The third great flaw in the flawless convention is the very structure of the Democratic ticket. In pursuit of the presidency, the Democrats have mounted a chariot that has three wheels. The left wheel is Mr. Jackson, the right wheel is Lloyd Bentsen, and the middle wheel is Mr. Dukakis. The middle wheel currently is not touching the ground because the moment it makes contact one of the other two wheels will have to lift, and one wing of the coalition will disappear into the night.    The candidate himself speaks with such glorious vagueness that he probably deserves to carry California. In 1968 I drove across the Golden Gate with a hitchhiker who joyfully told me that she went to an alternative school. When I asked her what she studied, she was unable to tell me. I pressed, however, until in exasperation she said, &quot;Like, it doesn't matter what we study. Like, the point is, man, it's an alternative school!&quot;    That the candidate hesitates to speak substantively merely illustrates that his party is now living a lie best exemplified by the fact of Mr. Jackson and Mr. Bentsen campaigning for the same slate. Perhaps the idea behind this approach is that those who want Mr. Dukakis to be like Mr. Bentsen will look at Mr. Bentsen and think that it is so, and those who want Mr. Dukakis to be like Mr. Jackson will look at Mr. Jackson and think that it is so. But what if those who want Mr. Dukakis to be like Mr. Bentsen look at Mr. Jackson and think that Mr. Dukakis is like him? And what if those who want Mr. Dukakis to be like Mr. Jackson look at Mr. Bentsen and think that Mr. Dukakis is like him?    My feeling is that if you want to conceal your positions you had better not craft yourself into a riddle, for a riddle invites continual probing. Anyone who lives in Massachusetts, reads the newspapers carefully, or takes what Ronald Reagan says at face value knows that Michael Dukakis is a liberal. He dares not be specific about foreign affairs because this is where his liberalism is most apparent.    If one of the wheels comes off the chariot and the center wheel must touch down, the nation will see a man to the left of Walter Mondale, far to the left of Jimmy Carter, and not too far to the right of George McGovern. Wherein lies the invincibility of that? Especially since the voters do not enjoy hide-and-seek, and may look askance at the many liberals who assume an air of offended innocence and righteous indignation should anyone describe their candidate with the L word.    Democratic strategy, at least as it appeared in the convention, is predicated upon the central premise that everyone is as fed up with the Republicans as are the Democratic strategists themselves. This is less a strategy than it is a hope, the very hope, perhaps, that has driven forth all the confident predictions. To return to the starting point, Mr. Dukakis &quot;is tough and bright, and if the election were held today he would win.&quot; Well, perhaps he might. But then again, he might not. July was a dangerous time for certainties. Were Gov. Dewey with us now, he probably would endorse this point of view.    ---   Mr. Helprin is a novelist and political commentator. </TEXT></DOC>