<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880818-0005 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Getting Tough: Bush Strategists Push A Bare-Knuckle Fight To Overcome Dukakis --- Worried About Low Ratings, They Hope to Shift Focus To Democrat's Failings --- Chasing After Ethnic Voters </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers and David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Parents, send the children to bed. This isn't going to be pretty.    Roger Ailes, the man who will guide George Bush's heavy media campaign, is pumping up his anger like a lineman preparing to crush the opposing quarterback. &quot;Michael Dukakis has the toughest knees and elbows today,&quot; says the New York advertising executive, who once pitched Richard Nixon as warm. &quot;He's the meanest little son of a bitch I've come across in politics.&quot;    Vice President George Bush comes to the Republican convention tonight with the glow of Ronald Reagan behind him and an army of avenging angels at his side. His acceptance speech marks his debut before the nation as the GOP nominee. The Bush camp aims to wage a pitched battle to undercut its Democratic rival and make the election a test of the ideas that took the Republicans to power eight years ago.    &quot;We're going to tell the truth, and it's going to seem like they've engaged a couple of pit bulls,&quot; the vice president declared yesterday, standing alongside his running mate, Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana.    The Bush get-tough strategy is born of necessity. With the vice president's high negative ratings in the polls, his advisers worry that, if the election becomes a referendum on him, it will be difficult to win. For that reason, they must focus attention away from their candidate and on their opponent. &quot;We can't worry about being too negative,&quot; says Eddie Mahe, a GOP consultant who is advising the Bush campaign. &quot;If we don't get the anti-Dukakis message out, we can't win -- period.&quot;    The Bush campaign is budgeting at least $30 million for advertising, aimed at forcing Mr. Dukakis into the open and cracking his cool exterior through gut appeals on issues of patriotism, taxes and crime.    &quot;The Ford campaign was too nice to Carter,&quot; says New Hampshire's Republican governor, John Sununu. &quot;This is not going to happen with Michael Dukakis.&quot;    At the Democrats' Atlanta convention, Mr. Dukakis sought to frame the election as a contest of competence, not ideology. Republicans will take aim at both, hitting hard at Mr. Dukakis's inexperience abroad and liberalism at home. Their goal is to cut the Massachusetts governor down to size and present Mr. Bush as a man of greater stature and safety -- &quot;the best chance of change without risk&quot; in the words of Illinois GOP Gov. James Thompson.    To accomplish this, the thrust of the campaign will be negative, but top campaign officials admit they also have to present a more positive view of the vice president. In particular, they say, the percentage of voters who have an unfavorable opinion of him -- which today hovers at about 40% of those polled -- must be reduced to the 30% range. Tonight's acceptance speech is an opportunity to begin moving toward this objective.    The Bush campaign, meanwhile, won't be the only one using some rough-and-tumble tactics, as the Democrats demonstrated during their convention last month. &quot;Susan Estrich is never going to operate a chain of charm schools,&quot; says Mr. Ailes, referring to Gov. Dukakis's campaign manager.    After two terms in the White House, Republicans are identified with the status quo at a time when the public is asking for change. Besides his high negative ratings, Mr. Bush is also burdened by a &quot;gender gap.&quot; Concerned about the future of the economy, far fewer women support him than support Mr. Dukakis.    The Republican nominee's &quot;safety net&quot; is an electoral base inherited from Mr. Reagan, who, among other things, has helped solidify GOP inroads in the once-Democratic South. That, notably, is an advantage Richard Nixon didn't have in 1960 as the last Republican vice president to try to move directly to the chief-executive post. Nor did Dwight Eisenhower strongly campaign for Mr. Nixon, as Ronald Reagan has promised to do for Mr. Bush. &quot;The old man is in there swinging,&quot; says GOP Sen. Ted Stevens of Alaska.    Texas and California are major battlegrounds, as is the industrial Midwest, home of Sen. Quayle. The two men travel to Indiana after leaving New Orleans tomorrow, on a campaign swing that will take Mr. Bush to weekend stops in Illinois and Ohio before going on to the West Coast and Texas.    Mr. Bush's choice of Sen. Quayle underscores the importance of the Midwest. Despite the senator's opposition to the recent plant-closing bill, his youth and record of support for job-training legislation give the Republicans tools to help counter the Democrats' &quot;Rust Belt&quot; rhetoric. A wealthy conservative, Mr. Quayle will be presented as a suburban father who is attractive to women and is at home both in urban, blue-collar wards and in the more rural Bible counties of such states as Ohio, which Gerald Ford lost by only 11,000 votes in 1976.    &quot;He lets us play the jobs and prosperity game,&quot; says David Johnson, assistant minority leader of the Ohio House. &quot;He articulates the issue and has the right stuff to make it ours.&quot;    The selection of the 41-year-old Mr. Quayle is a gamble by Republican strategists who have prided themselves in the past on their single-minded attention to the mathematics of the electoral college, rather than to the wooing of broad demographic categories of voters. The decision reflects anxiety about the dynamics of this election and an effort to add excitement and a look-to-the-future appeal to the GOP ticket.    In the race for the required 270 electoral votes, Republicans retain a major advantage over the Democrats. With its strength in the Old South, the Rocky Mountain and northern plains states and such dependable GOP bastions as Indiana, the party can absorb some losses and still accumulate close to 200 electoral votes.    &quot;The biggest advantage the vice president has got is the Republican electoral base,&quot; says Bush campaign manager Lee Atwater.    Texas and California, with a combined total of 76 electoral votes, would be the quickest avenue to a GOP victory, but Mr. Dukakis and his running mate, Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, hope to block this route. If the Democrats succeed, the GOP's most likely path to success would be through the industrial Midwest and such Eastern, largely suburban states as New Jersey.    Behind these numbers are the diverse constituencies that Mr. Bush must appeal to if he is to prevail. These voters, many of whom went for President Reagan in 1984, range from white, small-town Protestant conservatives in Texas to blue-collar Catholic ethnics in the North. They are the common target of a campaign that will try to draw sharp ideological differences between the vice president and Mr. Dukakis.    Texas will be a prime example of these hard-edge tactics. Karl Rove, a Texas political consultant and specialist in direct-mail campaigns, says his 1984 pitch for the Republicans &quot;was warm and fuzzy. This year, it will be sharp and clear.&quot;    Republicans will increase their use of targeted mail over the level of four years ago, and Mr. Dukakis can expect to be hammered for his support of gun control and for a decade-old veto of legislation requiring public-school teachers to lead their classes in the pledge of allegiance. &quot;I'd run that all over the state,&quot; says Kent Hance, a former West Texas congressman and Democrat-turned-Republican.    GOP strategists believe Hispanics will respond to military and patriotic themes, including Corpus Christi's stake in a planned Naval port. Tax and economic appeals will be tailored to suburban whites. Bush surrogates -- or what the campaign calls &quot;respected pols&quot; -- will spread the gospel. &quot;Once Texans know Dukakis's record,&quot; says Republican Sen. Phil Gramm, &quot;he's going to sink like a rock.&quot;    A more difficult sell may be the Northern ethnic voter. Stuart Spencer, an adviser to the Bush campaign, sees a &quot;Mediterranean tilt&quot; among swing voters: A disproportionate share are ethnic Catholics, often Italian-Americans, constituting an important bloc in the urban Midwest as well as California and New Jersey. Many of these voters sided with Mr. Reagan in the past, but identify more readily today with Mr. Dukakis, the son of Greek immigrants.    &quot;We have to convince them that, on policy issues, Dukakis is the elitist and Bush is closer to their ethnic values,&quot; says Republican consultant Roger Stone. Massachusetts' prison-furlough system and Mr. Dukakis's opposition to the death penalty will be staples of the attack. &quot;That stuff is ethnic dynamite,&quot; says Mr. Stone.    To succeed, though, the Bush campaign must appeal to economics and class, rather than purely to cultural background. GOP strategists figure that if these ethnic Catholic voters go into the ballot booth thinking of themselves as ethnics, they will vote for Dukakis. But if they think of themselves first as middle-class, the strategists believe the GOP has a better chance of holding their support.    Mr. Quayle's bustling Jaycee image and industrial-state background are part of this calculation. The campaign has been frustrated so far in capturing the benefits Republicans expected from the generally healthy economy. It is as if the party's success at home and improved U.S. relations abroad have allowed voters to turn their attention to issues such as education and the environment, where Democrats retain an advantage.    California -- &quot;the most pivotal state in the country,&quot; says Bush pollster Frederick Steeper -- may provide an example. Though unemployment is only 5.4% there, and Democrats have carried the state only once since 1948, Mr. Bush remains vulnerable.    California's Republican governor, George Deukmejian, speaks optimistically of emphasizing defense and tax issues and using Mr. Reagan's home-state popularity to benefit Mr. Bush. But Mr. Spencer, the Bush adviser, sounds a more cautious note, focusing on the anxieties of suburban homeowners who have &quot;made it&quot; but are ill at ease with the state's tumultuous growth and resulting deterioration in quality of life.    Mr. Bush's recent decision to support a delay in federal leasing of environmentally sensitive oil tracts off the state's coast was a first step to address these concerns, but &quot;he's got to cut some new ground,&quot; says Mr. Spencer, a veteran of the state's political wars. California will also be a showcase for Mr. Bush's media effort to trim the vice president's &quot;negatives.&quot;    &quot;We cannot stop until we break Dukakis's high {favorability} numbers,&quot; says Mr. Mahe, the political consultant.    For its part, the Dukakis campaign has already come out swinging at Mr. Bush, portraying him as little involved with the substance of the Reagan administration and belittling him at the Democratic convention last month as being out of touch with the everyday concerns of average Americans. Democratic strategists want to keep reminding voters of the vice president's perceived failings, but as a new figure on the national scene, Gov. Dukakis can't afford to become involved in daily skirmishes with Mr. Bush and the rest of the administration. He must reassure voters about his own abilities -- not the liabilities of his better-known rival.    Some Republicans express doubts about the tone of the GOP campaign. &quot;It's an absolutely dumb strategy to go negative,&quot; says Rep. Sherwood Boehlert of New York. Maine Gov. John McKernan adds: &quot;You have to know when to pull back. You can't win on negatives alone.&quot;    But in his hotel suite above the fray, Mr. Spencer smiles. &quot;I think this will be a campaign where there will be no prisoners taken,&quot; he says. &quot;We are a minority party and know about guerrilla warfare. Besides, we like being in power.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>