<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880919-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Rising Risk: Some Airlines Narrow Their Safety Margins, Seeking to Cut Costs --- With Deregulation, Pilots Fly Longer Hours and Switch From Aircraft to Aircraft --- But Accident Rate Isn't Up </HL><AUTHOR> Judith Valente (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> AIR </IN><G> TRN </G><TEXT>   Safety vs. the Bottom Line.    Ever since airline deregulation a decade ago, a lot of people have worried how that battle would turn out. Would airlines retain their commitment to safety or would the increased competition tempt them to cut corners?    Carriers have staved off such fears by increasing aircraft-maintenance budgets -- perhaps the most visible measure of their commitment to safety -- at least as fast as their fleets. They haven't hesitated to publicize their rising spending.    A look at other areas of airline operations, however, indicates that concern over costs is thinning the huge margin of safety the industry once had. To save money, most carriers have increased the hours pilots fly. Some have ignored design changes among different versions of an airliner when assigning pilots, resulting in confusion and mistakes. Some are seeking permission to hire foreign repair stations for major aircraft maintenance. And more carriers are flying two-engine rather than three-engine planes across the Atlantic, to save about $10,000 per crossing.    Although it is difficult to argue that any of these practices alone makes air disasters more likely, airline critics are concerned. &quot;There's been an erosion of the margin of safety,&quot; complains Wayne E. Williams, the president of the National Transportation Safety Association, a safety-advocacy group. The reason he cites: &quot;economics.&quot;    T. Allan McArtor, the chief of the Federal Aviation Administration, believes that deregulation has forced airlines to pay more attention to the bottom line. &quot;Have airlines relied more on the FAA to be the policeman and catch them doing something wrong? Yes, some have,&quot; he says.    But airline executives vehemently deny slighting safety. &quot;No one sits down and says, 'If we compromise safety by 5%, we can save $10 million.' Discussions like that just don't occur,&quot; says D. Joseph Corr, the president of Trans World Airlines.    William W. Hoover, executive vice president of the Air Transport Association, the airlines' lobbying arm, acknowledges that since deregulation, airlines have been trying to &quot;squeeze out the slack in the system, the overhead and less efficient ways of operating.&quot; However, he says, improved training simulators, increased reliability of engine components and more sophisticated engine and aircraft monitoring techniques greatly increase the margin of safety.    In fact, flying remains one of the safest ways to travel. Over the past 10 years, the number of accidents on major scheduled airlines has remained steady at about three to four per million flights, according to data compiled by Congress's Office of Technology Assessment. The agency defines accidents as events causing injuries, fatalities and/or major structural damage to the aircraft.    However, the industry does seem to rely increasingly on the government to draw the boundary lines for safety. &quot;Years ago, airlines were expected to do better than the minimum standards. Now, the attitude is, 'As long as it's legal . . . ,'&quot; complains Don Henderson, a Boeing 737 captain for Continental Airlines.    A recent study by the technology assessment office found that many airlines have lowered hiring standards and increased pilot and mechanic duty-time. It urged greater FAA supervision of safety.    Undoubtedly, the cost-saving measures have quietly scraped away at practices once considered essential. Eastern Airlines, for instance, recently discontinued special simulator training in emergency maneuvers for pilots who fly into tricky, high-altitude South American airports. Eastern says that although the training is no longer done regularly, it will be provided for anyone requesting it. It adds that most pilots flying South American routes already have had the training.    In addition, Eastern and TWA have cut back their weather departments. The carriers contend that advances in satellite weather-reporting systems allow flight dispatchers to do the work once done by airline meteorologists. However, dispatchers also must do several other jobs, including helping crews determine fuel needs.    To increase productivity, Eastern subjects pilots missing work more than three times in 18 months to a formal review session with a supervisor. It says it is merely trying to reduce a high absentee rate. But the company's written attendance policy says the primary goal is to &quot;aggressively compete in a deregulated industry and continually produce a profit.&quot; Some pilots say that to avoid job problems, they are flying while sick and self-medicating.    TWA's Mr. Corr comments that airlines have a right to seek more productivity from pilots and that pilots should be able to fly more than one aircraft type, with adequate training. He adds that repairs by major foreign-maintenance stations can be as safe as those done in the U.S. and that technological advances have made flying two-engine aircraft across the ocean &quot;absolutely safe.&quot;    But critics also complain that, because of economics, airlines have avoided moves that would improve safety, such as installing collision-avoidance systems and wind-shear warning devices. The airlines, rather than buying readily available equipment, are waiting for the FAA to force them to do so. In such cases, the FAA's own foot-dragging bears some responsibility.    Here is a closer look at some tussles between airline economics and safety:   Longer Pilot Hours   Since deregulation in 1978, pilots at nearly every airline have been working longer hours. For example, Continental Airlines -- like Eastern, a Texas Air Corp. unit -- has increased the time its pilots can be required to spend in the cockpit to 100 hours a month, the maximum legal limit, from 75 a decade ago.    At the airlines' request, the FAA in 1985 reduced the rest time carriers must give pilots. Under current rules, pilots should get a nine-hour rest after eight hours of flight; previously, pilots exceeding eight hours in the cockpit were entitled to double that time off. And now, if they work beyond that limit, the required rest periods are computed on a sliding scale, generally not to exceed 11 hours a day.    The federal rules regulate only time spent at the controls. A pilot's actual work day, including pre-flight check-in and time spent waiting in airports for an aircraft to arrive or waiting to take off, often stretches to 15 hours.    Even with more flexible rules, carriers have circumvented regulations designed to prevent pilot fatigue. A recent FAA inspection found that Northwest Airlines was requiring crews to fly more than eight hours without a rest period.    Several of the violations affected crews returning from long international flights. The FAA found that Northwest was requiring international flight crews to fly a domestic leg as well before going off duty. A crew flew nearly 14 hours without a rest period on one of these combination international-domestic flights, FAA records show.    The FAA has already fined Northwest $11,000 for the violations, and the airline may face new fines as a result of the latest inspection. But the NWA Inc. unit says it won't pay, arguing that no accidents or incidents have resulted from its interpretation of the rules.    Northwest officials complain that the regulations are confusing and outdated. They note that under international flight rules, a three-member crew going from the U.S. to a foreign country can fly as many as 12 hours without a rest. But if the return flight includes a stop in the U.S. before the final destination, the crew must be changed after eight hours. The FAA says domestic rules are more stringent because domestic routes require more landings and takeoffs than international routes do.    In another action, the FAA found that Northwest, Eastern and Delta Air Lines were, against regulations, making pilots fly more than 30 hours in seven days. Eastern and Delta contended that pilots need only be scheduled for 30 hours or less to comply with the rule. In reality, pilots were flying much longer. In Northwest's case, the FAA says, the carrier's violations didn't stem from its interpretation of the rules but rather from inefficient scheduling practices. The practice has been stopped at all three airlines.    Eastern and Delta say they haven't been fined for the &quot;30 in seven&quot; violations.    Pilot Training   United Airlines started flying Boeing 737-300s in December 1986. Compared with earlier 737s, the new ones are larger and have different navigational equipment, engine instruments and hydraulic systems.    United says it believed that its 737 pilots could fly the various versions interchangeably. But pilots contended that the new models were as different from the old ones as a 737 is from, say, a 727. They argued that, just as United lets only 727 pilots fly that aircraft, a new job classification should be established for the 737-300. At first, United refused.    Pilots who flew a new 737 one day and an old one the next became confused. One co-pilot reports seeing an experienced captain nearly stall a plane after lifting the nose of an older 737 to a pitch appropriate only for takeoffs on the new models.    &quot;It was like the difference between performing surgery with a scalpel and performing surgery with a laser,&quot; says Henry P. Krakowski, a 737 co-pilot who made the switch. He says he will never forget preparing to take off one day in a packed 737-300: &quot;The captain turned to me and said, 'I've been away from this plane for a month and a half, so keep a good eye on me.' How would the passengers feel if they heard a conversation like that going on in the cockpit?&quot;    Finally, after more than a year of complaints, United decided to allow its pilots to fly either the old or new versions of the plane, but not both. It now provides separate certification training for each version. Stephen M. Wolf, the chief executive of UAL Corp., declines comment, but a spokesman says concern about costs wasn't a factor in the initial decision.    Now, Northwest pilots are fighting a similar battle over the 747-400, the latest model of the jumbo jet, which will have two crew members instead of three. Northwest declines comment on its plans, saying the crew-size issue is still under negotiation. And Midway Airlines' pilots are trying to get it to separate the crews for the DC-9 and its latest derivative, the MD-87. Midway says it doesn't plan to use separate crews for the MD-87 because that isn't required by the FAA.    Foreign Repair Stations   With more carriers flying abroad, airlines are pressuring the FAA to allow them to use foreign repair stations to perform major maintenance work. They currently use FAA-approved foreign stations only for emergency repairs or for maintenance on aircraft operated solely outside the U.S. The use of non-union foreign labor could save airlines hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.    Critics of the proposal -- including James Burnett, until recently the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board -- say it would be difficult for the FAA to monitor work done abroad. It has 10 inspectors assigned to foreign stations; one covers all of South America.    Airlines that have used foreign stations in the past have run into problems. A few years ago, Eastern and Pan Am Corp.'s Pan American World Airways, for example, couldn't document the repairs or inspections done abroad on several of their aircraft engines.    United was fined $96,000 in late 1986 after the FAA discovered that the Hong Kong repair station responsible for maintaining United's L-1011 fleet had farmed out some of the work to an unlicensed subcontractor. The FAA found hundreds of unapproved parts on the United planes.    Last winter, United forwarded a service bulletin to Hong Kong, calling for special monitoring of the electric hydraulic pumps on its L-1011s. But the bulletin &quot;just died&quot; in Hong Kong, recalls Wayne Gallimore, a United mechanic. The problem came to light when a pump caught fire on an L-1011 while the plane was on the ground. (United has since sold its L-1011s).    Although the Department of Transportation supports the idea of relying on foreign maintenance, several congressmen who oversee aviation policy have raised questions about it. As a result, the FAA postponed action until next month.    Twin-Engine Use   Currently, two-engine aircraft flying to Europe must remain within two hours of an emergency landing site. Under a plan likely to win FAA approval soon, that requirement would be relaxed to three hours. That might not seem like a big change. But it would permit airliners, for the first time, to fly on two engines from the West Coast to Hawaii -- a practice now banned because there is nowhere to land between the two points if the engines fail.    It would also allow nonstop flights on two engines between the West Coast and some parts of Asia and Australia. Carriers such as Pan Am and AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, which now use two-engine jets over the Atlantic, could take less circuitous routes to Europe.    Statistics of engine shutdowns on overwater flights are scarce. But aircraft manufacturers' records show only 20 engine failures on some 47,150 such flights world-wide since 1985. None resulted in accidents. In May, a United Boeing 747 was forced to land in Tokyo with only one of four engines operating because of a faulty fuel valve.    The possibility of losing one of only two engines three hours from land worries some pilots. &quot;I don't care who is flying the plane, that's a long time to go on one engine 25,000 feet over water,&quot; says Gary A. Wagner, an Air Canada pilot who has studied the issue for that airline. &quot;If you get into a headwind, the trip back may actually be more like 3 1/2 hours,&quot; he says.    A set of letters between Airbus Industrie, the European airplane maker, and the Canadian Air Line Pilots Association shows just how much marketing, rather than safety, entered into the debate. In 1984, the pilot group asked Airbus to compare two-engine with four-engine planes on a variety of safety issues.    Airbus wrote back that four-engine planes &quot;provide extra margins in many failure scenarios.&quot; But a year later, when the consortium was pushing its two-engine A-310s for long-range flights, it wrote in a technical brochure: &quot;Experience on our twin-engine aircraft . . . has led us to support fully the use of twins on extended-range operations.&quot;    The FAA says it sees no problem with expanding the use of twin-engine jets. Airlines using such planes for long-range flights are held to more stringent maintenance standards, the FAA says. But it concedes that much depends on how closely airlines follow the stricter standards.    Last year, an FAA inspection found maintenance deficiencies at Aloha Airlines, which had a special exemption to fly twin-engine jets from Honolulu to Christmas Island. The inspection took place just months before an unrelated accident in which the top of an Aloha jet tore open on a flight from Honolulu to Maui. </TEXT></DOC>