<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871214-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Computer Firms Step Up EffortsTo Make Machines Easier to Use---By Paul B. CarrollStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AAPL LOTS IBM MSFT CANNYCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   If computers are supposed to make life easier, why are most of them so hard to use?    The question has long been posed to computer-industry officials, but few companies in the industry have done much about it -- until recently.    For one thing, the power of personal computers has increased to the point where companies can address the problem. And, seeing Apple Computer Inc.'s continued success with the easy-to-use Macintosh, other personal computer companies are realizing they must solve the complexity problem or fall by the wayside. Their efforts range from the mundane -- making computer installation easier -- to the more fanciful -- experimenting with programs that would produce personalized newspapers that automatically adjust to the changing interests of the user.    &quot;Ease of use is absolutely paramount,&quot; says Mitchell D. Kapor, who founded Lotus Development Corp. and who recently set up another software company to address some of the problems. &quot;To most people, the computer is like an automobile. They don't want to know how it works; they want to get it in drive.&quot;    Toward that end, Mr. Kapor says his new venture, ON Technology Inc., will develop software over the next couple of years that will give computers some of the savvy that people have. For instance, it's possible to give a secretary a letter and say, &quot;Send this to Bob.&quot; No computer now on the market could begin to respond to such a command, but Mr. Kapor says that isn't because the technology is lacking. Faster hardware and new software techniques, he says, now make it possible to link enough information in a computer that it could determine who Bob is, where he works or lives, whether to send the letter to him by electronic mail or regular mail, and how to do that.    International Business Machines Corp. is playing around with what it calls a paperlike interface, which is designed to make a computer as easy to use as a pencil and paper. With a special pen, a user can write or draw on the screen of an experimental, three-pound device that looks much like an Etch A Sketch and that can rest in the user's lap. Because a computer can decipher most people's handwriting and can thus be programmed to recognize handwritten commands, the user can write notes or operate a spreadsheet accounting program without a keyboard.    IBM has also announced a piece of operating-system software addressing the ease-of-use problem. The product, called &quot;Presentation Manager,&quot; was developed with Microsoft Corp. and will work with the new IBM-Microsoft OS/2 operating system. Using the new product, to be available next October, software developers will be able to write programs letting users operate much the way they do on a Macintosh. That means users will make more choices from menus, rather than having to remember commands, and will be able to move the cursor around the screen by using a &quot;mouse.&quot; Users will also be able to perform functions by using icons -- for example, deleting a file by placing the cursor on a trash-can icon.    In addition, IBM is trying to make screens more readable (it found that people read 20% more slowly from a computer screen than from paper). It thinks it has solved the problem with a screen that presents black, typewriter-quality characters on a white background.    IBM is also playing with a technique that it calls &quot;disambiguation.&quot; This involves software that tries to recognize a command or a word or a data entry as soon as the user types enough characters. For instance, if someone were filling in a form that called for specifying a month, as soon as he typed &quot;A-u,&quot; the computer would make the entry read, &quot;August.&quot; The technique would not only save time for people entering data or typing lengthy commands but could be used to catch errors or to let users search a data base much faster.    Apple, which thinks it has the ease-of-use basics licked, is now concentrating on &quot;hypertext,&quot; a software technique that provides for a free-form way of organizing a data base. Bill Atkinson, an Apple computer scientist, says that with hypertext Apple could create a program that would make the 1040 federal income tax form a breeze to fill out. If a user needed to get a different form to calculate a number for a line on the 1040 form, he could simply point to that line using his mouse and hit a button. Once that form appeared, if he needed help he would just use the mouse to point to the line he needed explained.    Jef Raskin, a major architect of Apple's Macintosh, says he has designed a product for secretarial and clerical tasks that is even simpler to use than the Macintosh. The product, sold by Canon Inc. and called the Cat, uses personal-computer hardware and can send electronic mail and exchange documents with other computers. But the Cat is designed to be as simple to use as an electronic typewriter.    Then there's the far-out stuff. Alan Kay, an Apple computer scientist, does experiments with young children and even a gorilla so he won't assume his subjects have any computer expertise. Mr. Kay talks of special glasses that will display a computer screen for the wearer. The glasses will be connected to a computer the size of a Walkman that will sit in the user's pocket, and the user will be able to control the computer through head movements.    Mr. Kay also speaks of &quot;agents,&quot; which will be sort of computerized alter egos for the user and will insulate him from having to understand how to find information in the computer system. One agent might monitor news services and electronic mail for the user and present him each morning with a newspaper tailored to his interests. And the computer will be able to adjust to fit the user's changing interests; for instance, each day the computer may put together a newspaper based on what the user has recently been most interested in.    But that's a long way off, and nobody expects ease-of-use issues to disappear anytime soon. In fact, Stewart Alsop, editor of PC Letter, says he thinks many companies are just paying lip service to such concerns. In any case, he says many problems occur because personal computers are still so new and unfamiliar to the general public, and because no company can force software companies to make the same command perform the same function in all software applications.    In addition, many issues are extremely subtle, baffling even the best designers. Mr. Atkinson of Apple describes the time he was watching a videotape of a man using one of the company's computers. The software seemed to be guiding the user smoothly through a task, right up to the point where he was to hit the &quot;Do it&quot; button. But then, for some reason, the user seemed confused and he hit the &quot;cancel&quot; button instead.    So Mr. Atkinson watched the tape again, this time turning up the volume so he could hear the man's comments. He heard the man say, &quot;What's this `Dolt' button? I'm no dolt.&quot; And the man hit &quot;Cancel.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>