<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870713-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Loose Lending:Texas Sandamp;L DisastersAre Blamed, in Part,On Freewheeling Style---Some Real-Estate DevelopersBought Thrifts and UsedThem as Source of Funds---Links Among Four Bankers---By Leonard M. ApcarStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After buying a Texas savings and loan association in 1983, Thomas M. Gaubert wasn't particularly impressed with his more-experienced competitors, comparing them to &quot;a Rotary Club luncheon in Hamtramck, Mich.&quot;    Mr. Gaubert has never had much patience with small-town guys with small-time ideas. Citizens Savings andamp; Loan Association of Grand Prairie, Texas, had a modest $40.5 million in assets when he bought control of it for about $1 million. He renamed it Independent American Savings Association and launched a program of explosive growth. At its zenith, the Sandamp;L had $1.86 billion in assets, and Mr. Gaubert envisioned a financial-services and real-estate empire that would provide funds for home builders like himself in good times and bad.    Instead, he was ousted from his Sandamp;L by federal regulators in 1984. Independent American is insolvent and in the hands of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., it is operating as Independent American Savings Association, F.S.L.A.    Deregulation of Sandamp;Ls in the early 1980s opened up commercial lending to the industry at a time when the Texas economy was booming. Overnight, Texas became a financial playground for Mr. Gaubert and several other Dallas real-estate high rollers. They saw the thrift business as a vehicle for their big ambitions and expensive tastes, as offering a chance to become lenders instead of borrowers.    &quot;I am tired of playing Monopoly with my money,&quot; one developer-turned-banker confided in the early days. &quot;This way, we can use the depositors' money.&quot;    For some developers, &quot;owning a Texas thrift was a dream come true -- a virtual printing press to provide money to develop real estate,&quot; says William K. Black, who, until July 1, was the FSLIC's deputy director. He is now a high official at the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco.    The new Sandamp;L owners often skirted the edge of regulatory propriety, and some of them, investigators say, may have committed fraud. Some Sandamp;Ls' operations were &quot;a variant of the old pyramid scheme,&quot; Mr. Black adds. They required a steady flow of deposits, which the government insured, to pile risky loans atop others and generate quick profits from loan fees.    In effect, Uncle Sam aided the scheme. Backed by federal deposit insurance, the Sandamp;Ls paid high interest rates for big, insured deposits, which the Sandamp;Ls lent interest-free to their developer friends. The loans frequently were padded with stiff loan fees and interest charges, which the Sandamp;Ls kept on their books. When interest was due, the borrower didn't pay it; the Sandamp;L simply transferred funds to the Sandamp;L from an &quot;interest reserve account&quot; funded by the loan. A similar process siphoned loan fees from the loans.    The phony incomes produced wildly exaggerated profits that wound up as dividends in the pockets of some Sandamp;L owners, regulators say.    Banks may structure real-estate loans similarly, but Sandamp;L deregulation allowed only thrift institutions to make loans without any down payment by the borrower. And in Texas, where Sandamp;L powers are broader, loans could exceed the purchase price of property.    When the loans soured, the Sandamp;Ls jacked up rates to lure more deposits, cranked out larger long-shot loans and booked more fees to cover the losses. Now, as thrifts are collapsing in Texas, the government is protecting depositors and trying to mop up the lending mess.    &quot;There is such a pattern there,&quot; says a former federal regulator, &quot;that it is hard to believe that it all fell into place accidentally.&quot; At some Texas thrifts, he says, &quot;there was clearly a looting-type situation. Some got in and started the looting,&quot; he adds, &quot;and then others said, 'Look at those guys driving Rolls-Royces and living it up,'&quot; and they became &quot;copycat&quot; Sandamp;Ls.    Today, of 280 Texas Sandamp;Ls, about 60 are insolvent. Regulators say about two-thirds of those are &quot;brain dead,&quot; open but sustaining losses and likely to collapse. Besides Mr. Gaubert, three other leading players who piloted Texas thrifts have been removed from their Sandamp;Ls by regulators:    --Don R. Dixon, another Dallas home builder, who bought sleepy Vernon Savings andamp; Loan Association in North Texas and converted it into a personal piggy bank with $1.3 billion in assets to finance a yacht, lavish California homes, a fleet of planes and loans to cronies. About 96% of Vernon's loans were in default when regulators took control of it last March and accused Vernon officers of looting. He has filed for personal bankruptcy and has taken the Fifth Amendment when questioned by government investigators.    --Jarrett E. Woods Jr., a Dallas real-estate investor, who bought another small-town Texas Sandamp;L, had a fancy for million-dollar loans without borrower equity. Among them were loans to a network of other Texas Sandamp;L insiders. The seizure by federal regulators last fall of his Western Savings Association, with $2 billion in assets, was the third-largest on record. A lawsuit by Mr. Woods to regain his thrift was denied by Federal Judge Barefoot Sanders, who called Western &quot;the story of a management oblivious to the recklessness of its policies.&quot; Mr. Woods is appealing the decision.    --Edwin T. McBirney III, a 35-year-old Dallas real-estate millionaire who merged six small, mostly unprofitable Sandamp;Ls into Sunbelt Savings Association, which at its peak was one of Texas's largest, with $3.2 billion in assets. He lent money with such eye-popping speed that would-be borrowers crowded into Sunbelt's waiting room or staked out one of his favorite restaurants. Sunbelt didn't fail, but after a string of losses and loan irregularities at the association, regulators pressured Mr. McBirney to leave, though he remains the largest shareholder. He also is the president of Tangent Corp. and Amchase Financial Corp., both of Dallas, and recently took control of Homac Inc., a small, publicly held Detroit real-estate company.    Of the four Sandamp;L executives, federal regulators have accused only Messrs. Dixon and Woods of wrongdoing in federal court.    At the local level, the Texas thrift debacle has left thousands of depositors worried about the safety of their funds, and the recession-struck real-estate market reeling from a glut of projects thrown together with easy money. Dallas has about 38 million square feet of unused office space, equivalent to 17 Empire State Buildings    In Washington, much of the debate over the number ofbillions needed to bolster the FSLIC focuses on the Texasproblem. Roy G. Green, the president of the Federal Home LoanBank of Dallas, conservatively estimates that up totwo-thirds of the proposed $8.5 billion bailout fund will beneeded in Texas alone.   Several weeks ago, the Federal Bureau of Investigation launched an ambitious effort to track billions of dollars in land deals throughout the Lone Star State. Many of the transactions involved Messrs. Dixon, Gaubert, McBirney and Woods and several of their borrowers. A Dallas federal grand jury subpoenaed their personal bank records as well as those of more than 250 other Sandamp;L owners, executives, borrowers and a few of their wives.    Much of what they find, it appears, also will reflect a breakdown in the federal and state Sandamp;L regulatory system. Regulators concede that the highflying lending operations in Texas Sandamp;Ls simply spun out of their control and still aren't in hand.    &quot;This is the biggest Keystone Kops debacle to happen to U.S. financial institutions since the Great Depression,&quot; says an experienced Sandamp;L executive hired by the FSLIC to help unravel one of Texas's weakest Sandamp;Ls. &quot;The failure on the regulators' side is every bit equal to the failures committed by the other side.&quot;    Even though the newly minted lenders were doubling and redoubling the size of their new Sandamp;Ls, thrift examiners were taking up to two years to schedule a visit. And when the regional Federal Home Loan Bank was moved to Dallas from Little Rock in late 1983, the number of agents and supervisors shrank to 12 from 34. &quot;We lacked bodies and experienced people,&quot; says Mr. Black, the former FSLIC official. &quot;Turnover was pandemic.&quot;    About a year ago, the situation was so grave that federal regulators summoned as many as 275 thrift examiners from around the country -- more than double the Dallas examination staff at that time -- to try to catch up on thrift reviews in Texas.    They found Sandamp;L owners tooling around in Rolls Royces and private jets and lending millions interest-free to developers who put little, if any, of their own money into the projects. On paper, the thrift institutions had artificially inflated profits; in fact, they were insolvent.    As a result, 58 Sandamp;Ls, mostly in Texas, have been placed under supervisory agreements that limit certain types of lending. Also, 23 Sandamp;Ls, again mostly in Texas, were slapped with cease-and-desist orders curtailing unsafe banking practices. Officers, directors or some stockholders of four institutions have been kicked out and barred from ever working in a federally insured bank or Sandamp;L; regulators decline to identify them.    The problems of the high rollers went well beyond the pain induced by the collapse of the oil-based Southwest economy. They ignored problem loans, resisted foreclosing on office buildings and dug themselves even deeper into trouble by making additional loans and restructuring others. There is evidence that some Sandamp;L insiders moved troubled loans from one thrift to another, keeping one step ahead of regulators and raising questions about fraud.    Messrs. Dixon, Gaubert, McBirney and Woods, all prominent in Dallas real-estate circles, were comfortable in this go-go atmosphere. As Sandamp;L owners, they lent to some of the same customers. Some Sandamp;Ls lent to one another and often swapped land holdings and loans. &quot;There was some incestuous trading going on,&quot; says Samuel D. Ware, a young Dallas real-estate investor who borrowed some $300 million from Texas Sandamp;Ls, including Sunbelt and Independent American.    For example, Sunbelt lent money to Messrs. Woods and Gaubert, and Mr. Woods's Western and Mr. Gaubert's Independent American apparently returned the favor, lending millions to Mr. McBirney personally and buying Sunbelt loans that had gone bad. Mr. Gaubert calls it &quot;correspondent banking&quot; and says that bankers have done it for years. The government calls it &quot;back-scratching&quot; when one thrift refinances or purchases a bad loan to scrub the books prior to a federal examination or to avoid loan write-offs and losses.    Many of the highfliers' practices seem to have little to do with prudent banking. The Sandamp;Ls often didn't plan to make money by earning interest on the loans. Instead, they generated profits by charging hefty loan -- origination fees -- sometimes as much as 5% of the loan. And they put part of the loan on the books as interest and often invested directly in projects, hoping to cash in on the real-estate boom itself.    At most highflying Texas thrifts, a friend of the boss could get millions of dollars on a signature. Loans could exceed the purchase price of the land, thanks to some liberal Texas Sandamp;L laws and cooperative appraisers. Down payments were considered an unnecessary formality, and nobody seriously considered chasing after a borrower who didn't pay.    The flow of loan-fee income and phony interest payments allowed the Vernon Sandamp;L to avoid loan write-offs and post impressive profits. In the first year Mr. Dixon controlled it, the Sandamp;L's reported net income tripled and loans more than doubled. Vernon, Sunbelt and Western paid hefty interest rates for &quot;hot money&quot; deposits offered by money brokers, who, for a commission, would make a series of deposits, each up to the federally insured $100,000 limit.    A lot of that money wound up as loans to Mr. Dixon's cronies, and some of it, regulators allege, went to Mr. Dixon. In a suit filed by the FSLIC in federal court here, regulators say Vernon officers &quot;looted, dissipated and wasted&quot; Vernon's assets. The agency, which now is operating it as Vernon Savings andamp; Loan Association, F.S.A., is seeking a record $540 million in damages. The FSLIC lawsuit says that Vernon's profits generated nearly $40 million in dividends to Vernon shareholders, mainly one of Mr. Dixon's companies, and that at least $8 million went to Mr. Dixon personally in dividends, bonuses and salary, though Mr. Dixon, other than serving on the loan committee, never had a formal job at the Sandamp;L.    Mr. Dixon's control of Vernon, whose assets hit a peak of $1.3 billion, paid off handsomely. His wife's diary describes &quot;the flying house party&quot; in October 1983, when, for 10 days, the Dixons, another Vernon couple and ahost of European socialites hopscotched by private jet or Rolls Royce to top-flight restaurants in Paris and southern France. At one marathon lunch in Lyons, complete with champagne and truffle soup, Paul Bocuse, a well-known French chef, lined up his 12 chefs in the courtyard for Mr. Dixon to review. Examiners found that Vernon paid $68,036.98 for that trip and four others.    The 250-pound Mr. Gaubert, and Mr. McBirney, who personally ran Sunbelt's lending operation, were cut from the same cloth. When young, both had their own businesses: Mr. Gaubert sawed bicycles in half in Indianapolis, modified them and rented them as tandems; Mr. McBirney rented refrigerators to students at Southern Methodist University. By the time they met, both had made millions in Dallas real estate.    Friends say the darkly handsome Mr. McBirney has the Midas touch in real estate: a fast mind, a retentive memory and a smooth, reassuring pitch. He ruined so many tablecloths outlining deals at Jason's Restaurant in Dallas that the management covered his table with paper.    At Sunbelt, Mr. McBirney, cigar in hand, often shuttled among two or three rooms filled with groups of borrowers, while others waited their turn in the lobby. He would huddle in a conference room to get a summary of how a multimillion-dollar deal was structured before he gave his approval. Then, he would go off to review another prospective loan. &quot;When he walked back into the the first negotiating room,&quot; says Jack Sommerfield, a former Sunbelt vice chairman, &quot;I'd start by bringing him up to date, and Ed would say, 'Yeah, I remember. Go from there.'&quot;    The Gaubert-McBirney loans include about $30 million in loans for two new Dallas-area apartment projects that Mr. Gaubert is building and $6 million that Mr. Gaubert borrowed to take control of TeleCom Corp., a diversified Dallas company that makes, among other things, heating and air-conditioning equipment, national-park souvenirs and pecan-processing equipment. Mr. Gaubert's Independent American lent Mr. McBirney personally $3 million to $4 million.    Of the four thrift executives, only Mr. Gaubert is willing to answer questions. Enmeshed in a bitter court fight with the FSLIC to regain control of Independent American, he denies that he &quot;networked&quot; loans between his Sandamp;L and the others.    Mr. Gaubert believes that his removal from the thrift industry is due partly to his prominent fund-raising activities for Democrats and to his willingness to supply congressional investigators with evidence about now-defunct Empire Savings andamp; Loan Association, of Mesquite, Texas, which was involved in an earlier Texas Sandamp;L scam that he believes embarrassed federal thrift-industry regulators. The regulators also looked into his business dealings and were critical of some land transactions, but he hasn't been accused of any criminal wrongdoing.    Federal officials are focusing on a tract of about 6,500 acres of Dallas County land that was sold twice in 1984 in transactions involving Western Savings, Sunbelt, Independent American and Investex Savings of Tyler, Texas, a failing institution that Independent American bought. Mr. Gaubert's real-estate business found the land, Independent American Savings bought it with help from Sunbelt and later sold it to a former Sunbelt officer who got financing from Sunbelt, Independent American and Western.    Along the way, Mr. Gaubert says Independent American pocketed a tidy $30 million profit on the sale, using the money to invest in Investex Savings. He says the land deal was cleared by Dallas Federal Home Loan Bank officials because they wanted to see the failing Investex merged with another Sandamp;L. The bank won't comment.    But federal examiners and law-enforcement officials question whether the transaction wasn't a land flip -- the quick sale of land at a wildly inflated price, in this case about double the purchase price -- designed to generate cash for the seller and the lending Sandamp;Ls. Mr. Gaubert says the original seller of the land didn't know what it was worth.    Meanwhile, the FSLIC is paying real-estate experts to put the once-highflying thrifts back in shape. But a whiff of the freewheeling days lingers on.    The other day at Western Federal Savings, the successor Sandamp;L to insolvent Western Savings, a man dropped in unexpectedly, dressed in white tennis shorts and swirling a glass of Scotch on the rocks. He owes Western about $100 million and for three months hadn't responded to dunning letters and phone calls.    He didn't have any plans to repay the loans, he told a lending officer, adding that he will ignore further appeals. &quot;I understand you have to take the properties away,&quot; he said, stirring his drink. &quot;I won't answer your letters. I won't respond to subpoenas. Here's my phone number, but I won't return your calls.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>