<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880906-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Investors Lose Millions in Stock Schemes --- European Operations Pitched Thinly Traded Shares at Inflated Prices </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas Kamm (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> SEC </G><DATELINE> GENEVA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Marcos Sideris, a Greek agronomist living in Saudi Arabia, usually is wary of investing in stock markets. But a series of persuasive telephone calls early this year from a man who identified himself as Blair Philips, vice president of a Swiss-based brokerage called Prudentrust Financial S.A., persuaded him to invest $15,000 in shares of &quot;a company of the future,&quot; Columbia Electronics Systems, a small U.S. concern.    &quot;He was so convincing, he made you think you'd be a millionaire overnight,&quot; Mr. Sideris says. Instead, Mr. Philips -- possibly a fake name -- appears to have vanished, along with Mr. Sideris's money. Columbia Electronics Systems, it turns out, didn't own the assets claimed for it; its stock is no longer traded on the U.S. over-the-counter market. And Prudentrust no longer answers telephone calls.    Mr. Sideris is one of several thousand investors around the world who investigators say got burned in one of the biggest and most sophisticated stock-fraud swindles in recent years. Authorities in Europe and the U.S. say a global network bilked investors out of an estimated $250 million for at least two years before being partially dismantled by police in late July.    Using aggressive telephone-sales tactics, prosecutors say, so-called boiler rooms like Prudentrust -- most of them operating out of Switzerland -- inflicted variations of the Columbia Electronics scheme on thousands of middle-class investors like Mr. Sideris. The various boiler rooms flogged shares of thinly traded over-the-counter stocks at inflated prices. Other than what the boiler-room operations sold, there was little market for these shares, and when they stopped pushing the shares the market for them would dry up, leaving investors stuck.    Evidence suggests that some of the boiler rooms sold stock in companies whose assets were grossly exaggerated. Some securities were sold on the promise of &quot;mergers&quot; that took place only in bogus press releases.    And some investigators say the sophistication and geographical reach of the stock-sales efforts lead them to conclude that the ring was used by organized crime to launder money. &quot;These aren't little crooks; this is organized crime,&quot; says Peter Cosandey, a Zurich prosecutor who handled a smaller but similar boiler-room case in 1985. And Laurent Kasper-Ansermet, an investigating magistrate in Geneva who is looking into the activities of three boiler rooms, says he is trying to determine if the scheme was meant to launder money. &quot;If you buy shares with dirty money, selling them to pigeons allows you to have clean money,&quot; he says.    At dawn on July 27, police in Switzerland and France shut down at least six boiler rooms and arrested at least 23 people, some of whom subsequently were released. Among those still held is Thomas F. Quinn, better known as Tommy Quinn, a 51-year-old American with a history of securities-law violations and alleged links to organized crime, who is under scrutiny as the mastermind behind the boiler-room scheme. Jailed in Paris, Mr. Quinn is charged with fraud, illegal canvassing and violating French securities law. His lawyer, Emmanuel Trink, won't comment on the case. Investigators say they issued arrest warrants naming five more individuals thought to be at the heart of the operation, but decline to identify them.    U.S. legal authorities say Mr. Quinn has links to organized crime. Mr. Cosandey, the Zurich prosecutor, says he obtained &quot;official U.S. reports&quot; from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Securities and Exchange Commission that described Mr. Quinn as &quot;an LCN associate.&quot; LCN stands for La Cosa Nostra. In 1970, Mr. Quinn served six months in the Danbury, Conn., federal penitentiary after being convicted in New York on securities, mail and wire fraud related to the 1963 sale of securities in Kent Industries Inc., an over-the-counter company. Mr. Quinn, a lawyer, was disbarred in New York because of the conviction.    In late 1986, Mr. Quinn settled SEC charges that he and others had used &quot;false and misleading information&quot; in public offerings of securities in two gold mining companies in which he was the &quot;undisclosed control person.&quot; Mr. Quinn signed a consent decree that enjoined him from violations of the registration and anti-fraud provisions of the federal securities laws, neither admitting nor denying guilt. He didn't have to disgorge profits.    Mr. Quinn's name also surfaced in a 1985 securities fraud case in Switzerland concerning a boiler room called Chartwell Securities, says Mr. Cosandey. Authorities closed Chartwell but they later dropped the case, and Mr. Quinn was never charged.    The latest raids were made possible by unusual cooperation between police in France, Switzerland and West Germany, who continue to compare notes.    The arrests could push regulatory authorities in many countries to tighten their watch on portfolio-management activities. Indeed, the affair highlights the down side of unregulated financial activities in countries such as Switzerland. In most Swiss cantons, brokerages don't need licenses to sell stocks -- all the while trading on Switzerland's image of security.    &quot;So far, there has been no regulation, but I think that it will become necessary soon, not just because of this affair but because of the internationalization of markets,&quot; says Kurt Schneuwly, chief executive of the Geneva stock exchange. The portfolio-management and security-selling houses &quot;sell stocks like they would sell shirts or ties. . . . Had there been regulations, we would probably have discovered earlier that they were selling hot air.&quot;    Investigators acknowledge it could take years to determine the sheer scope of the ring and piece together links between numerous companies and individuals. Already, investors in 40 countries, from Sweden to Australia, have filed complaints, says Geneva lawyer Cecile Ringgenberg. &quot;It was like a multinational company,&quot; she says.    Among the boiler rooms shut down in Switzerland are Falcontrust Financial Ltd. in Geneva; Kettler Investment AG in Geneva and Lugano; Equity Management Services in Nyon; Chelsea Financial AG and Stockwell Financial AG in Basel; and in France, Namco in Ferney-Voltaire. Prudentrust, which sold Mr. Sideris his shares, is under investigation but authorities won't say if they have closed it. Investigators are looking for links with boiler rooms in Britain, West Germany and Spain.    Whether they bought shares from Falcontrust, Prudentrust, Kettler or another boiler room, investors tell the same story. It all began with newsletters with names like the Swiss Analyst, the Fortnighter or Strategy Market Letter, which came unsolicited in the mail. Investigators say the newsletters combined analysis of blue-chip stocks with recommendations for &quot;undiscovered&quot; U.S. over-the-counter stocks.    A few days later, investors would receive a call hawking the over-the-counter shares. The callers usually had American or Canadian accents and, investors say, were highly persuasive. &quot;It was professional in every respect,&quot; says Colin Harvey, a British investor who bought shares from Falcontrust. &quot;They even sent me a Christmas card.&quot;    Once they hooked someone, the salesmen would call repeatedly, saying how well the stocks were doing and recommending new purchases. But if investors tried to sell, the salesmen would say the stock had fallen below the purchase price. Then the broker would propose swapping those shares at the investor's purchase price for other, more-expensive shares -- meaning investors would have to cough up more money.    Usually, &quot;investors couldn't realize their capital gain,&quot; if there was one, says Mr. Kasper-Ansermet, the Geneva magistrate. &quot;They were locked in.&quot; Now, with the boiler rooms shut and market makers dropping out of the stocks they bought, investors fear they are left with worthless securities, which they bought at apparently inflated prices in the first place.    In at least three cases in Europe, investigators say, stock sales involved companies that were in the midst of a &quot;takeover&quot; that was never completed. Typically, a shell company without any assets -- which may have been controlled by people linked to the boiler-room ring -- would announce plans to acquire a small private company with real assets. As negotiations went on, someone would issue a brochure asserting that the shell company already owned the target company's assets and offering to sell shares in the shell company. In most cases, after the shares were sold the takeover would fail or run into difficulty.    Such was the case with Columbia Electronics Systems, the company in which Mr. Sideris invested. It was supposed to be the result of a planned merger between a shell company called Solar Heat andamp; Insulation of Central Utah, which moved to Nevada in 1987, and a small Sidney, N.Y., electronics concern called Columbia Components Co.    William Montren, president of Columbia Components, says that in seeking funds to develop his company he entered into a contract in November 1987 with Solar Heat. Solar Heat was to buy Columbia Components and change its name to Columbia Electronics. Mr. Montren was to remain as operations officer of the new company. The takeover also was to include a private stock placement in Europe. But the takeover never was completed.    Yet, somehow, a brochure for Columbia Electronics Systems was sent to investors, and shares were sold. Mr. Montren says he wasn't aware at the time that the brochure existed or that stock was being sold. He says the brochure, which he saw only recently, &quot;makes it sound as if this is a $20 million company,&quot; though it has annual sales of only $300,000.    In March, Columbia Electronics investors received press releases announcing completion of the merger. Attached was a letter, supposedly signed by H. Robert Harber, who had agreed to become president of Columbia Electronics. But Mr. Harber says he has &quot;absolutely no knowledge of this letter&quot; and that the signature isn't his. Mr. Harber says he resigned &quot;about six months ago&quot; because of delays in receiving financial statements, but he says he isn't certain he had resigned by March 8, when the letter was sent. &quot;To my knowledge,&quot; he says, &quot;I don't know of one share being sold in that company.&quot;    But shares were sold to people like Mr. Sideris, who reports that in June he received a press release sent for Prudentrust that he says identified an unnamed company &quot;interested in acquiring a controlling interest&quot; in Columbia Electronics.    In the meantime, Mr. Harber says in a letter to Mr. Montren's attorney, Columbia Electronics moved to Trinidad and has three new dirctors. At the phone number supplied by Mr. Montren's attorney, a man says Columbia Electronics &quot;moved out last week&quot; and left no forwarding address.    Sums up Barbara Schmidt, an SEC attorney in Chicago who is involved in the current investigation: &quot;nothing would surprise me in this case. When Michael Douglas made the movie on Wall Street, he made the wrong movie. This is a much better story.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>