<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ PLANS to meet with Shevardnadze to discuss arms reduction.    An administration official said the secretary of state will travel to Moscow at the end of the month or in early April to &quot;accelerate the arms-control process.&quot; Michael Armacost, undersecretary of state, is to lay the groundwork for Shultz's visit, which had been tentative, when he travels March 16 to Moscow. Disclosure of the Shultz trip came as U.S. arms negotiators briefed NATO allies about proposals to eliminate mediumrange missiles from Europe amid alliance concern about short-range Soviet weapons.    Reagan said an arms pact was &quot;within reach&quot; following Gorbachev's offer dropping demands to limit tests of a U.S. space-based antimissile system.    ---   Reagan said it was time to move on from &quot;inside-Washington politics.&quot; The president's comments came a day after he conceded that his Iran policy was &quot;a mistake.&quot; The White House, meanwhile, sought to regain political momentum and began weighing such ideas as a budget &quot;summit&quot; and a Reagan speaking tour.    ---   Contra leaders said retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Secord procured arms for the Nicaraguan rebels, who paid about $9 million for shipments from an estimated $32 million from foreign donors in the first nine months after U.S. military aid ran out in mid-1984. Sources of the weapons included Europe and China.    The Reagan administration issued a formal statement to Congress aimed at freeing the remaining $40 million in aid approved last year for the Nicaraguan rebels. The move came as House Democrats planned a vote next week to block further assistance.    ---   Meese named independent counsel Lawrence Walsh as a special federal prosecutor. The move is an attempt to thwart any disruption of the Iran-Contra investigation. Meese also said the Justice Department had joined an effort to have North's constitutional challenge of the independent-counsel law dismissed.    ---   The House passed and sent to the Senate a bill authorizing $500 million in emergency aid to the nation's homeless. The bill, approved 264-121, was opposed by the Reagan administration, mainly because of its substantial cost.    ---   French police uncovered a cache of arms and explosives in Paris and arrested seven Mideast nationals in connection with the discovery, the Interior Ministry said. Separately, two men and two women suspected of being leaders of the Direct Action terrorist group were charged in the Nov. 17 murder of the head of the Renault car firm.    ---   Shultz said he intends during a visit to Seoul today to ask President Chun about the South Korean leader's plans to step down early. The secretary of state, at the close of his six-day trip to China, strongly reaffirmed a U.S. commitment to the eventual reunification of China.    A South Korean dissident expressed hope that the U.S. would help resolve South Korea's political deadlock over direct presidential elections. Kim Dae Jung said he wants the U.S. to act as a mediator between Chun's government and opposition leaders.    ---   Italian President Cossiga began consultations with veteran politicians in an effort to find a successor to Prime Minister Craxi, who resigned Tuesday. A dispute between the Socialist Party and the Christian Democrats, however, could lead to general elections about a year ahead of schedule.    ---   Israeli leaders sought to defuse tension with the U.S. over the Pollard spy affair and said Israel had made serious errors in handling the case. Defense Minister Rabin, however, insisted that the incident was a &quot;unique exception&quot; to Israeli policy. Pollard was given a life prison term Wednesday for passing U.S. military data to Israel.    ---   Aides to Lebanon's president met with Syrian officials on a Moslem proposal aimed at ending Lebanon's civil war. Details of the proposal haven't been announced, but they reportedly center on constitutional amendments that would strip President Gemayel of the power to veto cabinet decisions and to name the country's prime minister.    ---   Soviet officials denied any plans to publish the books of Alexander Solzhenitsyn on the life of dissidents in Soviet labor camps. The deputy editor of the literary publication Novy Mir, clarifying earlier statements, said that while the editorial board &quot;would consider all Russian literature,&quot; publication of two Solzhenitsyn works wasn't planned.    ---   Officials in Sweden said Stockholm's police chief, who led a futile yearlong search for the assassin of Palme, resigned. Hans Holmer, removed from the case last month, quit shortly before he was to testify before a parliamentary panel on the investigation.    ---   A Soviet cargo spacecraft docked with the orbiting Mir space station, where two cosmonauts have been conducting experiments for more than a month, Radio Moscow said. The cargo craft carried two tons of supplies, including scientific gear, rocket fuel and fresh fruit. The cosmonauts are to remain in space until at least July.    ---   Vatican sources said a document to be issued next week will question the morality of test-tube fertilization, embryo experiments and other medical practices connected with procreation. The document is expected to conclude that fundamental moral principles of the Roman Catholic Church are sometimes violated in such procedures.    ---   Military prosecutors demanded 16-year jail terms for 82 Ecuadoran air force paratroops accused of holding President Leon Febres Cordero hostage in January. Febres Cordero was freed in return for the release of an imprisoned rebel general.    ---   Markets --   Stocks: Volume 205,430,000 shares. Dow Jones industrials 2276.43, up 18.98; transportation 956.64, up 3.76; utilities 220.12, up 0.12.    Bonds: Dow Jones 20 bonds 94.90, off 0.04.    Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 113.59, off 0.56; spot index 113.98, off 1.44. </TEXT></DOC>