<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871222-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev's Reform: Where's the Beef?---By Vladimir Bukovsky</HL><DD> 12/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   The conditions he offers are extremely good: You rent a heifer from the state and raise it on your private plot. You can keep the heifer as long as you wish, milk it, sell its milk on the market and, if it calves, you are welcome to keep the calf. Above all, the state will pay you handsomely per kilogram of extra weight when you deliver your rental cow to a slaughterhouse.    The deal is attractive; there is even a discount for newlyweds. Yet for some reason the 25 million or so eligible Soviet peasants are in no hurry to take advantage of it. Unlike all those Western leaders who find Comrade Gorbachev to be trustworthy and courageous, honest and reliable enough to &quot;do business&quot; with, Soviet state -- and collective -- farmers know that the Soviet Union is not an autocracy and Mikhail Gorbachev is not a czar: You do business with the whole political system. And the system is still the same as it was 60 years ago when it first encouraged peasants to &quot;enrich&quot; themselves and then exterminated those who acted on its urging.    During World War II and after, the cows that survived collectivization were used to plow the fields, horses having been drafted into the army and largely killed. And after the war, the tax on a cow had become so huge that you had to sell your cow to pay it.    Then came a great liberalization. Peasants were allowed to keep their cows without a tax. Unfortunately, they were not permitted to produce the fodder. Later, this mistake was corrected by the party, and they could get the fodder, but not the cow -- because, you see, a cow could be described as a &quot;means of production,&quot; and under socialism the means of production could not belong to a private owner. Naturally, nobody wants a cow anymore.    The command economy is built on obedience. Rigid central planning, a huge bureaucracy, unlimited government power to promote or fire, to enrich or impoverish any individual in the country does create the illusion of total government control. At the same time people lose their interest in working, their skills and productivity decline, and the black market prospers. In practice, the government does not even know how much is actually produced, let alone how to regulate production.    The ruling Communist Party, which does not bother itself with such petty trifles as productivity, would love to &quot;rent&quot; out its decrepit economic machinery to someone for a while. But what price could it get for it? And above all, who would want it? Surely not the same people the party has been robbing and abusing for the past 70 years. To gain their confidence, much more would have to be offered than mere &quot;perestroika&quot; and &quot;glasnost.&quot;    Contrary to popular Western belief, Mr. Gorbachev did not invent glasnost -- he &quot;borrowed&quot; it from the Soviet human-rights movement. And so far he has not shown much gratitude to the members of the human-rights movement who are still in prison or the lunatic asylum not only for exercising glasnost de facto but even just for demanding it. The 170 of them pardoned earlier this year are but a meager fraction of the lot, and were released only after a prolonged, degrading campaign of pressure on them to recant.    In one sense Mr. Gorbachev is right to withhold his thanks: For the movement, glasnost was a way to expose lies; for him it is a method for concealing them. All he says, lullingly, is trust me. His deal is with the West only: He has delivered a bit of the goods and expects to be rewarded.    Mr. Gorbachev's glasnost is merely a campaign of criticism being carried on by certain elements of the media with the blessings of the party. Before this policy was launched, poor Boris Yeltsin explained its rationale: &quot;The Soviet people should learn bad news from the party propagandists, not from the BBC.&quot; After all, the proper task of propaganda is not to ignore events but to interpret them.    Mr. Gorbachev is out not to change the system but to save it -- along with his own skin. In Russia, unlike the West, we do not call this &quot;courage.&quot; If we did, we would have to say that Lenin also showed considerable courage when he introduced the New Economic Policy to bring his country back from the abyss in 1921. Nor could we deny the accolade to Stalin, who, in 1941, when the Russian people were refusing to defend his gulags and kolkhozes from the German army, even opened the churches. The courage displayed by Khrushchev would have to be considered positively stunning. On average, fits of courage afflict Soviet leaders every 20 years, by coincidence at a moment of some deep crisis in the Soviet system. Once the regime is saved, such courage not only becomes unnecessary but is even punishable.    The Soviet Union simply cannot afford any longer to compete militarily with the West and maintain its vast empire, let alone expand it. A few more years of decline and there will be no money to pay Cuba and Vietnam, Angola and Nicaragua. Just imagine what that might mean for Eastern Europe and possibly for the captive nations within Soviet borders as well. No wonder the Soviet press compares the current situation with that of 1941.    Mr. Gorbachev's new policies constitute a desperate attempt to recruit a reluctant Soviet population into saving the cause of socialism, even if to do so means &quot;renting a cow&quot; to the peasantry and sharing profits for a while. But he also knows that nothing will be achieved without massive Western aid. This is why most of his closest aides are the men most expert in dealing with the West. For here, too, there are quite a few &quot;cows&quot; he must rent out.    To begin with, there is the preservation of Soviet military superiority while concentrating all resources on internal reorganization. This cow is about to be rented to the Americans, who can be relied upon to treat it well under the terms of an &quot;equitable and verifiable&quot; arms-control agreement.    After this one comes a whole herd -- Cuba, Nicaragua, Vietnam, Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia and some others -- that must also be preserved in their socialist beauty while the cowherd is busy tending to himself. Accordingly, they have already been put up for rent, with the Soviets encouraging them to improve their property value by negotiating regional &quot;detentes&quot; with their neighbors. And business is brisk; there is no shortage of takers.    As for the Soviet Union itself, it, too, is very eager to be &quot;wooed away&quot; by the West. The biggest and most unproductive of all these cows, the Soviet economy, desperately needs credits, technology and even just managers. The conditions offered are quite good: Half the profit goes to the Soviets, and a mere 30% must be reinvested in the Soviet Union.    Only one term is not made clear, and that is the duration of the agreement. Even the least important of the &quot;changes&quot; Mr. Gorbachev is willing to bring about will grow into a formidable problem if allowed to go on for a few years.    The experience of certain East European countries teaches that the introduction of even the slightest element of a market economy leads to inflation and industrial unrest, and at the same time weakens the power of the Communist Party. After all, if people are going to be promoted according to their performance and rewarded according to their merits, who will bother to join the party or listen to it? Yet the general secretary has no other instrument of control over the country, and if he reduces the power of the party, he reduces his own power as well.    Meanwhile, a new generation brought up in the atmosphere of glasnost, phony as it is, will certainly go one step further and try to convert this so-called openness into real freedom of speech. Various nationalities and religious minorities will intensify their struggle as well. Moreover, Eastern Europe can be expected to follow Moscow's example -- even to the point where the &quot;fraternal assistance&quot; of the Soviet army would be required to correct the situation.    It is obvious that Soviet leaders cannot play with so-called &quot;radical reform&quot; for longer than a few years -- five to seven at best -- before the process becomes irreversible. So five to seven years down the line the party, with or without Mr. Gorbachev, will reverse gear and reclaim its property. The now-&quot;eliminated&quot; SS-20s, or their equivalents, will once again point their warheads at Western targets. Peace movements will once again fill the streets of European capitals. And by then the West will probably have given up on the idea of deploying its Pershings in response.    Five to seven years down the line the whole herd of socialist cows, now well-fattened by their Western keepers, will answer the call of the Soviet cowherd and desert the rich pastures of capitalism. At that point, Western bankers and businessmen will be setting out to cut their losses, exactly as they are doing today with their Third World loans. They may make angry speeches and threats, but taxpayers and stockholders will bail them out.    Clearly, neither articles nor books, neither national arguments nor emotional pleas, will succeed in averting this scenario -- or persuade a world bent on heedlessly doing itself in. But when this prediction comes true, at least do not blame the Russians. Even the most backward Russian peasant understands what Mr. Gorbachev is up to better than Western statesmen and bankers do.    ---   Mr. Bukovsky, a leading emigre dissident, now lives in Cambridge, England, and is a founder of Paris-based Resistance International. </TEXT></DOC>