<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880314-0027 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHAMIR TRAVELED to the U.S. for talks on unrest in the occupied areas.    The Israeli prime minister, who is to begin a four-day visit to Washington today, is to meet with Reagan and administration officials to discuss a U.S. initiative aimed at ending the unrest in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Shamir opposes provisions of the peace plan and is expected to present a counterproposal. In the occupied territories, more than half of the 850 Arab police officers resigned.    As thousands of Israelis rallied in Tel Aviv to support Shamir, Israel choked off gasoline supplies to the West Bank after Arabs set fire to two trucks.    ---   McFARLANE DEFENDED his congressional testimony despite his guilty plea.    The former White House aide, who pleaded guilty Friday to four misdemeanor counts of misleading Congress about the Iran-Contra affair, said it was &quot;reasonable to expect properly classified material will remain so.&quot; McFarlane's plea paves the way for the criminal charges expected to be filed against other participants in the sale of arms to Iran and the diversion of proceeds to Nicaraguan rebels.    McFarlane, who has promised to cooperate with the independent counsel's investigation, said on ABC-TV that he hadn't any new data on the affair.    ---   NORIEGA FACES a test of his strength following increased economic pressure.    In the wake of U.S. sanctions imposed Friday by Reagan, the Panamanian military chief must meet a $33 million payroll bill today and tomorrow for 140,000 government workers, a Reagan official said. His delayed payment last week to pensioners sparked demonstrations. At the same time, a senior U.S. official said reports show that some Noriega compatriots have transferred money abroad.    As opposition groups urged Noriega to accept Spain's offer of asylum, gunmen in Panama City attacked a church service. Injuries weren't reported.    ---   Anti-apartheid religious leaders defied a South African government threat to crack down on churches whose clergy preached &quot;revolution.&quot; Anglican Archbishop Tutu and the Rev. Allan Boesak led a Sunday service in Cape Town to express opposition to Pretoria's recent prohibitions against the political activities of anti-apartheid groups.    ---   Dole pledged to remain in the race for the GOP presidential nomination even if he loses tomorrow's Illinois primary. Polls show Bush ahead. In South Carolina, Jackson won Saturday's Democratic precinct caucuses, taking 54% of the vote in his native state.    ---   Researchers in California predicted that half of those infected with the AIDS virus will develop the disease, and another 25% will develop AIDS-related complex, or ARC, within six years. The study, published in the British Medical Journal, was based on three years' observation of 288 men infected with the virus.    Sex expert Masters is trying to develop a commercial product for use in preventing heterosexual transmission of AIDS. Last October, an author of a new book alleging AIDS is exploding among heterosexuals was given $25,000 by Ortho Pharmaceutical for research into a spermicidal jelly that would kill the AIDS virus.    ---   Hundreds of Armenians gathered at a Moscow cemetery to demand Kremlin action to resolve a territorial dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan. The dispute over the heavily Armenian area sparked demonstrations in both republics and riots in the Azerbaijan city of Sumgait last month in which at least 32 people died.    ---   Iraq fired a missile at Tehran and Iran vowed retaliation, threatening a resumption of the &quot;war of the cities&quot; after a two-day respite in the exchange of missiles in which hundreds of civilians were reported killed. The assault by Baghdad's forces followed Iranian artillery attacks that killed at least 21 people in Iraqi border towns.    ---   Pakistan's premier said Islamabad would make a decision today on whether to sign a U.N.-mediated Afghan peace accord. Moscow has offered to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan within nine months if a pact is signed by tomorrow. Pakistan has insisted on a new government in neighboring Afghanistan to oversee the pullout.    ---   Authorities in Nepal launched an inquiry into Saturday's stampede at a soccer stadium in Katmandu, in which at least 75 people were killed. Cremations were held for a number of the victims, who were trampled as they rushed to exits during a hailstorm. Witnesses said the doors were locked.    ---   Meese said he wouldn't step aside because of an inquiry into his role in an Iraqi pipeline project in which illegal payments to Israel's Labor Party allegedly were planned. The attorney general's comments on ABC-TV followed a report in the Washington Post that Meese, Peres and a Meese associate discussed the plan in 1985.    ---   Angola and Cuba have presented to the U.S. a proposal for the withdrawal of about 40,000 Cuban troops from the African nation, Luanda's Foriegn Ministry said. While details weren't disclosed, the plan reportedly is conditional on a halt to U.S. and South African aid to Angolan rebels.    ---   Died: Pham Hung, 75, prime minister of Vietnam, Thursday, in Ho Chi Minh City, of a heart attack. . . . Romare Bearden, 75, painter and collagist, Saturday, in New York City, following a stroke. </TEXT></DOC>