<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870630-0121 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> CRRTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   L. Stanley Crane, the canny 71-year-old railroad veteran who led Consolidated Rail Corp. through a thousand mine fields to the private sector, now faces a new peril. The same Congress that finally turned Conrail loose last year is threatening to reenact the kinds of regulatory measures that led to the collapse of the Northeast-Midwest rail system 17 years ago.    &quot;I guess I wouldn't worry if there were only going to be a little bit of re-regulation,&quot; says Mr. Crane. &quot;But knowing the history of legislation in this country, there isn't any little bit of legislation that ever comes out. We are very, very fearful that they really will start to tamper with the heart of Staggers, and if they do that -- I don't mean to be theatrical -- but really the industry can go bankrupt.&quot;    Re-regulatory changes in the 1980 Staggers Act are being pushed by something called Consumers United for Rail Equity (CURE). It is not made up of &quot;consumers&quot; as the term is normally used but primarily of bulk shippers. The E in CURE doesn't have much to do with equity either. CURE just wants to restore Interstate Commerce Commission control over rail rates, as in those good old days when the railroads were all going broke. The 1970 Penn Central collapse, which led to the nationalization of Northeast-Midwest rail service and the creation of Conrail in 1975, was heavily attributable to government-mandated labor costs and freight rate regulation.    Hearings on CURE's proposed bill have been held in Congress over the past two months. Given the strong opposition and the likelihood that Congress will be in its usual bind after its August recess, CURE will find it difficult to push through a bill this year. But even if it doesn't succeed, the threat will still be around next year.    The CURE shippers, mainly electric utilities, coal companies and grain companies, complain about two things, differential pricing and &quot;captive&quot; shipping. They assert that it is not fair if they have to pay more than, say, piggyback shippers. The Conrail reply is that if raising the rates for piggyback drives that business away, bulk shippers could end up with even higher rates, because rail overhead costs would be spread among fewer shippers. As to &quot;captive&quot; shipping, it's doubtful that any plant today is really &quot;captive&quot; to the railroad that serves it. Most utilities, for example, have multiple sources of energy, and hence strong bargaining power in making coal-haulage contracts. Railroads also know that if high freight rates cost shippers sales, railroads lose business too. As with any capital-intensive industry, it is important for railroads to maintain maximum volume so as to spread capital and overhead costs as much as possible.    Conrail now must pay taxes and dividends, but Mr. Crane believes it can make it as a private concern if it is not saddled with new regulatory burdens. He delights in not having to &quot;go down to Washington as much to appear before appropriations committees and commerce committees, and all the rest of those committees. I can worry a little bit about business.&quot;    Mr. Crane sees any number of business possibilities opening up. Conrail serves some 38% of the nation's population. Back in the heavy regulatory days, most of the business of the seven railroads that were merged into Conrail was taken away by trucks, which now haul about 80% of the freight in Conrail's market area.    &quot;What we need to do is learn how to expand in that marketplace,&quot; says the Conrail CEO. &quot;We think we can do this in networking with the truckers and the distribution warehouses. One of the things that is very interesting is the growth of the warehousing industry. There are a lot of warehouses going up in New Jersey. Some of them are rail-served, some of them are truck-served, but we are participating in them because business is coming in in big hunks, sitting in the warehouses and being pulled out by trucks in smaller deliveries. That is what's happening in the distribution business these days.&quot;    Auto companies, for example, have been cutting their inventory costs sharply by adopting the Japanese system of farming out component manufacture to suppliers and timing delivery of those components at the factory with the actual assembly operation.    &quot;This is what's in back of the Road-Railer development GM has embraced,&quot; says Mr. Crane. &quot;They don't have high-cube boxcars coming down there with a week's supply of seats or springs. They want it to come in a trailer load each day so that they won't have to have it in the plant for that period of time.    &quot;I think you've seen us advertise our Steel-Net where we bring steel in to central locations and then bale it out by trucks. We've also revolutionized lumber distribution and the funniest thing is there's a little guy in upstate New York who started us on that idea in 1981. He said why don't you bring your lumber in in big hunks and put it someplace and then when I want little pieces of it, I can draw it out. And it's quite successful.&quot;    In short, Conrail has been behaving like a real company since Staggers, making deals with shippers, finding better ways to distribute goods and earning a profit. It was aided by the $7 billion in taxpayer money poured into rehabilitating its physical plant and keeping it operating in the 1970s, but Stanley Crane deserves some credit too.    With less regulatory and political pressure, Conrail was able to abandon about 5,000 miles of track between 1981 and 1986. &quot;About half of that has been taken up by short-line railroads, nonunion railroads that have continued to provide the service at a lesser cost. They bring the business to us and we handle it as a trunk line.&quot;    Rail unions are pressing to have rail labor laws applied to these short lines. So-called &quot;full crew&quot; laws were repealed at the federal level in 1972, but because several states still had such laws Conrail was saddled with them when Mr. Crane took over in 1981.    The costs of rail labor laws are legendary. &quot;In the old days when I was on the Southern, we used to run a train from Louisville over to St. Louis. When we got to the Indiana line we taxied a guy out and put him on the train. When we got to the Illinois line, we taxied out there and took him off the train. Now, that's the stupidest damned thing you ever heard of in your life. You pay that guy $147 a day to ride across the state of Indiana and he sure didn't provide any safety to that train. One of the things that the Northeast Rail Service Act did was to let us buy those people out and that let us get our crew sizes down to where they were competitive with the rest of the railroads in the country.&quot;    In short, Conrail as it exists today represents a long journey back from the decrepit Northeast-Midwest railroad system that fell into government hands with the collapse of the Penn Central. It has gone from pillar to post in those years, including the years since 1981 when Mr. Crane was putting it on a profit-making basis but Congress couldn't make up its mind how to carry out its own legislated intent to restore it to the private sector. Now that Conrail is finally there, it would indeed be a shame if another round of regulatory legislation started the whole dismal process all over again and jeopardized its chances -- and for that matter the chances of the nation's other railroads -- for becoming a more useful and efficient part of the nation's transportation system. </TEXT></DOC>