<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861212-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Foreign Insight:Germany's Veteran Foreign MinisterFinds He's on Ever Shakier Ground---By Peter GumbelStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/12/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BONN, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Hans-Dietrich Genscher is one of the world's longest-serving foreign ministers. After more than 12 years in the job, maybe it's time he left.    Mr. Genscher, 59 years old, isn't in the best of health. His domestic power base is dwindling. Above all, under the government of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, he is no longer in full control of West German foreign policy. Since the autumn of 1982 when his small Free Democratic Party switched coalition partners, toppling Helmut Schmidt and installing Mr. Kohl, he has lost crucial internal battles with the chancellery over foreign-policy issues. Increasingly, Mr. Genscher is able only to delay or dilute decisions, not to implement them.    Thus, despite his strong opposition, he wasn't able to stop West German participation in the research phase of President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. His cautious, velvet-glove diplomacy toward Eastern Europe hasn't prevented Mr. Kohl from adopting a blunt, anti-Soviet stance in recent weeks. It is Mr. Kohl's office, not the Foreign Ministry, that has taken the initiative over a European response to the Reykjavik superpower summit. Mr. Genscher even has had difficulty winning support of cabinet colleagues on lesser issues, such as German participation in the planned French space shuttle, Hermes.    The veteran foreign minister's star is waning at an important time for West Germany. More than ever, the country needs a firmer, less equivocal foreign policy. The prospect of a Europe free of medium-range nuclear weapons, as discussed at Reykjavik, has raised vital questions about Germany's strategic vulnerability. The Common Market urgently needs more farsighted leadership from the country that ends up paying most of its bills. More than 40 years after World War II, many say Germany should play a role more commensurate with its economic power.    Mr. Genscher may not be the right man to tackle these formidable tasks. True, he is still popular with German voters, opinion polls show, and can call on a wealth of experience and contacts throughout the world. A qualified successor may be hard to find. And his supporters, worried about the growing influence of a hard-line conservative faction in Mr. Kohl's party, say the foreign minister stands for moderation, continuity and common sense.    But Mr. Genscher is on increasingly unstable ground both at home and abroad. The two chancellors he has served, Mr. Schmidt and Mr. Kohl, often publicly speak their mind even if it causes a stir. Their foreign minister, however, is notoriously hard to pin down.    His frequent shuttles from Moscow to Bonn to Washington, which he insists aren't attempts to mediate between the two superpowers, haven't endeared him to either, and may even have reduced whatever international influence he once had. Richard Burt, the U.S. ambassador to Germany, now denies that he referred to Mr. Genscher as &quot;slippery&quot; in an off-the-record talk with German journalists earlier this year. But U.S. officials maintain privately that the description isn't entirely inappropriate.    Above all, Mr. Genscher's personal and political backing in West Germany has declined rapidly in the current center-right coalition.    Many of Mr. Kohl's party colleagues, who had hoped that the change in government would be reflected in foreign policy, view Mr. Genscher with suspicion or even hostility. They complain that he is merely continuing the policies of the previous Social Democratic government.    &quot;It's high time for change,&quot; thunders Franz Josef Strauss, the conservative governor of Bavaria, who strongly attacked Mr. Genscher after his announcement that he wants another term.    Mr. Genscher's status is also less than rock solid within his own party. Although the Free Democrats clamor for him to continue as foreign minister after the January 1987 elections, he was forced to step down as party chairman last year because of internal dissent over his leadership.    For their part, some leading opposition Social Democrats haven't forgiven the foreign minister for what they regard as his treachery in bringing down the Schmidt government. Still, they are alarmed that Mr. Genscher has lost out to Chancellor Kohl on some issues.    Assuming Chancellor Kohl is returned to office as expected after January's elections, it will be up to him to reappoint or replace Mr. Genscher. But whether the foreign minister stays or goes may be determined by the voters. Opinion polls show that Mr. Genscher's Free Democrats, who have made a habit of narrowly scraping back into Parliament, can't yet be confident of getting the 5% support needed for representation. Given the continuing attacks by Mr. Strauss, the question of whether Mr. Genscher has stayed past his usefulness could be decisive. </TEXT></DOC>