<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870130-0001 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A Senate Intelligence Committee report on the Iran-Contra affair indicates that the diversion of profits to Nicaraguan guerrillas was an early feature of the secret U.S. arms sales to Iran.    The report says that notes of a meeting last November between Attorney General Edwin Meese and fired National Security Council staff member Lt. Col. Oliver North reflect that Col. North said money may have been diverted to the Nicaraguan guerrillas from the first U.S. arms sale to Iran last February. The notes indicate that $3 million to $4 million may have gone to the rebels, known as Contras, from this sale of 1,000 TOW anti-tank missiles; Col. North also cited a potential diversion of profits from a later arms sale last May.    The report provides no evidence that President Reagan knew of or approved the diversion of funds. But it casts new light on Col. North and a private network of arms dealers and financiers that he enlisted to deliver arms to Iran and aid to the Contras.    The committee acknowledged there are major gaps in its findings because important witnesses, including Col. North, have refused to testify. But the 65-page document includes new details about White House deliberations and the role played by Israeli officials and civilians and other private individuals in the administration's secret policies.    The report discloses two White House meetings that President Reagan led last April 23 on U.S. policy in Central America. Col. North participated in both, according to the report. And in one session, other participants included a Central Intelligence Agency officer who later was the subject of an internal CIA investigation of unauthorized contacts with private supporters of the Nicaraguan resistance.    The report says that the meetings took place shortly after Col. North apparently wrote an undated memorandum outlining plans to divert $12 million in arms sale profits to the Contras. But the report doesn't disclose what transpired at the meetings, and draws no conclusion about them.    According to the Senate report, the meetings came amid increasing concern in the administration about financial support for the Contras. It says that in a memorandum written last May 15, former national security adviser Vice Adm. John Poindexter noted that outside support for the Nicaraguan guerrillas would be consumed by mid-June and no further significant support appeared readily available.    The next day, according to documents received by the Senate committee, the president and his top foreign policy advisers discussed soliciting &quot;non-lethal&quot; aid for the Contras from other countries. According to the documents, Secretary of State George Shultz was to provide a list of countries that could be approached. But White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan told the committee that there was no mention of using funds from the Iran arms sales to aid the Contras.    It has been disclosed previously that an Iranian businessman used as a middleman in the arms deals, Manucher Ghorbanifar, raised the possibility of a potential diversion. U.S. officials later decided to push Mr. Ghorbanifar out of the operation because they concluded he was untrustworthy.    The report cites concern within the administration that Mr. Ghorbanifar needed $4 million in compensation for losses he claimed on the deals. According to a memorandum received by the committee, Col. North had been warned last September that the Ghorbanifar operation would have to be closed in a &quot;secure manner.&quot; The Senate panel's report said the administration was specifically concerned that &quot;Ghorbanifar's problems could lead somebody to go public.&quot;    Release of the report ends weeks of speculation over what public information the committee would provide based on its investigation and secret hearings on the Iran-Contra affair late last year. Despite White House requests that the report be released, the panel refused earlier this month to do so.    Once the new Congress convened, the Democratic majority set about writing a new version. Only this document has been made public, but the entire process has been overshadowed by leaks to the press of portions of the earlier draft. According to the Senate committee, the final report incorporates significant additional testimony and analysis that wasn't included in the earlier draft.    The report suggests President Reagan was deeply involved in the unfolding policy toward Iran. It quotes the president's aides recounting that Mr. Reagan was briefed about, and in many instances, approved new stages of the negotiations and arms sales. The report also undermines Mr. Reagan's assertion that the weapons deliveries weren't directly linked to the release of hostages.    White House spokesman Donald Mathes said last night that the report portrays that &quot;what really happened is that it (the Iranian arms dealings) became an arms for hostages deal almost from the beginning.&quot; But he concluded that at worst, the report reflected that the president &quot;let it (the policy) get away from him.&quot;    The report doesn't include President Reagan's own version of events. &quot;Does the president have a version of the events? I don't know if he does,&quot; said Mr. Mathes. He said the White House was pleased that the report had been released because Mr. Reagan &quot;wants to find out&quot; what happened.    The report says that Mr. Reagan was briefed about the arms-hostages link. It says that Chief of Staff Regan testified that during the November 1985 U.S.-Soviet summit meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, then National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane &quot;informed the president . . . that some type of arms shipment was being considered, and that if the operation were successful, hostages might be freed.&quot;    The report says further: &quot;With the president, said North, it always came back to the hostages. According to Meese, North said it was a terrible mistake to say that the president wanted a strategic relationship, because the president wanted the hostages.&quot;    The report doesn't clear up some pivotal questions, such as whether Mr. Reagan approved in advance Israel's initial transfer of U.S.-made arms to Iran. Mr. Regan testified that the president was displeased to learn of the Israeli transfers after the fact and instructed his staff &quot;to let the Israelis know of our displeasure.&quot; But Mr. McFarlane &quot;denied that the president ever expressed disapproval of the Israeli action,&quot; the report says.    Like the earlier staff report, the new analysis by the Senate panel is weakest in providing details on the specifics of the money transfers and on how much aid actually got to the Contras. The report cites unidentified testimony indicating that private funds for the Contras were funneled through offshore bank accounts in the Cayman Islands and Panama controlled by Contra leader Adolfo Calero. But the committee admits it received no direct testimony regarding the actual receipt of specific sums.    Although it carefully avoids making any judgments, the report paints an unflattering picture of a small circle of administration officials who were undeterred by a long string of broken promises that the Iranians would free the American hostages in Lebanon.    The officials, including Col. North, Adm. Poindexter, and CIA Director William Casey, persisted in using Mr. Ghorbanifar as a channel to Iranian leaders despite repeated warnings from CIA officers that the Iranian expatriate was untrustworthy. According to the Senate report, a CIA lie detector test given to Mr. Ghorbanifar last January indicated he could be an Iranian agent who was trying to deceive the U.S.    The Senate panel document also notes that Col. North reported that during a meeting with an Iranian official, Mr. Ghorbanifar had distorted much of what Col. North had said when he translated it into Farsi, the main Iranian language.    In an aside, Mr. Ghorbanifar speculated as early as January 1986 that Israelis involved in a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran may have held funds from the sales. His comments came during a break in the CIA polygraph examination, which Mr. Ghorbanifar failed. The Iranian said Israelis had told him they had &quot;doubled&quot; the cost of the shipment apparently because the Americans were involved.    Israel's role remains a source of controversy between Washington and Jerusalem. The Senate report cites specific evidence that Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin may have offered the Contras &quot;a significant quantity&quot; of captured Soviet-bloc weapons last September. A memorandum prepared by Col. North makes reference to the proposed transaction. Two days after a September meeting between President Reagan and Shimon Peres, then prime minister of Israel, Adm. Poindexter advised Col. North to proceed with a plan to have the arms picked up by a foreign-flag vessel and delivered to the Contras, the memo says.    &quot;Go ahead and make it happen,&quot; Mr. Poindexter wrote Col. North. In an apparent reference to retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, Adm. Poindexter describes the plan as a &quot;private deal between Dick (Secord) and Rabin that we bless.&quot; Mr. Poindexter instructed Col. North to keep the pressure on &quot;Bill&quot; -- apparently CIA Director Casey -- to &quot;make things right for Secord.&quot;    The reference to Gen. Secord reflects a major theme in the report -- the private network enlisted by Col. North to assist in both transporting arms to Iran and aid to the Contras. A CIA officer is quoted in the report as describing Gen. Secord and his business associate, Albert Hakim, as &quot;almost co-equal lieutenants&quot; of Col. North. The same CIA officer told the Senate committee that in February 1986, Col. North described the two men as his principal aides in his Contra activities.    The same month, a White House document indicates that Col. North described Mr. Hakim to Adm. Poindexter as vice president of one of the European companies set up to &quot;handle aid to resistance movements.&quot; The report cites an earlier, November 1985 memo by Col. North, which indicates that he and Gen. Secord were already involved in an enterprise called Lake Resources -- referred to as &quot;our Swiss company&quot; -- and that an aircraft belonging to the firm was in Europe to pick up arms to be transported to a landing strip built in Central America for the Contras.    The report cites Justice Department notes of a meeting with an attorney for Gen. Secord indicating that in early 1986, Mr. Hakim raised the prospect of the Iranians making a contribution above the price of the arms to help the Contras. The attorney, Thomas Green, is quoted as saying that money from the February 1986 sale of U.S. arms was routed through Israelis into Mr. Hakim's extensive financial network.    The report also shows the turmoil among senior administration officials about how to cope with the crisis. Secretary of State Shultz, according to the report, quickly sent a cable to Adm. Poindexter urging that &quot;the best course of action would be to go public on the (National Security Council) initiative.&quot;    However, after conferring with Vice President George Bush, Mr. Casey and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, the report asserts, Adm. Poindexter replied that there was an agreement on remaining &quot;absolutely closed-mouthed&quot; while stressing that U.S. policy toward Iran and terrorists remained unchanged. Later that month, Mr. Shultz even went to the White House residence after office hours and &quot;informed the president that some of the statements being made about the Iran arms affair would not stand up to scrutiny,&quot; the report says.    Mr. Meese told the committee that the day after he began his initial efforts to unravel the trail of money, he held a Saturday morning meeting with Mr. Shultz at the secretary's suburban Washington home, according to the report. That evening, Mr. Meese met with Mr. Casey at the CIA director's home.    Less than two hours before his crucial interrogation by the attorney general, the report says, Col. North met briefly with Mr. McFarlane. There, according to Mr. McFarlane's testimony, Col. North suggested that diversion of funds to the Contras was approved by Adm. Poindexter and &quot;was a matter of record in a memorandum&quot; he drafted for the admiral.    When Mr. Meese finally confronted Adm. Poindexter with allegations of diversion, the report says, &quot;no notes were taken&quot; and there weren't any witnesses in the room. According to Mr. Meese's recollection of the session, the report says, Adm. Poindexter acknowledged that Col. North had provided &quot;enough hints&quot; for Adm. Poindexter to know that money was going to the Contras but that he &quot;didn't inquire further.&quot;    Before announcing his findings during a nationally televised news conference, Mr. Meese again met with Mr. Casey at the CIA director's home.    Meanwhile, Mr. Meese, according to the committee's narrative, gave an opinion last January that withholding congressional notification of the arms sales was legal. And according to Mr. McFarlane's testimony to the committee, the attorney general later assured him that &quot;an oral, informal presidential decision&quot; involving the initial shipment of arms to Iran &quot;was no less valid than a written&quot; finding. </TEXT></DOC>