<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0047 </DOCNO><HL> 'There's a Lot of Privacy in the Constitution'</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   These excerpts from the nomination hearing of Robert Bork deal with the 1965 case of Griswold v. Connecticut, which invalidated the state's 1879 statute prohibiting the use of contraceptives. Justice William Douglas found a constitutional right to privacy. He wrote, &quot;specific guarantees in the Bill of Rights have penumbras, formed by emanations from those guarantees that give them life and substance.&quot; A related editorial appears nearby (see: &quot;Bork Hearings: Fear and Ferocity In a Senate Swamp&quot; -- WSJ Sept. 18, 1987).    Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah): The Supreme Court invalidated the Connecticut law banning contraception. In the first place, do you as a personal matter have anything against the use of contraceptives or the personal choice of individuals to use them or not?    Judge Bork: Nothing whatsoever. I think the Connecticut law was an outrage. And it would have been more of an outrage if they had ever enforced it against an individual.    Sen. Hatch: It's got to be a little irritating to you to be criticized for having criticized Griswold v. Connecticut on the grounds that you might possibly have wanted to sustain that statute.    Judge Bork: It is, senator, as you know, a regular form of rhetoric to say that if you would say a statute is not unconstitutional, that must be because you like the statute. And that is not right. The question is never whether you like the statute, the question is, is it in fact contrary to the principles of the Constitution?    ---   Sen. Alan Simpson (R., Wyo.): Is it fair to say that you think privacy is protected under the Constitution, but that you just don't believe that there is a general and unspecified right that protects everything, including homosexual conduct, incest, whatever? Is that correct?    Judge Bork: No civilized person wants to live in a society without a lot of privacy in it. And the Framers of the Constitution protected privacy in a variety of ways. The First Amendment protects free exercise of religion. The free speech provision of the First Amendment has been held to protect the privacy of membership lists and a person's associations in order to make the free speech right effective. The Fourth Amendment protects the individual's home and office from unreasonable searches and seizures. It usually requires a warrant. The Fifth Amendment has a right against self-incrimination. There's much more. There's a lot of privacy in the Constitution. Griswold, in which we are talking about a Connecticut statute which was unenforced against any individual except the birth-control clinic, involved a statute that banned the use of contraceptives. And Justice Douglas ended that opinion with a rather eloquent statement of how awful it would be to have the police pounding into the marital bedroom. And it would be awful. And it would never happen, because there is the Fourth Amendment.    Nobody ever tried to enforce that statute. The police simply could not get into the bedroom without a warrant. And what magistrate is going to give the police a warrant to go in to search for signs of use of contraceptives? It is a wholly bizarre and imaginary case . . .    Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.): Just for clarification, if they had evidence that a crime was being committed?    Judge Bork: How are they going to get evidence that a couple is using contracep . . .    Sen. Biden: . . . a wiretap. A legal wiretap.    Judge Bork: You mean to say that a magistrate is going to authorize a wiretap to find out if a couple is using contraceptives?    Sen. Biden: They could, couldn't they?    Judge Bork: No. Unbelievable, unbelievable.    Sen. Biden: Now I understand that. But under the law, judge, could they not have? It was a crime, right?    Judge Bork: It was a crime, on the statute books, which was never prosecuted, never. . . . Nobody is going to get a warrant for that and no prosecution is going to be upheld for that.    ---   Judge Bork: Let me illustrate my objection to this generalized right of privacy. Suppose a senator introduced a bill that said every man, woman and child in this country has a right of privacy. I don't think that bill would go anywhere until he told everybody exactly what the right of privacy protected. Did it protect incest? Did it protect beating your wife in private? Did it protect price-fixing in private?    No Congress would ever pass a bill like &quot;Here, here's a generalized right of privacy, make of it what you will.&quot; No court would uphold such a statute because it would be void for vagueness. Now the Supreme Court, or Justice Douglas, in effect did that with the Constitution. No one knows what that thing means. You have to define it. The court has not given it definition. That is my only point.    Now the only reason that Connecticut statute stayed on the statute book -- it was an old, old, statute, dating back to the days when Connecticut was entirely a Yankee state -- was that it wasn't enforced. If anybody had tried to enforce that against a married couple, he would have been out of office instantly and the law would have been repealed. Furthermore, if the prosecutor brought such a case, I don't think any court would uphold a conviction, assuming you could get a conviction.    That law . . . was an utterly antique statute. Nobody would have ever enforced it. I think you'd have a great argument of no fair warning, or sometimes what lawyers call, and I hate to use a word like this, &quot;desuetude,&quot; meaning it's just so out of date it's gone into limbo. So no prosecutor is going to bring that prosecution, and if he did the law would disappear, and furthermore no court would uphold a prosecution.    I think the law was an utterly silly law, but my objection is simply to the undefined nature of what the court did there. I've tried to illustrate that for you by asking whether you would vote for a statute that said nothing more than that everybody has a right of privacy, and the court shall enforce it. I don't think you would. </TEXT></DOC>