<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870417-0164 </DOCNO><HL> Grizzlies and Mosquitoes---By Alan BaylessStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDAPRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><DATELINE> REVENUE CREEK, Yukon  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Klaus Djukastein is a millionaire, but he spends his summers here in a battered old trailer that lacks plumbing.    Mr. Djukastein is a Yukon Territory gold miner, one of several hundred hardy souls who wash gold dust and nuggets from the creeks that run through the spruce-covered hills of the northwestern Canadian wilderness. The miner's life in these remote parts hasn't changed much since the gold-rush days of the 1890s, at least on the surface. Like the so-called sourdoughs of that time, today's miners are dogged by gold thieves, grizzly bears and clouds of summer mosquitoes.    Modern miners also face some hazards unknown to their predecessors, such as environmental inspectors. But all that is balanced by a few new advantages. Some miners begin their prospecting with computer analyses of satellite photographs of the terrain. Others use shortwave radios to monitor the price of gold in London. And, while the subarctic winter here used to be a tedious stretch of freezing darkness -- the stuff of Robert Service's poems of rugged individualism -- the coming of the cold now is a signal to fly south. Many Yukon miners winter in British Columbia and Arizona, among other places.    But for all that, the basics of life in the Yukon remain the same. Its icy arms still hold hidden charms, to quote one north-country ballad. As they have done for a century, people come here partly to get away from crowds, bosses and bureaucracy, but mainly to get rich. A surprising number succeed: Last year, one of the best in decades, the Yukon's 700-odd small-time miners collected some 82,800 ounces of gold, worth about $33 million.    How, in the sophisticated, computerized 1980s, does one become a Yukon miner? &quot;My advice is, listen to all the old-timers you can,&quot; says Jim Simpson, a Tennessean who came to the territory in 1982.    Now, as the ice begins to break up on the northern lakes and rivers, the miners are returning from their winter homes in the south. Soon Gerald Ahnert will be back at his claim outside Dawson City, a frontier town boasting wooden sidewalks and hotels that still accept payment in gold dust. His operation is old-fashioned from start to finish: Dressed in a floppy felt hat, cotton work shirt, blue jeans and work boots, he shovels gravel into a wheelbarrow and dumps it into a sluice. If he is lucky, bits of gold will be trapped in the ridges of the sluice as the water runs through it.    Similarly, Mr. Djukastein, the millionaire in the trailer, uses an old mining pan to locate gold concentrations in creeks. He gently swirls the pan to wash water and gravel over the rim of the pan, until only flecks of the heavier gold remain.    But when he finds enough flecks, Mr. Djukastein moves into the 20th century. He bulldozes tons of dirt from the promising spot and shoves it into a &quot;washing plant&quot; the size of a dump truck. His hired hand, meanwhile, uses another earthmover to pile washed dirt downstream. Mr. Djukastein, who arrived in the Yukon in 1954 as a penniless immigrant from Norway, designed and patented his own washing plant. It eliminates the need for a third man to handle boulders, and now is used by at least a dozen other miners.    Like any other modern businessman, today's miner keeps current with new developments in his field by attending a professional convention. Each March, just before the mining season begins, hundreds of miners gather in Vancouver. They discuss everything from high-tech machines that re-sift old claims to techniques such as lining one's sluice with Astroturf to trap almost-invisible gold particles.    But even when aided by new technology, successful gold hunting often still comes down to old-style slogging. Last summer, Samuel Holloway, a Whitehorse prospector, used a computer to analyze satellite photographs of Yukon creek beds and detect a likely spot. To reach that spot he had to hike through 25 miles of mosquito-infested swamps. He kept gold pans clanging on his belt to scare off grizzlies, which were particularly thick in the area. Getting to the creek took two days. He says he still doesn't know if he has a bonanza. But, he vows, &quot;I'm going to hit a big one, one of these days.&quot;    Mr. Holloway also has devised a kind of archaeological form of prospecting. He digs in the 90-year-old garbage piles of gold-rush miners. By examining their trash, he says, he can determine whether old sites might yield gold to modern re-sifting methods. Cans of cheap corned beef and kerosene are the telltale signs of a poor site. But, he says, &quot;If I see canned butter and canned tuna, then they probably were well off, and it probably was a good claim.&quot;    Other miners frequently turn up evidence of even earlier residents of the Yukon. Amid the muck and gravel, jawbones and tusks of prehistoric mammoths sometimes appear. Unlike tuna-fish cans, these aren't indicators of gold. But they do attract officials from government museums, who require miners to hand over all significant finds.    That is the least of the ways in which government bureaucracy has trailed the modern miner into the wilderness. Tight-lipped even about innocuous topics, miners grow unusually reticent when the conversation turns to the tender subject of taxes. Many hoard their gold in bank vaults in Whitehorse and Dawson City because the Canadian government doesn't tax the metal as long as it remains in &quot;inventory.&quot; Miners won't talk about it, but many are believed to sell gold on the sly.    The dreaded water inspectors from the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs aren't so easy to evade. Under rules promulgated in the early 1970s, miners must build ponds to settle muddy water coming out of the sluice. Several times a year, water inspectors make unannounced visits -- by helicopter, if necessary -- to ensure that that rule and others are being observed. Noncompliance can result in losing one's mining permit.    Even so, the most despised character in the Yukon isn't the faceless bureaucrat but the sluice thief. Many miners have taken to locking their sluices. Four years ago, Mr. Simpson, the miner from Tennessee, lost 65 ounces to a sluice thief. Most miners keep firearms to greet both bears and visitors who wander too close to their sluices.    Despite the volatile proximity of gold and guns, violence is surprisingly rare in the Yukon, and always has been, police here say. The shooting of Dan McGrew was an isolated incident, as it were. Locals still talk about a miner's murder two years ago outside Dawson City. (It was the result not of thievery or claim-jumping but of a domestic dispute.) Indeed, Sgt. Brian Gudmundson of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police says that the miners tend to be a quiet lot.    &quot;These days,&quot; the Mountie says, &quot;tourism brings more problems.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>