<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Passing a Test:Fed's New ChairmanWins a Lot of PraiseOn Handling the Crash---Alan Greenspan Was AidedBy His Ability to ForeseeProblems and by Planning---His Independence Still at Issue---By Alan MurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Oct. 19, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan arrived in Dallas at 5:45 p.m., and his first question for the official meeting him at the airport was: &quot;How did the market close?&quot;    &quot;Down five-oh-eight,&quot; came the reply. For a moment, Mr. Greenspan felt relieved. The Dow Jones Industrial Average had been off a staggering 200 points when he had left Washington four hours earlier. But it had rallied, he thought, to end &quot;down five-point-oh-eight.&quot;    The relief faded quickly. Mr. Greenspan found out that he had a problem with a decimal point -- and that the stock market had had a horrendous problem. It had crashed a record 508 points in a single day. Moreover, it had left him with much of the responsibility for cleaning up the mess.    In the month since, Alan Greenspan has proved his mettle. He and other top Fed officials responded coolly and quickly to the stock-market collapse and helped keep it from spiraling out of control. &quot;They handled the market crisis very, very well,&quot; says Stephen Axilrod, a former Fed staff director and now vice chairman of Nikko Securities Company International Inc.    One reason: Mr. Greenspan was prepared. Weeks before the crash, he had launched a secret study of how the Fed could respond to a variety of potential catastrophes, including a stock-market collapse. Fed officials say that effort helped them react quickly to the events on and after Oct. 19.    Before the market collapsed, some traders and analysts had expressed doubts about Mr. Greenspan's leadership. His public insistence that he saw no signs of inflation in the economy worried many, who thought the usually gloomy economist had turned Pollyannaish in his new job. Alan Abelson, the Barron's magazine columnist, jokingly blamed Mr. Greenspan's optometrist, who &quot;obviously somehow fitted the new chairman of the Federal Reserve with faulty eyeglasses.&quot;    The new Fed chief still hasn't achieved the heroic public stature of his predecessor, Paul Volcker, and he continues to face nagging questions about his independence from the Reagan administration. If these questions persist, they could damage the Fed's standing with Congress and the financial markets.    But since the crash, the reviews have been generally positive. &quot;Alan did what a Fed chairman should do,&quot; says Irwin Kellner, the chief economist at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. &quot;He reassured the markets, and he provided liquidity.&quot;    In addition, he has been more adept than Mr. Volcker at pushing the Reagan administration toward a budget agreement with Congress and at melding a consensus among the diverse personalities on the Fed board.    The events before and after the stock-market crash show how Mr. Greenspan's temperament and training have prepared him to guide the Fed through a crisis. His reputation as an economist was built upon an ability to foresee potential problems -- a skill now useful at the Fed as well.    Shortly after taking office, Mr. Greenspan quietly created a crisis-management team, which included Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson, New York Federal Reserve Bank President Gerald Corrigan and a few top Fed staffers. After the crash, Mr. Corrigan, a street-tough operator trained by Mr. Volcker, played a crucial role in restoring calm. Other government officials, including Treasury Secretary James Baker, and leaders of stock and options exchanges also helped. In the end, planning, cooperation and luck came together to prevent the market crash from turning into a financial calamity.    Mr. Greenspan started with planning. He told his crisis-management team to look at possible problems, to pinpoint the weak spots in the U.S. economy and financial system and to compile a book of options for the Fed to follow in any crisis. The book contained a section on how to deal with major bank failures; one on how to respond to a free fall of the dollar, and, most important as it turned out, one on how to handle a stock-market collapse.    Fed officials remain reluctant to talk publicly about the secret effort. Word that the Fed is looking into the possibility of any kind of crisis could set one off.    But privately they acknowledge that Chairman Greenspan urged them to think about all the &quot;flash points&quot; that could cause a breakdown. The various scenarios and options were compiled in notebooks, with a pink cover sheet marked: &quot;Highly confidential; restricted; controlled.&quot; Only a few high officials had access to them.    Paul MacAvoy, who served with Mr. Greenspan on President Ford's Council of Economic Advisers, says Mr. Greenspan has always shown skill and imagination in discerning troubles that may lie ahead. &quot;He has an amazing ability to anticipate a variety of outcomes from a policy initiative or from changing circumstances in the world economy,&quot; Mr. MacAvoy says. &quot;He would sit in a room with policy makers and come up with a scenario that made everybody else uncomfortable. They would all want to ignore it.&quot;    That Cassandra complex paid off on Oct. 19. As the markets began diving that Monday morning, Chairman Greenspan and the Fed board conducted a telephone conference with the presidents of the regional Fed banks. After some discussion, Mr. Greenspan decided to go ahead with a scheduled trip to the American Bankers Association meeting in Dallas. At the time, the market seemed to be leveling off, and his failure to arrive in Dallas might spark panic.    As the market continued to plummet, Vice Chairman Johnson called together a small group of senior Fed staff officials and established a crisis center in the mahogany-paneled library across the hall from his office. Included were Donald Kohn, the director of the division of monetary affairs; Edwin Truman, the staff director of the division for international finance; William Taylor, the staff director for bank regulation and supervision; and General Counsel Michael Bradfield. Mr. Johnson had with him the crisis notebook prepared weeks earlier, and he turned to the stock-market section.    All afternoon, Mr. Johnson worked the telephones, collecting information from Mr. Corrigan in New York and keeping in close touch with the Treasury Department. When Chairman Greenspan finally phoned from Dallas, Mr. Johnson reported on the day's devastation in the stock market.    The Fed officials knew that &quot;liquidity&quot; might prove a problem the next day. They needed to ensure that the banking system would have enough money to keep credit flowing in the New York and Chicago markets. Otherwise, panicked lenders might pull back, causing a shortage of credit, a rise in short-term interest rates and a full-fledged financial disaster.    Messrs. Greenspan, Johnson and Corrigan discussed whether the chairman should stay in Dallas and, the next day, deliver a much-shortened speech in which he would pledge to provide liquidity for the markets. Mr. Johnson and the Fed staff drafted a statement; Messrs. Greenspan and Corrigan reviewed it. The crisis team worked through the night, monitoring first the financial markets in Tokyo as they opened that evening (Washington time), and then the European markets when they opened early the next day.    Early Tuesday, Mr. Greenspan decided to cancel his speech and return to Washington. There, the Fed issued a brief statement: &quot;The Federal Reserve, consistent with its responsibilities as the nation's central bank, affirmed today its readiness to serve as a source of liquidity to support the economic and financial system.&quot;    The Fed began flooding the banking system with funds in an effort to drive down interest rates. On Tuesday, Oct. 20, a market collapse was narrowly averted.    But another near-crisis struck that week on the Chicago Board Options Exchange. The market plunge had caused huge losses at First Options of Chicago Inc., a subsidiary of Continental Illinois National Bank andamp; Trust Co. First Options clears, trades and lends money to more than 20% of market makers in listed options and, on a typical day, uses bank loans of about $2.5 billion to finance that business. When First Options faced large financing requirements on Oct. 21, Mr. Greenspan acted quickly to enable Continental Illinois Corp., the bank's holding company, to inject funds into the options subsidiary. Without that action, one official says, &quot;the options exchange would have shut down.&quot;    For the next two weeks, the Fed chairman ran a crisis center in his office, with Mr. Johnson and Monetary Affairs Director Kohn close at hand. Surviving on club sandwiches, they monitored markets world-wide for almost 24 hours a day.    Another aftershock hit on Nov. 10, when the dollar began to plunge. For the first time since the Oct. 19 crash, the stock, bond and foreign-exchange markets all were slumping, and U.S. officials began to worry about an uncontrolled fall of the dollar. Then, in late morning, President Reagan said he didn't want a further decline in the dollar, causing it to stabilize and then rise slightly. At the time, Mr. Reagan's comment -- made in response to a reporter's question during a photo session with the president of Israel -- seemed casual. But later, officials suggested that the remark had been planned, apparently after consultations between the Treasury and the Fed.    The Fed still isn't out of the woods. Before the stock-market crash, it had been worrying primarily about squelching inflation fears, which were driving up interest rates. Since Oct. 19, it has concentrated on providing enough liquidity to prevent a contraction in credit and a recession. As the markets continue to settle down, Fed officials are worrying about recalibrating their policies to avoid providing too much liquidity, which could reignite fear of inflation.    Perhaps the biggest challenge still facing the Fed chairman, however, will be to prove to financial markets that he can act independently of the Reagan administration. The independence issue is critical: With an election year approaching, many observers fear that the administration will push the Fed toward promoting short-term growth at the expense of long-term progress against inflation.    Treasury Secretary Baker renewed the doubts about Mr. Greenspan's independence in an interview with The Wall Street Journal on Nov. 4, when he stressed the need for an easy monetary policy to avoid recession. The same article quoted administration officials as saying that, in retrospect, the Fed's Sept. 4 increase in its discount rate -- the rate it charges on loans to member banks -- was a mistake.    Those comments angered Mr. Greenspan, who phoned the Treasury secretary to complain early on the morning the article appeared. In recent testimony on Capitol Hill, the chairman has reasserted his independence.    &quot;I know of no Federal Reserve policy actions which are affected by the Treasury Department,&quot; he said in response to a question from Rep. Stephen L. Neal, a North Carolina Democrat. &quot;We do not solicit their views in policy questions. We obviously try to coordinate with them in the sense that we are part of the United States government . . . but the one thing I can assure you is that the presumption that the Treasury Department is in control of monetary policy is false.&quot;    Mr. Greenspan isn't the only Fed official whose independence is questioned by market analysts. Vice Chairman Johnson, who had worked at the Treasury under Mr. Baker, also raises suspicions. But Mr. Johnson has tried hard since joining the Fed to bolster his credibility with the financial markets. And he knows that becoming linked to inflationary policies would surely kill his chances of ever being named Fed chairman.    Mr. Greenspan's deft political sense has helped at the Fed as well as in his dealings with the administration. Unlike Mr. Volcker, he has worked hard to court other board members, sometimes socializing with them after hours. The five other members tend to be fiercely independent, and they differ in their economic views. On the crucial issue of the dollar, for instance, Governor Wayne Angell argues strongly for supporting it in the currency markets, while Governor Robert Heller makes the case for letting it fall unimpeded.    The new chairman has also improved relations with the presidents of the regional Fed banks. During the crisis, he took the unusual step of holding telephone conferences every day for nearly two weeks with the board and all the presidents to discuss the situation.    &quot;The one thing that stands out about Chairman Greenspan is that he has gone to some lengths to include all potential sources of information,&quot; says Gary Stern, the Minneapolis Fed's president. Boston Fed President Frank Morris agrees. &quot;He did extremely well&quot; during the crisis, he says. &quot;He displayed a great deal of concern to get everybody's views.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>