<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871029-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Now if the FishWould Simply LeapInto a Frying Pan...---Snagging Salmon Is a CinchWith an Unbaited Hook;Critics Call it Unsporting---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> WELLSTON, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here in the Big Manistee River, a salmon struggles against the current below a small waterfall. Just ahead, 10 men clutch fishing rods equipped with large three-pronged hooks. Suddenly the men launch into a frenzied assault.    Whack. Whack. Bashing the water, the men flail away in an effort to snag the fish. Hooks fly in every direction. Lines become tangled. The men curse.    The salmon manages to escape, flinging her egg-swollen body up and over the falls. But her victory may be temporary: more men are waiting to hook her along the way.    This is snagging, a pastime that some people call sport and others view as the dark underbelly of fishing. Every autumn around this time, the rivers that flow into the Great Lakes are crowded with salmon heading upstream, some weighing as much as 30 pounds.    Meanwhile, the river banks are teeming with people who try to yank a hook into any part of the fish. They don't use lures or bait with their hooks, some of which are as big as a man's fist. Last year on the Salmon River in New York, snaggers took 2,000 fish in three hours.    &quot;Snaggers are barbaric,&quot; says David Smethurst, a former head of Michigan's Trout Unlimited, a statewide anglers' group.    A single fish may contain five pounds of eggs that some snaggers sell for bait, fetching $1 a pound. Salmon also are prized for their tenderness and flavor. But late in the season, when salmon become soft and inedible, snaggers often take the eggs and leave the fish behind.    Several states restrict or prohibit snagging. Wisconsin declared the practice illegal earlier this year, banning an event that drew 20,000 participants annually. The state acted at the request of cities such as Sheboygan, where snaggers in 1985 left so many dead fish that a stench hung over the downtown area five blocks away. City workers had to clear off the river banks with pitchforks.    Michigan allows snagging only on portions of four rivers. New York also limits the practice to certain areas, and Indiana prohibits it. &quot;We don't want to see our fish snagged,&quot; says Thomas Lauer, a fisheries specialist for Indiana's Department of Natural Resources. &quot;It's like shooting sitting ducks.&quot;    But enforcing restrictions can be difficult, even dangerous. In northern Michigan last year, a mob of illegal snaggers on a railroad trestle surrounded two conservation officers who attempted to make arrests. A man who tried to help the officers was pushed off the trestle into the river. He survived, state officials say, but another officer died last year after being pummeled by a snagger whose catch exceeded the limit.    Snaggers are likely to injure themselves as well, particularly when they pull their weighted treble hooks away from buried logs or rocks. The barbs come careening back out of the water. A Michigan snagger lost consciousness earlier this year after he had been hooked in the cheek.    Here on a Sunday at Wellston's annual salmon run, the crowd is raucous and the beer flows freely. Standing shoulder to shoulder are about 100 snaggers, including some from West Virginia, Kentucky and Pennsylvania.    Beverage cans lie strewn about the river bank. Tangled in the brush nearby are yards of heavy-duty fishing line. One man hooks a steelhead -- a game fish whose snagging the state prohibits -- and kicks it back into the water in disgust.    &quot;It's fishing, but it's not a nice kind of fishing,&quot; says another snagger, who refuses to give his name.    Fly fisherman Greg Glover looks on, initially appalled, as the snaggers jerk their hooks through the water repeatedly. But then, tempted by their big haul, he tries it himself.    Snaggers defend their pastime by arguing that the fish would die soon anyway. This is true. In an annual ritual, Great Lakes salmon that have reached maturity return to the rivers, stop eating, lay or fertilize eggs and then die. The Great Lakes area doesn't offer adequate breeding grounds for natural reproduction of salmon, so the lakes are stocked with fish by surrounding states.    The snaggers are &quot;just your common working people, and they're here to have some fun,&quot; contends Winston Churchill, the owner of a northern Michigan bait and tackle shop.    But some snaggers sell their catch on the black market, defying state limits on the sale of salmon or their eggs. Undercover conservation officials charged the owners of a Dexter, N.Y., fish market with buying salmon from snaggers last year.    After New York caught one snagger with 46 fish -- 40 more than the legal limit -- the state prohibited night fishing. Says Robert Lang, an official of the New York conservation department, &quot;Temptation can be just more than a person can stand when they're staring at a 35-pound salmon.&quot;    Even Chicago has a problem with snaggers. It seems that their weighted hooks are ripping the teakwood trim off the boats moored in city harbors, which salmon tend to mistake for rivers. One day this fall, Chicago officials discovered 12 hooks in a single boat. Another errant cast shattered the windshield of a parked Mercedes-Benz. </TEXT></DOC>