<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881014-0191 </DOCNO><HL> International: Pakistan's Military Waits and Watches As Politicians Start Race for Presidency </HL><AUTHOR> Anthony Spaeth (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> ISLAMABAD, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On the surface, Pakistan seems to be this year's South Korea or Philippines.    An unpopular military dictatorship has ended after 11 years. General elections scheduled for Nov. 16 promise to be the liveliest in decades, and the country's best shot at leaving behind the martial-law regimes that have ruled Pakistan for most of its 41 years.    But there the similarities end.    President Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq's authoritarian rule was brought to a close by an apparent accident, his death in a plane crash, rather than by popular protests as in Manila and Seoul. While some Pakistanis were disgruntled with military rule, they weren't protesting in the streets.    Nor is there any popular alternative to President Zia as there was, for instance, in the Philippines. Benazir Bhutto, despite her attempts to cultivate a reputation abroad as the Pakistani Corazon Aquino, is as often reviled as she is revered. Nor does Miss Bhutto command the broad popular support that Mrs. Aquino had.    A crucial factor in the political development of Pakistan is the posture of the military. The suddenness of Gen. Zia's death on Aug. 17 and the loss of high-ranking officers in the same crash confused the military; it surrendered control to a civilian president, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who committed himself to the elections. Even if the military stays in the barracks, it will be poised to take power back again -- as it has numerous times in Pakistan's tumultuous history -- if the new government falters.    That worries politicians and diplomats, because next month's National Assembly elections mightn't produce a majority party. Pakistan's next government could be a jerry-built coalition, struggling to rule in a system that already makes leadership difficult by splitting executive power between the president and prime minister. The result could be political chaos, analysts say, and an invitation for the military to step back in.    &quot;In Pakistan, the military is always waiting in the wings,&quot; says Syed Fakhar Imam, a prominent local politician. Until this past weekend, politicians were dubious the elections would take place. In recent weeks, floods inundated productive Punjab province, and more than 250 people died in riots in Karachi, the largest city, and Hyderabad.    But last week the Supreme Court allowed the elections to proceed, and the local election commission announced nomination and election dates. This sent politicians into a frenzy of meetings and announcements of political mergers. Campaigning should start next week.    There will be two sets of elections. On Nov. 16, Pakistanis will choose 217 members of its 237-member National Assembly, the lower house of parliament. (The remaining 20 seats are reserved for women and minorities and will be elected indirectly by National Assembly members.) The National Assembly was dissolved in May by Gen. Zia, ostensibly for corruption. But analysts think he was unhappy with its growing independence. Gen Zia's move was illegal, according to last week's Supreme Court verdict. The upper house, the Senate, is still sitting.    On Nov. 19, Pakistanis will vote for the four provincial assemblies. Parliament and the provincial assemblies will then join to choose a president. The president then chooses a prime minister, who needn't represent any particular party but must be &quot;likely to command the confidence of the majority&quot; of the Assembly, according to the constitution.    Constitutionally, the prime minister runs the government. But the president appoints the chiefs of the armed forces and the judiciary. And the president can veto bills, though parliament can override the veto. He also can dissolve the National Assembly &quot;if so advised by the prime minister.&quot; Gen. Zia, as president and army chief of staff, and with his less-than-legal temperament, made the presidency the seat of power.    It isn't clear how the system will work after Nov. 16, or even which post a political victor will choose to occupy: president or prime minister. Miss Bhutto has said she would restore the constitution to its form it had before Gen. Zia significantly amended it.    To date, there are three main political groupings. Their strength is hard to gauge. The first is Miss Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party, which was started by her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Gen. Zia overthrew Prime Minister Bhutto in 1977 and had him hanged two years later. The Bhutto party will contest the elections together with eight other anti-Zia parties.    The PPP arouses popular passion, both for and against it. &quot;People love it, and they hate and fear it, because of how it ran the country in the 1970s,&quot; says a Western diplomat in Islamabad, the capital.    The other two political forces are alliances wrapped around the fractured wings of the Pakistan Muslim League, the country's oldest party. The strongest is the Islamic Democratic Alliance, an amalgamation of rightist and religious groups with strong support in the Punjab. The weaker wing is the Pakistani Awami Itehad, three parties spearheaded by Mohammad Khan Junejo, prime minister until Gen. Zia sacked him in May for what the president called ineffectiveness.    No one knows what will propel the campaign, now that the late president isn't the issue. Prior to his death, Miss Bhutto stood for democracy and against authoritarianism. The blood feud between her family and Gen. Zia mesmerized the electorate.    Now Gen. Zia and authoritarianism are gone. Many of Miss Bhutto's opponents are associated with Gen. Zia, but few are genuinely tarnished. Mr. Junejo is even trying to compete with Miss Bhutto as a martyr. And almost all major players are from the feudalistic land-owning class that has controlled this part of the subcontinent for centuries.    No matter who wins, analysts say, the hard part comes after the elections. &quot;It will be very unfortunate if a single majority party doesn't emerge,&quot; says Mr. Junejo. Whether run by a single party or coalition, the new government must learn fast how to make friends with the military.    &quot;That's the first lesson for a civilian government in Pakistan,&quot; says a diplomat based in Islamabad. </TEXT></DOC>