<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880120-0057 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY -- On Sports </HL><AUTHOR> Laurie Kretchmar </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> PSM </CO><IN> EDP </IN><TEXT>      Computerized Replay   Gives Athletes an Edge   FOR YEARS, athletes have used high-speed cameras and videocassette recorders to scrutinize and improve their performances. Now, personal computers and other high-tech devices have taken the taped replay a step further -- and a small industry has sprouted to sell such equipment to coaches and athletes.    Phillip Cheetham, a former Olympic gymnast from Australia who now lives in Colorado Springs, Colo., started Peak Performance Technologies Inc. a few years ago to sell video systems to sports groups interested in motion analysis. With a $35,000 system, researchers can videotape, say, a gymnastic maneuver, then process and digitize it frame-by-frame to create three-dimensional images that can be analyzed from different angles. The U.S. Olympic Committee uses the equipment at its sports-science lab in Colorado Springs.    Having a computer on the coaching staff &quot;gives another way to look at the skill, at the performance, instead of just standing back and observing and giving opinions,&quot; says the 33-year-old Mr. Cheetham.    The former gymnast got into the business of applying computers to sports after a case of shoulder tendinitis forced him to stop competing six years ago. With that in mind, his company designed other equipment that the Olympic Committee has used to analyze how injuries can be avoided in gymnastic events.    Athletes, eager for any edge they can get, swear by the motion-analysis system. Todd Eldredge, 16, credits it with enabling him last summer to become one of only a dozen figure skaters in the U.S. to perform the triple-axel, a dizzying leap in which the skater makes three-and-a-half revolutions in the air.    After studying his leaps from all angles and working with a sports psychologist to improve concentration, &quot;my jumps started to get tighter and spins faster,&quot; Mr. Eldredge says. In December, he won the gold medal in the junior world figure-skating championship. -   With This Feature,   Why Bother Firing?    MARKSMEN at the U.S. Olympic Training Center are using a specially designed infrared laser to hone their aim. The laser -- about as big around as an index-finger and similar to those used in medical devices -- is mounted under a gun barrel and fires an invisible beam at a target 54 yards away. A TV screen displays the laser as it strikes the target, so a coach can observe how accurate the aim is before the gun is fired.    Modeled after a more cumbersome West German design, the laser system gives a new perspective to coaches who previously had to rely on athletes' own perceptions before a shot.    &quot;A couple of hours on the laser is worth several months of conventional training,&quot; says Thomas Westenburg, head of engineering technology for the Olympic Committee's sports-science program.    Recreational marksmen and hunters have shown interest in the device, but for now it's only available for use at the Olympic Committee's lab.    Henry D. Cross III, chairman of the National Rifle Association's shooting-sports research council, which is chief sponsor of the Olympic laser project, says the NRA isn't interested in seeing the product commercialized just yet. The reason: The NRA doesn't want the U.S. team's competitors to be able to train with it before this year's Summer Olympics.    Swimming in Place   To Reach the Olympics   RUNNERS HAVE tread mills. Cyclists have stationary bikes. And soon U.S. swimmers will have flumes.    These aquatic equivalents of wind tunnels are miniature swimming pools with currents powerful enough to keep even the strongest swimmer treading water. In training, the speed of the current can be turned up, for example, as a conditioning exercise. And it makes it easier for coaches to observe swimming techniques.    Flumes have been used for years by athletes in East Germany, the Soviet Union and Japan. The U.S. Olympic Committee is now building its own flume at its Colorado Springs training center. The flume will be in use by spring -- perhaps in time to aid this year's Olympic swimmers. Athletes who compete in kayaks, canoes, and rowing shells also will be able to use the device.    It's unlikely flumes will show up any time soon in the garages of Olympic hopefuls, however: The Olympic Committee says its flume will cost $1.2 million.    If You Ring the Bell,   You Win a Cigar   THE POWER of a punch can be measured by more than a black eye.    Impulse Sports Training Systems Inc. of Bay Village, Ohio, sells sensor-equipped punching bags, gloves, shields and wall pads with liquid-crystal displays showing the force and reaction time of the blows. So far, karate enthusiasts have been the main customers, but Impulse has started advertising to boxers and football players.    Thanks to another sensor-equipped device from Pennwalt Corp., John McEnroe may not have as much reason to throw tantrums on the court. Philadelphia-based Pennwalt, which makes the sensors used by Impulse, is developing a pressure-sensitive device to embed in tennis court foul lines. Unlike the optical sensors now used in some tournaments to detect when a serve is long, the pressure-sensitive foul lines would operate throughout the match to sound off whenever hit by a tennis ball. </TEXT></DOC>