<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THATCHER FAULTED Gorbachev on Afghanistan and human rights.    The British prime minister challenged the Soviet leader to produce deeds matching his words on seeking better relations abroad and providing greater freedom at home. In the first Soviet-British summit in 12 years, Thatcher praised the recent release of political prisoners and urged the Kremlin to go further. Gorbachev expressed readiness to discuss human rights &quot;openly and loudly&quot; if the debate includes Western unemployment, homelessness and discrimination.    Gorbachev reiterated that he wants a political solution in Afghanistan, where about 115,000 Soviet soldiers are posted in fighting Moslem insurgents.    ---   JORDAN'S HUSSEIN is putting off a decision on a trip to Washington.    The king, still angered by secret U.S. arms sales to Iran, doesn't believe the Reagan administration has taken meaningful steps to restore its credibility in the Middle East. The U.S. badly wants him to make the visit next month. Instead, Hussein is dispatching his prime minister and foreign minister to Washington this week to test whether the U.S. is willing to act on any of a series of proposed steps to mend fences with the Arab world.    The White House, driven by its anger toward Iran and a desire to retain lost prestige in the Arab world, is considering sending a senior official to Iraq.    ---   THE U.S. ORDERED all the Marine guards at its Moscow embassy replaced.    The Marine Corps, cooperating with the State Department, said it agreed to withdraw all 28 guards, noting that none is suspected of wrongdoing. The move, described as precautionary, follows accusations that two ex-guards there, Sgt. Clayton Lonetree and Cpl. Arnold Bracy, repeatedly allowed Soviet agents into restricted areas.    Bracy had been administratively reduced in rank from sergeant for fraternization with a woman while in the U.S.S.R., Pentagon sources said.    ---   Two Pakistani jets downed an Afghan warplane, Pakistani officials and witnesses said. The Soviet-built jet was shot down 10 miles inside Pakistan, in the same northern area where several Afghan bombing raids last week killed at least 152 people.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide the extent to which the First Amendment protects the news media against lawsuits for articles that may cause emotional distress but aren't libelous. The case involves an appeal by Hustler magazine and its publisher, Larry Flynt, of a $200,000 jury award for the Rev. Jerry Falwell.    ---   A Madrid trial began for 40 people, two in absentia, accused of selling tainted cooking oil that caused mass food poisoning in 1981. Police dispersed hundreds of victims, who hurled rocks at defendants outside the courthouse. The poisoning left at least 584 people dead and 25,000 others maimed. The trial is expected to last at least five months.    ---   Soviet officials promised that 11,000 Jews and their families who are seeking to emigrate will be allowed to go to Israel within the year, U.S. Jewish leaders said, noting that the pledge was agreed upon during their recent three-day visit to Moscow.    ---   Two Soviet sea captains were found guilty of safety violations in the August 1986 collision of cargo and passenger ships in the Black Sea and each was sentenced to the maximum 15 years in prison, the official news agency Tass said. The liner's sinking, considered the worst Soviet maritime disaster, killed 166 people and left 282 missing.    ---   A Van Gogh painting brought a record $39.9 million, more than three times the previous world auction record, at Christie's in London. The work, &quot;Sunflowers,&quot; was finished in 1889. It was acquired by an anonymous foreign collector bidding by phone.    ---   North Korea accepted a South Korean offer for a meeting between the nations' prime ministers, Pyongyang's official news agency said. North Korea broke off all talks in January 1986 with Seoul, which said it was studying a proposal for new talks. The earlier discussions were suspended to protest a U.S.-South Korea military exercise.    ---   Lebanese Moslem leader Jumblatt met with Archbishop of Canterbury Runcie in London and vowed to pursue the release of Church of England envoy Terry Waite, held captive in Lebanon. Separately, ex-President Carter, ending a five-nation Mideast tour, said he saw no immediate prospect for early release of U.S. hostages in Lebanon.    ---   Brazil introduced emergency measures to ease trade pressures and stimulate the economy. But it said it hasn't made progress on resuming suspended foreign debt payments.    ---   China's lawmakers faulted a report by Premier Zhao for failing forcefully to address agricultural problems or to combat extravagance, waste and other &quot;unhealthy tendencies&quot; in his socialist modernization, the official Xinhua News Agency said.    ---   A U.S. audit said special Medicare payments to hospitals that serve many indigent patients &quot;may not be economically justified.&quot; The payments are based on the theory that poor patients need more services.    ---   Warsaw was criticized by the Roman Catholic Church and dissident leaders for the government's latest round of price increases for food, fuel, postal service and public transit. The outlawed Solidarity union and the Communist-controlled successor alliance backed any protest actions by workers but didn't call for a strike.    ---   Prime Minister Gonzalez defeated an attempt in Spain's parliament to unseat his Socialist government for restricting wage boosts to control inflation. But he still faces a rising tide of strikes and social unrest, in part over Common Market milk quotas.    ---   Two suspected guerrillas were charged in Rome with conspiracy in air force Gen. Licio Giorgieri's killing earlier this month and with attempted murder in a December attempt on his life. He was shot dead by two men on a motorcycle. The Union of Fighting Communists, a Red Brigades breakaway group, has claimed responsibility.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir said an Israeli air force colonel's resignation of his post after being accused by the U.S. of espionage would ease strains in ties with Washington. Aviem Sella, accused of recruiting American Jonathan Pollard to spy for Israel, has resigned his command of a big air base. Pollard was given a life sentence.    ---   Nigeria banned religious organizations in schools and colleges for 12 months. A decree by military authorities allows normal worship on campuses but dissolves all religious associations. It set a five-year jail term for violators. The action was a response to recent religious riots in the north that posed a threat to the 19-month-old government.    ---   Indiana defeated Syracuse, 74-73, to win the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship, in New Orleans.    ---   Died: John Victor Herd, 84, former chairman of Continental Corp., Friday, in Brooklyn, N.Y. </TEXT></DOC>