<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Populist Crusader: Jesse Jackson Receives Wider Base of Support As Primaries Heat Up --- Plans for Soak-the-Rich Tax, Reduced Role for Military Face New Tests in South --- Fighting 'Economic Violence' </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib and Joe Davidson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> WILMINGTON, N.C.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pelicans swoop along the channel leading from this Atlantic Coast fishing town as the Rev. Jesse Jackson pilots the 75-foot charter fishing boat Pirate III out to sea. The Democratic presidential hopeful is on a vote-seeking voyage to an area where the shell-fishing industry is hurting.    &quot;We, as a principle, must not abandon people who are in trouble,&quot; Mr. Jackson, clad in foul-weather gear, tells a floating press conference. &quot;Two decades ago, people were divided along racial battle grounds. Today they are coming together along economic battle grounds.&quot;    This is the Jackson message of 1988: Farmers and workers of different races, ages, incomes and locales must unite against economic injustice. To listen to Mr. Jackson on the stump is to get a high-octane shot of economic populism. He doesn't bash foreign trade competitors but instead blasts American corporations that take jobs to overseas plants. He calls for a soak-the-rich tax policy, a higher minimum wage, a moratorium on farm foreclosures, more corporate taxes, and investment of billions of dollars of pension funds in low-income housing and research and development projects.    The message on foreign policy is no less controversial. Mr. Jackson calls for reducing the role of the military -- and the threat of military force -- as a tool of foreign policy. He would ditch the &quot;Reagan Doctrine&quot; of supporting anti-leftist insurgencies around the world and instead emphasize closer ties to the Third World. He endorses full diplomatic relations with Cuba, an independent Palestinian state, full economic sanctions on South Africa and a reduction of U.S. forces in Europe.    Mr. Jackson rails against the press for ignoring his message, but that message becomes increasingly relevant as the campaign turns toward the March 8 primaries in the Southern states where he is strongest. His words are relevant for another reason as well. Based on the evidence from the early contests -- including a surprisingly strong second-place finish in last weekend's Maine caucuses -- his populist crusade against &quot;economic violence&quot; is striking a chord among some Democrats beyond his black base.    &quot;His message fell on white ears in many cases,&quot; says Bonnie Campbell, Democratic chairman in Iowa, &quot;and they liked that message.&quot;    While the South is the home of the most conservative Democrats, it also figures to be fertile ground for Mr. Jackson. The region has the largest base of black voters, to which Jackson supporters figure he can add disgruntled union workers, struggling farmers and women. And although he remains a long shot to get the nomination, Mr. Jackson seems sure to win a big enough bloc of delegates to force other candidates to adopt parts of his message if they want his support.    But if the good news for Mr. Jackson is that his message will spread, the bad news is that many who hear it may find it too liberal, even far out in some cases. He supports extending some benefits afforded married couples, like health insurance, to lesbian and gay couples. He proposes doubling the federal education budget and pushes &quot;universal&quot; health and day-care programs. While advancing some powerful themes, he often is light on specifics; he hasn't offered a detailed deficit-reduction plan, for instance.    He proposes canceling new aircraft-carrier task forces, opposes the MX, Trident and Midgetman missiles, and says estimates that the Pentagon budget could be cut by 10% are too conservative.    &quot;Some of the positions he's taking are pretty far to the left on the current American political spectrum,&quot; says A. James Reichley, a political analyst at the Brookings Institution. &quot;I don't think most voters or most observers pay that much attention to what Jackson is saying, so in a sense he's getting a free ride on the issues. If they did take them seriously, I think they wouldn't be very popular.&quot; For the Democratic Party, the risk may be that Mr. Jackson will push the agenda too far to the left to be successful in an election.    Part of Mr. Jackson's economic message -- such as his attack on corporations and the export of American jobs -- has been picked up by other Democrats such as Rep. Richard Gephardt. Republican political analyst Kevin Phillips argues that, rather, than driving the Democratic Party to the left, Mr. Jackson and Mr. Gephardt are pursuing a brand of &quot;economic nationalism&quot; that appeals to some liberals and conservatives alike. When Mr. Jackson talks about corporate lack of patriotism, that isn't &quot;left,&quot; Mr. Phillips says.    Mr. Jackson argues that he delivers tough messages on drugs, sex and education that even card-carrying conservatives could love. &quot;When I go to schools and tell students to shun sex without love, and drugs and violence, conservatives embrace that as their approach to education,&quot; Mr. Jackson says.    When asked about the lack of detail in some proposals, he recalls that former Alabama Gov. George Wallace once advised him to deliver a simple message common people can understand. &quot;Keep your message so low the goats can get it,&quot; Gov. Wallace urged.    So to working-class whites hurt by the slumping fishing industry here, to black middle-class contributors in Richmond, Va., and to white steelworkers in Baltimore fearful of losing their jobs, Mr. Jackson cries that he will secure &quot;workers' rights beyond civil rights.&quot;    Specifically, he recommends increasing the minimum wage to $4.65 or $5 an hour from the current $3.35. This, he maintains, would alleviate a central problem with jobs created in President Reagan's tenure: So many are low-paying service jobs that many Americans are working but are still below the poverty line. It is an especially appealing pitch in the South's many low-wage areas.    To save American jobs, Mr. Jackson proposes a &quot;code of conduct for American multinational corporations&quot; that would make it difficult for companies like General Motors and General Electric -- two he frequently mentions by name -- to close domestic factories and open plants abroad. He isn't specific about what would be in such a code of conduct, but calls for advance notice to workers of plant closings and an end to any tax breaks corporations get for closing plants in the U.S.    To reduce the attraction of foreign plants, he asserts, the U.S. should push countries like South Korea to expand workers' rights just as the U.S. pushes for human rights abroad. That, he argues, would end the &quot;slave labor&quot; that makes such markets attractive spots for multinationals' plants.    To gin up overseas markets for American products, Mr. Jackson proposes prodding Japan and West Germany to create a new &quot;Marshall Plan&quot; to develop the Third World. He also suggests spurring international growth by establishing a new international mechanism to assume some Third World debt at a discount and to swap some of the debt in exchange for &quot;preserving land that is environmentally at risk, such as the rain forests in Brazil.&quot;    Mr. Jackson couples these international proposals with efforts to accelerate economic activity at home. One controversial idea is to pool billions of dollars in public pension funds and use the money to issue federally backed securities to finance low-income housing, mass transit and small businesses: The theory is that the new housing and train lines being built would use more American lumber and steel. Similarly, Mr. Jackson proposes a new &quot;American Investment Bank,&quot; a domestic equivalent of the World Bank, that would sell bonds to pension funds and use the proceeds for big research and development and so-called infrastructure projects.    The problem most analysts cite with such proposals is that the projects most of the pension funds would finance are highly unlikely to pay for themselves. And whenever such projects failed, either pension funds would be at risk or the federal government would have to foot the bill to make good on its loan guarantees. &quot;There are many kinds of investments that I would imagine a pension fund would avoid because it is concerned with pensioners and not with doing good at great risk,&quot; says Audrey Freedman, an economist at the Conference Board.    To cut the federal budget deficit, Mr. Jackson suggests an approach that combines soaking the rich and cutting back at the Pentagon. He says the upper-income taxpayers, those making more than $190,000 a year, should return to a 38% income tax bracket rather than stay at the 33% rate the 1986 tax law provided. Such a change, he says, could bring in $20 billion in new revenue annually. And he says corporations should pay taxes at the 1980 tax rate, in effect before Reagan-era tax changes, with incentives for research and job-creation. That could bring in another $20 billion, he says.    Dropping plans for two new aircraft carriers could save an additional $40 billion, he says. And some American troops could be brought home from Western Europe to save more money, he says, calling on the Europeans to pay more for their own defense.    While proposing such cuts to attack the current deficit, Mr. Jackson is vague on how the expensive new social programs he proposes would pay for themselves. Still, his message appeals to workers bitter about lost jobs and Reagan administration tax breaks for the wealthy.    &quot;The thing that he says that's different from any other Democrat is we need to build a movement against economic violence, like the civil-rights movement in the 1960s,&quot; says Leonard Shindel, a white Baltimore steelworker who turned out for a Jackson rally.    Mr. Jackson doesn't push his foreign-policy agenda as aggressively as he did in 1984, and he has softened some of its harsher edges. When he endorses a Palestinian state, for example, he is more careful to also call for security for Israel. Still, he has been the only candidate in either party to speak out aggressively on Israel's suppression of rioting in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and to criticize Israel for failing to resolve the plight of Palestinians.    Though he says America's basic defense mustn't be weakened, he calls unabashedly for directing huge amounts of money away from the Pentagon. Arms spending could be cut, he maintains, because he would reshape America's confrontational relationship with the Soviet Union. He proposes placing a moratorium on nuclear-weapons testing and suspending deployment of new nuclear weapons, and then challenging the Soviets to reciprocate. And he would stop President Reagan's Star Wars program, though he says he would continue some basic research.    Ultimately, Mr. Jackson's message this year isn't essentially confrontational but optimistic. &quot;We have transformed America,&quot; he declares, and says he is speaking of a civil-rights movement that not only desegregated America but moved hearts as well. White workers may have thought in the 1960s that they had to give up advantages so blacks could catch up, he argues, but in his drive for economic &quot;common ground,&quot; both groups of workers can gain by banding together.    &quot;We have the poorest campaign,&quot; he tells cheering workers in Baltimore, &quot;but the richest message.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>