<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880811-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE APPROVED an aid package for Nicaragua's Contra rebels.    Voting 49-47, lawmakers cleared a $27.1 million plan that includes food, clothing, shelter and medical supplies for the anti-Sandinista insurgents. It also holds open the option of resuming military aid to the rebels. The proposal was adopted after the Senate turned aside a competing Republican package that included military supplies that had been purchased earlier but hadn't been delivered.    The package must be reconciled with a House-passed version, which doesn't provide any assistance to the rebels seeking to oust the Managua regime.    ---   NASA CONDUCTED a test firing of the space shuttle Discovery's main engines.    The 20-second test at Cape Canaveral, considered an essential step toward the first shuttle launch since the 1986 Challenger explosion, was described as &quot;super&quot; by the space agency's administrator. The test had been delayed five times because of equipment problems. NASA officials said they could find only minor problems after examining the test data. Discovery's launch is expected in October.    Moscow disclosed that cosmonaut Anatoly Levchenko died Saturday of a brain tumor, and confirmed that he was in line to fly the Soviet space shuttle.    ---   BURMA SAID dozens of protesters have been killed in anti-government rioting.    The official Burmese radio reported that 30 people were killed by security forces in street battles in Rangoon, bringing the official death toll from two days of violent demonstrations to about 80. Three police officers were beheaded. Unofficial reports said more than 100 people may have been killed in clashes between security forces and students, Buddhist monks and others demanding the ouster of new leader Sein Lwin.    The U.S. has temporarily closed its embassy in Burma because of the rioting. The State Department said all American personnel were safe.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir said Israel would use an &quot;iron fist&quot; to prevent Palestinian statehood. Rejecting international demands for Palestinian self-determination as &quot;meaningless,&quot; he called on Arabs in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to end their uprising. In a speech to parliament, Shamir again ruled out any talks with the PLO.    ---   Pentagon sources said the skipper of the USS Dubuque is about to be relieved from command pending an inquiry into whether his vessel failed to render sufficient aid last May to a boatload of Vietnamese boat people. The 52 refugees who survived 37 days in the South China Sea reportedly resorted to cannibalism. Almost 60 people died.    ---   NATO is expected to recommend a unilateral reduction of short-range nuclear systems that weren't touched by the recent U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating intermediate-range missiles, according to Army Gen. Galvin. There are about 2,000 artillery pieces designed to carry nuclear explosives in NATO's arsenal.    ---   The EPA proposed programs to reduce the levels of hazardous lead in the nation's drinking-water supply. The steps include treatment of water at plants and educating the public on how to lower its lead intake. The programs would cost about $1 billion initially.    ---   Shultz attended the inauguration of Ecuador's new president, Rodrigo Borja, and criticized an anti-American mural that hangs in the hall of Congress in Quito. Borja has pledged a nonaligned foreign policy. Ecuador is the final stop on the secretary of state's nine-nation Latin American tour.    ---   U.N. cease-fire monitors arrived in Tehran and Baghdad. The five observers began laying the groundwork for a 350-member unit that will oversee the Iran-Iraq truce, which is set to begin Aug. 20. The U.N. said 24 countries have agreed to participate in the international peace-keeping force.    ---   Pretoria said that about 2,000 South African troops began withdrawing from Angola in the first phase of a peace plan that is expected to lead to independence for Namibia. Under a cease-fire pact announced Monday with Luanda and Havana, Pretoria is to pull its troops out of Angola by Sept. 1.    ---   The Senate Judiciary panel urged confirmation of Thornburgh as attorney general. The former Pennsylvania governor would succeed Meese, who announced his resignation after an independent counsel investigated allegations of unethical conduct but declined to file criminal charges.    ---   Afghan rebels have inflicted casualties on Soviet troops withdrawing from Afghanistan's southern Kandahar province, and have accelerated activities in an attempt to establish a rival government, the Soviet Communist party newspaper Pravda reported. The Moslem rebels also bombarded Kabul with rockets, Moscow reported. </TEXT></DOC>