<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870715-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   McFARLANE CONTRADICTED some of North's Iran-Contra testimony.    The former national security adviser, returning before congressional panels investigating the affair, portrayed his former aide as going &quot;over the line&quot; in assisting Nicaraguan insurgents during a ban on U.S. military aid to the guerrillas. McFarlane also denied authorizing North to begin a covert airlift in 1985. The comments came after North completed a sixth day of testimony, in which he disclosed that he was offered a $1 million bribe from an Iranian middleman.    The White House is considering seeking more than the $105 million it already has requested in Contra aid in the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1. The increase would be sought because the administration would like Congress to approve aid for an 18-month period, rather than a year.    Reagan continued to decline comment on the Iran-Contra hearings, but said that once the proceedings were over &quot;you won't be able to shut me up.&quot;    ---   At least two bombs exploded in Karachi, Pakistan, killing as many as 72 people and injuring more than 250 others. Witnesses said several buildings were set ablaze, shops gutted and about 20 cars destroyed. Responsibility wasn't claimed, but a statement issued by authorities blamed &quot;saboteurs of foreign origin.&quot; It didn't elaborate.    ---   Reagan administration officials said the first U.S.-flagged Kuwaiti tanker will move into the Persian Gulf under Navy escort next Wednesday, according to some members of Congress. In the gulf, Iraqi warplanes attacked an Iranian offshore base in an apparent bid to stop gunboat raids. It was the second such raid in two days.    ---   Taiwan's government lifted martial law that was was imposed by Chiang Kai-shek in 1949, and the Defense Ministry announced the release of 23 prisoners, including some political dissidents. The president, however, signed a new security law that critics said is as restrictive as the emergency law.    ---   A Soviet delegation met with Israeli officials in Jerusalem to discuss procedural issues related to the eight-member group's survey of Russian Orthodox Church property and of the status of about 2,500 Soviet passport holders. Protesters gathered at the Foreign Ministry to demand improved emigration rights for Soviet Jews.    ---   The Ukraine's premier was ousted along with at least eight other high-ranking officials of the republic in a shake-up that may be related to the area's economic problems. The dismissals, made last week by the Ukranian Supreme Soviet, appear to weaken the power base of Ukrainian Communist Party leader Vladimir Shcherbitsky.    ---   South Africa's government outlawed a strike by black metal workers, forcing thousands of union members to return to their jobs hours after the walkout began. Pretoria agreed to give legal backing to the industry's unilaterally imposed wage package. The union said it would challenge the legality of the government's ban.    ---   Iran has summoned a French consul in Tehran to appear before the Islamic Revolutionary Court in connection with &quot;espionage activities against Iran,&quot; Tehran radio reported. In Paris, Mitterrand said an Iranian who has taken refuge in Tehran's embassy must answer police questions about bomb attacks in the French capital last year.    ---   A former Intelsat official pleaded guilty to fraud in connection with a plan to bilk nearly $5 million from the international communications satellite organization. Two other defendants also pleaded guilty. A federal judge in Washington scheduled sentencing for Sept. 11.    ---   NASA named an accident investigation panel to study a launch-pad mishap Monday at Cape Canaveral, Fla., that resulted in the indefinite grounding of the space agency's Atlas-Centaur rocket. Four workers were injured when a platform ruptured the rocket's liquid-hydrogen fuel tank.    ---   The judge at Deaver's trial rejected news media requests to widen public access to the proceedings, allowing private questioning of prospective jurors to continue at a federal court in Washington. The former Reagan aide is charged with lying to Congress and a grand jury about his lobbying activities.    ---   A Polish official said Warsaw and the Vatican are moving toward reestablishing ties, which would make Poland the only East bloc nation with formal links to the Holy See. In Rome, Archbishop Lefebvre met with a Vatican official in an effort to end a dispute over Lefebvre's challenge to the pope's sole right to name bishops.    ---   South Korea's new premier urged the implementation of political changes pledged by President Chun. Kim Chung Yul's comments came as he was sworn in. Eight new cabinet ministers also were inaugurated. Separately, the ruling party dismissed five career military officers from leadership posts and named civilians to fill the vacancies.    ---   A Swedish citizen was sentenced by a Canadian court to a year in prison and fined $5,000 after pleading guilty to violating immigration laws by helping smuggle 174 Sikhs into the country. Four others have been charged in the Sunday incident.    ---   West German Chancellor Kohl ended a three-day visit to Beijing. Kohl, who discussed trade relations with Chinese leader Deng and Premier Zhao, is to travel to Nanking before flying to Tibet tomorrow. </TEXT></DOC>