<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871218-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Great Expectations:Korea's New PresidentFaces Heady DemandsOf Workers, Students---Roh Must Surmount ChargesOf Election Fraud FirstAnd Deal With Dissidents---A Lift for Democracy in Asia---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> PUPYONG, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Workers at Daewoo Group's auto plant here have a few demands for their new president-elect, Roh Tae Woo.    Woo Swang Myung, a rough-hewn union activist, points to the black ribbon pinned to his soiled work shirt. &quot;Free the Daewoo Seven,&quot; it reads, referring to plant heroes who masterminded successful strikes here last August. After Mr. Roh frees the jailed workers, the union man adds, he must raise wages 50%.    &quot;All the candidates have promised us much, so we would be foolish to demand little,&quot; he says without a hint of humor. &quot;If we don't get what we want, everyone can see there will be disorder during the spring wage rounds.&quot;    Mr. Roh isn't due to take over for 10 weeks, and they will be tense ones as the main losers, Kim Young Sam and Kim Dae Jung, try to blame their defeat on fraud rather than on their own splitting of the opposition vote. But as the union leader's mood suggests, Mr. Roh, assuming he survives the transition, faces a wave of rising expectations that will make his presidency a difficult experiment in democracy.    The expectations come not just from workers but also from students, indeed from much of the Korean populace. Unlike Latin American dictatorships in which economic mismanagement brought demands for democracy, in Korea the impetus apparently has been economic progress. It produced demands, eventually irresistible, for commensurate political progress. But now that the election has been held, it is those same impatient expectations that will endanger the new democracy.    Meanwhile, aspirations for a better life are rising elsewhere in Asia, too. This is a part of the world that has few democracies but appears due for some national transitions of power before long. The election in Korea is likely to raise democratic hopes for many peoples: in Taiwan, in Singapore, in Indonesia, in Malaysia (though the current trend in Malaysia seems more dictatorial, not less).    Thus, just as Corazon Aquino's rise in the Philippines encouraged the Koreans, Korea's election may whet the appetite for democracy in some other economically successful Asian nations as they face political successions.    In Korea, the deep desire for democracy showed in a phenomenally high voter turnout of some 90%. Nevertheless, with a loss by the opposition in the first free presidential vote in 16 years, the mood in Seoul is one of apprehension rather than relief. There has been sporadic violence in some parts of the country. Riot police have returned to the streets to deter a series of promised demonstrations. There is a general concern that somehow Mr. Roh, an ex-general who was President Chun Doo Hwan's chosen successor before the surprise decision to call an election, is simply a transition leader.    Supporters of Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam are trying to determine if there is some way to join forces against Mr. Roh. But during the campaign the two were bitter rivals, and they divided about 55% of the vote -- thus letting Mr. Roh win with 37%.    The fiery Kim Dae Jung has been subdued in his public comments so far, simply labeling the election an &quot;all-out fraud.&quot; It was the soft-spoken Kim Young Sam, No. 2 finisher in the race, who was most vitriolic. Calling on Koreans to &quot;rise up and end the military regime of Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo,&quot; Mr. Kim, his fist clinched in rage, charged: &quot;This was nothing but a second coup d'etat.&quot;    Even if the two Kims should now cooperate in their opposition to Mr. Roh, his task will be made somewhat easier by his large victory margin of some two million votes. In addition, despite the losers' charges, independent election observers suggest that voting irregularities don't amount to widespread fraud.    Street protests are nevertheless inevitable, and Mr. Roh's standing will depend on how skillfully he handles them. &quot;The more he tries nonconfrontation and containment the better,&quot; one Western diplomat believes. &quot;If the government doesn't react too strongly, there is a chance these protests will fade.&quot;    One difficulty for Mr. Roh is that he won't be calling all the shots. President Chun, his former military-academy classmate, is believed to prefer a tougher stance against dissent than Mr. Roh, who in victory has struck the same conciliatory note he did in the campaign. Some believe Mr. Chun wants to clean things up for his old friend and 1979 coup comrade before he is to take office Feb. 24. &quot;They will play good guy, bad guy,&quot; says Han Sung Joo of Korea University.    The problem is that the number and the organization of anti-government activists have grown. At Seoul universities, students express confidence that Mr. Roh won't be able to weather their protests. In a dingy cafe near Korea University, three self-described &quot;radical students&quot; slurp cold noodles while they discuss, with dubious logic, their world view. &quot;We didn't want to vote at all,&quot; a 21-year-old agriculture student says, &quot;but then we decided we might be able to use one of the Kims as a vehicle to increase our influence and bring about socialism by education of the masses. Now the election outcome is irrelevant. There will be much more violent protest than ever before. Mr. Roh is finished. He'll wish he had lost the election.&quot;    The chief of Kim Young Sam's young organization, Yoo Sung Hwan, says, &quot;Korean youth have proven they will fight to overthrow Korean military dictatorship legally if possible and illegally when necessary.&quot;    But so far, aside from scattered protests in Kim Dae Jung's home province of Cholla, the Kims aren't stirring broad public anger. In fact, a few relatively independent newspapers are defending the election. Hankook Ilbo, a national daily, called on both opposition leaders to resign for having irresponsibly split the opposition vote.    &quot;We are in a chaotic situation,&quot; says Lee Chul, an opposition member of the national assembly. &quot;We are depressed. We can't foresee what we should and can do.&quot; He believes the charges of heavy election fraud aren't persuading most Koreans. He also predicts the two Kims will continue to go their separate ways.    Beyond protesters, Mr. Roh will have to face down the opposition in negotiations over the date of a national-assembly election early next year and over laws to govern it. The government hopes to call the election soon to deflect attention from disputes over the presidential vote. But the election law as written has only inflamed the opposition more, because of a system of proportional allotment that clearly favors the ruling party.    Rounds of wage negotiations next spring will either coincide with or closely follow the national-assembly vote. After last August's strikes at more than 3,000 companies, corporate executives are predicting the worst. Kang In Gu, an official of the trade-union federation, says the country now has 4,074 unions, or 1,113 more than last summer. Workers were encouraged when their strikes won 10% to 15% pay increases, he says: &quot;They have discovered how powerful they are.&quot;    Beyond all that, this fledgling democracy almost certainly will face new pressure from the American Congress and some in the administration to reduce its trade surplus with the U.S., nearly $10 billion. During the dollar's steep fall against many currencies, Korea has prevented its won from gaining very much. Assistant Secretary of the Treasury David Mulford has publicly pressed Seoul recently for greater appreciation of the currency, which would make U.S. goods more competitive with Korea's.    However, with some 40,000 U.S. troops in Korea and a major interest in political stability on the peninsula, neither the state nor the defense department wants to press Korea too hard. This will be particularly true if, as many U.S. foreign-policy makers expect, the Soviets launch a major initiative next year to improve relations with both China and Japan by making new concessions. (How much Congress heeds this caution is another question.)    The major trade issues at the moment are U.S. efforts to gain a better market for agricultural products such as beef and for such services as insurance and advertising. However, more issues are likely to follow, as well as charges of South Korean &quot;dumping&quot; -- selling some products abroad for a price below the production cost.    &quot;In a more democratic world, our government will be more timid&quot; in the face of pressure from domestic producers and exporters, predicts Kim Mahn Je, a former Korean finance minister. &quot;Demands from the U.S. will inevitably bring up a great deal of anti-Americanism. People here have a complex about a big country ordering a small one around.&quot;    He predicts that agriculture will be one battleground. Domestic farm pressure will keep the Korean market largely closed to U.S. beef, he believes, possibly forcing U.S. retaliation in the form of sanctions against Korean goods. &quot;The choice is between losing dollars to sanctions or being burned domestically. This new president just doesn't know what's coming.&quot;    Despite all these problems, Mr. Roh has much going for him. He inherits a sound economy and an industrious and educated people. Korea's production has been growing at an 8% annual rate over the past quarter-century. Although wage demands will grow and perhaps trade surpluses will shrink somewhat, Korea doesn't face any real unemployment problem.    Another major force for stability, beyond the wish for continued prosperity, is South Korea's role as host to the 1988 Olympic summer games. Koreans of almost all political stripes long for the rite of passage from developing to developed nation, a passage they believe playing host to the Olympics will bestow. They love to point out that Japan's per-capita income in 1964, when Tokyo was host of the Olympics, was roughly equivalent to Korea's now.    Japan, of course, has gone on to become one of the world's most prosperous and economically powerful nations. And in Korea, dreams of following Japan abound. Such sentiments work against any serious civil disorder until after the September 1988 competition.    This would give Mr. Roh some time to reach out to opponents and try to consolidate his strength. &quot;The major domestic task,&quot; he said after his victory, &quot;is the work of reconciliation, the work of healing wounds.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>