<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BURMESE TROOPS CLASHED with protesters during anti-government rallies.    The security forces opened fire as thousands of Burmese in Rangoon and in 26 other cities demonstrated against new hardline leader Sein Lwin. At least 36 people were killed, officials and diplomats reported. Some said hundreds may have been killed or wounded in the capital city. Authorities imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew on Rangoon's 3.5 million residents. Martial law was declared in the capital last week.    The State Department issued a statement in Washington deploring the violence, saying &quot;nonlethal means&quot; should be used during such disturbances.    ---   THE U.N. APPROVED the stationing of a peacekeeping force for the Persian Gulf.    The 15-nation Security Council voted to send a 350-member unarmed force to monitor a cease-fire in the eight-year-old war between Iran and Iraq. The truce is to begin Aug. 20, and direct peace talks between Tehran and Baghdad are to open five days later. Advance parties for the observer force immediately headed for the region. As Iraq celebrated the truce declaration, Iran ordered its troops to halt military action.    The Reagan administration said it is prepared to provide logistical support for the $74 million peacekeeping force, which will be funded by the U.N.    ---   Mohammed Ali Hamadi confessed to participating in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner to Beirut, but he denied that he had killed a U.S. serviceman aboard the flight. In a statement read at his trial in Frankfurt, Hamadi said the four hijackers were trying to force the release of Lebanese Shiite Moslems imprisoned in Israel.    ---   Reagan nominated Texas Tech University President Lauro Cavazos to succeed departing Education Secretary Bennett. If confirmed by the Senate, Cavazos will become the nation's first Hispanic-American cabinet secretary.    ---   Israeli warplanes bombarded a radio station in Lebanon that the army said was broadcasting pro-PLO propaganda to Arabs in the occupied territories. Security sources in Sidon said at least three people were killed. In the West Bank, Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teen-ager in a clash between troops and Arab youths.    ---   Investigators in Bolivia blamed a leftist group, Comando Simon Bolivar, for Monday's bombing attack on a motorcade carrying Shultz. The secretary of state, meanwhile, traveled to Costa Rica, where he called for a resumption of peace talks between Nicaragua's Contra rebels and Managua's Sandinista government.    ---   Cosmonaut Anatoly Levchenko died Saturday in Moscow, the official news agency Tass reported. The 47-year-old spaceman, who flew aboard a Soyuz capsule last December, reportedly was preparing for the first manned flight of a Soviet space shuttle. The cause of his death wasn't disclosed.    ---   NASA managers prepared for the test firing today of the space shuttle Discovery's main engines. Space agency officials said the 22-second test at Cape Canaveral, which has been delayed five times because of equipment problems, must be successful before Discovery can be launched.    ---   The Senate approved a bill prohibiting the dumping of sludge in the Atlantic Ocean off the coasts of New York and New Jersey after 1991. The measure, cleared 97-0, apparently was spurred by concern over medical waste washing onto East Coast beaches. A similar bill is awaiting House action.    ---   South African troops began preparing to pull out from Angola as part of a peace accord declared Monday, but Pretoria's rebel allies threatened to continue fighting until they were included in the peace talks. The Unita guerrillas called for Luanda to negotiate a power-sharing arrangement.    ---   Sudan's prime minister declared a nationwide state of emergency in an effort to cope with what are considered the country's worst floods in more than 40 years. Officials in Khartoum said more than one million people were left homeless after thousands of houses were destroyed by the floods, which followed torrential rains last week.    ---   Ecuador's president-elect said one of his first acts after assuming office today would be to renew diplomatic ties with Nicaragua's Sandinista government. Relations between Quito and Managua were severed in 1985. Rodrigo Borja said he is committed to ending Ecuador's pro-U.S. stand and reversing free-market economic policies.    ---   Sporadic rioting erupted in Northern Ireland as police clashed with Irish nationalists marking the 17th anniversary of a policy allowing internment of suspects without trial. At least 42 people were arrested in Belfast. A number of people, including eight police officers, were reported injured.    ---   South Korean officials have agreed to a meeting with communist North Korea to discuss Pyongyang's demand to co-host the Olympics, sources said. North Korea, however, has rejected a proposal by the Seoul government to work out details for full-scale negotiations on political issues.    ---   Wayne Gretzky was traded to the National Hockey League's Los Angeles Kings by the Edmonton Oilers. The transaction involves four other players, three first-round draft picks and more than $10 million. Gretzky, 27, led the Oilers to four Stanley Cup championships in the last five years.    ---   Died: James R. Wolfe, 58, chairman and chief executive officer of CNW Corp., Monday, in Chicago, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>