<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870203-0115 </DOCNO><HL> 'Short-Time' Pay Fails to Catch OnAs a Way to Hold Down Layoffs---By Selwyn FeinsteinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORLABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   To its proponents, it is a win-win situation. Yet, after nearly nine years of experience in this country, so-called short-time compensation is a concept that only a dozen states have authorized, most people haven't heard of and few companies have been willing to try.    The idea is a humanitarian twist on an old hard-times technique. Instead of laying off employees during a temporary downturn, companies are encouraged to voluntarily split reduced work among existing staffers, by cutting the hours and paychecks of all. Short-time compensation eases the sting -- granting state unemployment benefits to make up for some of the lost pay.    Maximum benefits, which vary by state and sometimes amount to 50% of the average local pay, can range from under $25 to nearly $40 a day. Workers cut back to a four-day workweek can still end up receiving close to 90% of their regular pay.    The advantages of short-time plans are many, supporters say. Junior workers who would be laid off get to keep jobs and fringe benefits. Companies are able to hold on to experienced workers, avoiding the expense of hiring and training new staffers when business resumes. Some employees welcome a stretch of short weeks with only partial loss of pay. Even governments gain, by averting some of the increased welfare costs of unemployment.    But there are negatives. Senior workers who would otherwise keep full-time jobs sacrifice part of their pay to keep colleagues working. And some companies are hesitant to adopt short-time programs because of uncertainties about the costs. They will, after all, ultimately pick up the tab for short-time compensation, as they must for all unemployment benefits, because increased use of the unemployment insurance system raises the payments these companies are assessed by the states. And they also must bear the cost of full fringe benefits for workers on shortened weeks, as well as the expenses of administering the plan.    Perhaps for these reasons, short-time compensation has been slow to catch on in the U.S. By contrast, West Germany has been using the system since 1927.    A miscalculation prompted California to move first. Legislators, worried that Proposition 13 tax restraints would force big layoffs of government workers, hurriedly passed a short-time-compensation law in July 1978. Those layoffs never came; budget surpluses permitted state and local governments to retain staffs. But some private employers saw in the law an answer to their own needs.    Largely under prodding from Motorola Inc., which has a policy against laying off employees with more than 10 years of service, Arizona followed with its own short-time law, in January 1982. Then came Oregon in July 1982; Washington in 1983; Florida, Illinois and Maryland in 1984; Arkansas in 1985, and Texas, New York, Louisiana and Vermont last year.    Rep. Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat, took up the cause in Washington, D.C. She sponsored a bill, enacted in September 1982, authorizing the Labor Department to study the concept and write a model statute for the states.    Along the way, the idea gained other supporters. At the Sunnyvale, Calif., plant of Signetics Corp., a unit of N.V. Philips, 2,900 workers -- including managers -- now share shortened weeks in slack times. &quot;We can keep enough balls in the air to keep people and machines working,&quot; it says.    Motorola moved quickly when Arizona started its program. During the first year, it juggled hours for 9,000 workers, to retain them all. &quot;That strategy paid off&quot; when business picked up, says C.F. Koziol, Motorola's vice president of personnel administration. &quot;While competitors were busy recruiting and training workers, Motorola was going full-blast in the first quarter of 1983, gaining market share.&quot;    Motorola, again facing what it believed were short-term slumps, turned to short-time compensation in 1985 and 1986. At present, a total of 6,000 Motorola workers draw benefits in Arizona, a smaller number at a Texas plant.    The biggest winners, of course, are those employees who aren't fired. For Jeff Granger, a 31-year-old production worker at Barrier Industries Inc. in Port Jervis, N.Y., for instance, a short-time program saved his job. He was the next to last to be hired at the maker of cleaning compounds, a unit of Barrier Science andamp; Technology Inc., before the company found itself idled between orders last spring. He was one of six workers set to be laid off. But he and his 31 production-line co-workers voted to accept a management proposal to split the remaining work, with four-day weeks.    Ellison Flood, 26, was secure in his job, with three years' seniority. But he agreed to save the endangered jobs. &quot;I could understand their position,&quot; he says. After 12 weeks of partial pay and partial unemployment benefits -- totaling about 90% of their usual pay -- all the workers returned to full schedules. Mr. Granger, the newcomer, last December was named Barrier Industries' production worker of the year.    But many companies remain wary of the idea. Texas Instruments Inc., Dallas, says it is &quot;waiting for details to be worked out&quot; before trying it.    During the first 10 months of the law in New York state, only 107 employers with 8,000 workers applied for short-time-compensation benefits. California approved 1,138 plans covering 96,865 workers during last year's second half. Even so, that's a fraction of the number of laid-off workers drawing full unemployment benefits. In the year ended last Sept. 30, California paid out $3.1 billion in jobless benefits, to 2.2 million workers. Of that, a mere $21.8 million was for short-time compensation.    Most states simply aren't marketing the program to employers, suggests a study by Laurdan Associates, of Potomac, Md., and Robert Hitlin Research Associates, of McLean, Va. Five years after California's law went on the books, only 41% of the employers there who hadn't tried short-time compensation had ever heard of it, according to a study by Mathematica Policy Research Inc. of Princeton, N.J.    Mathematica questioned some of the claims made for short-time compensation. There wasn't any evidence, it said, that the program spared jobs for minorities or females, often the last hired and first fired. Some users still ordered substantial layoffs. Nor were employers' savings on rehiring and retraining costs as generous as promised, it said.    Still, Mathematica concluded that employers using short-time compensation &quot;were generally satisfied&quot; with results, raising anew the question why so few states and companies are giving it a try.    Rep. Schroeder blames the Reagan administration. &quot;What you need is a Labor Department that's pushing it, but there's no enthusiasm now,&quot; she says. Carolyn Golding, the director of the Labor Department's Unemployment Insurance Service, agrees that short-time compensation &quot;isn't a concept that we have marketed heavily.&quot; She insists, however, it is a matter &quot;best left to state legislatures.&quot;    Some specialists see other reasons for the slow growth. Though the AFL-CIO Executive Council has endorsed short-term compensation, some union leaders are wary of advocating a program they see as &quot;sharing the misery&quot; of underemployment rather than creating work, says Jerome M. Rosow, the president of Work in America Institute, Scarsdale, N.Y.    Oscar A. Ornati, a professor of manpower management at New York University, says companies, too, have been lax. Advocates of short-time compensation, he says, &quot;see a business decision as planned and rational.&quot; In reality, he says, companies don't anticipate how the program might eliminate layoffs. </TEXT></DOC>