<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870420-0110 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   When President Suharto of Indonesia gave an interview eight years ago to editors of The Asian Wall Street Journal, he offered a succinct political insight. &quot;Freedom and development,&quot; said Mr. Suharto, &quot;really cannot be separated.&quot; It's a thought that comes to mind as Indonesia's voters head for the polls Thursday to deliver a landslide -- it will be the fifth-in-a-row -- for Mr. Suharto's ruling Golkar party. For years, Indonesia has had its limited freedoms and its correspondingly limited development. Now it's becoming urgent that this sleeping tiger of Asia, the world's fifth most populous nation, should awake.    For many Indonesians it is no longer enough that Mr. Suharto saved them from an attempted communist coup d'etat in 1965 and has so far brought them almost 22 years of political calm and enough to eat. A new generation is coming of age that never knew the horrors of starvation under President Sukarno, or, after the attempted coup, the mayhem in which Indonesians ran amok and killed an estimated 500,000 of their countrymen. Mr. Suharto is 66 years old; he has no designated successor, nor has he set up any mechanism for the people to choose one.    What has grown up instead -- in an atmosphere of constricted public criticism -- is a crop of monopoly import concessions that further strangle an economy long choked with regulations, high tariffs and inefficient, state-run enterprises. Some of these monopoly licenses have gone to companies in which Mr. Suharto's relatives hold high positions.    So while some Asian countries have been trading their way toward development, heavily statist, protectionist Indonesia has stayed conspicuously camped out in the underdeveloped world. During the 1970s, the high price of the country's main export, oil, financed much of the government waste. But when the OPEC geyser began to dry up in the mid-1980s, there was no new source of income. Today, Indonesia's per capita gross national product is under $500 a year -- below that of the Philippines -- and growth has just about stopped. With good reason, Indonesians are asking themselves why that should be. &quot;We create our own problems,&quot; says economist Anwar Nasution. &quot;That's why we cannot exploit our potential.&quot;    The bright side of these troubles is that they hand Mr. Suharto strong reasons to change course, and complete the task begun in 1965 -- that of freeing his country and bringing it into the developed world. The moment is apt because Indonesia today is relatively free of the dangers that threaten liberalization elsewhere in Asia. Fundamentalist Islam has not made the kind of inroads now causing worries in Malaysia. There are no Philippine-style guerrillas prowling the countryside. China, which backed the 1965 coup attempt, has become absorbed in its domestic crusades; its next target is Taiwan. The Soviet Union, now the main threat to Asia, bides its time quietly in its oversized Jakarta embassy.    To Mr. Suharto's credit, a shift toward economic reform has at least begun. Faced some years back with a customs service that was taking bribes and imposing huge port fees, the president in 1985 simply turned the whole customs operation over to a private Swiss company, Societe Generale de Surveillance. The result has been more efficient import-processing, say some Jakarta-based businessmen. Indonesia also allows free trade in foreign exchange -- a prerequisite for a healthy economy.    In the past year, the government has brought out a series of reforms, limited in scope, but aimed in the right direction. These reforms have simplified rules for foreign investment and cut tariffs on dozens of imported goods. They have also ended monopoly trade in some imports, such as cotton -- which should help make Indonesian textile exports more competitive. The state budget has also been cut. One Jakarta-based banker estimates that, excluding debt service and inflation, real government spending for fiscal 1987 will be 20% less than last year.    But for all this apparent progress, Indonesian business remains tied up in official knots. Often, government rhetoric favors deregulation, but practice says otherwise. The government still directly controls about 30% of the economy -- including the state oil company, Pertamina -- and over-regulates the rest. &quot;You can count on your fingers the number of private companies that really stand out,&quot; says Tenri Abeng, president of PT Mulitbin tang Indonesia, a beer and beverage company.    By one estimate, protectionism costs Indonesia $700 million per year in foregone export opportunities alone. The high cost of protected tin can stock, for instance, raises the cost of canned-food exports such as pineapple and chili sauce, and Indonesia prices itself out of the international market.    Or take the effort to increase investment opportunities. While the government offers a long list of domestic companies open to foreign investment, the regulatory underbrush makes many Indonesian private sector investments unattractive. In a country of 165 million people, the worth of all equities in the Jakarta stock market is about $67 million, with the value of all trades averaging about $600 a day.    Massive amounts of capital are wasted by being poured into protected industries. One Jakarta-based economist says that more than $3 billion has been sunk in the protected steelworks at Cilegon, in West Java, an investment that he notes &quot;can't possibly pay.&quot; The people of Indonesia will pay instead. Mr. Suharto acknowledged as much in February when he called steel protection &quot;a sacrifice by the people.&quot; The president contended that this protection &quot;is only temporary.&quot; But no end is in sight, and the longer it goes on, the more Indonesia loses.    To change all this is hard. It helps that Mr. Suharto has a set of advisers -- technocrats, such as the coordinating minister for the economy, Ali Wardhana -- who know how countries get rich. In the early 1980s, Mr. Wardhana threw his weight behind a reform that lowered and simplified tax rates. Asked recently what would most benefit Indonesia, he answered &quot;Trade, not aid.&quot; It helps, too, that the World Bank has given up its old policy of urging import substitution and is now criticizing the monopolies and talking free trade.    But vast reforms require more than advice from technocrats and pressure from multilateral lending institutions. Mr. Suharto's best help would come from a more open public debate and more meaningful elections, in which the threat of criticism or a loss might better help the president say &quot;no&quot; to the ingrown factions his country can't afford. When the Indonesian newspaper Sinar Harapan referred forthrightly to Suharto family monopoly interests last fall, it was closed. It has since been allowed to start publishing again, under a new name and with some new top management. But some Indonesian businessmen say that overt discussion of the trade monopolies probably helped along the most far-reaching of the recent reform packages, which came out in January.    Indonesia has not yet reached a crisis. It is, however, &quot;at a crossroads,&quot; as one banker says. Whether Mr. Suharto eventually ends his long career in honor or in chaos depends greatly on whether he now follows his better instincts -- which were clearly on show when he noted, eight years ago, that freedom and development go together.    ---   Ms. Rosett is editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>