<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881102-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: Hanoi Goes for the Gold in Hostage Game </HL><AUTHOR> William Applegate </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> MANILA, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;Go for the gold!&quot; was an oft-heard cry during the just-ended Olympic Games in Seoul. At the very same time the world's athletes were competing for medals, another group of people were competing for their lives: the Vietnamese boat people.    In their race gold is something given to corrupt officials, which only gets them past the first hurdle. Then there are the pirates, the leaky boats, even the so-called friendly nations that push them away. Still they come, however, and it is for this reason that senior officials of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations met last week in Bangkok to discuss the problem, where they held talks with Vietnamese officials. Having soaked the refugees before they left, Vietnam evidently now has decided that there might be more boodle to be had by getting the rest of the region to pay it to take its own people back.    Right now things seem to be coming to a head, with the new overtures from Vietnam matched by an increasing reluctance by other nations to open their gates to these refugees. Although the U.S. recently agreed to take more Indochinese refugees in 1989, other resettlement countries have reduced their admissions numbers. Worse still is that the first-asylum countries -- where the Vietnamese land and are sheltered pending resettlement elsewhere -- are making it clear they are tired of both the new wave of arrivals and the long-stayers already there who have not yet found a resettlement opportunity abroad. Many of these places, such as Hong Kong, have opted to discourage refugees from coming there by making camps as stark and prisonlike as possible.    Though the nations of Southeast Asia have often complained to Hanoi, the only interest the regime there takes in refugees is how much money it can squeeze from them before they leave and, today, how much it might be able to get from the world for taking them back. In addition to ransom for departure, Vietnam obtains as much as $200 million every year in direct money transfers from Vietnamese settled in the Free World to their families back in Vietnam. To facilitate the cash inflow the Vietnamese government in March began allowing its citizens to open accounts to receive dollars from abroad.    But now there is a bizarre twist. Today Hanoi is insisting that assistance from abroad be given to finance the repatriation of those refugees who have reached first-asylum countries but voluntarily decide to return to Vietnam. Hanoi reasons that since these people sold practically everything they owned to get out, they would upon their return become a burden to the state (which drove them out in the first place). In Bangkok last week Hanoi officials also warned that forcible repatriation would probably only see people who were sent back try again.    Indeed, so long as conditions remain what they are in Vietnam, the exodus will continue -- particularly if would-be boat people feel the doors will be shut if they wait any longer. Every nation in Asia knows this, which works to Vietnam's advantage. The threat of a large, residual population of Vietnamese refugees in first-asylum countries might serve as a lever for the communist regime to blackmail those countries into getting the recognition, investments and aid it wants. In short, Vietnam will promise not to dump refugees on its neighbors in return for support for its quest for aid and recognition, particularly from the old enemy: Uncle Sam.    Ideally, the Orderly Departure Program holds out the most promise for a reduction in clandestine boat departures from Vietnam, but only with considerable changes that would make it available to all those wishing to leave. Since the program began in 1980, some 150,000 refugees have left Vietnam by air through the ODP for resettlement primarily in the U.S., Canada, Australia and France. That is quite an achievement, and these countries should rightly be proud of what they have done. But there are still 800,000 ODP applicants on file with the U.S. program alone. At the historical rate of departures to the U.S. of 10,000 a year, it would theoretically take 80 years to resettle all of them.    Although the U.S. expanded the numbers it will take, this will never be sufficient to stop the boat outflow. For that to happen, ODP would have to reach even more of those living outside Ho Chi Minh City and begin to include one refugee group that up to now has had minimum access to the program: re-education camp releasees and their families. Understandably, Hanoi's paranoid rulers have been reluctant to let this group leave in an orderly and safe fashion for fear that their former enemies might create problems from abroad once they are resettled in free lands. Thousands of former South Vietnam veterans and officials who fall into this group have left and are still leaving Vietnam by the only means available -- small boats.    Then there is the problem of the numerous ODP applicants who had signed up for the program in the early years and who became virtual noncitizens in their own country as a result. Their homes and properties, work permits, ration cards and so on were confiscated or revoked by the state, which labeled them phan quoc, or non-patriots -- yet another side of the ransom syndrome at work in today's Vietnam. The reason you have boat people is because they look at this situation and realize they are either ineligible for ODP or will have to wait years to get out.    In recent months, however, there have been encouraging signs for the relatively expeditious movement via the ODP for one group of migrants from Vietnam: the Amerasian children and their relatives. An estimated 30,000 of them are scheduled for movement out of Vietnam for resettlement in the U.S. over a two-year period that began in March. The Pearl Buck Foundation has reportedly just made an agreement with Vietnam to set up an office in Ho Chi Minh City, at a cost of $2.7 million. This works out to about $100 a person -- at no cost to the refugees. Certainly that is preferable to a chancy escape by sea.    Thus far Hanoi has played the game cleverly, extorting money and concessions for letting its people leave and now apparently looking for ways to extort more for taking them back. Clearly the countries of Southeast Asia are getting tired of this game, and want it stopped. But so long as the boat people keep coming, they are at the mercy of the willingness of these countries to provide first asylum in accord with Article 14 of the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights: &quot;Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.&quot;    As these regional leaders know, of course, the ultimate solution lies not in Bangkok but in Hanoi. On the outside hope that the spirit of glasnost is not just a passing smoke screen, Vietnam, a Soviet client state, might be encouraged to pick up something of that new spirit by dropping its money-for-bodies practice. Until it recognizes these boat people for what they are, ordinary people whose skills and talents have blossomed when exposed to the free air of countries that have taken them in, the exodus will continue and Vietnam will see itself slip ever further from its adopted motto: doc lap, tu do, hanh phuc -- independence, freedom, and happiness.    ---   Mr. Applegate is a Vietnam veteran who has worked in refugee programs in the U.S. and Asia. </TEXT></DOC>