<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870630-0077 </DOCNO><HL> ...Meanwhile, the Great Nonissue Is Nonbanks---By Brian W. Smith</HL><DD> 06/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   With 138 commercial bank failures in 1986, at least as many failures predicted for this year, and the FSLIC's tank running on empty, everyone agrees that Congress must enact legislation to stabilize and redirect the banking industry. What everyone does not agree on is exactly what Congress should do and, somewhat curiously at this late date, what its priorities should be.    As the House and Senate banking conferees begin their second week of negotiations today on H.R. 27, the omnibus banking bill, debate over nonbank banks, the nonissue issue, is likely to be the ax to grind the proceedings to a virtual halt.    The Bank Company Holding Act of 1956, as amended in 1970, defines &quot;bank&quot; as any institution that both accepts deposits that the depositor has a legal right to withdraw on demand and engages in the business of making commercial loans. A &quot;nonbank bank&quot; is a state- or federally chartered financial institution that places itself outside this definition by either accepting demand deposits or making commercial loans. By not engaging in both activities, these institutions squeeze through the so-called nonbank bank loophole and their parent holding companies avoid regulation by the Federal Reserve Board.    Nonbank banks have been used as a vehicle by nondepository holding companies to enter the financial-services industry and by depository holding companies as a means of geographic and product expansion. The legislation now under consideration, in addition to recapitalizing the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., would close the nonbank bank loophole. In exchange, it would impose a moratorium that would prohibit federal bank regulators from implementing expanded securities, real estate, or insurance powers for regulated institutions, retroactive from March 6, 1987, until March 1, 1988.    But, quite simply, nonbank banks are not worth the price of a moratorium. Taken collectively, they are not a major market force in banking and, because time has eroded many of the initial concerns they once engendered, their fate should be considered as part of a comprehensive legislative package, not as a quick fix to pacify a few in an industry otherwise languishing under congressional inaction.    Everyone refers to the nonbank bank loophole, but few realize that most limited-purpose banks did not need the loophole in order to be chartered. Indeed, Congress could render nonbank banks a nonevent simply by enacting comprehensive legislation that addresses the issues of the relationship between commerce and banking and of geographic expansion. At the most, we are talking about approximately 150 existing nonbank banks, most of which are not &quot;loophole banks.&quot;    Given that there are nearly 15,000 full-service commercial banks operating in the U.S., nonbank banks are hardly the David about to bring down Goliath.    It is not only a matter of the small number of nonbank banks that makes the perceived concerns unfounded. For example, concern has been expressed about the proper supervision and regulation of nonbank banks owned by commercial companies such as J.C. Penney, which is not subject to Federal Reserve Board regulation because it is not a bank holding company. Yet, it is plain that J.C. Penney's federally chartered nonbank bank, J.C. Penney National Bank, is supervised, examined and subject to the regulations of the Comptroller of the Currency, which supervises all national banks. As for interstate restrictions that do not apply to nonbank banks, this is becoming less significant as interstate banking laws proliferate.    Closing the loophole does not eliminate the competitive inequities between depository institutions and other financial-service providers. As far as competitive equality is concerned, eliminating the outdated provisions of the Glass-Steagall Act that hinder the full expansion of banks into a variety of financial products is the bigger prize worth pursuing. That's what the proposed moratorium will stymie.    By delaying legislative action and getting sidetracked by a nonissue issue like nonbank banks, Congress is only making the situation worse. The moratorium takes the pressure off Congress to act expeditiously, but it transfers the pressure to the banking industry, which must survive, without regulatory help, until Congress comes to the rescue. Rather than ask federal regulators to abstain from exercising the powers they now possess, Congress should turn its attention to formulating a new framework of authority under which these agencies can act.    The chartering of nonbank banks and the expansion of bank activities by &quot;sympathetic&quot; regulators did not cause the high-interest-rate environment of the late '70s and early '80s, nor did it foment falling oil prices or the crisis in America's farming communities. It is, however, abundantly clear that the legal harnesses the banks are wearing, which were fashioned in a much simpler financial environment, do not permit the banks to expand their income sources or diversify their risks by eliminating product and geographic concentration. This is where Congress needs to focus its attention.    The time to act is now, and the real issue is restructuring federal banking laws to enable banks to compete in a quickly changing financial marketplace. This will demand true compromise, innovation and foresight.    ---   Mr. Smith, a lawyer specializing in banking services, was a chief counsel to the Comptroller of the Currency, 1982-84.    (See related story: &quot;Sandamp;Ls Seduce Congress -- It's a Scandal&quot; -- WSJ June 30, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>