<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880322-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Justices to Decide if Congress Can Allow GAO Chief to Review Contract Awards </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AMN RAH LABOR TWA AET USW TAXES DI </CO><IN> TEL PHA AIR ENV BCY PUB </IN><G> SUP CNG FCC EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to decide if Congress may give the comptroller general, who answers to the legislature, the authority to review and temporarily delay the awarding of federal contracts.    The case may yield an important constitutional ruling on the separation of powers, along the lines of decisions invalidating the Gramm-Rudman deficit reduction law in 1986 and the congressional veto of federal regulations in 1983.    The case involves a 1984 law intended by Congress to promote competition in awarding federal procurement contracts, including major defense contracts. The law says that a company that bids or plans to bid on a contract may protest the procedures to the comptroller general, who will postpone the award while he reviews the dispute. The Justice Department says &quot;several thousand&quot; such challenges are filed each year.    If the comptroller general finds a problem with the award, he may recommend new bidding, but he can't order it. He may, however, require the agency to pay the protester's bidding and legal costs.    The comptroller general, who heads the General Accounting Office, is appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. But he can be fired only by Congress. The Reagan administration, which appealed a decision upholding the 1984 law, contends that the comptroller general is a legislative branch official and that Congress can't interfere with the awarding of federal contracts.    The case arose when the Army Corps of Engineers contracted for repair of sewer lines at the Military Academy at West Point. Ameron Inc., the low bidder, lost the contract because of a question about its surety bond, and filed a protest, which the comptroller general rejected.    In the course of a lawsuit by Ameron contesting the decision, the Justice Department challenged the law. But a federal judge in Newark upheld it in May 1985, and an appeals court in Philadelphia agreed.    The Reagan administration has long opposed the law. President Reagan called it unconstitutional when he signed it, and the Office of Management and Budget told federal agencies to disregard the comptroller general's role in a 1984 directive. After the district court ruling, the administration advised agencies to comply.    Dalkon Shield   The high court let stand the decision of a federal appeals court last November barring A.H. Robins Co. -- which is reorganizing in federal bankruptcy court -- from spending $15 million on an emergency fund for a group of infertile women. The appeals court said the women should be regarded like other unsecured creditors awaiting approval of a reorganization plan.    The dispute involved some of the roughly 200,000 claims filed against Robins by women who say they were injured by its Dalkon Shield intrauterine device. While the bankruptcy-law case is pending, Robins proposed to pay for treatment for women approaching age 40 who might benefit from surgery or test-tube fertilization. A federal judge last May approved the proposal over objections from Robins shareholders. The appeals court reversed the decision, 3-0.    Separately, the justices let stand a ruling by the Richmond appeals court that while the bankruptcy-law case is pending, Dalkon Shield suits can't be filed against Robins' insurer, the Aetna Casualty andamp; Surety Co. unit of Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co.    TWA Strike   The justices agreed to resolve an important labor issue that arose in 1986 after a two-month strike by flight attendants of Trans World Airlines. TWA argues that 1,280 attendants who worked during the strike were entitled to keep their jobs, and that strikers had to be rehired, based on seniority, only to fill 200 vacancies. But a federal appeals court in St. Louis ruled last May that TWA had to honor the seniority of the strikers and rehire them, even if it meant laying off those with less seniority who worked during the strike. The court will hear TWA's appeal.    At the same time, however, the high court let stand the appeals court's ruling that some 463 flight attendants who were newly hired and in training at the time of the strike can't retain their jobs over the strikers.    Yesterday, Carl Icahn, TWA chairman, said that because he gave his word to all the new hires at the time of the strike that they would remain TWA employees, the company will offer positions to any of the 463 trainees who are still with the company and who may be hurt by the high court's refusal to hear that part of the appeal.    Cable Rate Regulation   The Supreme Court refused to hear a challenge by state and local governments to a Federal Communications Commission rule effectively limiting regulation of rates for basic cable television service.    A 1984 law limited such regulation by state and localities to regions where there isn't &quot;effective competition.&quot; The FCC said in 1985 that such competition exists when a region has three over-the-air broadcast signals. The FCC's rule was upheld by a federal appeals court here last July, and the state of Connecticut, city of New York, National League of Cities and American Civil Liberties Union appealed.    In other actions yesterday, the Supreme Court:   --Agreed to decide whether states are immune from suits filed under the federal Superfund law for damages to cover the cost of cleaning up toxic-waste sites. Pennsylvania appealed to the court in a dispute with Union Gas Co.    --Agreed to decide if a fraud scheme can be a &quot;pattern&quot; of racketeering, a prerequisite for lawsuits for damages under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law. A federal appeals court in St. Louis threw out a lawsuit by customers of Northwestern Bell Telephone Co., a U S West Inc. unit, alleging that the company bribed or tried to bribe Minnesota utility regulators. The appeals court said there was no alleged &quot;pattern&quot; of activity.    --Agreed to decide whether a state may deny use of its federal and local courts to a company based in another state that refuses to file locally an annual report of its business activities. The court will hear an appeal by New Jersey officials defending that state's law.    --Agreed to decide whether a state may impose a sales tax on most magazine subscriptions but exempt religious publications. The justices will review a Texas law, challenged by Texas Monthly Inc., a unit of Mediatex Communications Corp.    --Agreed to rule on the power of unions under federal labor law to remove officers who disagree with official union positions on labor issues. The court will review a dispute between a Sheet Metal Workers' local and a union business representative who was removed from office in 1982 for opposing a dues increase. A federal appeals court ruled against the union, over the dissent of then-Judge Anthony Kennedy. Justice Kennedy won't participate in the Supreme Court case.    --Agreed to decide in an important case the question of when age discrimination suits against employers should be dismissed before trial and when a trial is required. The court will hear an appeal by Harbison-Walker Refractories, a Dresser Industries Inc. division. The company was ordered by a federal appeals court in Philadelphia to face a trial in a suit brought by an employee who alleged that he was laid off because of his age. </TEXT></DOC>