<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870909-0126 </DOCNO><HL> Home to Havana:Cuba Through EyesOf an Exile Is a PlaceOf Ironies and Ghosts---Yacht Club and Elegant StoreNow Serve the Workers;They Ask About Miami---A Redistribution of Mansions---By Jose de CordobaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> HAVANA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Until I left Cuba 27 years ago, Maria de la Cruz was my nanny. My last memory is of her, a small white figure in the airport waiting room, waving goodbye as we left for Miami. The revolution was nearly two years old, and I was seven.    Mary Cruz, as we called her, hadn't written us in years, and my family guessed she had died. But now, on a rare trip back, I have traced her to a small and weathered row house in a working-class suburb of Havana, where she lives with a daughter and grandchildren. At 81, she is a tiny raisin of a woman, her hair tied back tightly. She brightens when she sees me at the door.    &quot;I dreamed you were coming,&quot; she says, in a voice so low I must strain to hear as I lean down to hug her carefully. Without another word, she shuffles back to her room and changes her worn housedress for her best gray blouse and cultured-pearl earrings.    Most of the news from Havana concerns the course of Fidel Castro's revolution. One hears about Cuba's periodic warming or cooling toward Washington, its floundering socialist economy, its Central American involvement, the way it has gotten bogged down in Angola.    But for this reporter, Cuba has always been a personal matter. My roots here go back four centuries. I came from a land-owning merchant family that was part of the Cuban upper class disbanded by the revolution. We had a standard of living that we were by no means able to match after fleeing.    My political upbringing, nonetheless, was liberal by the standards of displaced Cubans, so much so that eight years ago I visited Cuba with a group of left-leaning young exiles and helped build housing. Some of the gains of the revolution, such as new schools and hospitals, impressed me, but I found their cost in personal freedom too high -- and left feeling more Cuban and more exiled than ever.    Now I am back on a journalist's visa. And I am reminded by the sight of people like Maria de la Cruz of how much remains familiar after nearly three decades of Communist rule, even as other things have changed in ways I could not have guessed.    Our large house now is a residence of Marxist diplomats. North Korean children chase one another in the garden where I used to dig trenches for war games with my cousins. (We had agreed Fidel could use them when he came to the city.)    My grandfather's once-elegant department store now is run by the state. There is very little to buy. A saleswoman counsels against choosing a jigsaw puzzle of a European castle because some pieces are missing, so the customer instead buys a broken toy drum. Yet a woman employee, who has stayed through all of the changes, keeps a large picture of Che Guevara above her desk and declares, &quot;We will fight to defend the revolution with cape and sword.&quot;    The Havana Yacht Club, where I learned to swim, has been renamed for a Communist hero and is a center for construction workers' families. &quot;This was a rich man's club, and now it belongs to the workers of this country,&quot; says Orlando Barroso, the manager, looking suspiciously at me from behind dark glasses. Then he says he is sorry, but he can't talk to foreign correspondents.    On a steamy Havana night I attend a small party, with about a dozen of Cuba's artistic and literary elite, at a diplomat's house. It is filled with magnificently carved antique marble-topped furniture left by its pre-revolutionary owner, and outside is a spring-fed pool with a lion's-head waterspout. By chance, it is just across the street from my family home.    &quot;How old were you when you left?&quot; asks one of the guests, as wary of me as I am of them. Seven, I reply. &quot;You didn't leave, you were taken,&quot; he answers. That makes him feel more comfortable.    Servants appear with canapes, and the evening sparkles much as it might have, I think, had there never been a revolution. Sipping imported beer, a dapper writer who wears a gold ring with a family coat of arms reviews the revolution as if it were a play in which the protagonist has but one flaw. &quot;Fidel wants to control everything,&quot; he says. &quot;He is a tragic figure.&quot;    Before the U.S. tightened visa restrictions in 1985, this man, the only member of his wealthy and prominent family to stay behind, would stop in Miami during trips to literary events and play canasta with his old cronies. He misses the games. &quot;They hate the revolution viscerally,&quot; he says of the departed bourgeoisie. &quot;Not only because it took their money -- they have made it back -- but because it destroyed a way of life.&quot;    But he says he has no regrets. &quot;I am a revolutionary,&quot; he proclaims. He insists that artists have more freedom of expression now than earlier in the Castro era. A new Cuban novel, he remarks, is full of &quot;metaphorical possibilities.&quot;    Another writer, who has drunk a couple of Scotches, takes me aside and offers a darker view of a writer's life here. &quot;I know more than you the price that has been paid,&quot; he says. &quot;We had to grovel.&quot;    The next day, I cross the street to my old house. Shutterless and shaded by flowering trees, the neoclassical mansion, adorned with columns, grillwork and an elegant balustrade, suggests a dowager down on her luck.    When my family fled, we left my nanny in charge of the house. But soon a lieutenant in the revolutionary army evicted her and installed his mistress. Later the house went to the North Koreans.    A crew is renovating it just now, and the foreman gives me a tour. Passing the stacked lumber and cement bags, we climb to the roof and gaze north at the sea. The foreman is a priest of Santeria, a Caribbean hybrid of Catholicism and an African tribal religion, and he asks that when I get back to Miami I say hello to his daughter, who is a model -- and a Santeria priestess.    The house was built by my great-grandfather, Don Pedro Sanchez, for my grandfather as a wedding present in 1928. Don Pedro, who had inherited a share of one of Cuba's largest family-owned sugar mills, lived next door and also built houses on the block for his other two sons. Three were linked to a central patio, where Don Pedro, a thin, white-haired man whose uniform was a white &quot;guayabera&quot; and white linen pants, reigned from a park bench, watching over a brood of grandchildren and great-grandchildren. We would bring him mangoes from a tree in the garden. Don Pedro would express great delight and pay us with coins.    Later, as the fighting against the dictator Fulgencio Batista heated up, my cousins and I dug up the garden and played war. After nighttime firefights we would look in the bushes for bullets, which we would add to our collections.    During a work break, three members of the construction crew cautiously begin to ask about Miami. They are wary because one workman is a die-hard revolutionary. When he enters the room, the others fall silent, and when I continue talking they tell me, through pointed glances, to shut up. When the revolutionary leaves, one of the men asks my help in getting a visa.    I ask what would happen if Cuba permitted free emigration to the U.S. &quot;There would be no one left here,&quot; one says.    As we walk a few blocks to a restaurant, the laborers are very nervous, lowering their voices when we pass anybody on the street. &quot;We are not allowed to associate with foreigners,&quot; says the one who wants visa help. &quot;I don't know if state security will pay us a visit because of this.&quot;    The only items on the lunch menu are pork sandwiches, made with brick-hard bread, and mango juice. Our three sandwiches come on one tin plate, which a waitress plops on the counter. &quot;Here you work and work and work, and for what?&quot; one of the men says bitterly.    Good food in Havana is available only to the few. One evening I take Tula, the grown daughter of one of our former maids, to the Centro Vasco, a hard-currency restaurant. &quot;Excuse me,&quot; the uniformed maitre d' says, spotting us as Cubans. &quot;To eat here, you have to have dollars.&quot; I assure him that I do.    Backers of the revolution gloss over such problems. &quot;Fidel is the only one who has made big changes here,&quot; says Daniel, a fire-eating retired law professor who lives with his wife, Carmen, in what had been my great-uncle Pedro's house. A broken hip has confined him to his bed, which is set up to overlook the patio. Dressed in white pajamas, a ripped fly swatter in his hand, he extols the revolution. Education and free health care are available to all, he says; there are no beggars, &quot;and production is always going up.&quot;    The couple moved into the house after letting their own even larger one be turned into a hospital and donating their collection of Spanish paintings to the state. Large cracks mark the walls; they have been repaired but remain unpainted, because there is no paint to be had.    &quot;We who were richer live poorer,&quot; shrugs Carmen. &quot;But we are with Fidel.&quot;    My great-uncle wasn't, even though he, unlike the rest of us, stayed in Cuba. Eventually he died in this house. Government officials promptly sealed it off, having been alerted that it contained a hidden bourgeois treasure. They found it in closets sealed with concrete.    The discovery made the newspapers. &quot;There were silver plates, utensils, parasols, his daughter's wedding dress,&quot; recalls Aidee Ramos, his next-door neighbor and friend. She now heads the local Committee for the Defense of the Revolution, a watchdog group active on every block.    In downtown Havana, there are more family ghosts. On San Rafael Street, crowds shuffle past a tired neoclassical department store painted in faded orange and green. It is the store my grandfather owned.    When he returned from his European honeymoon in 1928, he found that his father, Don Pedro, had bought him a share in a small sporting-goods store. In time my grandfather took it over and made it one of Havana's three finest department stores, Sanchez Mola.    In 1960 he was planning to open a branch in a wealthy suburb, confident of Cuba's future despite Castro's recent rise to power. But on Oct. 17, Sanchez Mola was nationalized. My grandfather handed over the store to a bureaucrat and two armed soldiers, then walked out of his glass office for good. The 100 employees stood in respect as he left, my grandmother says. Shortly afterward, our family left for Miami.    We soon moved to New York, where my father and grandfather went to work for Macy's. My mother sold Life magazine on the phone to a largely Cuban clientele who sympathized with her because they were as broke as we. My grandmother gave piano lessons. I shined shoes. I forgot most of my Spanish but relearned it when we later moved to Puerto Rico, where my father, an engineer by training, got a job in engineering sales. We scrambled to maintain a middle-class life.    Sanchez Mola now is called Belinda. The few employees left from my grandfather's day heard by letter from Miami of his death three years ago, and they offer me condolences. &quot;We used to be a family,&quot; says Julia, a stringy woman who is still unfailingly courteous to the customers who come to look at her few samples of distressed merchandise.    Though Belinda hasn't much to offer, neither do most other stores in Havana, except for hard-currency shops. &quot;There is no food,&quot; says one employee. &quot;There is no water. Things are bad and getting worse. No one can fix this.&quot;    But Pili, the employee with Che Guevara on her wall, sees it differently. White-haired and energetic, she used to be a sales clerk but now keeps the books. &quot;Before the revolution, the streets were full of beggars, hungry children and prostitutes,&quot; she says. &quot;That's gone now.&quot;    Naomi Denis, a niece of one of our maids, also supports the revolution. For her it has been a dream come true. Before, she says, prospective employers would &quot;shut the door in my face when they saw me coming because I was black.&quot; Now she is a teacher and so is her son, who has a college education and is a karate champion who has competed abroad.    Others recall the old days fondly. Our former cook, Mary, who used to slip me tiny cups of aromatic Cuban coffee, shrieks with joy and dances a quick jig when I push open the door to her small, crowded house. &quot;I dream about you all the time,&quot; exclaims Mary, a fat, jolly woman who is my nanny's first cousin. &quot;I dream you have returned and we are all together in a big house, working there.&quot;    Aside from a television set, Mary has few possessions. &quot;We live well as poor people -- always poor, but well,&quot; she says. When I offer to buy her whatever she needs at the hard-currency store, she demurs, then says her grandson needs shoes. A pair bought outside the ration system would cost her two-thirds of a month's salary. It turns out that other relatives need shoes as well. I end up buying them a dozen pair.    My last night in Havana, I walk the streets of the old city, unable to sleep. I pass the illuminated baroque cathedral and go down to the harbor, where a crane unloads grain from a Soviet vessel.    Walking in Havana, one understands the terrible nostalgia of Cuban exiles. Even now, ramshackle and unpainted, Havana is a beautiful city, both sensual and imperial. It is a jungle of columns and wrought-iron arabesques, of grand monuments to machete-wielding heroes, of tree-lined avenues and stately, worn mansions. The Castro regime's drive to centralize and control has quieted the once-raucous street life, but a song still breaks out occasionally from the battered buildings lining the old city's narrow streets.    I walk and try to fix in my mind's eye every detail of the city. I feel anguish when the details blur and disappear. </TEXT></DOC>