<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870120-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Democrats CommitPolitical Hara-KiriDuring Primaries---By Newton N. Minow</HL><DD> 01/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   As 1987 arrives, and the 1988 presidential campaign begins, we Democrats face a paradox. On one hand, our party is blessed with an exceptional array of fresh talent on the national scene. It is the party of Sam Nunn and Bill Bradley, of Michael Dukakis and Mario Cuomo, of William Gray and Paul Simon, of Dianne Feinstein and Bruce Babbitt, of Martha Collins and Tom Bradley, of Joe Biden and Barbara Mikulski, of Richard Gephardt and Charles Robb -- and more. On the other hand, Democrats have lost four of the last five presidential elections, three by landslides.    At least part of the reason for our dismal national showing is our ritual intraparty bloodbath on the way to nomination. Ronald Reagan reminded his Republican opponents for the 1980 nomination of the Eleventh Commandment: Do not criticize Republicans. We Democrats, however, act as though our First Commandment is: Destroy other Democrats. One humorist observed that when Democrats form a firing squad, we get in a circle.    In 1968, after the death of Robert Kennedy, the Humphrey and McCarthy forces split the party in two. In 1972, the Muskie-McGovern and later, Humphrey-McGovern, battles similarly ripped apart the party. In 1976, Jimmy Carter narrowly triumphed after bruising primary encounters with Morris Udall, Henry Jackson and Jerry Brown left the party in disarray. In 1980, the fight between Mr. Carter and Edward Kennedy again fractured the party. And in 1984, as the bitter Mondale-Hart strife proceeded from state to state and month to month, disunity endured after the nomination.    Even apart from the damage it does to party unity, the system itself is badly flawed. Iowa's caucus and New Hampshire's primary receive enormous attention from the media because they are first. Yet neither state is an accurate reflection of our nation and its voters. Nationally, blacks and Hispanics constitute 11.7% and 6.5% respectively of the population. Iowa's black and Hispanic residents, on the other hand, total just 1.43% and 0.87% of its citizens, while blacks and Hispanics constitute a mere 0.43% and 0.60% of New Hampshire's population.    Furthermore, caucus/primary voters do not reflect the views of voters in general elections. Studies of the 1980 primaries show that fewer moderates voted than did people who consider themselves &quot;extremely liberal&quot; or &quot;extremely conservative.&quot; Yet most voters in general elections are moderates who reject both extremes of the left and the right.    Journalists' fascination with the horse-race scenario of the nomination process leads to concentration on the early primaries and caucuses. Studies after the 1984 election show that of a total of 616 network TV stories on the primary elections in all 50 states, New Hampshire's primary was the subject of 250, or about 40%. Primaries in the two most populous states, California and New York, received only one-twentieth the attention given New Hampshire on network television and one-third the attention it received in print.    As a participant in or delegate to every Democratic Convention since 1952, I've been pondering how we could change the system in 1988 to avoid another failure. The other night I had a dream. I dreamed that all the Democratic contenders for the presidential nomination retreated to a quiet place for a weekend to reflect on the Democrats' past and future. After a good long talk, they held a joint press conference to announce:    &quot;We are sick and tired of a tiny handful of people in Iowa and New Hampshire -- plus a few dozen journalists plus Pat Caddell deciding in February and March who will run as the Democratic candidate for president. We're sick and tired of someone 'winning' Iowa and New Hampshire with fewer votes than those cast in a primary election in only one of Chicago's 50 wards.    &quot;The Democratic Party needs an open and truly democratic convention in 1988. Delegates from all over the country will meet at the same time, face to face, to confer, debate and decide on the best ticket to unite the nation. We want the Democratic convention in 1988 to be truly democratic. We want our states to be players in the process. Our voters will no longer be shut out by a game that was played by insiders months before the convention, before we knew the state of the country or the strategy of the opposition.    &quot;To achieve this, each of us will run as a favorite son or daughter from our own part of the country. We will come to the convention to listen to one another, to negotiate, to conciliate, to compromise and to give all the delegates a chance to exercise their best judgment about who would make the best president and vice president. We recognize that personal ambition is less important than our party and that our party is less important than our nation. We will show the country that we remember that choosing the next president and vice president of the U.S. is the most important responsibility of citizenship.&quot;    At this point I awakened. Alas, like Bobby Ewing's death on &quot;Dallas,&quot; these laudable sentiments were only a dream. After I woke up I remembered that most Democrats would rather fight than think. While several potential candidates I have talked to say they agree with me, none is willing to stick his neck out by taking the first step. We will probably resume our firing squad by forming yet another circle. We'll again declare civil war and again give the voters a divided party.    But I still think about the last time we had open conventions. In 1952, the Republicans and the Democrats, after full debate and multiple ballots, gave the nation a happy choice between two splendid candidates, Adlai E. Stevenson and Dwight D. Eisenhower. Remembering 1952, I recall the Democratic orator who said: &quot;Let us face the future with nostalgia.&quot;    ---   Mr. Minow is a Chicago lawyer and past chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. Michael Zubrensky, a student at Harvard, assisted in the preparation of this article. </TEXT></DOC>