<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Climb in Off-Exchange Futures Sales Challenges CFTC---Industry and Others Seek Regulation,Citing the Potential for Fraud---By Albert R. KarrStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG)COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION (CFT) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A potentially huge market is forming in off-exchange commodity futures, shaking up the industry and its federal regulator.    &quot;This is the hottest subject right now in commodity regulation,&quot; Edmund Schroeder, a New York commodity lawyer, says. And it is getting close attention in Congress from Rep. Dan Glickman (D., Kan.), a House Agriculture Committee member.    Most commodity or financial-futures dealings away from the nation's 14 futures exchanges have been illegal for 65 years. But there is a large and growing, if murky, area of over-the-counter transactions.    Congress specifically allows some of them, such as trading between financial institutions in futures in foreign currencies and government securities. But lately, there has been a large number of new financing plans involving futures, such as bonds with interest rates tied to fluctuating oil or gold prices.    Wall Street investment firms and banks, searching for new ways to raise money or spur trading, want more such off-exchange action. They say the new kinds of contracts shouldn't be stifled just because they aren't made in the futures pits of commodity exchanges. They also say these new items -- which often involve only financial institutions, rather than the public -- are frequently one-shot, tailor-made transactions that lack the volume and the uniformity needed for exchange-floor trading.    The institutions involved in such trading want to be freed from &quot;the strict tenets of the Commodity Exchange Act,&quot; says William Seale, a member of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which regulates the futures industry.    The CFTC is starting gingerly to permit more trading outside the exchanges. It also has begun a study of how to deal broadly with the big new headache it has acquired. Officials say the small agency cannot begin to regulate the proliferating number of over-the-counter futures-type transactions and must decide which ones to try to control, which to ban and whether many should just be ignored.    The CFTC isn't going to &quot;go too quickly or seek an easy answer, because it isn't there,&quot; Kenneth Raisler, a former general counsel who left the agency Feb. 1, says.    Not surprisingly, exchanges have been hostile to the expanding over-the-counter sales.    &quot;Off-exchange products bearing any resemblance to futures contracts or commodity options are strafed (by exchanges) like so many night intruders,&quot; Philip Johnson, a New York commodity attorney and former CFTC chairman, says. But lately, exchange officials have moderated their attacks, seeing that a more conciliatory stance might better serve their interests.    Investment firms say they will press for more leeway in hatching futures -- like deals off exchange floors. Standard Oil Co. and USX Corp. recently offered notes with interest rates that rise and fall with oil prices. The CFTC questioned whether the notes, with a commodity option-like feature, could be traded off exchanges, but decided it just wouldn't act against the offerings. (Commodity options have been allowed only on exchanges, under special CFTC surveillance.)    Rep. Glickman worries that without &quot;firmly grounded&quot; regulations on such endeavors, &quot;clever financial types&quot; will greatly expand off-exchange trading, threatening exchange markets.    Others argue that Congress never intended to ban all off-exchange futures, that it only specifically confined grain futures trading to exchanges and that financial futures, such as Treasury bonds and stock indexes, have only inadvertently come under such restrictions.    Now, Mr. Schroeder says, huge markets are developing &quot;without regard to the law,&quot; and he says they are &quot;healthy, economically viable and justified.&quot; The unresolved issue, he said, &quot;needlessly casts a cloud of legal uncertainty over billions of dollars of transactions.&quot;    Although some of the off-exchange deals would be offered to the public, their advocates say most of them would involve only large institutions that don't need the protection the government tries to give small investors through regulation.    &quot;I'm hard-pressed to say they shouldn't be able to do so; Citibank can take care of itself,&quot; CFTC Commissioner Seale says.    But exchange executives say that argument is deceptive. John Gilmore, former chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, the largest commodity exchange, warned recently against actions that would appear &quot;eminently reasonable for institutions, for wealthy people, for the so-called sophisticated investor&quot; that also would &quot;build a safe harbor for the scam operator&quot; to defraud individuals.    A similar distinction between sophisticated and naive investors played a central role in a recent congressional debate over whether to close or to further open off-exchange leverage trading, or long-term contracts to buy or sell with a small down payment, usually involving gold or other precious metals. The CFTC contends that leverage is clearly futures trading, that the off-exchange business has been marked by fraud and that it should be banned or forced onto exchanges.    But under congressional mandate, the agency has allowed a few companies to offer leverage transactions to the public, and Congress last fall opened the field to all comers.    In opposing the congressional action, Philip Feigin, Colorado's assistant securities commissioner, said it would lead to a full-scale over-the-counter futures market that would be &quot;so rife with fraud and consumer and investor abuse that the very prospect is chilling.&quot; Mr. Feigin also heads the commodities panel of the North American Securities Administrators Association.    Congress and the Reagan administration have pressed the CFTC to allow more leverage and other off-exchange futures-like trading. The agency or its general counsel has tacitly approved some such items in recent months by deciding not to act on them. These include a &quot;no-action&quot; ruling permitting a bank holding company to buy or sell future rights to export or import farm goods.    The CFTC also is likely to allow Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. to announce plans to sell stock-index futures the night before the sale is made in an exchange pit. This would be the first move by institutions to line up big futures trades off the exchange floor -- which is a common practice in trading securities but a violation of CFTC rules against prearranged trades under commodity law.    The agency must decide how to follow the law without &quot;inhibiting or prohibiting other activities helpful to capital formation and economic efficiency,&quot; Commissioner Robert Davis says.    The CFTC also needs to prevent off-exchange trading from unfairly drying up exchange-floor business, Commissioner Seale says. But otherwise, he says, &quot;I'm not sure we should regulate&quot; many off-exchange transactions.    Exchanges say the line should be firm. They say unregulated off-exchange trading steals their business and makes it more difficult to attain the large volume needed to make pit trading work. They also say off-exchange trades rife with consumer abuse give all commodity markets a bad name.    But the exchanges' critics argue that much of the off-exchange trading will mean more exchange-floor business because institutional investors will want to hedge over-the-counter risks with offsetting orders on the exchanges. Moreover, the exchanges are &quot;in an awkward position to argue that competition should not exist,&quot; Jack Lehman, commodities chief for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., says.    A CFTC official also says the exchanges risk &quot;killing the goose that lays the golden egg&quot; by offending some large influential members -- the brokerage houses that want to make the off-exchange trades.    But one brokerage-firm partner says, &quot;Exchanges have come to realize that a narrow, parochial view may be shortsighted.&quot; After demanding that the CFTC block several off-exchange proposals, such as the oil-indexed bonds and export-import trading plan, the big exchanges have turned more conciliatory and called for CFTC and industry studies of the issue.    &quot;There's a large middle ground for which we can't give up jurisdictional authority,&quot; says Leo Melamed, special counsel to the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the second largest commodity exchange. But it may be possible to allow certain off-exchange trades, he says, while developing measures, such as exchange trading after normal hours, to ensure that contracts that &quot;belong on a regulated exchange&quot; will stay there or be moved there. </TEXT></DOC>