<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ISRAEL ACKNOWLEDGED contacts with the U.S. over Beirut hostages.    A Foreign Ministry official said the U.S. and Israel were involved in &quot;an exchange of information&quot; over the fate of hostages held in Lebanon. Israeli officials, however, refused to comment on reports of efforts to trade 400 Arab prisoners for the more than two dozen foreign captives. According to newspapers in London and Tel Aviv, Israel and the U.S. were negotiating an exchange involving four other nations through the International Committee of the Red Cross.    A cease-fire took hold at Palestinian camps in Beirut, but a dispute over terms of the truce kept food from reaching thousands of starving refugees.    ---   Reagan underwent questioning by his panel investigating the Iran-Contra affair. A spokesman said Reagan reviewed National Security Council operations and &quot;the development and execution of the Iran policy.&quot; It was his second meeting with the panel, which was granted a one-week extension of its Feb. 19 deadline.    Iran's parliamentary speaker said an intermediary for the U.S. approached Iranian leaders &quot;a few days ago&quot; and urged them to contact Reagan. Tehran Radio also reported that Iran's president said it was wrong for the U.S. to believe that there are moderate leaders in Iran.    ---   Iraqi warplanes bombed at least 11 Iranian cities, where thousands of people were attending rallies to mark the anniversary of the 1979 Iranian revolution. Iran's official news agency said scores of civilians were killed or wounded. Tehran fired a surface-to-surface missile at the Iraqi capital of Baghdad in retaliation for the raids.    ---   U.S. arms-control adviser Adelman said NATO allies didn't &quot;have any qualifications&quot; for telling Washington how to interpret the 1972 ABM treaty, which governs testing of Reagan's space-based antimissile project. Meanwhile, Shultz said any congressional attempt to force strict compliance with the pact would be &quot;harmful.&quot;    ---   HHS Secretary Bowen proposed legislation that would permanently ban federally funded abortions and stop the flow of federal family planning aid to organizations that perform abortions or provide abortion referrals. The measure also would have Congress ask the Supreme Court to reverse the 1973 decision permitting abortions.    ---   Interior Secretary Hodel suggested that Canadians advocate strong U.S. controls on acid rain and oppose oil development in an Alaskan refuge because they want the U.S. to be more dependent on Canadian energy.    ---   Philippine President Aquino declared the nation's new constitution in &quot;full force,&quot; and said the army would resume operations against communist rebels following last Sunday's expiration of a 60-day cease-fire in the 18-year-old insurgency. Aquino, in a speech to about 500 soldiers, stopped short of putting the army on the offensive.    ---   The Reagan administration wants to discuss the possibility of an international conference on Mideast peace with Israeli Prime Minister Shamir, a spokesman in Tel Aviv said. Such a forum, expected to be discussed during Shamir's visit to the U.S. next week, would be aimed at leading Israel into direct talks with Jordan and other Arab states.    ---   The Air Force has selected 10 military bases as potential sites for the second group of MX missiles that would ride railroad trains to make them more difficult for the Soviets to target. Half of the bases, from Louisiana to Washington state, have never been missile installations. The first group of missiles are to be placed in Wyoming.    ---   An Energy Department inspection found security lapses at a plant producing nuclear arms in Texas, declassified congressional records showed. The documents said inspectors simulated a plutonium theft and had a gun smuggled into a plant, near Amarillo, which was closed for five days in 1985 because of the security breaches.    ---   U.S. officials began meeting with European, Japanese and Canadian aides in an effort to resolve a mounting dispute over the Pentagon's use of a proposed space station. The orbiting platform is planned to be launched by the mid-1990s. NASA's administrator has said that major weapons won't be placed aboard the platform.    ---   An American scientific team concluded that poisonous gas and flooding continue to pose a threat at Lake Nios in the African nation of Cameroon, where more than 1,700 people were killed by a toxic cloud last summer. The scientists, in a final report, said the lake still contains high concentrations of dissolved carbon dioxide.    ---   Thousands of workers marched with students across Spain in the first joint protest against the socialist government's education policies. The demonstrations, called during a weeklong boycott of high-school classes, were prompted by demands for the elimination of university entrance exams.    ---   The U.S. leads most industrialized nations in the number of Caesarean-section births, but the practice is increasing world-wide, according to a survey. Researchers at the National Center for Health Statistics found that one in five of all U.S. births was by Caesarean section, 50% to 200% more common than in most other nations.    ---   The Vatican has formally expelled a Jesuit priest from the religious order for his public dissent from church teaching on homosexuality. The priest, John McNeill, had been officially silenced for a decade by the Vatican when he spoke out against a declaration that homosexuality was a moral evil. He said he would appeal the ouster.    ---   Died: John Burgess, 74, former chairman of Reuters, Tuesday, in London. </TEXT></DOC>