<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870506-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Japan's Policies Are Expansionary---By Michael M. Hutchinson</HL><DD> 05/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Going beyond recent protectionist trade measures, the U.S. is now calling for Japan to adopt more expansionary financial policies to help reduce the huge and prolonged U.S. trade imbalance. The claim is that &quot;austere&quot; financial policies in Japan have slowed the growth of U.S exports. The facts are quite different, however. Japan is following expansionary policies.    The basic argument against Japan is simple: Japan for domestic reasons is presumed to have adopted policies that keep domestic purchases of goods and services (aggregate demand) at a low level. Part of these purchases are imports, including goods and services supplied by U.S. firms. Slow growth of U.S. exports is therefore alleged to be in large part attributable to restrictive Japanese policies. A reversal of these policies toward expansion, monetary expansion in particular, would presumably help ease the U.S. trade problem.    But Japanese aggregate demand growth over the past two years has not been slow, nor have Japanese financial policies been particularly restrictive. Moreover, the U.S. trade deficit was not caused by restrictive Japanese financial policies, and will not be cured by expansionary ones.    In recent years, domestic demand adjusted for inflation grew at a faster rate in Japan than in either Europe or the U.S. Over 1985 and 1986, it grew an average 4% in Japan. The major European countries and the U.S., in contrast, both averaged only about 3% real demand growth over the same period. Moreover, forecasts by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development indicate that this year, Japan's aggregate demand growth of about 3.5% will be on a par with Europe's, and will exceed that of the U.S. by a full percentage point. Japan hardly fits the picture of a stagnating economy whose financial policies discourage imports and have indirectly caused sluggish U.S. growth.    Over the past few years, Japan's fiscal policy has been dominated by a desire to reduce the huge budget deficits that emerged in the mid-1970s, and it's relied primarily on monetary policy in maintaining aggregate demand.    Responding to the recession in the aftermath of the first oil-price shock, Japanese fiscal policy became very expansionary in the mid-1970s. This led to several years of record budget deficits and a debt-to-GNP ratio that grew fivefold. Considering all levels of government, Japan's public-sector budget moved from a surplus in the early 1970s to a series of deficits peaking at the equivalent of 5.5% of GNP in 1978. At that time, Japan adopted a steady and moderately restrictive fiscal stance. Over almost a decade, budget deficits have been gradually reduced to an equivalent of about 1.4% of GNP.    Moreover, it appears that a recent move to fiscal expansion first announced by the Ministry of Finance last September will not seriously undermine the policy of deficit reduction. Most analysts view the pump-priming package and supplementary budget as only mildly stimulative.    Generally restrictive Japanese fiscal policy since the beginning of the decade has been balanced by a monetary policy directed both to maintaining aggregate demand growth and influencing the value of the yen exchange rate against the dollar. After the Group of Five meeting at New York's Plaza Hotel in September 1985, Japan gave in to U.S. pressure and engineered a major tightening of monetary conditions. Interbank rates were raised by more than 200 basis points (to 8% from under 6%) between September and December 1985 with the sole objective of appreciating the value of the yen against the dollar; domestic conditions at the time did not warrant monetary restraint.    Needless to say, the strategy worked: Monetary contraction in Japan during the second half of 1985 helped sustain the rise of the yen against the dollar that had begun in February. But as confidence in the dollar was shaken, the yen's continued rapid advance through the end of 1985 and into 1986 surprised both policy makers and financial-market participants. The recent appreciation of the yen to around 140 per dollar is its strongest value ever.    To counteract the deflationary effects of high interest rates and a strong yen, the Bank of Japan abruptly shifted gears and adopted an aggressive expansionary stance in January 1986 that has continued to this day. The discount rate was lowered in four steps in 1986 to 3% from 5%, and again in February 1987 to 2.5% -- a historic low (the previous low of 3.29% held from April 1936 through October 1946). Reflecting these reductions in the discount rate, money-market rates fell to 4% by the end of the year. Average lending rates of Japanese banks for both short- and long-term loans have declined to their lowest levels in the postwar period, and are currently far below those in the U.S. and the other major industrial countries. Moreover, surveys of large enterprises and banks in Japan also indicate considerable ease in credit market conditions, and promises of more rate cuts last week by Prime Minster Nakasone bode even more relaxation.    Reflecting the easy stance of monetary policy, money growth in Japan has been strong. The principal money aggregate (M2+CDs) monitored by the Bank of Japan grew 8.3% in 1986, slightly less than its 9% growth in 1985, but significantly faster than the 1980-84 6.9% average. Narrow money growth (M1) in Japan has accelerated even more -- it was 9.1% in 1986, compared with 5% in 1985 and a 5.6% average over the 1980-84 period.    Despite this record of monetary ease, the 10% decline in Japanese wholesale prices in 1986 is often cited as an unambiguous sign of the contractionary effects of Japanese policies. This assertion is incorrect. Wholesale prices in Japan have followed the prices of imported raw materials. The average price of imports coming into Japan has fallen 45% since the beginning of 1985, spurred both by the sharp rise in the value of the yen and by the drop in crude-oil prices. The temporary &quot;passthrough&quot; of lower import prices has undoubtedly been the primary cause of falling Japanese wholesale prices, and not a restrictive Bank of Japan policy.    The evidence clearly suggests that the state of aggregate demand in Japan and Japanese financial policies were not significant causes of the more than $100 billion rise in U.S. trade deficits between 1980 and 1986. America's trade deficit has grown against all of its major trading partners and regions: Canada, Latin America, Europe and Asia. In fact, the proportion of the total multilateral U.S. trade deficit accounted for by its bilateral deficit with Japan is about the same today as it was in 1980. Nor are Japanese policies primarily responsible for the broad-based and rapid decline in the foreign-exchange value of the dollar since February 1985. The dollar has fallen against the currencies of all of the Group of Five industrial countries.    Responsibility for the wide swings in the U.S. trade balance and the exchange value of the dollar rests primarily with U.S. domestic policy and private spending and saving decisions. Even if Japan were to follow yet more expansionary policies, almost all of the major econometric models suggest that the spillover effects on the U.S. trade deficit would be small and would have only a minimal overall impact on U.S. economic growth. Browbeating Japanese policy makers about perceived shortcomings in their macroeconomic policies only serves to divert attention from the real issues.    ---   Mr. Hutchison is an assistant professor of economics at the University of California, Santa Cruz. He recently was a visiting scholar in the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Pacific Basin program. </TEXT></DOC>