<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880311-0093 </DOCNO><HL> A Wide Variety of Information Services Will Soon Be Available on Phone Lines </HL><AUTHOR> Julie Amparano (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> NYN BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AIT </CO><IN> TEL EDP </IN><TEXT>   Telephone lines are about to get busier.    Federal Judge Harold Greene's ruling on Monday clears the way for the seven regional Bell companies to offer households a wide range of information services -- everything from voice mail to pay-for-view cable TV programs. The Bells have versions of many of these services ready to roll. Some are likely to enter the marketplace by year end.    Of course, many of the services covered by the court order are already available through other means. But they have remained obscure and difficult to use. The judge's ruling, while still forbidding the Bells to originate the data they supply to customers, does give providers of information services a central pipeline -- the telephone network -- into every home and workplace that has a phone.    PAY-FOR-VIEW CABLE TV: Instead of subscribing to separate cable programming services such as Home Box Office or the Disney Channel, viewers will be able to pick and choose. By dialing a phone number, people will get a &quot;menu&quot; of cable channels and programs. To select a show, they will simply punch the corresponding key on the phone pad.    &quot;You won't need to pay for three different cable channels,&quot; says Raymond F. Albers, a technical-planning executive at Philadelphia-based Bell Atlantic Corp. &quot;You'll just pay for what you watch.&quot;    VOICE MAIL: All the Bells are gearing up to offer this sophisticated service, which will record and send out telephone messages.    For about 50 cents a message, calls will be routed to a personal &quot;voice mail box&quot; at the telephone company, where a user's own voice asks callers to leave a message. Subscribers will retrieve their messages by dialing a secret number.    For people who receive a small number of messages, an answering machine might be more economical. But voice mail is a clear threat to answering machines and live answering services.    &quot;Judge Greene's order hits us square between the eyes,&quot; says Joseph N. Laseau, executive vice president of Associated Telephone Answering Exchanges Inc. in Washington. &quot;This could be very, very scary for our industry. It could put some companies out of business.&quot;    He estimates that the Bells could quickly capture up to 40% of the business from existing vendors. In the live telephone-answering market alone, revenues total $750 million a year.    ELECTRONIC MAIL: Documents can be sent from one computer to another just by calling one phone number, eliminating the need for costly peripherals. Moreover, the computers won't have to be compatible.    British Telecommunications PLC, MCI Communications Corp., Western Union Corp. and GTE Corp. currently provide electronic mail services on a national level. A three-page letter can be sent across the country for about a dollar. John R. Gunter, director of strategic analysis for Atlanta-based BellSouth Corp., says he expects prices at all the regional companies to be competitive with those vendors.    The Bell companies are hoping electronic mail and voice mail will become a major revenue source. Link Resources Corp. estimates the electronic mail market at about $296 million a year and voice mail at about $76 million. Industry analysts expect the market to double when it becomes available to residential customers.    VOICE MESSAGE: BellSouth labels this service the Big Call.    Want to find out what the weather will be like this weekend, what concert is at the park and where the new eateries are in town? Just one telephone call will give people all this information and more.    Instead of looking through the yellow pages, scouring through newspapers or making several directory assistance calls, people will be able to dial one number that will give them access to dozens of recorded messages. Once the first number is dialed, a user would have to push only one key for the weather report. A second key would provide concert information, while a third would offer information about restaurants. There would also be messages about sports, travel, stocks and so on.    Voice message has other applications. Kenneth Millard, a senior vice president with Chicago-based Ameritech, says religious organizations and professional societies could use voice messages to provide news to members who call in.    COMPUTER HELPERS: Currently, personal-computer users can tap into electronic bulletin boards to obtain information and new programs. But to do that, they usually need fairly sophisticated -- and expensive -- equipment. Moreover, gaining access to individual bulletin boards can be time-consuming and costly.    As early as next year, however, computer owners may be able to get at such information and software quickly and cheaply. By dialing one number -- and using even the most basic computers -- people will have access to more than 1,000 data banks. Callers will pay for only what they use; there will be no subscriber fees, passwords or compatibility problems that currently exist with some bulletin boards.    Mary Gardner Jones, a former FCC commissioner who now works at the Consumer Interest Research Institute in Washington, says the availability of this service may prompt people to buy simple computer terminals that will give them access to airline schedules, stock listings and other data.    AUDIO TO TEXT: Still in the works is a complex system that would allow people to communicate with the deaf over phone lines. Bell Atlantic is working on a service that would convert voice into typed messages that would appear on a video screen. Similarly, the text would be converted into voice.    To communicate with the deaf now, both parties need a text-to-type converter, which costs about $3,000. With Bell Atlantic's proposed service, a toll call would cost about 30 cents for three minutes. </TEXT></DOC>