<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870818-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Arms Control's Down-to-Earth Problem---By Edward L. Rowny</HL><DD> 08/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK) </IN><TEXT>   The flurry of Soviet arms-control actions in past weeks indicates Mikhail Gorbachev's apparent willingness to make progress on intermediate-range nuclear arms reductions. Still in doubt, however, is his interest in concluding an agreement cutting strategic offensive arms -- the most powerful weapons.    Many critical issues, such as Soviet acceptance of specific limits on ballistic missile warheads, remain to be resolved. But the primary obstacle to progress toward deep reductions in strategic offenses is the Soviet insistence that such an agreement be linked to limits on the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative.    The Soviets put two draft agreements on the table in Geneva last month: One is their answer to the U.S. draft treaty to cut strategic arms; the other elaborates on the Soviet position in the Defense and Space talks. Soviet presentation of a draft Strategic Arms Reduction Talks treaty could lead to progress. However, whether the START negotiations will lead to agreement still depends on whether the Soviets retain their unreasonable position that deep reductions in strategic nuclear arsenals can be agreed to only if the U.S. agrees to much greater constraints on SDI than those already contained in the ABM Treaty.    Why do the Soviets continue to put off the issue that Mr. Gorbachev correctly called &quot;the root problem&quot; in U.S.-Soviet arms control? Why do they continue to hold it hostage to limitations on a U.S. program investigating the feasibility of defensive systems already limited by the ABM Treaty?    The Soviets like to say that the problem is &quot;weapons in space.&quot; The U.S. counters that the most pressing problem is to enhance strategic stability through reductions in the huge number of the most powerful nuclear weapons in existence today. There are no weapons in space. There are more than 20,000 strategic nuclear weapons in the superpower arsenals. It is obvious that this problem should be addressed without further delay.    If the real Soviet worry is the direction and pace of future strategic defense technology, the U.S. has taken steps to address this concern. We have proposed &quot;predictability&quot; measures that would ensure that neither the U.S. nor the U.S.S.R. is surprised by the other's strategic defense program. To address the Soviet concern that the U.S. might seek some unilateral advantage from deploying strategic defenses, we have proposed that a transition to a defense-dominant strategic relationship be managed jointly.    In short, the U.S. is doing everything it can to address Soviet concerns -- everything, that is, but forgoing the promise of SDI. We will not cut off our examination of advanced defenses against ballistic missiles for a very simple reason: Effective strategic defenses could make the U.S., our allies, and the world more secure.    If the Soviets' real interest is in killing the U.S. strategic defense program, we will not accommodate them. President Reagan made this clear at Reykjavik. Though they act as if it didn't exist, the Soviets have an extensive strategic defense effort of their own under way -- one that includes the same advanced technologies being explored by SDI. The Soviet program dates back well before ours and represents a massive investment of time and money. Apparently, the Soviets' objection is not to defenses per se, only to the American strategic defense program.    The Soviets are demanding that the U.S. agree to further restrictions on strategic defense work before either side can benefit from the 50% reductions in strategic offenses that President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev endorsed without preconditions as far back as the Geneva summit in 1985. There is no objective reason to support the Soviet demand for linking these important reductions to greater constraints on defenses.    The U.S. did not sign the ABM Treaty on the Orwellian theory that &quot;defense is bad; offense is good.&quot; Rather, it signed it on the basis that effective defenses against ballistic missiles were not technically feasible at that time, and that stability could improve if both sides pursued drastic restrictions on offensive weapons. The U.S. signed the ABM Treaty with the expectation that a new treaty involving substantial reductions in offensive weapons would supersede that SALT I &quot;Interim Agreement&quot; and place comprehensive, long-term limits on strategic offenses.    The U.S. made this clear at the time, stating that failure to achieve such an agreement within five years could jeopardize our supreme national interests and constitute grounds for withdrawal from the ABM Treaty. Limits on defense in the ABM Treaty were, in effect, conditioned on limits on strategic offenses -- not the other way around.    A treaty reducing offensive arms was never achieved, and so the promise of the ABM Treaty has gone unfulfilled these past 15 years. And while the U.S. exercised restraint in its strategic offensive and defensive programs, the U.S.S.R. engaged in an unprecedented buildup of offensive arms and pursued an aggressive strategic defense program.    Today, the Soviet Union has roughly four times the number of strategic nuclear weapons it had in 1972 when the ABM Treaty was signed. Yet the Soviets, pointing to SDI, insist they cannot reduce these weapons without &quot;strengthening&quot; the ABM Treaty, a Soviet euphemism for changing the treaty to make it far more restrictive than it already is. The U.S. complies with the ABM Treaty. It is the Soviets' behavior -- for example their offensive buildup and Krasnoyarsk radar violation -- that has eroded the ABM Treaty.    SDI is being conducted in compliance with the ABM Treaty. Moreover, the U.S. has proposed that in the context of a 50% START cut neither side should withdraw from the ABM Treaty through 1994. The U.S. SDI program is designed to determine whether it is feasible to enhance stability by providing effective defenses against ballistic missiles. One can only be left wondering how many offensive weapons the Soviet Union wants in order to &quot;defend&quot; itself against the U.S. program.    Though it is obviously of concern to us, the Soviet strategic defense program is not keeping the U.S. from vigorously pursuing deep reductions in strategic offensive arms in a stabilizing manner. A 50% START cut can serve the interests of both the U.S. and the Soviet Union. The U.S. considers these reductions a matter of the highest priority.    The opportunity exists to make good the promise of deep reductions in both countries' strategic offenses. Since May 8, the U.S. has had a draft START treaty on the table that would build on the progress made at Reykjavik and provide for a halving of strategic offenses. The cuts should be made now. If the Soviets are willing, the reductions can be made in the context of an agreement that would provide predictability and confidence in the area of strategic defense programs. They could be made without choking off the potential contribution strategic defenses could make to strategic stability, and therefore to the security of the U.S., our allies, and the U.S.S.R. as well.    If Mr. Gorbachev truly intends to conclude agreements on arms control with President Reagan, the way is open, not only toward eliminating the entire class of intermediate-range nuclear missiles, but also toward addressing the central problem of strategic weapons. But to reach the goal of cutting strategic weapons, he will have to stop trying to pressure the U.S. into renouncing its legitimate aspiration to be protected against ballistic missile attack.    ---   Mr. Rowny is special adviser to President Reagan and the secretary of state on arms control. </TEXT></DOC>