<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871223-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan Signs Bills to Fund Government,Cut Deficit After Winning Concessions---By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and John E. YangStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT LATAM TAXES LABOR JAPANECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS)AEROSPACE (ARO)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan, winning late concessions from Congress, signed two bills that fund the government through fiscal 1988 and fulfill a deficit-reduction plan to replace the budget cuts under the Gramm-Rudman law.    The massive measures, approved in the wee hours yesterday before most lawmakers had a chance to read them, appropriate some $600 billion for federal programs and agencies and also require enough changes in law to trim the projected fiscal 1988 budget deficit by more than $33 billion.    Few voted for the measures with zest; many believed the process was too harried and the product too timid. But the drive to adjourn the first session of the 100th Congress in time to get home for Christmas proved to be too strong for most members to resist. Shortly after the president signed the bills yesterday afternoon, both houses adjourned until next month.    The aim of the exercise has been to replace the $23 billion in across-the-board cuts of the Gramm-Rudman budget law with legislated savings of about equal size. Actual deficit reductions contained in the bills, removing some one-time savings and accounting gimmicks, approximate that amount. The cuts had been in effect until the president signed the bills.    On the most hotly debated non-budgetary issues, Democrats, who controlled both the House and Senate for the first time in the Reagan administration, were steamrollered. The president won $8.1 million in aid to Contra rebels in Nicaragua and succeeded in turning back an effort to place into law the fairness doctrine, which would require radio and television broadcasters airing controversial material to offer free air time for opposing views.    &quot;This is clearly no Democratic victory,&quot; said Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) of the House Ways and Means Committee. &quot;A lot of the votes were to go home.&quot;    House Democrats were defeated on such major issues as Contra aid, the fairness doctrine, Medicare and Medicaid, when their fellow Democrats in the Senate allied themselves with the Republican minority and the Reagan administration.    The fairness doctrine was the last major controversy to fall away, and many Democrats were angry that they had to accede to the administration on that issue after already compromising on Contra aid. &quot;We are having (Contra aid) shoved down our throat,&quot; said Rep. Les AuCoin (D., Ore.). &quot;Why can't they take the fairness doctrine?&quot;    This frustration nearly led to the defeat of the omnibus spending bill in the House. In protest over the Contra-aid funds, 120 Democrats voted against the measure. It squeaked through by a single vote, 209-208, aided greatly by 93 Republican votes. Both Republican and Democratic leaders had a few votes they could marshal if defeat appeared imminent, but Rep. Tony Coelho (D., Calif.) conceded: &quot;We were nervous.&quot;    The spending bill later passed the Senate by the more comfortable margin of 59-30.    The other major bill passed yesterday, which combined spending changes with a $9 billion tax increase for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, was approved by both chambers without much dissension.    Lawmakers said the bills' approval demonstrated that Congress was able to govern, replacing Gramm-Rudman's mindless automatic budget cuts with savings they devised. They also asserted that passage was far better than the alternative: a closure of the federal government. &quot;It does have its weaknesses,&quot; said Sen. William Proxmire (D., Wis.), &quot;but it is certainly the best we can do.&quot;    Not all of the legislation pares programs, however, as the bills contain various special grants and giveaways. The Medicaid program for low-income individuals, for example, receives some $600 million in additional funding over two years.    Some of the benefits are more specific and were won by negotiators on the budget accord. Sen. Lawton Chiles (D., Fla.), chairman of the Budget Committee, obtained a $25 million grant for high-technology research at the University of Florida. Sen. Bennett Johnston (D., La.), a senior appropriator, won $16.5 million for bioenvironmental hazards research, part of which would go to Tulane University and Xavier College in his home state, according to a Johnston aide. The energy and water section of the omnibus bill alone contained $97.3 million in grants to 10 colleges, aides said.    The recent congressional actions were driven by a budget accord reached Nov. 20 after prolonged negotiations between White House officials and congressional leaders. It called for $30.2 billion in reductions from the projected federal deficit for fiscal 1988 and $45.85 billion in reductions for fiscal 1989.    The accord includes $7.6 billion of savings in discretionary spending programs, which are contained in the omnibus spending bill. Projected military spending would be reduced by $5 billion to $285.4 billion; nonmilitary spending would be cut by $2.6 billion to $176.8 billion. The second bill holds $17.6 billion in savings, including the $9 billion tax increase, $650 million in user fees, and reductions of $2.1 billion in Medicare and $1 billion in farm subsidies.    In addition, savings of about $1 billion in interest on the national debt are assumed. The two bills also include $7.6 billion in receipts from sales of government assets and prepayments of U.S. loans.    Still, fiscal 1988 spending won't decline. Under the bills, spending would increase by about $47 billion from the prior year because the savings are measured from an inflated base. What's more, this year's deficit isn't likely to shrink below the $148 billion in fiscal 1987.    The aim of the exercise has been to replace the $23 billion in across-the-board cuts of the Gramm-Rudman budget law with legislated savings of about equal size. Actual deficit reductions contained in the bills, removing some one-time savings and accounting gimmicks, approximate that amount. The cuts had been in effect until the president signed the bills.    The tax-and-spending package raises $23 billion in taxes over two years, hitting corporations and wealthy individuals the hardest. It halves the amount of income that defense contractors can defer under the completed-contract method of accounting. It speeds up corporations' estimated tax payments, and prevents corporations from escaping taxes when they dispose of the assets of a company they acquire.    The legislation ends the installment-sales method of accounting used by large manufacturers and home builders to defer taxes on sales made on credit until they actually receive payment. Last year's tax bill partially disallowed the technique, but the legislation restores it for &quot;casual&quot; sellers of real estate and small businesses.    The package forbids interest deductions on home-equity loan amounts exceeding $100,000, and caps the amount of mortgage debt eligible for interest deductions at $1 million. It freezes the existing estate tax rate at 55% for five years, which was scheduled to fall to 50% next year. The 3% telephone tax was extended for three years.    And the bill raises the limit on the Treasury's authority to issue long-term bonds by $20 billion, which is expected to be adequate to get the government through its bond auctions planned for this spring.    The U.S. Postal Service was spared a sharp cut when lawmakers decided to achieve savings by postponing some of the agency's capital projects and by placing some of the burden on federal retirees. The bill allows retirees to take only 60% of their retirement benefits in a lump sum when they retire; they can now take 100%. They can take the remaining 40% the following year.    Another provision in the legislation significantly alters the regulation of pension plans. Under the provision, employers whose pension plans are underfunded will be forced in 1989 to put more money into their plans faster than under current law. And starting next year, the employer-paid fee to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. will rise to at least $16 from the current $8.50 per employee per year. Employers with underfunded pensions could pay as much as $50 per employee under the new system to help the burdened federal agency.    Among other things, the omnibus spending bill:    --Allows President Reagan to prevent Japanese companies from participating in federally funded construction projects. The provision prevents contractors and suppliers in other countries from bidding on or supplying construction projects funded by the U.S. if the foreign country prevents U.S. companies from participating in its projects.    --Provides a total of $8.1 million in nonmilitary aid and transportation services to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. The arrangement also establishes a procedure for congressional handling of future White House requests for Contra funds.    --Designates remote Yucca Mountain in Nevada as the only site examined to see if it is safe to store nuclear waste underground. The provision was included over Nevada lawmakers' objections.    --Prohibits for eight months the imposition of sanctions on places that have failed to plan adequately to meet the standards of the Clean Air Act. Several metropolitan areas, including Los Angeles, Atlanta and Dallas-Fort Worth, have been found in violation of the requirements of the law. </TEXT></DOC>