<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870112-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN PUSHED additional arms sales to Iran to free captives, a senator said.    GOP Sen. Cohen of Maine, a member of the Senate Intelligence panel, said the committee's inquiry showed that Reagan wanted to continue selling weapons to Tehran after the first such shipments failed to free all the American hostages in Lebanon. In an NBC-TV interview, Cohen also faulted the president for turning &quot;to amateurs for advice&quot; on the policy. On Friday, the White House released documents that appear to undermine arguments that Reagan wasn't trading arms for hostages.    A memo by departed aides Poindexter and North raises new questions about Reagan's level of involvement in running his administration.    ---   PROTESTERS BURNED copies of Aquino's proposed constitution.    About 30,000 Philippine leftists marched through Manila and torched copies of the proposed charter, which they said was &quot;pro-imperialist.&quot; At another rally, about 2,000 supporters of ousted leader Marcos also protested the document, which goes before voters Feb. 2. In Honolulu, an aide said Marcos was willing to appear before a federal grand jury investigating alleged kickbacks in U.S. aid to Manila. Marcos is to appear before the panel Jan. 22 in Virginia.    Aquino traveled to four cities to campaign for ratification of the charter as former Defense Minister Enrile branded her rule a corrupt dictatorship.    ---   IRAN ATTACKED the Iraqi capital of Baghdad and the port city of Basra.    As military communiques from both sides indicated that heavy ground fighting was continuing for a third consecutive day, Tehran radio said that missiles struck Iraq's air force command in Baghdad and that military and economic targets were hit in Basra. Many casualties were reported. Iraq said it bombed Iran's holy city of Qom. The claims couldn't be substantiated.    It was unclear if the latest moves were part of Tehran's threatened &quot;final offensive&quot; to end the Persian Gulf War before the Iranian new year March 21.    ---   Weinberger said the Reagan administration didn't expect a quick breakthrough in U.S.-Soviet arms-control talks in Geneva because of Moscow's appointment of a high-ranking Foreign Ministry official as chief Kremlin negotiator. The defense secretary's comments came on ABC-TV. The negotiations are to resume Thursday.    ---   Argentina reached agreement with the IMF on the basic elements of an accord that would lead to $1.8 billion in new IMF loans for the country. The accord, details of which could be completed today, also is expected to pave the way for talks between Argentina and commercial banks for about $2 billion in new loans.    ---   Two national strikes in France began to unwind over the weekend. Union officials said striking rail workers, after almost a monthlong walkout, have begun drifting back to work in large numbers. And the electric-power strike was nearly over by Saturday, when all unions but one accepted Paris's wage offer.    A pair of newspaper groups said they would launch a legal challenge against the South African government's latest press curbs. The two domestic English-language groups said they would appeal Friday's edict barring publication of material that could &quot;improve or promote the public image&quot; of outlawed movements.    ---   Limits on damage awards were opposed by an American Bar Association commission studying the liability system. The panel recommended that state and federal judges review jury awards for pain and suffering more thoroughly to see if they are reasonable.    ---   NASA officials are creating a standby &quot;scrub team&quot; so launch managers can get adequate rest when space shuttle countdowns are postponed, a space agency official said. The agency also has announced management changes aimed at preventing problems similar to those that contributed to last year's Challenger explosion.    ---   An Afghan guerrilla leader said that the Kremlin's recent statements about wanting to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan appeared genuine, and that the Soviet Union might be willing to sacrifice the Afghan Communist government if necessary. The high-ranking rebel leader also called for direct peace talks with Moscow.    ---   An official Chinese newspaper accused an outspoken academic, whose pro-democracy views may have inspired recent student protests, of trying to lead China toward capitalism. In Peking, a Japanese official was told that leader Hu Yaobang, rumored to be in political trouble, was &quot;too exhausted from overwork&quot; to meet visitors.    ---   Sub-zero temperatures and snow gripped Europe and the Soviet Union, triggering fatal avalanches in Soviet Georgia, prompting a threat of electricity rationing in Sweden and disrupting road and rail traffic on the continent. Deaths were reported in several countries as a direct result of the freeze.    ---   Chadian forces fought skirmishes with Libyan troops in northern Chad, and the N'Djamena government said many of Libya's soliders were killed or wounded. The report couldn't be independently confirmed. In Paris, France's most senior military officer raised the possibility of new French strikes against Libya in northern Chad. </TEXT></DOC>