<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880823-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Irredentist Perils in Faltering Soviet Empire </HL><AUTHOR> Paul Johnson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><TEXT>   Next year Europe will celebrate the longest period free from war in its history.    West of the Iron Curtain at least, ancient frontier disputes and the ethnic minorities that underlie them have ceased to be significant. The Schleswig-Holstein problem is virtually forgotten. The Saar and Alsace-Lorraine are dead issues. The vexed question of Trieste and the Austro-Italian border no longer matter. Basque and Irish nationalism continue to cause bloodshed but neither remotely threatens war. Instead, the spread and consolidation of the European Community offer a long-term and increasingly attractive alternative to the very concept of ethnic nationalism.    But it is a different matter in Eastern Europe. There, the gradual loss of Soviet self-confidence in the notion of a Russian-Marxist empire and in the theory of economic management that underpins it has provoked an epidemic of nationalist emotions that threatens to become pandemic. The failure of Soviet nerve was itself produced by a dawning sense of economic disaster, and it is the same public dissatisfaction with chronic or worsening shortages that is helping to give ethnic grievances a new lease on life.    In Romania, where economic collapse threatens, the Ceausescu regime is using members of the Hungarian minority, which according to Western estimates totals 2.5 million people and constitutes more than 10% of the population, as scapegoats and waging quasi-genocidal warfare against them. This in turn has provoked mass demonstrations in Hungary. The Yugoslavs, too, are at daggers with the Romanians (and the Hungarians) over ethnic issues, and their own economic misfortunes have provoked a crop of internal troubles, especially from the aggressive and much-resented ethnic Albanians in the south and discontented Slovenians in the north, who would like to break away from Yugoslavia entirely and rejoin Austria.    In Russia itself, the universal demand of the Armenians for the dismemberment of Azerbaijan and the return of the province where they constitute a majority is a classic case of old-style nationalism. On the Baltic coast, there is a growing demand from the Lithuanians, the Estonians and the Latvians for self-government or even a return to the independence they enjoyed between 1918 and 1939. Ukrainian nationalism, by far the biggest and most dangerous of the Russians' minority problems, is stirring again.    Many other ethnic groups are beginning to dust off their claims. Perhaps not surprisingly, there has even been a counterresurgence of extreme Russian nationalism, in the form of the Pamyat (&quot;Memory&quot;) movement, which claims descent from the Black Hundreds of Tsarist days, and its militant arm, the National Patriotic Front.    To gauge the significance of these developments it is important to remember that, until modern times, the whole of Eastern Europe was ruled by three vast multi-ethnic empires, Prussia, Russia and Austria. The unifying principle in each was not so much a common culture, language or religion as allegiance to a divine-right monarchy. The system was plainly unsatisfactory but it had the modest virtue of keeping the peace between antagonistic racial groups, rather as the British raj did in India.    But in the century up to 1914 it was progressively undermined by writers and academics who stressed the cultural differences among peoples at the expense of the traditional ties and mutual economic interest that kept them under one crown. They promoted, as the force of the future, not only nationalism but its fashionable byproduct, irredentism, signifying the union of an entire ethnic group under one state.    It was Serbian irredentism, directed against Austria, which was the direct cause of World War I. The Treaty of Versailles, which concluded it, marked the end of the East European empires. It was supposed to enshrine the principle of nationalism and another fashionable intellectual concept, &quot;self-determination,&quot; by which was understood the adjustment of frontiers by plebiscite according to ethnic preference. But in fact the treaty created many more problems than it solved, including new, large and extremely bitter minorities, especially German and Hungarian ones. A series of frontier wars followed, between 1919 and 1921, leaving terrible scars.    Indeed, there was no real peace in Eastern Europe throughout the 1920s and 1930s. All the new or expanded states, not least the artificial creations, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia, ill-treated their minorities, often more savagely than the old empires. As a result, German irredentism in turn became a formidable force, leading directly to the Anschluss, Munich and the crisis over the &quot;Polish Corridor,&quot; the immediate cause of World War II.    Now it was at this point that the ironies of history came into play. In the light of the experience of the 1914-39 period, the many minority problems of Eastern Europe seemed insoluble on their merits and had provoked two world wars and the deaths of 100 million people. Hitler sought to solve them permanently within the context of his Nazi New Order. In effect, this simply involved slamming down the lid on the seething cauldron of ethnic animosities, with the Gestapo, the SS and ultimately the German army holding it firmly in place. But the New Order met defeat in battle. Stalin's Russia, as the successor-state to Nazi Germany in Eastern Europe, again slammed the lid down by producing an alternative system: Communist internationalism.    At its height, the system run by Stalin and his successors controlled about 20 nationalities in Eastern Europe and a further 200 or so ethnic groups within the Soviet Union. In theory, Marxism-Leninism made nationalism, let alone irredentism, unnecessary since all units within the Socialist Bloc were ruled by Communist parties sharing the same humanitarian aims and able to settle such superficial matters as frontiers and minority rights by friendly deals within the context of a common political culture. In practice, however, the old enmities remained. Indeed, Moscow sometimes found it useful to exploit them -- &quot;divide and rule&quot; being a recurrent theme of all empires. Thus in 1968, Leonid Brezhnev had no difficulty in getting the Poles, Hungarians and East Germans to cooperate gladly in the invasion of Czechoslovakia.    Moreover, Communist internationalism was no more successful in replacing nationalism as a focus for loyalty than in replacing capitalism as a source of prosperity. Whereas in Western Europe traditional ethnic grievances were anesthetized by prosperity, in the East and still more in the Soviet Union they remained raw. Hence, just as under Hitler's New Order, the lid on the nationalist cauldron had to be held down by the KGB and its affiliates in each territory. The interlocking system of secret police forces, itself the ultimate cohesive of the Warsaw Pact, is the only aspect of Communist internationalism that has ever functioned efficiently.    Now, however, Mikhail Gorbachev and his adherents appear anxious to scale down the intervention of the police in political life just as they are reducing the role of the central state in economic life. For the first time in 40 years -- 70 in the case of Russia itself -- the chains that hold down the lid on the nationalist cauldron are being loosened, and the nationalist mob is once more making its appearance in the streets of Eastern Europe.    Most sensible people in the West welcome glasnost and perestroika. They would like to see Mr. Gorbachev go further and not only embrace multiparty democracy but apply the principles of self-determination to all the peoples subject to Soviet rule. But if he does so, or even if he merely continues to relax the sanctions of force, there is an evident price to be paid in stability. The re-emergence of nationalism in the East is in itself an international phenomenon, an incident in one capital stimulating trouble in another. Mr. Gorbachev himself clearly fears a firecracker effect, which could lead to another Year of Revolutions, as in 1830 or 1848.    It is one of the tragedies of history that the dismemberment of empires, even unpopular ones, is usually the prelude to frontier and civil wars among their components -- as the gruesome experiences of Latin America and Africa testify. Who can say what price will have to be paid for ending the Evil Empire?    What we in the West should be doing now, and encouraging our friends in Eastern Europe to do likewise, is debating the alternatives to communism as a counternationalist force behind the Iron Curtain. Granted that communism had failed totally to engage either the intellects or the emotions of East Europeans, what is likely to succeed there? Is there any chance that the spirit of a united Europe can be planted beyond the Oder-Neisse Line? Is there an opening for a religious dimension to it? Could the ancient notion of an international Christendom be revivified?    We should start discussing these possibilities, and others, because of one thing we can be sure: If the Soviet Empire contracts, leaving a vacuum, there will be no lack of those eager to fill it with ethnic nationalism, that potent source of discord and war.    ---   Mr. Johnson is a British historian and journalist. </TEXT></DOC>