<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Changes in HiringOf Police WouldArrest Trouble---By Lawrence W. Sherman</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   After years of budget cuts reducing the number of police officers, some big cities are reversing the trend. While police forces in other cities are still shrinking through attrition or are considering layoffs, more prosperous cities such as New York and Minneapolis are moving quickly to increase police strength. They may be moving too quickly.    There is little risk of repeating the gross mistakes born of the law-and-order hysteria of the Nixon era, when some cities hired thousands of officers in a year without proper screening or selection. These officers incurred high rates of disciplinary problems, corruption and drug abuse.    But cities still risk hiring the wrong people, training them improperly, and shaping the wrong kind of organizational culture for effective crime control. The average annual cost of each officer's salary, benefits and equipment is close to $60,000, or a $1.8 million investment over a 30-year career. To use that investment wisely, cities should adopt several policy recommendations based on recent research.    --Hire Older Officers. The research shows dramatic differences in behavior before and after age 25. This minimum age should be established under federal age-discrimination law as a &quot;bona fide occupational qualification&quot; for police work -- just as it is for election to Congress.    Police officers traditionally have been hired from ages 18 to 21. But youth and police work do not mix well. New York City has already discovered what insurance companies have known for years: Men under age 25 have much higher rates of auto accidents. More important, research in Kansas City, Mo., by Prof. Mark Blumberg of Central Missouri State University found that younger officers are more likely than older ones to use their guns, even on equally crime-ridden patrol beats. Prof. Elizabeth Croft of the Rochester Institute of Technology found that police hired at a younger age in Rochester, N.Y., are also more likely to use force of any kind, even as they grow older.    As political scientist James Q. Wilson and psychologist Robert Herrnstein note in &quot;Crime and Human Nature,&quot; young men have committed most violence in all known societies at all points in history. The reasons are not clear, but the pattern is. Hiring young men to resolve disputes and defuse violence among other young men makes no sense.    --Fire more probationary officers. The endless debates over police selection methods miss the point: A police force does not have to keep every officer it hires. During the probationary period, which can last for up to one year, it is easy to dismiss officers on the ground of poor performance. Sergeants and training officers can easily spot officers lacking the gentle salesmanship, calm demeanor and street smarts that it takes to control misbehaving people effectively.    Top police managers generally believe that the problem is not spotting the misfits, but getting first-line supervisors to recommend their dismissal. All too often they &quot;give the kid a break,&quot; until it is too late for a dismissal on any grounds short of criminal conviction or major administrative rule breaking.    Not only does this produce a lower standard of police personnel, it can also incur costly civil liability. Lawsuits against police frequently allege &quot;negligent hiring and supervision,&quot; and cite the evidence of early problems recorded in the officers' personnel files. If a jury decides that a probationary officer should have been fired, the verdicts for such negligence can run to millions of taxpayer dollars.    --Train for problem-solving, not firefighting. The greatest barrier to crime control in this country is the squandering of police time and money in running from one radio dispatch call to the next. Most calls do not need instant attention. National Institute of Justice research has found that rapid police response rarely increases the chances of catching criminals, because crime victims often wait half an hour or more before calling the police.    NIJ research also shows that most people do not mind if police don't come right away, or at all, as long as the police telephone operator tells them exactly what to expect. People hate waiting an hour or two for a police car that will come &quot;as soon as possible,&quot; but they don't mind giving a report on minor vandalism or shoplifting over the phone to a department clerk.    Following the strategy developed by University of Wisconsin Prof. Herman Goldstein, police in Baltimore County; Newport News, Va.; Minneapolis and elsewhere are approaching police work as a repetitive set of problems, rather than a constant flow of new incidents. Rather than &quot;firefighting&quot; each incident, they are attacking the more general problems the incidents reflect.    Recruits can all be trained in this approach. Both the specific experiences of the cities experimenting with &quot;problem solving&quot; and the general intellectual tools for analytic thinking can become part of the training curriculum. New officers can even be selected and evaluated on probation for their problem-solving skills.    --Hire college graduates. Many college graduates, who are often more adept at problem-solving work, are interested in police careers. With overtime and off-duty assignments, many big-city officers earn salaries of $50,000 a year or more -- enough to attract even the hard-to-get minority college graduates. Effective policing is an enormously complex job, which the Supreme Court has described as &quot;judicial&quot; in character.    Yet few police departments require any college education of their recruits. Police executives who want to often are stymied by police unions, archaic civil-service laws, and fears that it will set back minority hiring. On this and many other issues, police leaders need help from political leaders courageous enough to protect the massive public investment in our new police officers.    ---   Mr. Sherman is a professor of criminology at the University of Maryland and president of the Washington-based Crime Control Institute. </TEXT></DOC>