<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881026-0160 </DOCNO><HL> The Baby-Busters: New Generation Asks More Than Its Elders Of Corporate World --- The Newcomers Work Hard, But Value Independence, Own Pursuits, Over Cash --- Little Taste for 'Dues Paying' </HL><AUTHOR> Amanda Bennett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The baby-busters are coming.    They are hard-driving, ambitious and acutely aware of their place in the scheme of things. Hear Eugene B. Nomicos, a program manager at Hewlett-Packard Co., talk about his job: &quot;I'm in a position that gives me good visibility with the upper management.&quot; He is 21 years old.    Yet, paradoxically, they are also less wedded to their jobs, less motivated by money and more willing to gamble their careers than many of their predecessors in earlier generations. Karim Bitar turned down a job that offered 20% more in order to join Dow Chemical Co. as a $25,000-to-$30,000-a-year technical salesman. &quot;Money is nice, but my major concern was to be happy where I was working,&quot; he says. He is 23 years old.    The baby-busters are generally men and women born after 1964, when the U.S. birthrate began to decline again, although they also include many born earlier in the 1960s who only now are beginning to leave their imprints on the workplace. The baby-busters are as varied and individualistic as any other generation of Americans; not all love work, nor do all of them care about access to the top. But their employers and others find that many share attitudes that differ somewhat from those of previous generations.    Between a half-million and a million fewer of these young Americans will start to work each year through the end of the century than did in the 1970s. Because of their scarcity, they are in a position to make demands on their employers that previous generations never would have dreamed of. &quot;It's a seller's market out there,&quot; says John Brown, 58-year-old vice president for employee relations at Johnson andamp; Johnson in New Brunswick, N.J.    To their elders, the baby-busters are sometimes annoying, sometimes puzzling -- and definitely New Wave. After workouts at the Johnson andamp; Johnson gym, Mr. Brown often overhears them talking among themselves. &quot;I'm standing there in my underwear listening and a lot of talk is about their leisure time,&quot; he says. &quot;They're keen about softball. One guy is talking about soccer, and one guy is going biking in the evening.&quot; When he was a young Jandamp;J manager in the 1950s, he says, &quot;We talked a lot about work.&quot;    Yet Mr. Brown finds the youngsters almost incredibly hard-working, and he admires them. &quot;Today,&quot; he says, &quot;as a top-level manager you just have to be more mindful that they have a more multidimensional life than we did when we were their age.&quot;    The emergence of the baby-busters may signal the most striking change in management's mindset since World War II. The tone since then was largely set by returning veterans who brought to the corporate world the organizational lessons they learned from the military. More than 40 years later, American corporations with elaborate line and staff hierarchies, clearly defined jobs and an emphasis on loyalty and obedience still bear the stamp, albeit greatly weakened, of the war generation's influence.    In the 1950s, the gray-suited, security-minded Organization Man became a corporate archetype. In the 1960s and 1970s, it was the socially responsible corporate do-gooder. But specialists in management, including executive recruiters, human-resource executives and academics, say none of these changed the tone of corporate life as much as the baby-busters may change it.    Enamored of self-development, they reject the work environments and career touchstones imposed by others. Says Burke Stinson, a district manager for ATandamp;T in New York: &quot;They're asking not so much what the pension plan is like as, 'do you have a fitness center?' They don't want to know how they can go up the corporate ladder; they want to know about the environment they'll be working in. They don't want to know the pecking order as much as if they'll have access to the top.&quot;    The turbulence of the corporate world is expected to enhance the baby-busters' influence. Post-World War II managers made their mark partly because the companies they joined were already in the process of change, retooling for peacetime production and preparing for an explosion of consumer demand suppressed by 16 years of depression and war. The military-trained managers of the era were well-prepared for the job.    Corporations today are also changing as they struggle to contend with rapid technological advances and fierce foreign competition for their or their customers' markets. To deal with this kind of change, corporations have begun to reject rigid structuring in favor of a lean-and-mean flexibility. &quot;We're moving into a new competitive world,&quot; says Michael Maccoby, director of the Project on Technology, Work and Character, a research group in Washington, D.C. &quot;The new generation fits better.&quot;    Corporate employers had better fit, too. Competition for the best and brightest of the independent-minded generation will make it easier for them to leave employers they dislike. &quot;Most of the folks joining Dow Chemical are prepared to go somewhere else if they don't like it,&quot; says John Billingsley, director of personnel resources at Dow, in Midland, Mich. &quot;We'd better have our act together. If Dow isn't a good place to work, people will roll out.&quot;    Fear often influenced the postwar generation's choice of jobs. &quot;We looked for security because our parents didn't have security,&quot; says a 64-year-old former manager for Eastman Kodak Co. Another former Kodak manager, who joined the company in 1953, recalls the attraction of a corporate job: &quot;It was a five-letter word spelled m-o-n-e-y.&quot;    Robert Ciatto, 54 years old, manager of technical services at Johnson andamp; Johnson, remembers driving to work years ago on crowded local roads because he couldn't afford the faster tollway. &quot;That creates a hunger and a desire to be successful that you can't duplicate,&quot; he says.    The baby-boomers, born between 1946 and 1964, came later, and grew up in flusher times. They nonetheless were influenced by parents who came of age during the Depression and the war. But today's youngest managers, in their early 20s, are another generation removed from hardship, and some of their parents are almost young enough to be baby-boomers. &quot;In my lifetime there's always been prosperity,&quot; says Machelle Hayes McAdory, a 26-year-old compensation analyst at Chrysler Corp., whose parents are in their late 40s.    In a recent Roper Organization survey of more than 1,000 college students, starting salary ranked sixth in importance in a list of job considerations. In first place: opportunity for promotion.    Many youngsters now expect to deal with top executives, and soon. Earlier generations were more mindful of their lowly status. &quot;I revered the people at the top,&quot; says 49-year-old Bill Schlich, a technical-development manager who began his career with General Electric Co. working in an appliance plant in Louisville, Ky. &quot;I thought the person who ran Louisville was a god. I had no contact with him at all. There was a tremendous caste system. You didn't go to him for anything without going up his chain of command.&quot;    Lisa Risser, a 25-year-old auditor for Honeywell Inc., sees things quite differently. &quot;I didn't want to sit at my desk and pay my dues for a lot of years,&quot; she says, explaining how pleased she is that her job requires her to work directly with vice presidents and the corporate controller.    Such attitudes annoy some senior executives who did, as they see it, pay their dues. But others observe that the disappearance of several layers of middle-management at many corporations has made more direct top-to-bottom communication desirable. And that's the way the baby-busters want it. &quot;I had a little trouble when I first came here understanding why you had to answer so many questions,&quot; says John H. Zimmerman, senior vice president of human resources for MCI Communications Corp. &quot;Then the light went on. It was the type of work force we had. They didn't want a manager who had been a supervisor for 30 years and {whom} the train had left at the door.&quot;    Middle managers who survived the past five years' staff cuts and layoffs remain anxious over their careers and the economic future. Not so the baby-busters. &quot;I'm currently doing my M.B.A., and that will make me marketable even if the economy is questionable and middle managers are being phased out,&quot; says Todd Dembsky, a 27-year-old systems analyst for a subsidiary of U S West Inc.    Indeed, many seem almost untouched by the corporate traumas of the past few years, even those that hit close to home. When a steel plant closed, Jeffrey Frantz's father was laid off after more than 25 years, and spent more than six months looking for work. How did that affect the 25-year-old Mr. Frantz? &quot;It was interesting,&quot; he says. He notes that he and his father were interviewing for jobs &quot;within a year or two&quot; of each other. The younger man is now a salesman for Dow Chemical in Midland.    The job security that so obsessed earlier generations now seems to mean little. &quot;Security didn't come into my mind at all,&quot; says James Bonini, 26 years old, a production supervisor for Chrysler Corp. in Detroit. &quot;I figured I would go there for three or four years and if it didn't work out, I'd go someplace else. There's a lack of young talent in manufacturing.&quot; Mr. Bonini has a bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from Princeton and a master's degree in engineering from the University of California at Berkeley.    Some managers who matured in an era of corporate loyalty dislike the cavalier attitude. &quot;In my day if the shoe didn't fit, you wore it anyway -- and walked with a funny walk,&quot; says the former sales manager at Kodak. But many corporations today make little pretense of providing lifetime security, and they encourage employees to adopt the independent attitude that the baby-busters display. General Electric Co., for one, encourages its managers to maintain their skills and their outside contacts and to rely on themselves rather than the company for their security.    The seeming brashness of some young managers also annoys their elders. Mr. Schlich of GE recalls a meeting with one youngster he supervised: &quot;After 18 months, he came in and demanded I increase his job. He started ticking off all the things he was master of. In his mind, once he had done it, it was in his experience file and he knew how to do it. I told him, 'Leave my office. I don't consider you an expert on anything.'&quot;    Others resent the attention companies lavish on newcomers at a time when old hands are still being laid off. &quot;You can't replace the guy with 25 years' experience with a guy with a Ph.D. from Harvard, Stanford or Carnegie-Mellon,&quot; says an engineer at McDonnell Douglas Corp.    To senior managers, the resentment is understandable. Younger managers are &quot;better educated and more valued in the current system,&quot; says Frank Doyle, a senior vice president of GE. &quot;We have consciously tried to remove hierarchy and all the things that empowered middle management -- and for a while we were surprised that {older middle-managers} were upset.&quot;    Unlike their elders, the baby-busters grew up in relatively tranquil times. The baby-boomers' world, of cold war, air-raid drills, the assassination of an American president, and the Vietnam War, had largely ended before most baby-busters were born. Those under 25 years old are hard-pressed to remember anything of historical significance: &quot;The things I remember most are things in my family, not news events,&quot; says 24-year old Allison Culler, a sales trainee at General Electric, who was born in 1964.    Thus, their elders find the baby-bust generation less politically inclined and more internally focused than earlier generations. &quot;No wonder they aren't rebelling,&quot; says D. Quinn Mills, professor of business administration at Harvard Business School. &quot;We haven't been drafting them. That leaves them free to adapt to other priorities -- like life styles.&quot;    Life styles are so important that some corporations are already accommodating those of its youngest managers. &quot;Starting up a plant 30 years ago, we might have said 'Joe, you work 16 hours today and we'll tell you when it's over,'&quot; says Mr. Billingsley of Dow Chemical. &quot;If we did that today, some of the young people might tell us when it's over. They have more focuses than just their job.&quot; He adds: &quot;We have to throw more people, more resources into the effort to get the plant started up, but not impact so negatively on the quality of life.&quot;    Johnson andamp; Johnson is starting a &quot;work and family program&quot; that includes on-site child care, a year's maternity leave, support for &quot;flextime&quot; -- flexible working hours -- and a flexible benefits program. &quot;It's a recognition that these new people have changed the way we have to do business,&quot; says Mr. Brown.    For all their ability and drive, the newcomers to management won't have as many opportunities for promotion as their predecessors during the expansionary 1950s and 1960s. The elimination of redundant managerial layers in today's stripped-down corporations has seen to that.    &quot;I literally struggled my way up,&quot; says Janet Dale, a 37-year-old public-relations director for Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, Calif., who went to work for the company at the age of 18, right out of high school. &quot;That would be impossible to do today. High-powered companies are only hiring people with advanced degrees.&quot;    Specialists in corporate organization say the youngsters' independence, aggressiveness and commitment to a full life outside the corporation will pay off when their corporate careers hit a dead end.    Howard Stevenson, a professor of business at Harvard Business School, says that 90% of the school's business students now profess the long-term goal of owning or managing their own businesses, up from about 60% a decade ago. Eli Ginzberg, an emeritus professor at Columbia, says that's a good thing, too. &quot;The long-term, implicit contract {between managers and corporations} has been broken,&quot; he says. &quot;No sensible student of mine would join a corporation and assume they were there for life.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>