<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880202-0162 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Cuomo on 'The Decade of the Child' </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   It was gratifying to read in your Jan. 12 editorial &quot;Save the Children&quot; that the Journal agrees that &quot;this country's poorest children are too often poorly educated and poorly prepared to enter the mainstream.&quot; In the same editorial, you endorse government action to address the problem: &quot;There may be merit, for instance, in providing crucially important prenatal care and education to young pregnant women.&quot; Surprisingly, however, your editorial goes on to criticize a more comprehensive agenda to address the problems of poverty contained in my State of the State address to the New York Legislature.    The theme of that address, &quot;The Decade of the Child,&quot; meets with the Journal's approval, but you object to related program initiatives such as expanded health and day care for New York's poorest children, pre-kindergarten education, Liberty Scholarships and nutrition assistance. You apparently view such efforts as statist or anti-family. That view is myopic.    New York, indeed the nation, is threatened by growing poverty that is creating an economic underclass. More than a symbol of social injustice, poverty and the problems it creates are also a significant burden on taxpayers and undermine the real economic necessity of maintaining a strong and productive work force to meet the needs of the marketplace in the 21st century.    Increasingly there is broad recognition of the need for government action to intervene in the cycle of poverty. A distinguished Poverty Task Force in New York concluded more than a year ago that more than hope and good intentions were needed. Others, including the National Governors Association, have endorsed reforms to address this problem more effectively. That is what our Decade of the Child programs would do.    Day care for the children of mothers on public assistance is universally recognized as essential to effective job training and employment efforts that help mothers liberate themselves from welfare dependency. Preventive health care, such as prenatal services, nutritional assistance for pregnant women and children, and expanded health services, reduces long-range public-health costs. Similarly, early education, through pre-kindergarten classes, and incentives to complete at least elementary and secondary education, offers economically disadvantaged children the best chance to compete in the work force.    New York's past efforts to get people into work and off welfare have, in conjunction with an improved state economy, yielded results already. The number of public-assistance recipients in New York has decreased by 70,000 since 1983. That's a good start, but not nearly enough.    In our initial agenda for the Decade of the Child, we have proposed expansion of educational opportunities, child care and health care for low-income families. Far from a threat to the family unit, as the Journal characteristically interpreted them, these initiatives will strengthen low-income families and provide them with additional tools to help themselves through employment and education.    While we believe that we should have only the government we need, our responsibility to the most vulnerable members of our society requires that we also have all the government we need. Where the line gets drawn is always a matter of judgment. In New York, offering the hope for a better life to poor children always has been within the accepted boundaries of the role of government.    For the Decade of the Child, I have proposed that New York celebrate that tradition through a series of prudent initiatives that are completely consistent with my belief that the ultimate answer to poverty can be found only on a private-sector payroll. Unfortunately, there are many who need help to get there, through child-care and improved education opportunities.    More than the disadvantaged will participate in the Decade of the Child, however. It also will make pre-kindergarten classes available for all four-year-old children in New York, increase support for public education generally (state aid to education increased 65% in the six years of my administration), and expand child-protection, mental-health, teen-age pregnancy and substance-abuse prevention services for all of New York's children.    The Journal suggests these efforts &quot;would ensure that lower-income children become virtual wards of the state, from birth through childhood.&quot; Nonsense. To the contrary, the Decade of the Child will help impoverished children and their parents to become independent and productive citizens.    Our children are our future and the Decade of the Child seeks to make that future as bright as possible for all of the children of New York.    Gov. Mario M. Cuomo   Albany, N.Y. </TEXT></DOC>