<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880815-0051 </DOCNO><HL> When Management Professors Gather, Relevance Sometimes Rears Its Ugly Head </HL><AUTHOR> Amanda Bennett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   With their love for the theoretical, disdain for the practical, and enthusiasm for the complicated, management professors often seem removed from the prosaic world of business.    Thus, one question on a trivia quiz at last week's Academy of Management annual meeting here in Anaheim, Calif., asked for the paper with the &quot;least interpretable, most jargon-laden title.&quot; The winner: &quot;Enter and Die: Effects of Incumbents' Waiting Periods on the Duration of Industry Entrants' Participation in 5 Subfields of the Medical Diagnostic Imaging Industry (1959-1986).&quot;    &quot;Some people feel the more esoteric and uninterpretable the subject, the more scholarly it is,&quot; says Steven Kerr, dean of the faculty of the School of Business Administration at the University of Southern California, and program director for the meeting. The academy's 7,500 members make up perhaps three-fourths of the country's management professors.    But slowing business-school enrollment and increasing competition for corporate funds are forcing management professors out of their ivory towers. &quot;We can't put our heads in the sand,&quot; says Mr. Kerr. To that end, this year's conference stressed practical applications of scholarly research. Here is a sampling of some of the research presented at the meeting.    ---   Procrastination isn't necessarily a time management problem.    If only employees would learn to &quot;prioritize and organize,&quot; corporate executives often argue, then tardy reports, missed deadlines and frantic late nights would disappear. Courses designed to train employees in time-management skills proliferate.    But recent research suggests that procrastination isn't caused so much by disorganization as by hostility. Elizabeth Coote Weymann, an associate professor of management at Loyola University in New Orleans, found that the less control people felt they had over their work, the more they were likely to procrastinate. &quot;People who can't control what they are going to do, or how they are going to do it, can control when they do it,&quot; she says.    She asked bosses in a savings and loan company to assess subordinates according to their tendency to do such things as leaving letters and memos unanswered or putting off jobs. Then she asked workers to rate themselves and their jobs. The result: &quot;The more their job autonomy went up, the more procrastination went down.&quot;    She suggests that companies concerned about procrastination look at job design. More freedom to set schedules and pace work may reduce procrastination, she surmises. &quot;You're less likely to aggress against deadlines you set yourself,&quot; she concludes.    ---   Computer monitoring, if done well, can enhance job satisfaction.    Electronic performance monitoring has been seen as a kind of malevolent Big Brother, squeezing productivity out of increasingly stressed workers, says Delbert Nebeker, as he flashes a slide of a giant eye for the audience.    But, the research psychologist at the Navy Personnel Research and Development Center tells the session on computer monitoring, his studies suggest that computer monitoring can increase both productivity and job satisfaction. But, he warns, it has to be done right.    In an experiment with data-entry workers, performance and job satisfaction went up when workers were monitored electronically and given modest goals to meet and modest rewards for doing so. Giving big rewards for meeting modest goals also increased performance. But when high rewards were combined with high standards, the best performers' performance and job satisfaction plummeted.    Mr. Nebeker theorizes that the high-reward/high-standard combination puts too much stress on good performers. &quot;They got frustrated and focused more on the reward than on their own satisfaction,&quot; he says. Inferior performers weren't affected in the same way, he speculates, because the goals were so far out of their reach that they just ignored them.    ---   Productivity gains from computerization don't always happen as expected.    Many companies hope that productivity gains from computerization will enable them to cut staff. But there's little concrete evidence of how it happens -- or even that it happens. A study by Brian Mittman of Rand Corp. indicates that when computers come in, people do indeed go out. But the study contains some surprises.    Between 1984 and 1988, the U.S. Forest Service added computers to handle tasks such as payroll, bills and mailings. At first, though, computers didn't reduce the work; they increased it. Mr. Mittman surmises that the organization needed new people for &quot;training, installing, moving furniture and running parallel programs&quot; -- doing everything twice until the system was debugged. It wasn't until a year after the system was installed that employment began to drop, and it was 18 months before there was a net decline.    What's more, immediately after introducing computers, managers cut back clerical staffs, apparently anticipating that computers would pick up the slack. They soon had to hire back clerical workers. In the end, clerical staffs shrank, but by less than other groups.    ---   Learning lessons from Disneyland. But not too many lessons.    As part of their quest for real-world relevance, the academy's planners added a program analyzing the operation of the meeting's site, Disneyland. &quot;Disneyland is a classic business-school case,&quot; says Arthur Bedeian, a management professor at Louisiana State University. &quot;It's held up as a model of effective and efficient management.&quot;    To Robert Sutton, an assistant professor of organizational behavior at Stanford University, Disneyland is also an excellent example of image control. People returning from Disneyland, he tells a large audience, are likely to say they had a wonderful time -- even if they didn't. They remember the cleanliness, the friendliness, the amusing rides and the adorable anthropomorphic characters. They forget nasty experiences like high prices -- admission for a family of four can top $75 these days -- hour-long waits for five-minute rides, and expensive, bad food.    Why? One reason is that Disneyland encourages photo-taking by lending cameras without charge, and setting up designated photo sites. People tend to take pictures of -- and thus remember -- only pleasant scenes like the cute shot with Mickey Mouse, and not the long line at the ladies' room. There are external pressures, too. &quot;Our culture defines a visit to Disneyland as good fun,&quot; says Mr. Sutton. So it's tough to conclude that &quot;I expected to have a good time, I spent a lot of money, and I went through a lot of trouble to go to Disneyland, but I had a lousy time.&quot;    But Mr. Sutton is a good example of how academics resist relevance. Pressed for implications of his observations for other companies' public relations or marketing operations, he professes to be proud that he can't think of any. He examined the topic because &quot;it's really cool&quot;; thus drawing real-world lessons for other companies &quot;isn't something I have any interest in. I've been in the real world. It stinks.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>