<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0045 </DOCNO><HL> But They Continue to FaceTenacious Foreign Rivals;Imports Also Are Rising---Some Firms Still Stay Home---By Douglas R. SeaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GNN GAF CMZ PKN GE WX HRSMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> BRIDGEWATER, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Can America compete? To John Viehe, an industrial engineer and inventor, that's no longer the question. Right now, the question is whether he can make enough rotary paint strippers to satisfy foreign buyers.    Mr. Viehe's tiny International Hardware Co. here recently won a big West German order and signed up a major Japanese trading company to sell the paint stripper throughout Asia. He also is searching for financing and a site for a larger factory.    &quot;Don't let anybody tell you that people around the world don't like American products,&quot; he says. &quot;They love American products. There's a huge market out there if you just go for it.&quot;    More than two years after the dollar began a drop that was supposed to make U.S. goods cheaper and more competitive overseas, American exporters are finally bringing home a bigger piece of that huge market. Gains have been piling up across the industrial spectrum, ranging from commodity goods such as paper and chemicals to manufactured wares such as hand tools and computers. And now, at American companies both large and small:    --Some previously battered corporate income statements and balance sheets are being strengthened by sales abroad.    --Exports are creating new jobs, or saving existing ones, as some companies crank up to meet foreign demand.    --And some American businessmen, like Mr. Viehe, are finally getting a new jolt of confidence in their ability to compete in world markets.    The upturn in exports hasn't solved America's trade problems, of course. In the second quarter, exports rose a hefty $3 billion, but imports surged an even larger $3.8 billion, and the merchandise trade deficit, on a balance-of-payments basis, widened to a record $39.53 billion.    In addition, U.S. companies still face intense competition abroad as Japanese and European concerns reduce costs to offset the disadvantage of their strong currencies. Rivals from developing nations such as South Korea and Brazil still offer attractive prices because their currencies have generally weakened along with the U.S. dollar. And many American companies -- whether gun-shy from previous export failures or just plain lazy -- still aren't pushing exports very hard.    Nonetheless, first-half exports ran at a $233.9 billion seasonally adjusted annual rate, up from the $224.4 billion in all 1986. Over the past three quarters, net exports contributed 1.1 percentage points of the 2.7% growth in U.S. gross national product, David Levine, an economist at Sanford C. Bernstein andamp; Co., estimates. They are also helping corporate profitability: In the second quarter, export prices rose a healthy 2.8%, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. And, theoretically, exports should have created 580,000 jobs in the past year, says James Tsao, a Georgetown University professor.    The most striking benefits, however, are evident at individual businesses.    Consider how Great Northern Nekoosa Corp. has benefited since the dollar's early-1985 peak. Suffering fierce competition at home and abroad, the big U.S. paper company earned only $46.2 million that year. Exports consistently represent up to 60% of some of Great Northern's product lines, yet it was a hostage to the pricing power of Scandinavian rivals. But despite the pressure, it was starting up a $560 million state-of-the-art pulp mill in New Augusta, Miss. On June 30, 1985, it had $502 million of long-term debt.    The dollar's drop changed the rules. Great Northern has raised its dollar prices repeatedly, but, with the increases more than offset by changing currency values, its exports still are cheaper to foreign customers, and sales are improving. At home, price increases are sticking because overseas demand has tightened the paper market and the lower dollar has forced up prices of most competing imports.    The New Augusta mill is paying off. It is exporting two-thirds of its output, and its capacity was recently expanded 15%, through improvements in operating efficiency, to meet rising foreign demand.    As a result, Great Northern's net income in the 1987 first half soared to $88.2 million from the year-earlier $13.6 million, which was depressed partly by a restructuring charge of $21.2 million. Long-term debt on June 30 was cut to $389.5 million, and cash and short-term investments rose eightfold from two years earlier. That improved balance sheet recently helped the company borrow about $1 billion toward its $1.15 billion purchase of Owens-Illinois Corp.'s forest-products group.    Ironically, Great Northern credits the previous high dollar almost as much as the current low one. &quot;Our exports are much more profitable because of the price increases of the last 12 months,&quot; concedes William R. Laidig, the chief executive officer. But efforts to get more competitive in tougher times proved important, too. &quot;With the dollar so strong, we really had to pay extreme attention to costs. That's paying off right now in improved margins and new customers,&quot; he says.    Some industries, of course, are geared up to take advantage of currency swings. When the dollar was strong in the early 1980s, the GAF Chemical subsidiary of GAF Corp. supplied Asian customers with butane diol, a raw material for plastic, from West Germany while its U.S. plants operated far below capacity. Now, GAF has switched to plants in Texas City, Texas, and Calvert City, Ky., to supply Asia. GAF's increased U.S. exports raised its trade surplus -- its exports minus imports -- to $55 million in 1986 from only a slight surplus when the dollar was high.    &quot;We can swing back and forth as circumstances dictate with one month's notice,&quot; says Heinn F. Tomfohrde III, GAF Chemical's president. &quot;It's better to do that than to sit here and think you can guess what exchange rates are going to be next year.&quot;    Products such as paper and chemicals and commodities sold largely on price are a big factor in the export rebound because a falling dollar quickly translates into a competitive price advantage.    But some unlikely exports are growing, too. Edward K. &quot;Kim&quot; Gandy, the owner of Gandy Industries Inc., is selling so many pool tables and related gear abroad that he has just hired 25 new workers, an increase of about one-third, at his Macon, Ga., plant. He suspects that the movie &quot;The Color of Money&quot; has sparked an overseas billiards craze, but he is sure that his European and Japanese business &quot;is wild. I am getting 14 contracts a day from a place (Japan) that used to give me three or four a year.&quot;    For Mr. Viehe, this is a renewed fling at the export game. In 1981, when his under $15, hand-operated paint stripper was brand-new, Mr. Viehe exported to France, only to become uncompetitive after three years of a rising dollar. Retreating to the U.S., he licensed a French concern to make the tool there. Now, his export business is so strong that he is hunting in North Carolina for a 15,000-square-foot factory that could handle up to 140 workers; it would replace his eight-person, 7,000-square-foot New Jersey operation.    He expects Wolfcraft, a big West German hardware distributor, to buy 50,000 paint strippers this year and 100,000 next year. Mitsubishi Nagasaki Machinery andamp; Equipment Group is preparing to sell them in 16 Asian countries. &quot;Mitsubishi says it can't produce the product for half again as much as I can,&quot; he boasts. In September, he will seek more customers at a big hardware show in Tokyo.    Companies making complex manufactured items need a little longer to capitalize on export opportunities. Perkin-Elmer Corp., of Norwalk, Conn., is about halfway through developing a list of priorities for moving some of its scientific and test instruments from plant to plant for maximum competitive advantage, estimates Gaynor Kelley, its chairman. It has already brought to the U.S. the manufacture of two chemical-analysis instruments -- one from Germany and one from England.    With domestic markets for many Perkin-Elmer products sluggish, Mr. Kelley adds that &quot;in many ways, exports to strong-currency markets are the saving grace that's keeping our company growing modestly.&quot;    Cincinnati Milacron, America's largest machine-tool maker, also takes a long view. International travel expenses are up, says Donald G. Snively, the executive vice president for operations, but no one is complaining as teams of engineers huddle with potential customers in Germany, Italy, Korea, Taiwan and China. In the early 1980s, he adds, &quot;it was difficult to justify spending money to go to those places when you knew the currency situation made you uncompetitive.&quot;    Now, he says, the company is exporting even some basic grinders to German customers. &quot;We haven't been exporting things like that to Germany in a long time,&quot; he says. Exports rose 43% last year, and he sees several years of strong foreign sales possible if the dollar doesn't rebound.    Obviously, the lower dollar has affected pricing in various ways. Aided by currency shifts in some foreign markets, Caterpillar Tractor Co. is raising its effective selling prices without losing customers. &quot;The strong dollar was killing us,&quot; a spokesman says. &quot;Now, we're doing better in Europe. We're not doing anything differently, but we're getting better prices for our product and getting back to profitability.&quot;    On the other hand, some exporters are letting prices fall in foreign currencies in hopes of increasing unit volume. &quot;We've gotten our divisions together and said, 'OK, let's use concessionary pricing as a strategic weapon to get market share, particularly against European and Japanese competitors,'&quot; says Michael Bonsignore, the president of Honeywell Inc.'s international operations. He won't disclose export figures but says that &quot;we're getting a kicker from the weaker dollar.&quot;    Exports are improving for other reasons, of course. General Electric Co. says the dollar helps major-appliance sales in the Mideast, where Japanese brands once dominated. But Walter Joelson, GE's chief economist, says sales of things such as aircraft engines and high-tech plastics aren't much affected by currency values.    &quot;We would have seen the increase in jet engines anyway because airlines around the world are modernizing,&quot; he says. &quot;And with a new product like some of the plastics, it's hard to say whether sales are due to the dollar or to new applications&quot; being found by customers.    Harold La Tulip, vice president of Lamson Corp., expects export sales to surge 250% this year but says that's just because the manufacturer of air-pollution-control equipment got serious about selling abroad only after its U.S. markets softened last year. He explains that, technologically, Japanese competitors &quot;can't touch us.&quot; The role of the dollar? &quot;That's only an emotional thing,&quot; he contends.    And for some companies, there simply isn't much action in exports. Westinghouse Corp. &quot;has obtained a small amount of additional business, and, if the dollar continues to weaken, we expect a small additional gain,&quot; a spokeswoman says. Joseph Boyd, the chairman of Harris Corp., says the dollar must fall a lot more if the manufacturer of computer equipment is once again to be a major exporter.    Some economists, however, say many U.S. companies just aren't trying. A recent Coopers andamp; Lybrand survey showed 55% of manufacturing executives regard other American companies as their biggest competition. Eric Kruger, a Conference Board economist, comments that &quot;most U.S. companies haven't positioned themselves to take advantage of the weak dollar.&quot; He says that when a strong dollar made selling abroad tough, many simply withdrew to the U.S. market. Now, they aren't successful exporters and don't make much effort, he says. &quot;It's self-reinforcing.&quot;    One reason for not getting back into the fray quickly is that it can be difficult. When the dollar was strong, Osmose International Corp. gave up its government permits to sell its chemical wood preservatives in much of Europe. &quot;Why pay for a permit when you can't sell anything there anyway?&quot; asks Stig Hansen, its president. Now, Osmose is reapplying for permits, but Mr. Hansen concedes that that could take years. Meanwhile, he no longer has a European service organization. &quot;We'll have to pass up some smaller customers in favor of big buyers who don't need much attention,&quot; he figures.    Nevertheless, more and more hardy entrepreneurs are heeding the lure of the export trade. Paul Hait, a California maker of a collapsible, stainless-steel cooking grill, recently sent 50 samples to a Japanese trading company on the assumption that the low dollar will make the grill affordable. And New Yorker Elindra West just started up a pharmaceutical-exporting firm because the low dollar &quot;will make it much easier.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>