<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880512-0084 </DOCNO><HL> More Buses Travel the Market Route </HL><AUTHOR> Vincent Carroll </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> G LDMFA BFI HRMN LABOR </CO><IN> TRA </IN><TEXT>   Public transit agencies are like dandelions: unloved but hardy. No matter how damning the evidence of faltering ridership and productivity, they seem to prosper year after year with lavish budgets and staffing.    But perhaps their luck has run out. From San Francisco to Washington's suburbs, officials are turning to private bus operators for more efficient help.    What's more, for the first time a state has ordered a transit district to contract with private companies to supply a portion of its bus service. Early this month, Colorado lawmakers passed a bill requiring 20% of bus service in metropolitan Denver to be awarded on the basis of competitive bids. The six-county Regional Transportation District will thus become, by the end of 1989, one of the most heavily privatized major transit agencies in the nation.    If experience elsewhere holds true, the district should save millions. Wendell Cox, a St. Louis-based transit consultant who tracks the growth of competitive bidding on publicly subsidized bus routes, says the practice generally reaps savings of 30% to 60%. Steven Steckler, senior manager with Price Waterhouse in Washington, puts the range at between 10% and 50%.    And once part of a bus system is subject to market discipline, the entire operation tends to respond.    San Diego provides the lesson here. Since 1979, about 16% of fixed-route service in that region gradually has been awarded to private firms. As a result, Mr. Cox says, the cost per mile of service, adjusted for inflation, has declined not just on those routes but on the rest as well. Elsewhere in California, average costs rose 30% during that period. In effect, San Diego's public sector rolled up its sleeves and competed with private providers.    In Colorado, Republican state Sen. Terry Considine originally hoped to privatize all RTD routes, making his case with a litany of district shortcomings. They include the fact that some RTD drivers earn more than $50,000 a year while the district collects less than 15% of its total expenses from the fare box. Given the amount of subsidy RTD receives, Mr. Considine argued, the district could afford to buy new cars for each of its regular daily riders.    A number of his fellow lawmakers agreed, including several Democrats who signed on as the bill's co-sponsors. Then political reality struck in the form of an aroused Amalgamated Transit Union (ATU) local. By the time its campaign against privatization peaked, all but two Democratic co-sponsors had disowned the bill and Democratic Gov. Roy Romer promised to veto it, setting the stage for a tense confrontation between Messrs. Romer and Considine at a news conference. Yet after trading insults, the two men eventually settled on the compromise bill that passed.    While the union lost in Colorado, its objections were similar to those invariably brandished against competitive bidding for bus service. They deserve examination:   --There aren't enough private bus firms to provide real competition and keep prices down over time.    In fact, at least a dozen national companies are prepared to compete for bus contracts, including Greyhound, Laidlaw, Browning-Ferris, R.W. Harmon and ATE, not to mention a number of smaller firms in most urban areas. Jim Seal, a consultant to the California Bus Association, says multiple bids are common where competition has been introduced. He notes, for example, that the Bay Area Rapid Transit agency recently attracted five bids alone for several bus routes to its rail stations.    --Safety suffers when the profit motive reigns in transportation.    Tell that to the privately owned U.S. airline industry. For that matter, tell it to Greyhound and other private bus operators, whose safety record easily surpasses that of public agencies as measured by fatalities per 100 million passenger miles. Although the comparison fails to account for the fact that private buses roll up more miles on the open highway, anecdotal evidence also confirms the point.    Take the experience of the Los Angeles Department of Transportation. It began awarding contracts for private delivery of bus service in 1985, with 15 routes and more than 60 buses involved today.    Was safety compromised? &quot;We found just the opposite to be the case,&quot; says Jim McLaughlin, who supervises the program. Private firms care at least as much about safety, he insists, because they value their reputation. What's more, &quot;the quality of their people is higher.&quot;    Not that Mr. McLaughlin gives the private companies free rein. His department screens equipment for safety, conducting spot checks and enforcing maintenance standards. Buses held together with baling wire simply don't reach the road.    --Service will deteriorate with private operators.    Not unless private firms suddenly decide to forfeit their reputations, not to mention their hope of winning a future contract from the same agency.    --Privatization advocates exaggerate the inefficiency of urban transit. Their real targets are union wages and public employees.    This would be easier to believe if Greyhound and some other private operators were not also unionized (Greyhound drivers belong to the ATU; Laidlaw drivers in Los Angeles to the Teamsters). Outside the public sector, however, competition has kept union wages in line with the apparent market price for driving a bus.    Greyhound representatives testified in Colorado that their combined costs for drivers and mechanics were 36% lower than those of RTD. In Los Angeles, public bus drivers earn a maximum of $14.30 an hour, while private drivers -- unionized and nonunionized -- make between $8 and $10.    Fort Wayne, Ind., offers the most intriguing direct comparison between the public and private salary market. Rather than farm out bus routes to private firms, Fort Wayne elected in late 1986 to hire nonunion contract labor to drive some of its buses -- the equivalent of an office calling on Kelly Services. The hourly wage package (including fringes) for its public employees totals $18.95. For its contract drivers: $8.50, including the commission to the private suppliers.    Not that salaries and benefits are the only reasons for the high cost of public transit. Other culprits include crippling work rules and overstaffed, congested management. The result, in part, has been an utter collapse of productivity during the past quarter century. In 1965, passenger revenues virtually offset operating expenses of urban transit systems. Today the percentage is closer to one-third.    No wonder Alfred Dellibovi, chief of the Urban Mass Transportation Administration, complains the federal government has handed out almost $49 billion (more than $70 billion in 1988 dollars) in mass-transit aid over the past 20 years while the percentage of work commutes involving mass transit has steadily declined.    This discouraging record can't all be laid at the door of mismanagement and indulgent labor practices. Politicians in many cities have been beguiled by rail systems that devour vast amounts of capital while too often attracting scant ridership. Even in cities that resist the siren call of commuter rail, transit officials find their mission undermined by social forces beyond their control. Mass transit depends in part on population density, which has declined with the dispersal of employment to the suburbs, growth of disposable income and shrinking of average household size.    But these factors hardly absolve public transit. By any reasonable standard, it has become appallingly inefficient. The bracing influence of competition just might check that slide.    ---   Mr. Carroll is a syndicated columnist and deputy editorial page editor of the Rocky Mountain News in Denver. </TEXT></DOC>