<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880816-0096 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Grand New Party? </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Republicans in New Orleans today will endorse a 30,000-word platform that contains hundreds of specific proposals. The Democrats in Atlanta last month issued a 4,500-word manifesto that treated specifics like Typhoid Mary. The contrast carries the message of a political watershed, if the Republicans can understand and seize their opportunity. The party's past instincts leave open the real possibility that it may not.    To put it most simply, Republicans under Ronald Reagan have won the battle of ideas. In a historic reversal, the GOP now is the party with the confidence to assert a detailed program in public, while the Democrats promise economic growth and a strong defense even as they decline to say how they would achieve either. The question now is whether Republicans also will have the confidence to shed their historic inferiority complex and campaign as if their principles and program deserved to govern.    The GOP platform suggests the party does not lack for unifying ideas. It coheres around themes that somehow in the 1980s have come to be identified as &quot;conservative&quot; -- limited government, a resolute foreign and defense policy, and values rooted not in government mandate but in families and local communities. The lack of debate at last week's platform hearings suggests how much Ronald Reagan has united Republicans around these ideas. Senator Lowell Weicker, the last Mohican of Republican liberalism, tried to attract the TV cameras with a few amendments on abortion and such, but their support was so thin they were routinely rejected by voice vote.    On economics, the Republican platform institutionalizes a supply-side agenda derided as voodoo just eight years ago. Following George Bush, it would extend tax reduction to capital gains and declares against any tax increase, even the Washington establishment's current favorite, a valueadded tax. On foreign policy, it heralds American leadership and commitment to its allies as a hallmark of freedom, much as John F. Kennedy did. It doesn't flinch even on controversial subjects, supporting military aid for the Contras and &quot;rapid and certain deployment of SDI.&quot;    GOP rifts, such as they are, persist mainly on social issues. The platform's anti-abortion planks rankle many women, but they energize social conservatives. This clash also is cultural: The old-line Republicans of the country clubs find themselves challenged for position and perks by middle-class insurgents mobilized by Pat Robertson. The party is attracting a younger generation of activists, many from middle-class or working-class families, who argue forcefully for integrating conservative principles with broad, populist goals. These emerging forces suggest a growing party, struggling to unite under a bigger tent.    For most of this century, the Democrats have been the party of the Big Tent. But their coalition has foundered in large part because the party's core idea -- that the federal government can both mold a national community and spur economic growth -- has been discredited by painful experience. As their confidence has waned at home, the Democrats' willingness to support U.S. principles abroad also has ebbed, lapsing at its worst into a &quot;blame America first&quot; isolationism. Their ambiguity in Atlanta showed how uncomfortable Democrats are with this message, though they can't decide what should take its place.    The question now is whether the GOP will recognize its intellectual victory and act like a majority party. Traditionally, of course, the GOP has doubted its own convictions and in the last year and a half, its leaders have again showed signs of retreat. Treasury Secretary James Baker's surrender on the trade bill -- even after the primaries discredited it as a political issue -- was a concession to the special interests of Big Business. The catastrophic health bill was both poor politics -- raising taxes on the elderly -- and an expansion of the welfare state. These are decisions of a party that doesn't understand its own accomplishments.    A majority party, on the other hand, would recognize that its principles offered more than simply the maintenance of &quot;peace and prosperity.&quot; It would appeal to black voters not by pandering through &quot;affirmative action&quot; but with an agenda of economic empowerment and individual incentives. It would seek to improve education not with more spending but by breaking a bureaucratic and union monopoly that has strangled parental choice and teacher accountability. It would have the confidence to reject demagoguery about &quot;plant closings&quot; and &quot;mandated benefits&quot; as a threat to jobs and opportunity.    Ronald Reagan the intellectual insurgent has remade the Grand Old Party's message into one that can fairly lay claim to the vote of every American. His successors have the chance to consolidate that victory or squander it. </TEXT></DOC>