<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0030 </DOCNO><HL> REGIONS:Los Angeles Widens Its LeadAs California's Growth Champ---By Eugene CarlsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE GROWTH SURGE that has pushed the Los Angeles metropolitan area past its Northern California rival San Francisco is likely to accelerate between now and the mid-1990s.    Whether measured by increases in population, personal income or retail sales, the growth figures favor L.A.    &quot;The disparity between the health of the two regional economies has sharpened,&quot; says Stephen Levy, senior economist at the Palo Alto-based Center for Continuing Study of the California Economy.    In its annual county economic and population projections, CCSCE lists the large counties where population will grow the fastest between 1986 and 1995. Heading the list are Riverside and San Bernardino, two huge counties that are part Los Angeles suburban tract housing and part Mojave Desert.    Riverside County's 865,000 population will increase almost 50% by 1995, CCSCE says. San Bernardino's 1.1 million residents will increase about 40%. In the next eight years, more than half of California's population growth will occur in the five-county, Los Angeles metropolitan area. Since retail sales and per-capita income follow population growth, it's not surprising to see L.A.-area counties leading these two categories, too.    MUCH OF THE PUSH behind the Los Angeles population boom follows from the fact that this is the area where the overwhelming majority of California's Hispanic and Asian immigrants have settled.These two groups will contribute 75% of the state's population growth between now and 1995.    San Francisco, meanwhile, isn't exactly dogging it. Most areas of the U.S. would kill for a slice of the Bay Area's prosperity. In 1995, CCSCE says, six of the seven most-affluent California counties -- affluence in this case marked by per-capita income -- will be in and around San Francisco. Income in 1995 in Marin County, across the Golden Gate from San Francisco, will average $30,000 per person in today's dollars, 50% above the state average.    Although these figures show the Bay Area hanging on to its affluence, the rest of the state will be closing the gap. In terms of regional growth in personal income to the mid-1990s, San Francisco is at the bottom of CCSCE's list.    San Francisco's buoyant income performance to date reflects a lot of people working. For instance, about 71% of adult women in the Bay Area are employed, compared with 61% nationally. &quot;It is perhaps the highest income area in the nation, and that's how they're doing it,&quot; Mr. Levy says.    But without a lot of people moving into the region, which isn't occurring nearly as fast in San Francisco as in Los Angeles and elsewhere, the rates of increase in jobs and income, two key ingredients of growth, are likely to slow in the Bay Area.    ---   IS COLLEGE FOOTBALL good for business? Do leaves turn red in October? A Pennsylvania State University economist says loyal football fans who traveled to the school's isolated campus in central Pennsylvania last fall to watch seven home games dropped about $21 million into the local economy.    While the Nittany Lions were chewing up the likes of East Carolina and Pittsburgh en route to the college national championship, 54,000 out-of-town fans were spending $8.3 million at the stadium for tickets and hot dogs, $2.7 million at local restaurants, and $2.1 million at motels. Add $800,000 for clothing, and yes, $25,000 for baby-sitter fees. The spending list goes on.    Rodney Erickson, director of Penn State's Center for Regional Business Analysis, limited his survey to fans who traveled more than 25 miles one-way to watch the games. He figures every dollar spent by a football visitor was re-spent once again, for an overall economic impact on the campus community of about $40 million.    ---   IDAHO IS ENJOYING upbeat economic news for a change. Silver and beef prices are on the rise, and the state's growing high-tech industry is benefiting from stronger national microcomputer and semiconductor sales.    Wood products are riding an export surge, according to forecasters in the state's financial-management division. An expected jump in housing starts in Japan, a byproduct of that country's pledge to stimulate its domestic economy, means added overseas lumber shipments. Idaho could also squeeze more forest products into the Midwestern market if a Canadian railway workers strike this summer cuts off lumber and plywood from Western Canada    Since 1980, Idaho and most other Rocky Mountain stateshave barely held their own, a sharp reversal from themid-1970s, when Idaho was one of the nation's fastest-growingstates. Remnants of the slump persist. Fertilizer outputremains in the dumps. The only hope for an increase infederal hiring is a situation no one wants -- a wave ofsummer forest fires. And the state appears to have lostpopulation in 1986 for the first time in more than 20 years.   ---   IOWA BACKSLIDES: First among the states in value of farm exports three years ago, Iowa slipped to second in 1985 and third last year. The reason: Corn and soybeans are the bulk of Iowa's farm exports and these grains haven't fared well in world markets lately. California is now No. 1 on the strength of a diverse export listfruits, vegetables, nuts, rice and cotton.    Texas, victimized by poor cotton prices, slipped below fourth place on the export list for only the second time since 1964. </TEXT></DOC>