<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0022 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Lifts Punitive Tariffs on Some GoodsFrom Japan, but Nakasone Isn't Satisfied---This article was written byWalter S. Mossberg, Ellen HumeAnd Philip Revzin</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP CANDA JAPAN FREST MDEST AFRICMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> VENICE, Italy  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan removed punitive tariffs on some Japanese imports as the economic summit got under way, but Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone said the action wasn't enough.    As expected, Mr. Reagan told Mr. Nakasone that he is removing the tariffs on 17%, or $51 million, of the $300 million of Japanese imports on which the sanctions were imposed in April to retaliate for Japanese dumping of computer chips. The White House said the Japanese are still dumping chips in third countries, but to a lesser degree.    To achieve the reduction, the administration is removing 20-inch color television sets from the list of products covered. All other Japanese products affected by the sanctions, including other sizes of TV sets, power tools and laptop computers, remain subject to the 100% tariffs.    But Prime Minister Nakasone told President Reagan during their bilateral meeting yesterday that all of the sanctions should have been lifted. He noted that while the U.S. complains about Japanese trade practices, it is still running a large budget deficit, according to a senior White House official.    Indeed, the Japanese delegation quickly issued a statement calling for &quot;an early and total lifting&quot; of the remaining sanctions. In the statement, Hajime Tamura, Japan's minister of international trade and industry, was restrained, saying only that &quot;I appreciate to some extent&quot; the U.S. decision.    In their opening dinner last night, the seven leaders met for 3 1/2 hours in an &quot;animated discussion&quot; about East-West relations and arms control, according to White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater. He said the leaders, who met without deputies or note-takers for 90 minutes longer than anticipated, discussed changes under Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and the impact they might have on the West. The leaders &quot;decided that they must wait for deeds not words&quot; before judging Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Fitzwater said.    Canadian officials who briefed reporters after the dinner said that deputies to the seven leaders were expected to work all night drafting language for a joint statement on East-West relations and arms control. They said the leaders were in agreement on arms control. An anticipated discussion on the Persian Gulf was put off, though the leaders touched briefly on the issues of terrorism and South Africa.    Separately, France expressed reservations about the unified allied stance the U.S. has been seeking on Persian Gulf freedom of transit. And West Germany, as expected, rebuffed U.S. calls for additional actions to stimulate its economy. The president held private meetings with West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Italian Prime Minister Amintore Fanfani, as well as with Mr. Nakasone. Britain is the other nation at the meeting.    The partial removal of the sanctions amounts to a political reward to Mr. Nakasone, who has criticized the dumping and whose cabinet recently approved a $43 billion stimulus package intended to boost growth in Japan and thus help improve the market there for U.S. products. The president also tied the move to his general desire to avoid protectionism.    There were, however, no new trade-offs promised by the Japanese for this, a senior White House official said.    Defending the decision under questioning by reporters, the president said, &quot;We have to recognize that there are people in Japan, like Prime Minister Nakasone, who have worked very hard . . . and we think that they ought to be rewarded for their effort.&quot;    Mr. Reagan said the Japanese leader had given assurances that Japanese dumping will be further reduced. The president warned that &quot;if this does not prove to be the case, I will not hesitate to reimpose the partial sanctions.&quot; White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker said the decision was &quot;an incentive&quot; to better Japanese behavior.    But in easing the sanctions, the president defied the urgings of congressional leaders and some of his own political and trade advisers. They felt that Japanese trading practices on chips were still violating the U.S.-Japan semiconductor agreement, and that removing some of the sanctions while Congress is debating a trade bill might inflame protectionism by signaling weakness toward Japan.    In Washington, Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd disparaged the agreement to lift some of the sanctions. &quot;I regret that the president has decided to lift some of the sanctions on the basis of less egregious dumping for a single month,&quot; the West Virginia Democrat said. Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) said he supported the action, saying it was &quot;very limited, and it makes sense. The sanctions were supposed to be an inducement for compliance, and there's nothing wrong with having a carrot as well as a stick.&quot;    The administration was divided about whether to lift any of the sanctions, a senior White House official said. At the Economic Policy Committee meeting last week, Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige expressed the strongest opposition to lifting them, and U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter also opposed such a move. But National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci and Secretary of State George Shultz argued the sanctions shouldn't have been imposed and called for a partial lifting.    The White House offered a complex mathematical justification for the partial easing of sanctions, saying the decision was based on a lessening of Japanese dumping of the most common memory chips, called dynamic random access memory, or D-ram, chips. But the figures disclosed to support the move showed that, even in the case of the D-ram chips, Japanese companies are still dumping chips in third countries, although they are charging on average 85% of fair-market value instead of the 59% when the sanctions were imposed.    In the U.S., the Semiconductor Industry Association applauded the decision, saying in a prepared statement that it hopes the &quot;goodwill gesture will lead to a continuing pattern of compliance by Japan.&quot;    But in Boise, Idaho, Joseph Parkinson, chairman of Micron Technology Inc., the only U.S. chip maker that still specializes in D-ram chips, said recent increases in Japanese chip prices represented &quot;only a two-month blip over a two-year landscape of severe Japanese dumping.&quot; Mr. Parkinson said he thinks the U.S. should wait until the Japanese demonstrate 100% compliance with fair-market values for at least three months before it removes any of the retaliatory sactions.    Separately, White House Chief of Staff Baker hinted at some significant economic developments resulting from the summit, despite expectations that the summit would yield little in the way of concrete results. Neither he nor other U.S. officials would specify what those might be.    Mr. Baker told reporters, &quot;It is, after all, an economic summit. I think there will be important news coming out of this summit.&quot; Aides said later that, despite the statement, there didn't appear to be any specific surprising developments on tap.    On economic issues, it became clearer that neither Japan nor West Germany are ready to take further actions to stimulate their lagging economies. Japanese officials referred to their stimulus package, and German officials said that despite an estimated 1% reduction in gross national product in the first quarter from the prior three months, retail sales in April rose an inflation-adjusted 7% from a year earlier. Bonn government spokesman Friedhelm Ost said that the West German economy has resumed growth and that any fiscal stimulus would risk &quot;reigniting inflation.&quot; He added: &quot;All talk of recession in Germany is wrong.&quot;    The meeting is also expected to move forward on, and perhaps approve, a plan to increase the coordinated monitoring of various economic indicators, including exchange rates.    Canadian officials said that the nations' finance ministers agreed at a dinner to ratify &quot;almost verbatim&quot; a strong statement adopted last month in Paris that called for an end to all nations' agricultural subsidies.    The leaders also will probably agree to a recycling plan for capital surpluses, whereby surplus countries such as Japan would greatly increase contributions to the International Monetary Fund, which in turn would direct the money to the poorest nations, especially those in Africa.    White House Chief of Staff Baker said he hoped that the allies could endorse a &quot;general statement in support of the U.S. position&quot; that &quot;freedom of the high seas, freedom of transit in the Persian Gulf, access to Middle Eastern oil will not be interrupted by another nation.&quot; White House advisers declined to speculate on whether President Reagan would ask the allies for increased military or financial help in the Gulf. But National Security Adviser Carlucci said he hoped that other countries would offer support at the United Nations and possibly assist in diplomatic areas, with possible port visits, &quot;some symbolic presence, assistance in dialogue with some of the Gulf countries.&quot;    A French spokesman said France couldn't respond to U.S. requests for help &quot;because the U.S. administration position itself is still maturing, and it is nearly impossible for us to talk about a U.S. position, or to know what they want us to do about various aspects of the issue. Until we know the questions, we can't give an answer.&quot;    The spokesman added, however, that the French were likely to agree to share information and increase technical help on such matters as the possible reinforcement and positioning of French ships in the gulf and the continuing escort of tankers through the war zone, but would agree to little else. Other countries also displayed little interest in joining the U.S. in either tougher talk or military action against Iran.    French officials said a major part of the leaders' dinner discussion centered on whether the West needs to revise its flexible response strategy, in which nuclear weapons are used to overcome Soviet conventional superiority. According to the French, Mr. Reagan and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher argued that the strategy was sound, while French President Francois Mitterrand pressed for a revision. French officials said Mr. Mitterrand reported that Mr. Reagan assured the others that &quot;Europe remains America's first line of defense.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>