<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870120-0086 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Keeping Secrets</HL><DD> 01/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT FORGNCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The Senate Intelligence Committee report on the Iran/contra affair, published yesterday, raises questions about the administration's compliance with several statutes governing oversight of U.S. covert activities. The administration's actions, the report says, &quot;puts the oversight process at risk&quot; and may &quot;undermine . . . the current basis of congressional authorization of covert action.&quot; These assertions bring us full circle in the contentious debate over the role of covert action in U.S. foreign policy.    Ever since the Church committee investigations of the 1970s, Congress has held that the Central Intelligence Agency, particularly its covert actions, should be subject to close scrutiny. The degree to which this country's ability to conduct necessary covert activities should be balanced against political oversight of those activities is, in theory, a legitimate debate. In practice, however, congressional oversight has never quite lived up to its billing as an objective, bipartisan mechanism. The oversight function has often become just one more weapon in Washington's continuing struggle over the control and content of foreign policy.    The U.S. attempt to mine Nicaragua's harbor at Corinto in 1983 is a case in point.    The mining was a classic example of covert activity -- advancing national-security goals secretly. The Corinto mining had a sensible U.S. security objective -- curtailing the shipment of Soviet-bloc arms to Central America through the communist government of Nicaragua. The existence of the operation leaked out, and once exposed, details flowed freely from Congress. The activity ended. This example is not unique. Opponents of covert activity have discovered that by leaking covert operations into the news, they can create a debilitating aura of suspicion and illegitimacy around foreign policies they dislike.    Put bluntly the question is, does Congress want the U.S. to have a covert-action capability or not? If not, why doesn't it explicitly say so? Why don't the CIA's critics -- such as Sens. Patrick Leahy and David Durenberger of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence -- just write a bill banning covert action?    That was advocated in the 1970s by such groups as the American Civil Liberties Union, but Congress rejected the proposal. Instead, what we have now is the worst possible outcome -- politicized oversight, but a lack of political support to conduct covert operations.    In fairness, Congress isn't totally to blame for the covert-action debacle. Jimmy Carter and his CIA director, Adm. Stansfield Turner, played a big part. During the late 1970s, CIA covert-action agents were fired in droves, foreign agents were abandoned and the CIA's paramilitary operations were dismantled. The pickup team atmosphere around some recent operations suggests the U.S. hasn't recovered from the loss of these specialized skills.    President Reagan set out to revive U.S. covert-action capability. CIA Director William Casey began seeking operatives in foreign lands in the Mideast, Asia, Africa and Latin America important to U.S. security. But this is a daunting enterprise that takes time. The U.S. has had some success in Afghanistan, Angola, El Salvador and, to an extent, Nicaragua. But the U.S. is still short on intelligence capability abroad.    Take the U.S. air strikes on Libya. At that time the U.S. didn't have a single operative on the ground in Libya to help direct the targeting of the aircraft attacks. The Navy and Air Force pilots had to rely solely on reconnaissance from spy aircraft and satellites. High-tech intelligence is useful, but on-the-ground information from human agents is a necessary component of a successful operation.    The U.S. needs to regain its covert-action capabilities. However, intelligence specialists both inside and outside the government don't see how the U.S. can sustain successful covert activities so long as Congress is ambivalent about them.    When addressing this subject in their frequent TV appearances, the members invariably argue that they merely wish to participate in the process so that they can build the necessary public support once the activities become known. But what happens to these consensus-builders in the days after a covert action is leaked and blown? Somehow the most widely quoted Hill members suddenly become the familiar arrogance-of-power crowd.    Before Congress gets too carried away with the oversight needs of the Hughes-Ryan Amendment of 1974 (section 662 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961), it ought to face squarely the question of whether it wants covert activities in any shape or form. Put it to a vote. Stop temporizing. Congress should vote either to pull the CIA out of the covert-activity business, or to pull itself out of the CIA's hair. </TEXT></DOC>