<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880525-0047 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE MOVED to ratify an arms pact as Reagan discussed superpower ties.    Senate leaders agreed that the chamber still has time to approve the U.S.-Soviet treaty banning intermediate-range missiles before Sunday's start of the Moscow summit, and Majority Leader Byrd filed a petition to halt debate. He said work on the accord could be completed by Saturday. Meanwhile, in a speech broadcast to Europe, the president praised Moscow for progress on human rights, but said the situation in the Soviet Union remained &quot;far from good.&quot; Reagan also said U.S. relations with Moscow must be guided by realism.    Shultz said the U.S. would submit verification proposals at the summit to try to resolve an obstacle to a future treaty reducing long-range missiles.    ---   A Soviet official said the Communist Party may limit leaders to two five-year terms, ending the perpetual tenure that permits officials at the local, regional and national levels to build power and privilege. Karl Vayno, Estonia's party chief, didn't indicate that such limits would apply to Gorbachev, who favors restrictions on tenure.    Premier Ryzhkov called for the legalization of profit-making incentives to spur development of urban and rural cooperatives, the new growth area of the Kremlin's economic restructuring. He made his comments during the opening-day session of the Supreme Soviet, the national parliament.    ---   Panama's lawmakers voted to compel Noriega to appear before the assembly by tomorrow and report on talks with the U.S. about ending the country's political crisis. In Washington, a Panamanian opposition leader said the turmoil in Panama would continue if an accord being arranged by the U.S. for Noriega's removal is approved.    ---   NATO defense ministers are expected to debate how to share defense costs in Europe with the U.S. at a meeting in Brussels tomorrow. The alliance is to decide how to finance the transfer of a U.S. fighter wing from Spain, which no longer wants it, to Italy, which does but doesn't wish to bear the costs alone.    ---   Hezbollah fighters assaulted the last stronghold of pro-Iranian militiamen in the Shiite Moslem slums of southern Beirut as more than two weeks of fighting continued. Lebanese police said at least 17 people were killed and as many as 50 wounded in the house-to-house battles.    Three Syrian soldiers were killed and two were wounded when a stray artillery shell hit their post on the edge of the Beirut slums. The incident increases pressure on Syria's army to enter the area and try to quell the factional fighting.    ---   Western diplomats in Pakistan said the pullout of Soviet troops from Afghanistan is being slowed by Moslem guerrillas who are attacking troops still positioned in the eastern part of the country. The reports indicated that Moscow wouldn't meet its deadline of withdrawing 25% of its estimated 115,000 soldiers by the end of the month.    ---   Hungary's new leader said the Budapest government has failed to revitalize the country's economy. Karoly Grosz, named Sunday as general secretary of the Communist Party in place of Janos Kadar, pledged political changes to support the radical economic restructuring he has proposed.    ---   South Korean students battled riot police in Seoul and in the southeastern city of Taegu as violence flared during anti-government rallies to demand the abolition of compulsory military training. The country's main opposition party, led by Kim Dae Jung, blamed U.S. interference in domestic affairs for the recent student unrest.    Seoul is conducting an inquiry into Korea Electric Power Corp. The government is seeking to determine if the state-run company received payments from U.S. contractors in the construction of nuclear plants, the Chosun Ilbo newspaper reported.    --   New Jersey moved to seize control of a local school district that has been failing since 1984 to meet the state's minimum education standards. If the state takes control of Jersey City's schools, it would assume direct responsibility for turning around the troubled district.    ---   A suspected hijacker was captured near an airport at the coastal town of Cartagena, Colombian military authorities said. The man allegedly commandeered a Colombian jet Monday during a flight to Bogota from Medellin, released all but the cockpit crew and ordered the plane flown to Panama, Aruba and then back to Colombia.    ---   The U.S. modified its stance on the seizure of boats found with drugs on board when outside U.S. territorial waters. Such vessels now will be seized only when there is evidence of intent to smuggle drugs into the U.S. Meese said there was &quot;no softening whatsoever&quot; of anti-drug policy.    ---   Reagan named four top aides, including Meese, to represent him on his proposed new bipartisan task force on drug abuse. The panel is to recommend new government initiatives to stem the spread of drugs. The president also urged congressional leaders to quickly appoint representatives.    ---   An explosion ignited a fire at an oil-products tank farm owned by Mexico's Pemex, forcing the evacuation of as many as 100,000 people in the northern city of Chihuahua, the state-owned oil company and the government news agency said. A gas leak reportedly triggered the blast. There weren't any immediate reports of deaths or injuries. </TEXT></DOC>