<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880527-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Plant's Death Could Aid Nuclear Industry --- Shoreham Pact Cost May Avert Other Closings </HL><AUTHOR> Bill Paul, Staf Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LIL PNH </CO><IN> NUK UTI </IN><G> ERG </G><TEXT>   While the death of Long Island Lighting Co.'s Shoreham nuclear-power plant is a black eye for the nuclear-power industry, it may also be a blessing in disguise, nuclear officials, utility analysts and New York political leaders said after Shoreham's demise was announced.    An agreement in principle between Lilco and New York state was announced by state officials in the wee hours of Thursday morning, after an all-night bargaining session. New York Gov. Mario Cuomo had set a midnight deadline. The actual terms of the settlement are still being put on paper, and the final document might not be ready until next week, a state official said. The agreement will have to be ratified in part or whole by Lilco shareholders, the New York Public Service Commission, the New York legislature and the federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Approval is expected.    Shoreham's death marks the first time that a nuclear-power plant didn't go into commercial operation after operating at 5% power under a federal low-power license. It's also only the second time that a substantially completed U.S. nuclear plant didn't go into operation, the first being Cincinnati Gas andamp; Electric Co.'s Zimmer plant. A completed Austrian plant was dismantled recently when public opinion turned against nuclear power in the wake of the Chernobyl accident in the Soviet Union.    Still, the high price Long Island electricity users are going to pay for a plant whose power they'll never use likely will make it more difficult to gain public support for killing off any of the other eight nuclear plants currently under construction, these observers said.    Lilco customers already pay the third-highest electric rates in the U.S., based on 1986 industrywide figures, behind only Consolidated Edison Co. of New York and Philadelphia Electric Co. Under the state-Lilco agreement, Lilco will be guaranteed a 5% annual rate increase for each of the next three years, and probably way beyond that. The utility also will get a healthy 13% return on its equity, including the bulk of its investment in Shoreham.    To be sure, some of Lilco's financial uncertainty remains unresolved. The Hicksville, N.Y., utility still faces a suit brought by the Suffolk County, N.Y., legislature and others charging that it defrauded customers out of more than $2 billion, which the suit claims should be refunded.    Still, Moody's Investors Service Inc. placed Lilco's credit rating under review for possible upgrade because of the settlement. About $3.5 billion of securities could be affected. In addition, Lilco stock surged on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday after opening late because of an influx of buy orders. The stock closed at $11.375 a share, up $1.25 on volume of nearly five million shares.    The high cost of burying Shoreham is expected to give state and local politicians pause before they try to emulate Gov. Cuomo, who killed Shoreham by refusing to let state officials participate in mandatory plant-evacuation drills. Nuclear officials have long worried that even well-operated nuclear plants could be shut by local-government officials who take advantage of this loophole in the law. An emergency evacuation drill must be conducted at every plant at least once every two years.    &quot;Long Islanders are going to pay not only for the cost of Shoreham but also for building the generating facilities that will be needed instead,&quot; said Harold B. Finger, president of the U.S. Council for Energy Awareness, the nuclear industry's Washington lobbying group.    Shoreham's demise isn't expected to prompt any immediate changes in Nuclear Regulatory Commission licensing procedures. But in the long run, it could provide ammunition for joint efforts by the industry and the Reagan administration to ease federal licensing requirements, according to federal energy officials.    U.S. Secretary of Energy John Herrington, for one, expressed strong concern about the decision. &quot;Long Island's residents may very well suffer brownouts through the next several years,&quot; Mr. Herrington said, adding that &quot;large increases in electricity rates are likely&quot; for area businesses and residents.    &quot;No question, we're going to take a big hit in the pocketbook,&quot; said Arthur Kremer, a Democratic New York assemblyman from Long Island. Mr. Kremer, who supports the Lilco-state pact because he sees it as being a less-costly way to kill Shoreham than the proposed public takeover of the utility by a state agency, said Long Island &quot;got the best of a bad deal.&quot;    Wayne Prospect, a Long Island legislator who favored a public takeover, said, &quot;We had a choice of either accepting economic blackmail or rolling the dice on Shoreham.&quot; The state-Lilco pact &quot;puts Lilco in fat city, and we're going to have to pay the bill,&quot; said Mr. Prospect.    Added Daniel Scotto, utility-bond analyst for L.F. Rothschild andamp; Co.: &quot;The Shoreham opponents didn't do Lilco's customers any favor. They're going to pay for this deal -- literally.&quot;    Standing to lose most are residential customers. While many of Lilco's commercial and industrial electricity users will have the option of turning to cogeneration, residential customers won't. Cogeneration is the simultaneous production of electricity and steam heat from a single source, such as natural gas, generally for less cost than the price charged by the local utility. In other parts of the U.S. where cogeneration has caught on, residential customers have been left to pick up a greater percentage of their utility's overall expenses.    New York state officials nevertheless called their deal with Lilco very good for Long Island. A spokesman for Gov. Cuomo's chief Lilco negotiator said the pact has resulted in the &quot;certain&quot; death of Shoreham. Also, he said Long Islanders will be paying less for their electricity than if the Long Island Power Authority, a state-created agency, had pursued its $12-a-share takeover offer for Lilco.    Shoreham's demise isn't expected to affect the other completed-but-still-unlicensed U.S. facility, Public Service Co. of New Hampshire's Seabrook plant.    Like Shoreham, Seabrook has run into a licensing dilemma caused by governmental opposition to emergency evacuation plans. But unlike Shoreham, none of its utility owners' investment in the plant is yet being recouped from customers. Thus, for any deal similar to Lilco's, electricity rates would have to rise a lot more in Massachusetts and New Hampshire than they will on Long Island.    Moreover, said Vincent Palumbo, a Seabrook supporter and Republican majority leader in New Hampshire's House of Representatives, the politics surrounding Seabrook are much different. Although Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis opposes Seabrook, New Hampshire Gov. John Sununu, a Republican, has been a strong supporter. &quot;With New York, there was more or less a confluence of forces -- Lilco and the state -- to not have the plant go on line. That isn't the case' with Seabrook, said Mr. Palumbo, explaining that Seabrook's 11 utility owners still want to get the plant licensed.    ---   Lawrence Ingrassia and Andy Pasztor contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>