<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880316-0179 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: What Gorbachev Can Learn From Yugoslavia's Strikes </HL><AUTHOR> Milovan Djilas </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST LABOR </CO><DATELINE> BELGRADE, Yugoslavia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It is small wonder that Communists long believed --and many of them still do -- that there would be no strikes under socialism since the state itself was a workers' state, governed by a party whose role was to be the avant-garde of the working class. This was particularly admired by leftist intellectuals and by fellow travelers of the Soviet Union and communism. Indeed, decades of Communist rule passed without a hint of strikes. If one did break out, officials ascribed it to &quot;bureaucratic excesses&quot; or &quot;enemy activity.&quot; Even today, in Yugoslavia for example -- where Mikhail Gorbachev is visiting this week to see if he can profit from Belgrade's experience -- there remains, as self-delusion and deceit by the Communists, the phrase &quot;work-stoppage&quot;: A strike according to them is an event only of &quot;capitalism&quot;; we have only an occasional &quot;work-stoppage.&quot;    The reason that there had been no strikes in the past in the socialist bloc is clear, simple and can be hidden no longer: (1) Absolute power has been concentrated in the hands of the party and absolute control in the hands of the secret police; (2) labor unions have been required to be subservient to the state; (3) a non-market, bureaucratic economy has been imposed where all real values, including the value of work, are lost.    But with the weakening of totalitarianism leading to what can be described as internal markets of sorts, strikes in some Communist countries -- notably Poland and Hungary -- soon became a component part of the social scene. Resident ideologists ceased to regard them as &quot;harmful&quot; or as &quot;enemy activity.&quot;    The causes of strikes are uniform throughout Communist countries: Workers must make do with low wages and thus are exploited by management, which often circumvents laws, while unjustified privileges are extorted on behalf of nonworkers. These strikes usually are short-lived. While authorities generally show some understanding for the material demands of workers, they completely disregard any desires to form independent workers' unions. Officially created and recognized unions not only fail to lead strikes, but in fact play the role of strikebreakers.    With the exception of actions by the Polish Solidarity free-trades union, which has been banned by that country and which is also a political movement, strikes in Eastern Europe do not have a political character. Yet, they are not quite nonpolitical. They take place against the wishes of both the authorities and the unions. The right to strike, of course, does not exist in law.    It may be of interest to Mr. Gorbachev that Yugoslovia is not only an example but also a leader in the new phenomenon of strikes, as it is in most other spheres of perturbation in Communist states. With the country in the throes of economic and political crises, strikes in Yugoslavia have multiplied. In the first quarter of this year they have become nationwide.    Official Yugoslav unions say 174 strikes with a total of 11,000 participants took place in 1982. For 1986, they give figures of 696 strikes and 60,000 participants. These were mostly short strikes in smaller enterprises. An alarming phenomenon but one with no lasting or deep effects.    The fateful shift began in the first quarter last year. Details announced were rather contradictory, but there clearly was an abrupt increase. In this short period there were 400 to 600 strikes involving 50,000 to 80,000 strikers. For about a third of these strikers, the immediate cause was the Intervention Law of Feb. 27, 1987. Wages over the entire economy were rolled back to December 1986 levels, and were frozen. During the same months inflation rose 22%, while federal civil servants' salaries were increased 30%. From an economic point of view, the wage freeze might have been regarded as justified by the circumstances. But it appeared to the workers at best as a bad joke and at worst a provocation. Strikes spread so unexpectedly and turbulently that the government was forced to change the Intervention Law drastically only a month after its introduction, even though Belgrade was reiterating ad nauseam that it would not yield &quot;one millimeter.&quot;    The wave of strikes produced even more significant phenomena. The workers showed an ability to organize. Gaining self-confidence, they became obdurate -- openly confronting party and union officials as well as installed managers. Furthermore, the assertive attitudes of the workers produced divisions that deepened with time inside the ruling party -- the League of Communists of Yugoslavia.    The greatest, and in most ways the decisive, role was played by about 1,500 coal miners at the Labin Colliery in Croatia. Their strike lasted 33 days. In spite of promises, pressures and strikebreakers, the miners obtained 50% raises and a change of mine managers.    Class and ideological perturbations are most evident in Croatia, one of the six constituent republics of Yugoslavia, where in fact the party appears to be more oppressive than in lesser-developed Serbia or in the more-developed Slovenia. The party leadership in Croatia, and under its influence the official unions, surprisingly assumed a rather benevolent attitude toward the strikers -- something of a novelty in a socialist state.    Communists in the enterprise affected by strikers became divided and beset by dilemmas. In the Labin mine 235 Communists became strikebreakers. But in the Zagreb food-processing plant, Sljeme, where 1,200 workers struck, the Communists in fact led the strike. The same thing happened in the Belgrade tractor factory Zmaj, where 4,000 strikers were supported by their Communist fellow workers.    The party and state top echelons are grappling with dilemmas and divisions, but these remain hidden from the public. This is not the only issue where decisions are avoided or postponed by the country's leaders. In the general crisis of the economy and in relations with the outside world all the measures that are being taken publically are out of date and stereotyped.    The strike wave and the manifest alienation of the workers from all official organizations have provoked much discussion -- mainly among lawyers and sociologists for the time being -- of the need to legalize the right to strike. The issue is in fact being resisted by party ideologists on the ground that nowhere in the legal system are strikes specifically forbidden, so that &quot;in consequence&quot; there was no need to regulate them in law one way or the other.    The workers of Yugoslavia nevertheless have achieved in practice the right to strike -- but not yet the right to establish their own, independent, unions.    Pressures, as Mr. Gorbachev is bound to notice, remain. The strike wave may calm down somewhat, but only for a time. It will renew its momentum with greater force and with more organization. There is no prospect of halting further rises in the cost of living, as the winter of 1987-88 is showing clearly. Why should the workers halt in freeing themselves of unelected leaders and imposed illusions?    ---   Mr. Djilas is a Yugoslav writer who has spent nine years in prison for his critical views of Tito's communism. </TEXT></DOC>