<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881007-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   PINOCHET ACCEPTED defeat but ruled out relinquishing power early.    After losing a plebiscite Wednesday on extending his presidency, the general told Chileans in a televised speech that he respected &quot;the verdict of the majority.&quot; Pinochet also firmly rejected any change in the military's political timetable. Opposition leaders have called for the 72-year-old general to leave office quickly, but the constitution written by the junta gives him until December 1989 to call elections. Just 43% of Chileans voted for Pinochet, who ousted democratically elected Marxist President Allende in 1973.    Chile's 16-party opposition coalition vowed to pursue national unity and said it would seek talks with the armed forces on a return to democracy.    ---   Communist Party leaders resigned from the Politburo that ruled Yugoslavia's Vojvodie province after 100,000 protesters demanded they quit. The demonstrators support Serbian demands for greater control of the autonomous province. The resignations may prompt leadership changes in the national party and the six republics.    ---   The Justice Department extended antidiscrimination laws to people infected with the AIDS virus. Reversing itself, the department said fear of contagion by itself doesn't justify bias by U.S. agencies or U.S.-assisted employers. Its earlier opinion was criticized by public-health officials and civil rights and gay groups.    ---   The Pentagon slashed its estimate of costs for the first phase of Reagan's space-based anti-missile system to $69 billion from $115 billion. A Defense Department review panel approved a restucturing of the first phase. The reduction follows a compromise reached by congressional leaders and the Pentagon last fall.    ---   As Bush strategists tried to put the vice-presidential debate behind them, Dukakis focused on GOP candidate Quayle's performance and extolled Bentsen, who was campaigning with him, as &quot;the star of the show.&quot; Reagan criticized Bentsen's remark that his opponent was &quot;no Jack Kennedy&quot; as &quot;a cheap shot.&quot;    ---   Algeria proclaimed a state of emergency as police fought demonstrators in Algiers protesting price rises under an economic restructuring plan. The army opened fire to disperse stone-throwing youths, and apparently several people were wounded. Several government buildings have been destroyed by fire during the three days of protests.    ---   Poland has ruled out any possibility of recognizing the Solidarity union as a result of talks later this month, according to a Communist Party document sent to the nation's leaders. The document, which calls the union the main danger facing the party, appeared aimed at reassuring officials.    ---   An Energy Department report shows the test that led to the closing of one of the four U.S. reactors producing nuclear-arms materials has yet to be performed on the other three. The fourth reactor at Savannah River, S.C., was closed because of cracking, and the agency is under congressional order to test the others.    ---   A U.S. appeals court cleared the way for the government to sell oil and gas leases involving millions of acres of Alaska's environmentally sensitive Bristol Bay. It agreed that the Interior Department hadn't violated environmental law in preparing the sale. Officials said bids will be opened in Anchorage Tuesday.    ---   British and U.S. scientists developed a new method to detect Down's syndrome, the major cause of severe mental retardation in the industrialized world. They say the technique could detect more than 60% of the pregnancies affected by the birth defect, about twice the proportion discovered by current methods.    ---   A New York grand jury concluded that Tawana Brawley concocted her story of abduction and rape by a white gang last November. Its report said there was no evidence that a crime had been committed. The black teen-ager refused to cooperate with the seven-month inquiry and accused officials of a racially motivated cover-up.    ---   The EPA has failed to act against Safe Drinking Water Act violations by local systems, the National Wildlife Federation said. The group based its charges on a study of EPA computer printouts for fiscal 1987 that showed 101,588 violations. While the 1974 law requires that each violation be reported to customers, only 5,867 notices were issued.    ---   The House joined the Senate in approving legislation to combat medical-waste dumping. The bill, approved 390-28, requires the EPA to set up a system to track infectious or dangerous trash from hospitals, labs and clinics to disposal sites. Congress acted after publicity about used syringes and blood vials washing up on beaches last summer.    ---   Pope John Paul II is expected to promote his vision of a united, Christian Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals during a four-day visit to eastern France that starts tomorrow. The pope will go to Strasbourg, where he will address the Council of Europe and the European Parliament. The trip will be his 40th foreign tour and his fourth to France. </TEXT></DOC>