<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880506-0176 </DOCNO><HL> Efficient Market Theory Lives! </HL><AUTHOR> Susan Lee </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR </IN><TEXT>      What distinguishes journalism from mere reporting is the search for Deeper Meaning. And, since few events are immune from this search, it's hardly a surprise that the Oct. 19 stock-market crash has attracted all sorts of Deeper Meaningfulness. What is rather surprising, however, is how far from the mark most of these commentaries are. Consider this portentous offering in the April 18 issue of Business Week:   &quot;The October 19 cataclysm marks the failure of the most pervasive belief in economics today: an unquestioning faith in the wisdom of markets. . . . The intellectual core of the free-market paradigm was the efficient market theory (EMT). . . . Then came Bloody Monday. The EMT can't explain it.&quot; Similar pronouncements have appeared in The Wall Street Journal, London's Financial Times and elsewhere.    Actually, of course, Adam Smith had never heard of the Efficient Market Theory and many true capitalists on Wall Street bitterly oppose it. Indeed, you don't have to swear fealty to this rather abstruse view of how financial markets work to believe that the U.S. Postal Service is never going to outperform Federal Express.    But in any case, much of this Deeper Meaning interpretation about the failure of the EMT proceeds from a misunderstanding of what, exactly, the EMT is.    So, what is it? A perfectly efficient market is one where the price of every security equals its investment value at all times. (For the financially literate, that means that the market price of a stock equals the present value of its future prospects.) This perfection is achieved when all investors have access to all currently available information about the future, all are good analysts, all follow market prices and all adjust their stock positions accordingly. In short, a perfectly efficient market is one where an amazing amount of information is fully and immediately reflected in prices.    Great, but pie-in-the-skyish. You know, for example, that your brother-in-law wouldn't recognize a piece of information if it flew up his nose. Thus, as a concession to a world made up of brothers-in-law and brokers, the EMT comes in three flavors: the &quot;strong&quot; form that argues that all current information, public and private, is reflected in stock prices; the &quot;semi-strong&quot; form that says that only publicly available info is; and the &quot;weak&quot; form which restricts what is known to the basic trade-off between return and risk reflected in prices of securities. Financial economists -- particularly those who have brothers-in-law -- don't believe in the strong form.    It's fairly easy to make a case that what happened in October supports the weak form of EMT. What happened was simple. There was a sudden wave of new information, all of it bad, and all of it threatening to swamp U.S. corporate earnings. Stock prices responded -- just like they're supposed to -- by collapsing. One finance academic called this process &quot;a massive reformation of investor expectations.&quot; Indeed, even before the washout on Monday, Oct. 19, the market was busily digesting the news and reflecting these reforming expectations.    Directly before the Crash, late Tuesday on Oct. 13, the Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee agreed to tax changes that would make corporate takeovers less attractive. Eeeek! Corporate takeovers had been the mighty engine pushing up the market: News of a takeover, or rumors of one, enhance not only the future prospects of the target company, but (and more immediately) the price of the stock as well. Even if only for the short term.    So that was bad news. But worse, early Wednesday morning on Oct. 14, the trade figures for August were announced and -- eeek! -- the deficit was larger than expected. That not only depressed the dollar but goosed up interest rates: Treasury-bond yields pierced the psychologically sensitive 10% barrier. Little wonder this information drove the Dow down 95 points by the close of trading Wednesday.    Even worser, consider what happened on Thursday, Oct. 15. Not only did Chemical Bank raise its prime lending rate, but Treasury Secretary James Baker threw a tantrum over West Germany's monetary policy. Specifically, Mr. Baker suggested that he might go Germany one better in dumping on the dollar. His hint that the U.S. would not defend the dollar against the depressing impact of Bonn's events seemed to confirm fears that Wednesday's higher interest rates were not a random blip on the inflation screen. Result? The Dow slid another 57 points more.    On Friday, Oct. 16, more of the same. Reports of an Iranian attack on a U.S.flagged oil tanker didn't help any. Pessimism spread as the news spread, and the Dow dived 108 points.    Over the weekend, the news got even grimmer. Mr. Baker continued to publicly threaten the Germans -- double -- eek! In fact, it was reported that he was ready to let the dollar drop even more. Indeed, it had gotten to the point where brothers-inlaw all over the world realized that the dollar might keep falling. That, of course, would push up U.S. interest rates and inflation, and render corporate earnings -- politely put -- weak. Who would want to hold stocks in this kind of environment?    Indeed, by Monday morning, Oct. 19, the bad news was zipping around the world, communicated by falling stock prices, which, in turn, constituted its own bad news. (Actually, foreign investors who had the most to lose from a falling dollar had started the dumping action Sunday night.) It's no stretch at all to say that what happened on Black Monday was the utterly predictable result of the fact that information flows have become so good, so instantaneous. Unfortunately, but just as predictably, the group of investors seeking to respond to all this distressing information and adjust their portfolio holdings accordingly -- that is, dump their stocks -- became so large that they swamped the trading technology. Resulting illiquidity made an orderly retreat from the market impossible.    After October, of course, the tenor of information changed again. The news was surprisingly good. Interest rates subsided, inflation anxieties were quelled, the dollar remained fairly stable, unemployment continued to behave and takeover activity resumed. Consumer spending remained steady and GNP figures weren't too bad. Thus -- no hocus-pocus about it -- corporate earnings seemed likely to be strong. And, of course, lower stock prices meant investors could purchase these improved, future prospects &quot;cheap.&quot; Investors seeking to adjust their portfolio holdings accordingly -- that is, buy stocks -- lifted the Dow some 200 points back from its October low.    As with all academic debate, needless to say, there's an element of game-playing. Critics can complain that it's easy to discover reasons for events after the fact and ultimately impossible to prove how much effect these factors, or any others, really had.    But other aspects of EMT should not be forgotten. EMTers maintain that stock prices do fluctuate around the underlying market valuation. That much (or all?) of a 500-point down move could be called a &quot;fluctuation&quot; is a disturbing thought. But there's nothing in EMT to preclude it.    The proof of the EMT is in the eating, or, more precisely, in the investing. If markets are efficient, and any price movements left over are random and hence unpredictable, equity investors will not in the long run be able to beat a strategy of buying and holding a diversified portfolio of stocks. They just won't be able to find information that is not already reflected in prices. They may luck out, and beat the market in the short run, but eventually they will regress to the mean.    The evidence is very powerful that this is exactly what happens. For example, Forbes columnist Mark Hulbert, proprietor of a Washington-based monitoring service, reports that only a dozen or so of the 100 investment-newsletter portfolios he has monitored since 1980 have been able to beat the market -- and not by much. Big institutional investors do about as well. There has been no decisive change in performance since the Crash.    The market isn't perfectly efficient. Some advisers did beat it. Many of them exploited one or another of the marginal &quot;anomalies&quot; that researchers have known and puzzled about for years, such as the slight tendency of stocks with low &quot;price-earnings ratios&quot; (the market price of the stock relative to the company's profits per share) to go up more than average.    But as dramatic as the Crash was -- and it was -- it did not deck the Efficient Market Theory as properly understood, or lay bare the ruins of capitalism. Deeper meanings to the contrary, look no further than the old Wall Street saying: When the market wants to go down, it does.    ---   Ms. Lee is a senior editor at Forbes. Her &quot;ABZ's of Money and Finance&quot; is due out next month from Poseidon. </TEXT></DOC>