<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870527-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:French Irons in the Persian Gulf Fire---By Kenneth R. Timmerman</HL><DD> 05/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP MDEST FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Iraq's recent mistaken attack on the U.S. guided-missile frigate USS Stark in the Persian Gulf was carried out by French-trained Iraqi pilots flying French-built Mirage fighters, which fired French-built Exocet missiles.    Iraqi President Saddam Hussein quickly offered public apologies to the U.S., and promised a joint inquiry. But beyond a discreet letter of condolences, France remained curiously silent. Foreign Minister Jean-Bernard Raimond merely said that the attack showed how important it is to end &quot;this absurd war.&quot;    He also said that France was only &quot;a partial supplier&quot; of weapons to Iraq, since Iraq relied on Soviet arms deliveries &quot;for 95%&quot; of all its arms needs. But he didn't say that France has been fiercely competing with Russia in the Iraqi market for over a decade, and if French arms sales to Iraq have fallen momentarily behind that of the Soviets, it is only because the Soviets offer better credit terms.    In fact, between 1977 and 1985 France sold more than $11.8 billion worth of high-technology weapons to Iraq, making Iraq the top importer of French arms. The French delivered at least 113 specially developed Mirage F-1 fighters, capable of launching the Exocet missile; they shipped so many Exocets that Iraq accounted for three-quarters of the total French Exocet production, and sent amphibious tanks, high-tech radars, helicopters, Roland air defense units, and self-propelled howitzers. They trained the Iraqis on all French air-to-air and air-to-surface missiles, including the brand-new AS-30L laser-guided missile, which has such an advanced sensitive technology that the U.S. has bought it.    And these are only the public deliveries. Neither the manufacturers nor the government announced the follow-on contracts or the &quot;replacement of war losses,&quot; a veritable sinkhole believed by experts to disguise billions more of French weapons sales, including more Mirage fighters.    By 1983, the French were selling more weapons to Iraq in dollar terms than the Soviets were. And France remained Iraq's main arms supplier until March 1986, when the Soviets offered Iraq some $3 billion worth of military equipment at highly favorable long-term credit.    In the early months of 1985, however, French arms dealers in Baghdad were confident the winds would continue to blow in their favor. They were expecting the announcement any day of a $3 billion deal for 60 Mirage 2000 fighters, which would have meant the cream of the Iraqi air force would be &quot;flying French&quot; -- and not Soviet -- well into the 21st century. Plus, they were expecting another $3 billion in helicopters and radar contracts.    Three days before the Defense Ministry official supervising French arms exports, Gen. Rene Audran, was due in Baghdad to announce his decision, he was shot outside his home near Paris. Experts in three French intelligence services still believe that Iran ordered the killing through contacts with the Red Army Fractions in West Germany. Only weeks earlier, the RAF had merged with Action Directe, the French terrorist group that claimed responsibility for the killing. When the French police raided an Action Directe hideout earlier this year, they found innumerable documents proving close ties between the two groups.    Gen. Audran's murder was not the only reason the Mirage 2000 deal was canceled. A mounting hostage crisis in Lebanon made public mention of arms sales to Iraq such a sensitive subject that the French government asked major newspapers including Le Monde to withhold or at least delay publishing articles that might &quot;aggravate&quot; the situation.    Gen. Audran is also believed to have gone to Tehran three times during 1984, to try to set up French arms sales to Iran. French journalist Charles Villeneuve, whose recent book &quot;Les Juges de l'Impossible: L'Histoire Secrete du Terrorisme&quot; details the Audran case, believes that Iran took hostages in Lebanon, backed European terrorist movements, and may have even killed Gen. Audran, to get France to reduce its arms sales to Iraq and to begin selling the same arms to Iran.    Other, less spectacular deals between France and Iraq have been signed since the Audran assassination, although not on such a large scale. Pressure from Iran, anxiety over Iraq's ability to pay its debt, and the fear that French arms sales might have become too &quot;customer oriented&quot; all contributed to decreasing the volume of French arms sales to Iraq.    However, French military support to Iraq remains massive. An entire military airport in central France is devoted to a daily airlift of military supplies to Iraq, loaded onto Soviet-built Antonov 22 military cargo planes. As one French intelligence analyst says, &quot;If we cut off our deliveries for a mere three weeks, Iraq would collapse.&quot; After Russia, which is also supplying both sides, France is the second-largest arms supplier fanning the flames of the Gulf War.    If the public line is to downplay French involvement in Iraq, top French officials adopt a different position in private. The attack on the USS Stark was an unfortunate accident, they say, but look at the alternative: If France cut off its arms sales to Iraq, or even diminished them, Iraq would have no choice but to throw itself into the Soviets' arms.    It is certainly true that the French military presence in Iraq has greatly helped Iraq to throw off the yoke of Soviet domination. From the more than 8,000 Soviet advisers supervising all aspects of Iraqi military activity in the late 1970s, Western diplomats in Baghdad say there are only a few hundred Soviet technicians in Iraq today. As its contacts with the West grow, Iraq has markedly toned down its anti-Israeli rhetoric as well, and has recently adopted a more pragmatic approach to the Arab-Israeli conflict.    Arms-trade experts even hint that the Iraqis purchased small amounts of Israeli military electronics last year. And U.S. diplomats believe Iraq would be willing to take part in international peace talks, if convened by the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, that could lead to direct talks with Israel.    The French play a valuable -- and generally positive -- role in the Middle East. In countries such as Iraq, they can serve as a bridge to the West, and as an alternative to superpower domination.    This would also appear to be the objective behind France's intensive backdoor negotiations with Iran, which include covert shipments by major French arms makers to Iran and a renewal of Franco-Iranian nuclear cooperation, interrupted by the shah's fall in 1979. The French are hoping, by walking the tightrope between Baghdad and Tehran, to eventually win a hefty share of the Iranian arms market.    What is disturbing, however, is the suspicion of French duplicity. So as not to anger Iran, the French claim they are only a &quot;partial&quot; arms supplier of Iraq. So as not to anger Iraq, the French call for an end to the &quot;absurd war.&quot; In both cases, purely mercantile interests have come to dictate French policy. This makes for a two-faced policy, specially tailored for specific audiences -- a far cry from the clarity of principle to which great powers should aspire.    ---   Mr. Timmerman, associate editor of the Washington-based Journal of Defense and Diplomacy, recently completed a study on arms sales to Iraq and Iran. </TEXT></DOC>