<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861212-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Europe's Jobless Owe It to the 'Ins'---By Marie-Josee Drouin</HL><DD> 12/12/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><TEXT>   France has just been through a wrenching series of protests whose student leaders said they were concerned about future jobs. Indeed, Western Europe's job-creation record is dismal. Even the West German &quot;locomotive&quot; has had to contend with stagnant employment for over a decade.    In fact, under the guise of social justice, what most West European countries have done is create a two-tier economy that grants extensive protection to employed workers and punishes new entrants into the labor market, notably young men and young women. If you are &quot;in,&quot; job security and generous payroll benefits provide almost fail-safe protection. But they also weaken pressures to adjust wages and enhance job flexibility. If you are &quot;out,&quot; looking for work, the system is a prescription for long-term unemployment.    During most of the 1970s this bias toward employed workers was hidden by unemployment rates that seemed to be sharply lower than in the U.S. In West Germany, for example, for a number of years unemployment rates remained well below U.S. rates. But what many failed to notice was that total employment was also declining. Prime-age male participation rates were falling, the foreign labor force was being cut drastically and female participation rates were increasing only slowly. West Germany was holding down unemployment not because the country was creating jobs, but because it was limiting the supply of labor. Even now much of the policy debate in West Germany continues to revolve around ways to deal with the supply of labor -- a reduced workweek, early retirement, time sharing, etc. -- rather than around mechanisms that might stimulate job creation.    Another indication of the policy bias favoring employed vs. unemployed workers is the failure of high, persistent and rising unemployment to trigger a sustained drop in wages. In this instance, the British case is probably the most perplexing. Despite double-digit unemployment, real per-capita earnings in the United Kingdom increased by roughly 3% between 1983 and 1985. In the first quarter of 1985, British labor costs jumped 6%.    Throughout the Common Market, stringent legislation regarding dismissals has reduced the need for workers to accept lower wages. Confident of not losing their jobs, employed workers tend to disregard the effects high wages have on the demand for labor, and, consequently, on the unemployed. For example, an International Monetary Fund estimate suggests that in 1978, private-sector employment would have been higher by 5.3% in the U.S., 17.4% in France and 23.2% in West Germany if relative 1964 factor prices had been maintained. Labor costs are the key culprit. Only recently has the growth of real wages per person begun to decelerate. But Europe's adjustment has been nowhere near the U.S. decline.    Rigid dismissals legislation has transformed labor costs into fixed costs. The ensuing inflexibility increases overall business costs and risks. Again most countries, notably France, are introducing measures to facilitate hiring and firing. Most countries are allowing increased use of fixed-term contracts. Italy is relaxing recruitment regulations. But, generally, layoffs continue to require discretionary decisions by governments and lengthy negotiations. The cost of dismissal remains steep.    The alternative has been to substitute capital for labor. The combination of the rising relative cost of labor, rigid labor laws and investment subsidies have made investment in labor-saving equipment much more attractive than investment in people. But capital deepening has encountered diminishing returns that have contributed to a decline in the rate of return to capital. In 1984, the net rate of return on invested capital averaged 4.2% in Common Market countries, compared with 11% in the 1960s. Ultimately this has led to an investment slowdown.    Yet throughout most of 1985, Common Market economies operated on average at 82% capacity. In West Germany, by the middle of 1985, capacity utilization rates were just one percentage point below their 1980 peak.    To increase their growth potential, West European countries must generate considerably more investment in new capacity, new products and innovations rather than labor-saving investment. Now world-wide demand slowdown is exacerbating investment problems.    On a sectoral basis, the problem is quite compelling. In strong-demand sectors (automated office equipment, information technology, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, etc.), investment in Western Europe has been more or less flat for the past 10 years. In fact, the gap between the annual average growth in real gross fixed capital formation in these strong-demand sectors in the Common Market and the U.S. was 6.6% from 1973 to 1982. The gap was 6% between the Common Market and Japan.    Not surprisingly, over the same period, while wage differentials between sectors were increasing in the U.S. and Japan, they were narrowing in Western Europe and therefore failing to direct workers from declining industries to those with greater growth potential. Naturally, pressures mounted for increasing protection to these declining sectors since stronger sectors were unable to absorb the unemployed. And the focus of attention was increasingly directed toward job preservation or job sharing rather than job creating. Again as always the &quot;ins&quot; were better able to protect themselves than the &quot;outs.&quot;    But the &quot;outs&quot; have been unemployed for longer and longer periods. On average through the Common Market, long-term unemployment -- defined as having been unemployed more than one year -- represented more than 38% of unemployment last year, compared with 28% in 1979. Last year, long-term unemployment represented 12% of total unemployment in the U.S. The longer someone is out of a job, the more his skills and work habits tend to deteriorate and the more discouraged he is likely to become. As job-searching becomes less intense, the downward pressure unemployment exerts on wages weakens. This is especially true when employed workers enjoy almost total job security.    Ironically, the overly protective and rigid labor structure created by West European governments to preserve a harmonious social contract is now undermining the objectives of social justice, stability and equality it was intended to defend.    Tremendous pressures are being exerted on Western European economies, especially on West Germany, to stimulate demand, but this should not divert attention from the need for continued structural change and correction of deeply rooted distortion and impediments to growth.    ---   Ms. Drouin is executive director of the Hudson Institute of Canada, a private policy research organization in Montreal. </TEXT></DOC>