<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880915-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Hurricane Gilbert Hits Financial Markets As U.S. Gulf Coast Prepares for It to Strike ---- A Wall Street Journal News Roundup </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM AVDL RD SC DI CHV HOU CCL </CO><IN> CMD PET INS STK LNG MIN SCR </IN><TEXT>   Hurricane Gilbert swept through the financial, commodity and insurance markets yesterday, taking a heavy toll even though it remained at least a day from possible landfall along the U.S. Gulf Coast.    Analysts predicted that if it hit the U.S., Gilbert could inflict insurance losses totaling $2 billion to $4 billion. Quickly, a wave of selling hit insurance stocks. &quot;This hurricane will clean some clocks,&quot; said Myron Picoult, an analyst with Oppenheimer andamp; Co.    Also yesterday, futures prices for crude oil and gasoline surged as major oil companies evacuated offshore oil platforms, shuttered above-ground pipelines and studied whether to close as much as one-third of the nation's refining capacity. The price of aluminum ingot also soared in the wake of the devastation in Jamaica, where Aluminum Co. of America and others mine bauxite, the raw ingredient of aluminum. Jamaican officials said the local economy had been set back by years.    The destination of the worst hurricane ever measured remained unpredictable, but its most direct path pointed toward the South Texas coast near Mexico. As it slipped into the Gulf of Mexico, Gilbert caused consumers to pick grocery shelves clean and set into motion thousands of corporate disaster plans. &quot;For major companies, this is definitely not business as usual,&quot; said Joseph Gay of Abraxas Associates Inc., a Houston consulting firm that formulates telecommunications disaster plans.    Indeed, even among the heartiest veterans of Gulf Coast weather, Gilbert aroused a deep sense of forboding. A disaster-planning official in Houston said that in the event of a direct strike to the nation's fourth-largest city, &quot;the death toll could be very, very high.&quot;    Compared even with the destructive hurricanes of recent years, &quot;there's a much greater fear factor being generated by this storm,&quot; said Dave West, a portable-generator salesman in Houston. Mr. West sold a record 200 portable electrical generators yesterday, but he wasn't celebrating. &quot;A generator is not much good if you don't have a roof over your head,&quot; he explained.    Although no profiteering was in evidence, some businesses openly capitalized on the storm. Randall's, a leading grocery chain in Houston, ran &quot;Hurricane Alert!&quot; advertisements. An enterprising copier salesman for Minolta Corp., Scott Ferree, passed out colorful copies of hurricane maps on his sales calls. &quot;It's a way to show the quality of our copiers,&quot; he said.    Wall Street, too, traded on the news. Early in the session, Herbert Goodfriend of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. told Dow Jones Professional Investors Report that Gilbert could cause as much as $3 billion in damage, after which insurance stocks fell sharply. Among those hardest hit were Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co., Hartford, which fell $1.75 to $50.25.    &quot;A lot depends on where it hits and whether it will reintensify in the Gulf -- but this is a big sucker, and a lot of money will be paid out in the Continental U.S.,&quot; said Oppenheimer's Mr. Picoult. State Farm Life Insurance Co., a mutual insurer based in Bloomington, Ill., collected 23% of all home-insurance premiums paid in Texas last year. &quot;You could say we have a pretty good sized exposure in Texas,&quot; a spokesman noted.    Some analysts warned that insurers' reserves may be too thin to absorb easily the potential claims. But analyst Gloria Vogel of Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. pointed out that most underwriters reinsure as much as 50% of these risks, and added that most companies have adequate reserves.    Analysts also say insurers may well use Gilbert as an opportunity to increase long-depressed premiums. In the meantime, major underwriters began booking hotel space, dispatching staffers and deploying computers to the Gulf Coast to brace for an onslaught of claims. &quot;It's a big logistical process,&quot; the State Farm spokesman said.    The oil industry also coped with logistics, airlifting as many as 8,000 workers from the Gulf of Mexico. For the helicopter companies involved, Gilbert was a blessing and a curse. &quot;Yes, we log a lot of flight time,&quot; said John La Plante, treasurer of Petroleum Helicopters Inc., Lafayette, La. But so long as the storm idles drilling rigs and production platforms, he said, &quot;we're doing nothing.&quot;    Air Logistics of New Iberia, La., will move not only all of its helicopters from the coast but also its critical data and flying manuals. Similarly, Avondale Industries Inc. began moving U.S. Naval vessels under construction at its New Orleans shipyard up the Mississippi River.    The personnel evacuation from the Gulf halted an estimated 900,000 barrels a day of oil production out of total U.S. production of less than 8.2 million barrels a day; Chevron Corp. was among the biggest producers waylaid in the Gulf. Oil-service companies also hunkered down; Dresser Industries Inc. estimated that the inactivity in the oil-producing region will cost it alone $1 million of revenue a day.    The hiatus is costly in other respects. Spouses inundated oil companies with phone calls seeking the whereabouts of loved ones, while inland hotels were quickly filling with offshore workers who were idle on company time. &quot;The beer costs alone will be astronomical,&quot; one industry official quipped.    As the production ground down in the Gulf, Shell Oil Co., in turn, closed a pipeline that carries one million barrels of oil a day to the upper Midwest. Meanwhile, Shell and other Gulf Coast refiners generally reached the halfway point to complete shutdowns in their stage-by-stage disaster plans. As a consequence, the price of gasoline on U.S. futures markets soared by more than three cents a gallon.    While the domestic aluminum industry tried, with little luck, to assess damage to operations in Jamaica, commodity traders weren't waiting for any definitive reports, pushing the price of aluminum sharply higher on the London Metals Exchange. &quot;We've heard the rooftops have been blown off refineries,&quot; said Ben Hanauer, a trader at Rudolf Wolff andamp; Co. in New York. &quot;Whether this information is correct or not, I can't tell you. But it's moving the markets.&quot;    Alumina, which is extracted from bauxite to make aluminum, lately has been in particularly tight supply; extensive damage to alumina refineries could drive up metal prices sharply.    Gilbert's landfall near Houston or New Orleans would also be costly for utilities, which are already deploying masses of troops. The 10,000 members of the &quot;storm trooper&quot; contingent at Houston Lighting andamp; Power Co., a unit of Houston Industries Inc., began readying replacement poles and transformers and spools of wire. The utility's huge South Texas Project, a two-unit nuclear plant, has only recently gone into commercial operation -- a mere 13 miles from the coast. But it was built to withstand winds of 370 miles an hour, a utility spokesman said.    Many other companies have avoided getting hurt. Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. said its cruise ship that sails in the western Caribbean happened to be in drydock.    Royal Caribbean Cruise Line Inc. may resume making stops in Jamaica next week. Norwegian Cruise Line, a unit of Kloster Cruise Ltd., said its cruise through the western Caribbean will instead voyage through the eastern Caribbean for the next few weeks.    And for some companies, the added costs of the storm is a burden worth carrying. The Weather Channel, a cable television network owned by Landmark Communications Inc., suffers from sharply higher personnel and programming costs, yet obtains scant additional commercial revenue during a hurricane. But its ratings have been known to increase fivefold, which helps in the long run.    &quot;This kind of condition really improves credibility and sellability,&quot; said a spokesman, &quot;at a trade level and to the consumer.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>