<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870710-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Why Delaware Is Wary of Anti-Takeover Law---By Lewis S. Black Jr.</HL><DD> 07/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Since the U.S. Supreme Court in April upheld an Indiana anti-takeover law that two lower courts had thrown out, four other states have pushed to more than 20 the number of these statutes across the nation.    These are &quot;second-generation&quot; laws, so called because they are written to get around a 1982 Supreme Court decision striking down an Illinois tender-offer law and, effectively, the 37 other such statutes in force at that time.    With the upholding of the Indiana legislation, attention focused on Delaware. More than half of the Fortune 500 companies and more than 40% of New York Stock Exchange companies are incorporated there. The Corporation Law Section of the Delaware Bar, which has responsibility for drafting amendments to the Delaware law, was asked to fashion an Indiana-type statute before the Legislature adjourned in June.    However, after 1 1/2 months of intensive study, the bar committee decided not to recommend such a law. Did the train leave without Delaware? Did the chief incorporating state miss a golden opportunity to reclaim a role for the states in takeovers?    Although Delaware prides itself on being a leader in corporation law, it has always been wary of laws regulating tender offers. For one thing, such laws have never fit well in corporation statutes. For another, they don't work. Efforts to regulate tender offers at the federal level under the Williams Act have distorted the process. Since the Williams Act was enacted in 1968, the Securities and Exchange Commission (and the states, through such acts as the now-validated Indiana law) has played an endless game of catch up, adopting rules that seem to fix one problem only to give rise to another.    Even with this background, many members of the Delaware Corporation Law Section initially favored adoption of an Indiana-type statute. The Supreme Court majority had said that the statute was good for stockholders. Moreover, the Indiana act, like other second-generation state tender-offer laws, does not prohibit or even regulate tender offers. Its principal impact is to give stockholders the right to decide whether &quot;control shares&quot; acquired by a bidder will have voting rights. Hence, it seemed less intrusive than statutes adopted in such states as New York and Ohio that are generally regarded as posing greater deterrents to potential offerors.    But as the Delaware committee worked on, the initial support evaporated. The group uncovered a number of problems as it tried to forecast how the statute would work in practice. Moreover, its own misgivings were echoed by practicing lawyers inside and outside of Delaware, as well as corporate counsel and members of the academic community who reviewed drafts of the statute. Indeed, the bar committee was surprised at the large number of corporations that urged caution.    The committee finally concluded unanimously to hold off on action for several reasons:    It seriously questioned whether the Indiana statute would even do what it is intended to do. The statute's principal deterrent to hostile offers is the requirement of a shareholder vote in 50 days on whether control shares will have voting rights. Since it is likely that tender offers would be conditioned on a favorable vote, this would, indeed, lengthen the duration of tender offers to 50 calendar days from the 20 business days required under the Williams Act.    But wouldn't the result be a stockholder plebiscite on every offer, and wouldn't the stockholder vote always favor the bidder or any new bidder that offered a greater premium? It did not seem to the committee to matter that the Indiana law precluded the bidder (as well as management) from voting. It seemed likely that institutions would vote for a short-term profit. So would arbitragers who could acquire shares before the record date for the stockholders meeting or purchase shares with proxies attached.    It is argued that 50 days would give a target management more time to take defensive action or to find a white knight. But it is unclear that courts would permit defensive action during the proxy solicitation mandated by the statute. Courts might well prohibit either side from taking any action to prejudice a fair vote, including adoption of shareholder-rights plans, sales of stock, corporate restructurings and other devices used to defend against unwanted takeovers. And, since every control-share acquisition would now involve a proxy contest, it was not clear what the position of the SEC would be on action by either side that might affect the vote or require changes in proxy materials.    The Delaware committee was also skeptical of the claim that the mere existence of a 50-day wait would deter tender offers. The market's usual creativity in connection with takeovers has extended to financing matters, as well, not only with junk bonds but with investment bankers providing bridge loans to finance takeovers.    In addition, the committee was impressed by those who counseled that the Indiana statute affords a ready means to put companies into play. Almost anyone who wants to do that, or even to harass management, could simply notify the company of his intention to make a control-share acquisition and trigger the statutory stockholder plebiscite. The ensuing meeting notice and other publicity provide a cheap means to publicize the company's availability for sale.    Others noted that Indiana-type legislation might have a particularly short shelf life. A number of bills pending in Congress would extend the time tender offers must remain open under the Williams Act. One by Reps. John Dingell (D., Mich.) and Edward Markey (D., Mass.) would extend the time to 60 days. One commentator on the proposed Delaware law said that its incidental extension of tender offers to 50 days was a poor trade for the stockholder plebiscite the law required, and a net loss if Congress extended the time for tender offers to 60 days, anyway.    Other activity at the federal level also has the potential to make Indiana-type statutes an anachronism. The Dingell and Markey legislation would impose a oneshare, one-vote standard on all shares listed on national exchanges or quoted on NASDAQ, and the SEC has proposed a rule to prohibit corporate action that would disproportionately reduce the voting power of shares. Such provisions might preempt the provisions of the Indiana law that limit the voting rights of control shares.    A host of other problems emerged in the drafting process. Some Indiana provisions seem to permit greenmail, and their viability was called into question in light of legislation pending in Congress that would prohibit greenmail. Technical problems abounded. It appeared that the Indiana statute does not grandfather certain existing control-share positions. Would Delaware's adoption of such a statute inadvertently confiscate the control premium attached to existing blocks? Should the statute cover all corporations, or should stockholders or directors be permitted to opt in or opt out? Should an effort be made to preclude the decision on every tender offer from turning on the votes of arbitragers?    In the end, it was decided that these questions could not be resolved responsibly in time, and that court tests to come may yet alter the picture. Study will continue up to the reconvening of the Legislature.    Delaware's decision will undoubtedly influence other states that were poised to adopt Indiana-type legislation. It is likely that the potential for backfire that the Delaware lawyers saw will also cause corporations to shy away from pressing for the adoption of such legislation in the states where they are incorporated or from considering moving to Indiana or other states that have a control-share law.    In the near future a track record should develop that will permit responsible predictions of how courts will view takeovers when an Indiana-type law is in place. Further instruction will come out of the decision on Ohio's more aggressive tender-offer statute, which had been held unconstitutional but was remanded by the Supreme Court for further consideration in light of its Indiana decision.    Delaware's flirtation with tender-offer legislation is certainly not the last round in efforts to rationalize the takeover phenomenon, now in its third decade. State corporation law developed in this country on a relatively laissez-faire model. The corporation law that is developing in Congress, and more notably over time by SEC rule-making, fits an activist, regulatory model. Whether shareholders will be better served if Congress takes the opportunity signaled by the Supreme Court and leaves the tender-offer ball in the states' court remains to be seen.    ---   Mr. Black is a member of the Council of the Corporation Law Section of the Delaware Bar. He is also chairman of the American Bar Association's Federal Regulation of Securities Committee. </TEXT></DOC>