<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880211-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Bleak Prognosis: The Specter of AIDS Is Haunting the Lives Of the 'HIV Positive' --- Some Are Well but Worried By the Dire Implications Of Blood-Test Results --- Seeking Hope and Support </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Ricklefs (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Michael Hirsch fully expected the bad news. But when it came, he says, &quot;I got so angry I ripped a shower out of the wall.&quot;    For months he had suffered night sweats, fevers and weight loss. So, finally, the worried New Yorker had his blood tested for evidence of the AIDS virus. The result was positive.    &quot;Getting the official stamp is so devastating because it is irreversible,&quot; says Mr. Hirsch, a former theater- and dance-company manager. &quot;You feel like everyone is looking at you and everyone can tell.&quot;    Some 52,000 Americans have contracted AIDS, but a far larger number are infected or suspect that they are. Some have symptoms of illness; others aren't sick, at least not yet, but they have reason to fear that sooner or later they will die of AIDS.    The AIDS virus, now called HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), has already infected between one million and 1.5 million Americans, according to estimates made by the federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta. Of those people, the CDC says, perhaps 250,000 to 500,000 already show signs of AIDS-Related Complex, or ARC. Many other people, while still healthy, are waiting and worrying.    Thousands of Americans each month are told that they have been infected by the virus and thus are at great risk of developing AIDS. By last June, public test sites had examined the blood of 676,000 people who had sought the test and found 57,000 of them to be HIV positive. By late 1987, the New York City Health Department was processing nearly 7,000 blood samples a month -- twice the volume it had been doing early in the year. And more than 1,000 New Yorkers each month were learning that they carry the AIDS virus.    People say that a positive test result can dominate their lives. &quot;Hardly an hour goes by when I don't think about it,&quot; says a clothing salesman who has known for two years that he is HIV positive. A young woman who contracted the virus from a blood transfusion says: &quot;I feel like a leper.&quot; Another infected woman, a social-work supervisor, says, &quot;I am frightened of being rejected.&quot;    James Kautz, a medical technician who was living in Orlando, Fla., when he tested positive, says: &quot;At first, I thought I had AIDS and was going to die. . . . Later, I tried to kill myself, but a friend and a fireman rescued me.&quot;    Some &quot;HIV positives&quot; go on to develop severe ARC. Dorothy Warner, a 36-year-old postal worker in Brooklyn and former intravenous-drug user, developed ARC 10 months ago. Since then, the single mother of four hasn't been out of the hospital for more than two weeks at a time.    &quot;Whenever I tell my four-year-old I am going to the doctor, he screams because he knows I could be gone for weeks,&quot; she says. &quot;I try to put him in another room playing with his sister when they come for me.&quot; As Ms. Warner lies in St. Clare's Hospital losing weight and suffering kidney failure, relatives help care for the children.    Even HIV positives who have no symptoms of disease say that research news whips them between hope and despair. Several experimental treatments appear to slow the virus's progression in infected individuals and may enhance the survival prospects of HIV carriers. &quot;Within 12 to 18 months, we will be able to arrest the disease at whatever stage it is in except for people who are very sick,&quot; predicts Bernard Bihari, a physician and optimistic AIDS researcher at the State University of New York. Although others are not so sanguine, many ARC and AIDS patients are aggressively pursuing treatments that they hope will prolong their lives and improve the quality of their lives.    But if new treatments don't pan out, the prognosis for HIV positives seems bleak. Since June 1986, the CDC has predicted that 20% to 30% of virus carriers would develop AIDS within five years of infection. More recently, a San Francisco Public Health Department study found that 78% of a group of HIV-positive gay males developed signs of immune-system damage within 6 1/2 years of their exposure to the virus. Some 30% developed AIDS, 21% ARC. Some 27% had persistent, generalized lymphadenopathy (swollen lymph nodes), a condition sometimes classified as ARC.    The passage of time offers no solace, no reassurance. The San Francisco study indicated that AIDS may be seven times as likely to develop in the sixth or seventh year after infection as it is in the first or second year.    &quot;Virtually all those infected are doomed,&quot; says David Axelrod, New York state health commissioner.    By the CDC's definition, one has AIDS only if he has contracted certain opportunistic diseases such as pneumocystis carinii pneumonia or the cancer Kaposi's sarcoma. ARC usually begins with such symptoms as sudden, unexplained weight loss, night sweats, fever, fatigue and diarrhea. &quot;We think that at least half of the people with ARC will develop AIDS within a couple of years,&quot; says George Rutherford, the medical director of the San Francisco Public Health Department's AIDS office.    It isn't known how many infected individuals whose only symptom is generalized lymphadenopathy will ultimately develop AIDS. Mere infection with the HIV virus might in some cases never progress to disease. But knowing that one is infected inspires dread.    Says a young actor: &quot;I didn't cry until I thought of how the worry would destroy my parents.&quot; Six months later, he still hasn't told them.    For fear of losing jobs, health insurance, friends and lovers, many people who test positive carry their burden secretly. &quot;I am perfectly up front about being gay,&quot; says a bartender, &quot;but I'd lose my job tomorrow if my boss knew I tested positive.&quot; Already suffering some ARC symptoms, he says he has absorbed nearly $4,000 in medical bills rather than file a tell-tale insurance claim.    The fear of disclosure often adds to an overwhelming sense of isolation: &quot;For two days after getting the test results, I didn't leave the house,&quot; says the clothing salesman. &quot;The initial shock is the sense of being contaminated. I went a year and a half carrying this thing around with me without telling anyone. I knew about a hundred people who had come down with AIDS, but I never met anyone who said he was HIV positive. I am very gregarious, but I felt completely alone.&quot;    The isolation can be especially painful for ARC patients, most of whom continue working and keeping to their routines. &quot;The thing that most preoccupies their lives, they aren't going to tell most people,&quot; says Lewis Katoff, the director of client services at the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the largest of the groups helping people with AIDS and ARC.    The ambiguous symptoms of ARC can create intense anxiety. Mark Howard, a social worker who runs a support group, says: &quot;Often people with ARC feel relieved when they get the AIDS diagnosis because at least the uncertainty is gone.&quot;    Because the illnesses associated with ARC often mimic common, minor complaints, it is hard for a person at risk for AIDS to know what to make of a bad cough, a fever, or swollen glands. Says Mr. Katoff: &quot;It occurred to me that I might have ARC, but I told myself I was being a self-indulgent hypochondriac. I could run a half-marathon, so I assumed I was OK. It was all a form of denial,&quot; adds the young official of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, who has since developed AIDS.    For all the anguish, many people who know themselves to be infected are acting aggressively to improve their prospects. Many had blood tests in order to get a head start on treatment, or at least to allay the anxiety of not knowing.    The testing process is far more elaborate than most realize. Susan Rosenthal, a New York City health official, figures on 20 to 45 minutes of counseling before blood is drawn, to explain the test and what to make of the results. Miguel Arenas, who runs a New York City test site, says it can take an hour to discuss a positive test result with a subject. &quot;They all talk of the fear of abandonment,&quot; he says. &quot;At first, some of them just stare at the wall and can't pronounce a word.&quot;    Increasingly, people who test positive join the support groups that have sprung up across the country in the past year. Several cities have versions of the British organization Body Positive. Founded last October, New York's Body Positive already has 16 groups meeting every two weeks.    Group members exchange treatment information and discuss such subjects as anxiety, loneliness, how to tell your family and where to turn for help. Mr. Hirsch, the executive director of the New York group, says, &quot;We're trying to develop the concept that being positive is part of life, not the end of it.&quot; Mr. Hirsch himself recently developed AIDS -- &quot;graduated,&quot; as he puts it.    Often support-group members help steer one another away from self-destructive behavior, says George La Fountain, a social worker at St. Clare's Hospital.    Groups encourage participants to avoid passivity and to plan for the future. Sometimes, a crisis over testing positive leads to reassessing one's life. &quot;When you are faced with a crisis, it is a strong motivator to confront what is important,&quot; says social worker Gail Spindell.    For Mr. Kautz, the medical technician, the positive blood test cost him his job when his doctor divulged the results. Mr. Kautz then attempted suicide. But he had a change of heart. &quot;I decided to leave Florida and get my life back together,&quot; he says. He moved to San Francisco with $30 in his pocket and got a job as a medical technician. &quot;I told my supervisor about my HIV status, but it was never a problem,&quot; he says. Mr. Kautz now spends his evenings studying business and computer science in order to advance himself professionally.    The young technician has also sued his Florida doctor, Herminio Orizondo, for causing Mr. Kautz's employer, a Florida hospital, to learn of his HIV-positive blood test, allegedly in violation of Florida law. Dr. Orizondo's lawyer, Raphael Martinez, says the physician felt obliged to inform hospital authorities to protect hospital patients.    Many HIV positives and ARC patients are starting treatment programs, hoping to arrest or at least slow the damage the virus does. &quot;I am in good health today because I have taken an active role in my survival,&quot; says Mitchell Cantor, a New York shopkeeper. He has had ARC for four years.    Besides taking the antiviral drug AL-721, Mr. Cantor has consulted a nutritionist, changed his diet, started an exercise program and worked on reducing stress through meditation and acupuncture.    Of course, those faced with a fatal disease are particularly vulnerable to quack cures. And California has established an AIDS health-care-fraud task force to crack down on the rip-offs.    No drug yet cures AIDS. But recent medical reports confirm that the extraordinarily expensive Burroughs Wellcome Co. drug, AZT, prolongs the life of AIDS and ARC patients -- especially if they are in the early stages of the disease.    &quot;The use of treatments is resulting in significant reduction in progression to AIDS, hospitalization and death,&quot; Dr. Bihari of SUNY told a packed meeting sponsored by Body Positive. &quot;People who are active and aggressive and take charge of their own lives do much better.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>