<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871118-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN IS RESPONDING to questions from independent prosecutor Walsh.    The White House said the president is preparing written responses to questions submitted to him more than a month ago about his role in the Iran-Contra scandal. Although no details were provided, White House aides and law-enforcement officials for months have anticipated that the questions would focus on whether the president approved of, or knew about, certain clandestine activities of former aides Poindexter and North.    Dissenting congressional panel members said the Iran-Contra report, due out today, concludes Reagan violated the Constitution and aides broke the law.    ---   Congress and the White House reached a compromise in a dispute over Pentagon adherence to the traditional interpretation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in Strategic Defense Initiative tests. The accord on a pending defense bill paves the way for a military budget for the current fiscal year.    U.S. and Soviet negotiators expressed optimism that details will be wrapped up shortly on a treaty banning the superpowers' medium-range nuclear missiles. Chief Soviet negotiator Vorontsov said the pact should be finished by Monday and sources in Geneva said U.S. negotiator Kampelman may issue a statement today.    ---   The EPA announced its plan to penalize cities with the dirtiest air by banning industrial growth, but in many cases the penalty wouldn't be imposed until 1990 or later. The plan is being opposed by environmentalists and lawmakers, who question whether the EPA can extend Clean Air Act deadlines.    ---   A federal investigator disputed Continental Airlines' claim that a DC-9 involved in a fatal Denver crash Sunday had been de-iced within 20 minutes of takeoff. National Transportation Safety Board chief Burnett said control tower tapes show the de-icing took place 23 minutes before, but didn't indicate whether the interval was too long.    Burnley told a Senate panel that as transportation secretary he would be a &quot;tough traffic cop&quot; on aviation safety. He also said he might reorganize the Federal Aviation Administration.    ---   Tehran said Iraq bombed an Iranian reactor that contained nuclear material, killing 11 people. An Iranian nuclear official said the attacks could lead to a &quot;transfrontier radioactive release,&quot; but U.S. scientists disputed the claim. The Bushehr plant was being built by a West German firm, but was mothballed after Iran's 1979 revolution.    ---   A Sandinista leader said U.S.-backed rebels would be allowed to take part in municipal elections in Nicaragua next year if a five-nation Central American peace plan succeeds. Separately, Shultz and Wright said they settled their dispute over the House speaker's meetings with Ortega, and issued a list of goals on which they agree.    ---   A House panel approved a measure requiring employers to give up to 10 weeks of unpaid leave to workers when they become parents of newborn or adopted children. It also includes provisions for illness leaves. A similar bill is pending in the Senate and prospects are good for approval by Congress early next year.    ---   A federal jury convicted two members of a neo-Nazi group of civil rights violations in the 1984 slaying of Denver radio talk-show host Alan Berg. Two others tried in the case were acquitted. The jury found that the two men killed Berg because he was Jewish, and they face life in prison.    ---   Warsaw invited Solidarity activists to cooperate with government economic reforms. The overture marked the Communist government's first mention of the banned union in seven years, but Walesa was noncommital about cooperating in the reforms, which include sharp rises in food prices.    ---   U.S. Catholic bishops voted, 156-10, to begin a fund-raising drive to aid thousands of nuns who spent decades teaching but now face poverty in their old age. According to a recent study sponsored by the bishops, almost $2 billion will be needed.    ---   Yugoslav foundry workers won pay increases after demonstrating against new austerity measures. About 5,000 marched in Macedonia and won a promise of higher wages from the local Communist government. Western diplomats viewed the concession as a blow to the central government's anti-inflation plan.    ---   A Soviet spokesman said Boris Yeltsin, the ousted Moscow Communist Party chief, was admitted to a hospital with an unspecified heart ailment. Yeltsin was ousted last week after criticizing the pace of Soviet leader Gorbachev's reforms.    ---   A Philippine coup leader surrendered without conditions and will face a courtmartial. Lt. Col. Navida was the chief strategist for Col. Honasan, who led the Aug. 28 mutiny in which 53 were killed.    ---   Weinberger received a Medal of Freedom and was the guest of honor at a Washington ceremony, which included a B-1 bomber flyby. The event, attended by Reagan, was to say goodbye to the secretary of defense, who resigned two weeks ago.    ---   Italian President Cossiga asked caretaker Prime Minister Goria to try to form a new government. Goria is expected to try to revive the five-party coalition that broke up last week in a dispute over a finance bill. </TEXT></DOC>