<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880401-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Work Shift: The Sun Belt Gains Manufacturing Jobs As Nation Loses Them --- Population Pool, Labor Costs And the Quality of Life Help Region Lure Firms --- Pepperidge's Toast to Florida </HL><AUTHOR> Ken Slocum (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> TEX </IN><TEXT>   What state has 30% of its work force in manufacturing? Ohio, Pennsylvania and Michigan spring to mind -- and they're all wrong. The answer is North Carolina, and that points up an important fact of life in the U.S. these days. &quot;The nation is going through an immense restructuring in the kinds of stuff we produce and where we produce it,&quot; says John Godfrey, chief economist for Barnett Banks Inc. of Jacksonville, Fla.    Much has been written about the U.S. loss of jobs in heavy industries like steel, autos, bulldozers and farm equipment, and about the nation's shift to a high-tech and service economy. (Even in North Carolina, the percentage of workers in manufacturing has dropped; it was 40% back in 1970.) Less well-recognized is the rapid shift of the remaining manufacturing jobs from the North to the Sun Belt.    Take the three years from November 1984 to November 1987. The period began with a two-year slump in manufacturing, but many Sun Belt states added manufacturing jobs even then. North Carolina gained 11,800 during the slump, then added 24,000 more in the following 12 months, when industrial output nationally was rebounding. California gained 4,300 such jobs during the slump and 29,600 more during the rebound.    In the nation's traditional manufacturing states, it was a different story. New York dropped 94,900 manufacturing jobs during the slump; it lost 19,300 more during the recovery. Ohio lost 27,800 during the downturn, then lost 7,500 more. The whole Rust Belt -- Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Illinois, Indiana and Wisconsin -- gained just 10,600 manufacturing jobs during the recovery while, in the Sun Belt, Florida alone was gaining 10,700.    The overall decline in the traditional heavy-manufacturing spots more than offset the gains in the Sun Belt. In that three-year period, the number of manufacturing jobs in six Sun Belt states -- California, Texas, North Carolina, Georgia, Florida and Tennessee -- rose by 96,800, to 5,553,600; the number of such jobs in nine Northern states -- New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Illinois, Indiana and Wisconsin -- dropped by 392,200, to 7,701,700.    In the entire nation during the three-year period, 382,000 manufacturing jobs were lost, largely because of deep inroads by foreign producers.    &quot;The Rust Belt has been clobbered by the type of industry it specialized in -- cars and steel and other industries {that are} no longer growth areas,&quot; Barnett's Mr. Godfrey says. &quot;And anybody starting a new process or plant {in other industries} locates it in a different place, because the population base has shifted and the economic climate is better.&quot;    Many Northern states have offset their losses of manufacturing jobs with increases in service jobs. New York had a February unemployment rate of only 4.4%. Ohio's job rolls recently hit a record five million; &quot;we're not the basket case of the national economy,&quot; says the state's labor-market information director, Dixie Sommers. The nation as a whole ended up with some eight million more jobs in November 1987 than it had in November 1984.    Still, labor experts view the loss of manufacturing jobs as a grim omen. &quot;Manufacturing is the traditional route for the relatively low-educated or low-skilled into the middle class,&quot; observes Steven Malin, senior economist for the Conference Board, an industry-supported, nonprofit economic-research concern in New York. &quot;To the extent it's being foreclosed, it eliminates an important means for these people to make it.&quot;    Then, too, manufacturing jobs spawn a huge number of other jobs. Auto manufacturing leads to such offshoots as auto-upholstery makers and parts manufacturers, and this sort of job creation is true of service jobs to a far lesser extent. Manufactured products also account for far more exports than services do. Says Norman Robertson, senior vice president and chief economist of Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, &quot;Any time a plant closes because of obsolescence or loss of business, that's a real loss indeed.&quot;    The Sun Belt's gain in manufacturing jobs results partly from recovery of its traditionally dominant industries, particularly textiles and furniture. Eden Yarns Inc. of Eden, N.C., a joint venture of Pannill Knitting Co. and other investors, is starting up a $25 million plant with 125 production workers to supply Pannill with yarn for fleece wear -- mainly sweat shirts, sweat pants and jogging suits -- a hot item for the past couple of years.    North Carolina &quot;has had a lot of relocations from other states, but the thing that's making the economy hum is the textile industry,&quot; says Alfred Smith, chief economist for NCNB Corp. a bank holding company based in Charlotte. He attributes the textile comeback to the decline of the dollar, which improves domestic mills' competitive position.    Textile-mill employment in 1987 totaled about 730,000 nationwide, up 25,000 from 1986, says the American Textile Manufacturers Institute. (The rebound in traditional industries shows up as well in a few areas outside the Sun Belt, particularly Iowa, where farm machinery and construction equipment are recovering with the decline of the dollar and a modest rebound in farming. Washington state showed a marked gain in manufacturing jobs between November 1986 and November 1987 because of an upturn at Boeing Co. and its support companies and, to a lesser extent, lumber.)    Although unions have lost much of their strength in the North and the North-South wage gap is narrowing, lower labor costs are still a powerful lure in the Southeast. &quot;Cost of labor is a significant factor in manufacturing, and historically it's lower in the South,&quot; says William F. Farley, the chairman of Fruit of the Loom Inc., an underwear manufacturer based in Bowling Green, Ky. Fruit of the Loom has increased its work force by 5,000, or 35%, in the past two years. It doubled employment to 2,000 in Jamestown, Ky., for example, and started up a 2,000-worker plant in Rockingham, N.C.    The North tends to have more obsolete factories. &quot;Companies usually find manufacturing is more expensive {in the North} and the plants older and that the Sun Belt plants are newer and more efficient,&quot; says the Conference Board's Mr. Malin. A University of Texas economist, James Smith, sees the Sun Belt's manufacturing-job gains as &quot;an acceleration of a trend that started with World War II when the nation moved where land was cheaper and there was more labor.&quot;    In Massachusetts, where the unemployment rate stands at only 3.4%, job growth is being hampered because the demand for labor has outrun the supply -- and the cost of living, particularly housing, discourages relocations there. &quot;With the entry price into Massachusetts housing among the highest in the country . . . it reduces the pool of people we can attract to the state,&quot; says Stephen Minicucci, chief economist for the state's Budget Bureau.    Other factors also play big roles in the shift to the Sun Belt, particularly the quality of life away from America's urban pressure cookers. &quot;We didn't come here for cheap labor,&quot; says Robert Miller, the president of Okuma Machine Tools Inc. of Charlotte, a new state-of-the-art operation that is computer-controlled and has 75 workers. It is the first machine-tool plant outside Japan for Okuma Machinery Works, one of the world's largest machine-tool builders.    Okuma, says Mr. Miller, found in Charlotte &quot;the ideal plant in an ideal location&quot; with good airline and highway access to its markets. Besides, he says, &quot;the Piedmont area of the Carolinas proved to be a tremendous asset in recruiting.&quot; The company also moved its sales force of 100 there from New York state.    Similarly, Organon Teknika Corp., a wholly owned unit of Akzo N.V. of the Netherlands, took a merged medical-diagnostics operation to Durham, N.C., partly because &quot;when we were relocating from New Jersey and elsewhere, we were concerned with relocating to a place where key people would want to go,&quot; a spokesman says.    Grumman Corp., which employs 4,000 in Florida, opened an 850-job plant in Melbourne, Fla., a year ago to design and install airborne radar surveillance systems under a joint Air Force-Army contract. Grumman cites a laundry list of reasons for relocating the operation from Long Island, N.Y. Among them: lower taxes, lower housing costs and cheaper energy rates.    And the Sun Belt isn't attracting only the sort of light industry long associated with the South. &quot;Auto Alley,&quot; the car industry's fast-expanding new artery of car production, runs through Kentucky and Tennessee. Nissan Motor Co.'s car and truck plant in Smyrna, Tenn., employs 3,200 workers. Toyota Motor Corp. this year will start producing cars in a $1.1 billion plant at Georgetown, Ky., that will employ 3,500. General Motors Corp. is building a plant at Spring Hill, Tenn., that will begin producing subcompacts in 1990 and will ultimately employ 3,000.    In a joint venture with a Japanese company this fall, Nucor Corp. of Charlotte will start melting steel in a new 500-worker I-beam mill at Blytheville, Ark., on the Mississippi. Nucor's steel-mill crews have swelled by some 15% over the past two years, despite the enormous inroads into that industry by foreign steel. &quot;Our strength is in our new technology and our highly productive, nonunion work force,&quot; says Chairman F. Kenneth Iverson.    California's rapid gain in manufacturing jobs stems from a &quot;high concentration of fast-growing industries, a highly educated work force and our geographic positioning for the Pacific Rim market,&quot; says Janet Turner, chief economist for the state's Department of Commerce. California is big in the production of scientific instruments and electronic and electrical products.    Ms. Turner estimates that &quot;at least 75% of job creation comes from existing companies.&quot; The Costa Mesa plant of Eaton Corp., which makes illuminated high-performance switches and displays for the military and the aircraft industry, recently increased its work force by 60, to 480 people. &quot;There's been a growth of high-performance-lighting requirements and that happens to be our area of strength,&quot; says Barry Weidenhammer, general manager.    The South and the Far West benefit also from another factor, a population explosion. The fastest-growing populous states are Florida, Texas, California and North Carolina. Florida will have roughly doubled its population in the 20 years ending in 1990. Texas' population is expected to grow by 56% over the same span.    With people, of course, comes demand for products. Pepperidge Farm Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Campbell Soup Co., is building two new bakeries near Lakeland, Fla., that will employ some 500 workers. Says a spokesman: &quot;Demographically, our customer is middle-income and slightly older with one or two in the household -- and that's what we have in Florida.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>