<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880808-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   PEREZ DE CUELLAR SAID he would announce an Iran-Iraq truce today.    The U.N. secretary-general, who held a day of talks with Iranian and Iraqi envoys, also informed the Security Council that both sides in the Persian Gulf conflict had agreed to hold direct talks after the cease-fire declaration. Perez de Cuellar has said that a truce could take effect 10 days after the setting of a date. He spoke after Tehran agreed to the face-to-face talks with Baghdad. Iran's decision followed Iraq's offer Saturday to accept a truce if Tehran announced its willingness to hold direct negotiations.    There appeared to be a lull in fighting in the eight-year-old gulf war, with Iran and Iraq reporting only minor clashes over the weekend.    ---   SHAMIR WARNED the U.S. against making contacts with the PLO.    The Israeli prime minister told U.S. envoy Murphy that such contacts would lead to more violence in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Murphy, who arrived Saturday in Israel, urged Arabs and Israelis to seek political solutions to their problems. Israel's cabinet, meanwhile, criticized a Palestinian initiative to issue a &quot;declaration of independence&quot; proclaiming a Palestinian state in the occupied territories. Shamir said such a move was an &quot;insane idea.&quot;    Jordan's King Hussein vowed that Amman would fully recognize a Palestinian government-in-exile if one is formed in the Israeli-held territories.    ---   Thornburgh told the Senate Judiciary panel that he didn't withhold from Congress a Justice Department report exploring Panama's role in international drug-trafficking. But during a confirmation hearing Friday, lawmakers asked the nominee for attorney general to assure them that he would turn over the 1975 report.    ---   Bush said he would debate Democratic presidential nominee Dukakis more than once, denying that he was shying away from such a confrontation. Meanwhile, Bush's soon-to-be campaign manager, James Baker, said the GOP candidate would be free to speak on issues &quot;different from the administration&quot; once he's nominated.    ---   Police in Burma killed as many as five people during anti-government demonstrations over the weekend, official Burmese newspapers reported. An undetermined number of people were injured in the violence. Students in Rangoon called for a nationwide general strike today to demand the ouster of new hard-line leader Sein Lwin.    ---   Africa's front-line states will hold a summit in Angola today that is expected to include a discussion of U.S.-mediated talks aimed at bringing peace to southwestern Africa. In Geneva, progress was reported Friday in the talks involving South Africa, Angola and Cuba, and at least a partial accord is expected this week.    ---   Reagan has agreed to freeze the nation's emissions of nitrogen oxide, a pollutant in acid rain, at 1987 levels for at least seven years, a White House official said. Reagan's decision assures U.S. participation in an international pact to curb acid rain.    ---   A U.S. judge in Washington postponed North's criminal trial until after the November elections. The trial was to begin Sept. 20. A new date wasn't set. The ruling makes it more likely that all the charges filed against the former Reagan aide will be prosecuted. Both sides in the case had sought more time to examine documents.    ---   Officials in France said the president of the state-run railroad quit after a crash Saturday at the Gare de l'Est station in Paris. One person was killed, and about 60 were injured, authorities said. On June 27, a crash at another Paris station, the Gare de Lyon, killed 56 people and injured 32.    ---   NASA mechanics reconnected pipes and electrical lines on the space shuttle Discovery after replacing a hydrogen valve and its computer sensor. The parts caused a computer to abort last Thursday's test firing of the spacecraft's main engines. The test was reset for this week at Cape Canaveral.    ---   Biaggi resigned his seat in the House following his conviction on racketeering, extortion and bribe-taking charges in the Wedtech case. The 10-term Democrat from New York, in making his announcement Friday, said he wouldn't be able to give his constituents &quot;all the time they deserve.&quot;    ---   Moslem rebels fired rockets into Kabul on the last day of talks between Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze and Afghan leaders. The Soviet Union and Afghanistan warned Pakistan's government about its support for the rebels, but Shevardnadze said the Red Army's withdrawal from Afghanistan would be completed on schedule.    ---   Authorities in India said the more than 400 Hindu pilgrims missing after a ferry capsized in the Ganges River were presumed dead. The overcrowded vessel capsized Saturday in the rain-swollen waterway. There were about 100 survivors.    ---   Died: J. Skelly Wright, 77, former federal judge, Saturday, in Washington, of cancer. . . . Ralph Meeker, 67, actor, Friday, in Woodland Hills, Calif., of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>