<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Data for ReaganOn Iran AffairPossibly Altered---By John Walcott and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST UNP GOVMT LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)EXECUTIVE (EXE)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Two memoranda the White House says were used in January 1986 to brief President Reagan on secret arms sales to Iran may have been revised last November by White House officials to play down Israel's and the president's role in the affair, administration officials said.    Separately, independent counsel Lawrence Walsh and the Federal Bureau of Investigation are investigating whether memos and other documents in the office of former National Security Adviser John Poindexter are missing or were altered to recast the history of the secret arms sales, law enforcement officials said.    It isn't known whether the investigators are focusing on the two January 1986 memos, which were from Vice Adm. Poindexter to the president. Administration officials said the memos, as released to the public or provided to congressional investigators, contain false and misleading statements, which mirror those in a chronology of the arms sales. The chronology was falsified last November by White House officials to protect the president from political damage, according to officials who helped prepare it.    The documents, which were kept in a safe in Vice Adm. Poindexter's office, include a Jan. 17, 1986, memo drafted for the former national security adviser by fired National Security Council aide Oliver North explaining the Iran arms sales. That memo, which the White House released last month with considerable fanfare, suggests that Israel at the time was prepared &quot;to unilaterally commence selling military materiel to Western-oriented Iranian factions.&quot; In fact, Israeli arms sales to Iran had begun some months earlier.    Fawn Hall, Lt. Col. North's secretary, has told investigators that last November she retyped several White House documents on the administration's secret Iran arms sales after they had been altered by her superiors, according to administration sources and law enforcement officials. The investigators have been told that the original documents were destroyed after the changes were made.    Whether the documents Ms. Hall says were altered include the two presidential briefing papers isn't clear. But sources familiar with Ms. Hall's statements said that investigators have quizzed her about whether she revised or replaced memos that went from Col. North to Vice Adm. Poindexter, and perhaps eventually to the president.    The sources said Ms. Hall, who has been granted immunity from prosecution by Mr. Walsh, also has recounted that she helped destroy other classified documents and remove additional records from White House files.    Mr. Walsh and the FBI declined to comment on the focus of their investigation. Other officials said Ms. Hall is scheduled to testify before a federal grand jury about her activities.    The disclosures regarding Ms. Hall's statements come as the Senate committee investigating the Iran-Contra affair is to meet Thursday and consider granting limited immunity to several persons. Mr. Walsh had discouraged the committees from granting immunity too quickly, but now that he has promised Ms. Hall this protection, congressional investigators will be eager to follow his lead in an effort to gain information from less-prominent players in the affair, such as Ms. Hall.    Neither Col. North nor Vice Adm. Poindexter is likely to receive such protection soon, but the Senate panel is expected to consider applications for a &quot;handful&quot; of individuals targeted by its counsel, Arthur Liman, and staff, a source close to the committee said.    Investigators see Ms. Hall as both a confidante of Col. North and an aide who acted as his representative in meetings with private political supporters of the Contras. &quot;Somebody had to carry the ball while he was out running around,&quot; said one intelligence source. &quot;This woman knows a lot about what's going on.&quot;    The two memos -- the other was dated Jan. 6, 1986 -- claim that Israel was proposing to commence the arms sales and that the administration approved doing so. However, President Reagan, Vice Adm. Poindexter and other top officials knew at the time that the Israelis already had sold U.S.-made TOW anti-tank and Hawk antiaircraft missiles to Iran the previous autumn. Former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane has testified under oath that the president approved the Israeli sales in advance.    A week after he allegedly drafted the Jan. 17, 1986, memo, Col. North prepared a &quot;notional timeline&quot; for the secret Iran arms sales. The timeline also casts doubt on the memo's claims that the Israelis were merely prepared to begin selling arms to Iran and that the arms sales were made for geopolitical purposes rather than to free U.S. hostages.    According to the timeline, on Feb. 10, 1986, the Iranians were to deposit enough money &quot;to cover purchase of 508 additional TOWs owed to Israel for Weir release and all transportation costs&quot; into an Israeli bank account. The Rev. Benjamin Weir, one of the U.S. hostages in Lebanon, was freed in September 1985 after Israel sold 508 American-made TOW missiles to Iran.    Former Prime Minister Shimon Peres also has contradicted the memos to President Reagan by asserting that the U.S. came to Israel for help in freeing American hostages in Lebanon.    U.S. intelligence officials said the Jan. 17, 1986, memo contains other irregularities that raise questions about its authenticity.    For example, the memo was initialed for the president by Vice Adm. Poindexter and contains a handwritten notation. In the notation, the former national security adviser claims the &quot;president was briefed verbally from this paper&quot; in the presence of Vice President George Bush, White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan and Donald Fortier, a member of the National Security Council staff who died last August.    But intelligence sources said Mr. Reagan always signed such decision memoranda himself, often in more than one place, and they said they couldn't recall a single case in which the president didn't sign a decision memo authorizing a covert action. &quot;It was a rule that the president always signed decision memos himself,&quot; one such official said.    The president did sign a formal covert action directive called a &quot;finding,&quot; approving U.S. arms sales to Iran. The directive was attached to the memo. The sources said the entire Iran arms sales operation was carried out in a unique fashion by the administration and they conceded that Vice Adm. Poindexter could have initialed the memo without Mr. Reagan ever having read it.    Still, investigators now are trying to determine whether White House officials made an effort late last year to hide or disguise the earlier involvement of some Reagan administration officials in the Iran arms sales.    Col. North's former secretary, Ms. Hall, has told investigators that she was asked to retype and replace some memos about a week prior to the shredding of other documents last Nov. 21, according to law enforcement officials and other sources. In some cases, these officials said, investigators have been able to retrieve copies of the original documents.    Plato Cacheris, Ms. Hall's attorney, has confirmed that she is cooperating with the independent counsel's investigation, but he has declined to elaborate on what she has told them. Reports of altered National Security Council memos appeared in yesterday's editions of the Los Angeles Times.    Present and former administration officials said White House officials launched a frantic effort in mid-November 1986 to conceal the fact that the administration had at least tacitly -- and perhaps explicitly -- authorized Israel to sell American weapons to Iran in 1985.    The administration officials said the effort began after Col. North returned Nov. 10 from a secret meeting with Iranian representatives in Geneva, Switzerland, and convinced Vice Adm. Poindexter and Mr. McFarlane that the Iranians would break off their secret contacts with the U.S. if it were made public that Israel had been a partner in the arms sales. The officials said Col. North also warned repeatedly that &quot;the hostages will die&quot; if the operation were halted.    &quot;Ollie somehow convinced himself that he still had a chance to bring the hostages home, and he convinced the others, too,&quot; said one official.    Administration officials said Col. North and Vice Adm. Poindexter also feared that revealing that a third country had participated in a sensitive covert operation would discourage other nations from assisting the U.S. in other ventures.    On the evening of Nov. 12, Mr. McFarlane pleaded with the Washington bureau chief of The Wall Street Journal to remove all references to Israel from a story on the Iran affair that was to be published the following day. He argued that revealing Israel's role in the policy would force the Iranians to abandon the operation. Although Mr. McFarlane's request was denied, the Iranians met again with U.S. officials in early December.    Administration officials said Vice Adm. Poindexter, Col. North and White House Chief of Staff Regan also sought to play down the president's role in the secret Iran policy because they believed media interest in the story would skyrocket if it were disclosed that Mr. Reagan was an important participant. &quot;They wanted to hold off (press) coverage as much as they could,&quot; said one source.    Meanwhile, at the White House yesterday, Chief of Staff Regan called together nearly a dozen senior-level political advisers to plan the White House reaction to a presidential commission report on the Iran affair, which is to be released Thursday.    According to two participants at the meeting, the group explored such options as a presidential news conference and speech following the report. But the only consensus was that, in all likelihood, the president shouldn't react to the report until the week after its release in order to have enough time to digest it and to gauge the media's reaction to it.    One participant said that President Reagan, whose recent low profile has raised concern in some circles, was an active participant in the discussion.    Mr. Regan is said by a growing number of senior political advisers in and around the White House to be near resignation. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said yesterday he hadn't spoken with the chief of staff about published reports suggesting his departure was near, and said Mr. Regan hadn't mentioned the speculation at the senior staff meeting yesterday morning.    Nonetheless, political pundits continued discussing possible successors. High on the list were former Transportation Secretary Drew Lewis, who is now chief operating officer of Union Pacific Corp.; Energy Secretary John Herrington; Treasury Secretary James Baker, and Education Secretary William Bennett. It has also been suggested that Mr. Regan's duties might be shared by former Nevada Sen. Paul Laxalt and former White House political affairs director Kenneth Duberstein. Messrs. Baker and Laxalt attended yesterday's strategy session.    ---   Jane Mayer contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>