<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880715-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AND IRAN DEBATED the destruction of a civilian airliner.    Tehran's foreign minister told the U.N. Security Council that a U.S. warship didn't warn the Iranian jetliner before shooting it down, saying the July 3 attack was &quot;a barbaric massacre.&quot; Vice President Bush said that the naval vessel fired in self-defense, and that Iran shouldn't have sent the aircraft into a Persian Gulf battle zone. He said the downing of the plane, in which 290 people were killed, was a &quot;terrible human tragedy,&quot; but asserted that the U.S. had a right to protect gulf shipping lanes.    The leadership of the International Civil Aviation Organization agreed to investigate the downing of the Iranian jetliner, but refused to condemn the U.S.    ---   MEXICO'S OPPOSITION REFUSED to recognize presidential election results.    The opposition parties pledged a nationwide protest campaign after final vote returns were released showing ruling-party candidate Salinas the winner of last week's balloting. Salinas won with only 50.3% of the vote, the narrowest margin of victory in the 59-year history of the Institutional Revolutionary Party. Meanwhile, both President de la Madrid and the president-elect said they will continue Mexico's program of economic liberalization.    The unpopularity of the government's economic program is considered one of the main reasons for the ruling party's poor showing in the July 6 election.    ---   Jackson called on former President Carter to mediate his pre-convention dispute with Dukakis, whose Democratic presidential nomination is assured. Speaking in Chicago, Jackson didn't say what specific issues he wanted Carter to discuss with the Massachusetts governor, but noted that he wanted &quot;respect and responsibility.&quot;    Dukakis continues to hold a substantial lead over Bush in a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll -- a lead sustained more by voter reservations about the vice president than by major issues. The poll found Dukakis leading Bush by a margin of 48% to 36%, almost unchanged from a Journal/NBC poll last month.    ---   Nicaragua expropriated the country's largest and oldest sugar refinery, claiming the enterprise wasn't productive enough under private ownership. The Sandinista government also announced that four conservative opposition leaders were sentenced to six months in jail for disrupting public order.    The Reagan administration expressed support for a bill introduced in the Senate by Dole of Kansas that calls for $20 million in new military aid and $27 million in nonlethal assistance to Nicaragua's Contra rebels.    ---   Congress approved legislation authorizing $299.6 billion in defense spending for fiscal 1989 and sent it to Reagan. The legislation would bar the Pentagon from conducting space-based anti-missile tests that could violate the 1972 ABM treaty, and would transfer spending from Star Wars programs to conventional arms.    ---   More than 200,000 people staged a rally and strike in the Armenian capital of Yerevan to demand the transfer of the Nagorno-Karabakh enclave from Azerbaijan, sources said. In Moscow, police arrested a dissident journalist and 14 other demonstrators after they unfurled a Latvian flag and several protest banners near the Kremlin.    ---   Chinese leaders in Beijing told Shultz that they would consider a U.S. prosposal to hold talks on limiting the spread of ballistic missiles, especially in the Mideast. The Reagan administration has expressed concern that China may be marketing a new shorter-range missile in the region.    ---   Greece sentenced a Palestinian hijack suspect to seven months in jail for entering the country with a false passport. The arrest of the Arab, wanted by the U.S. for a 1982 bomb attack on a Pan Am jetliner, may have provoked Monday's attack on a Greek cruise liner in the Aegean Sea, in which at least nine people were killed.    ---   South African and Cuban officials said major issues remained unresolved after a tentative agreement aimed at ending the 13-year Angolan civil war. Pretoria said President Botha will hold a government meeting next week to decide whether to accept the principles, and Havana said Cuba's troop pullout remained under discussion.    ---   Warsaw Pact leaders arrived in Poland for today's start of a two-day meeting that is expected to focus on reductions in nuclear and conventional forces. Soviet leader Gorbachev, who is on a six-day visit to Poland, is expected to brief the five-nation alliance on recent superpower arms negotiations.    ---   Hungary's Communist Party approved plans for political and economic changes in 1989, including giving free rein to market forces. The move, cleared at a Central Committee meeting in Budapest, is liable to increase unemployment, officials said.    ---   A federal judge in Washington rejected a defense motion regarding procedures for handling classified documents in the case of a former CIA agent accused of conspiring to illegally ship arms to Nicaraguan rebels. The lawyer for Joseph Fernandez, former CIA station chief in Costa Rica, argued that the procedures were too restrictive. </TEXT></DOC>