<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880826-0123 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Patriotism and Democracy </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the Republic for which it stands, one Nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.    Who says this campaign doesn't have issues. Pretty soon we'll be debating Motherhood and Apple Pie.    Faced with George Bush's suggestion he was against the pledge of allegiance, Mike Dukakis put up his dukes, saying that he vetoed a Massachusetts law requiring teachers to lead the pledge because &quot;any first-year law student&quot; would recognize it as unconstitutional. Legally this is poppycock. Politically, it's a puzzling place for the Democratic nominee to choose to fight; we wonder what John Sasso would have advised if he got the loyalty from his boss that Dan Quayle has.    Symbolically it is a truly revealing issue, though, as we're sure will shortly be confirmed by screams of &quot;unfair&quot; from the left. It says much about unresolved questions of the nature of our republic, including the wounds this country still suffers from the Vietnam War's self-doubt. And it says much about how Mr. Dukakis would shape the judiciary if elected, indeed about his own quixotic views of the law and democracy.    When the Democratic-dominated Massachusetts Legislature voted the law in 1977, Mr. Dukakis told the Massachusetts Supreme Court he opposed the bill, and asked for an advisory opinion, allowable under the peculiarities of the commonwealth's law. A majority said they thought the bill violated teachers' rights, and the Governor vetoed it. When the veto was overridden by a whopping 201-27 in the House and 24-7 in the Senate, he simply announced he was not going to enforce it. This is the position he now defiantly upholds while asking to be President. Extraordinary.    To take the legal issues first. While the Governor got the opinion he wanted from five Massachusetts justices, two dissented; one of the dissenters had been on the teaching side of first-year law classes at Harvard. While the Supreme Court, by a 5-4 vote in 1943, said it was unconstitutional to force students to salute the flag because school attendance was compulsory, this had little relevance here. Teachers are not forced to be teachers, and one would think the Legislature could specify the duties of state employees. Advisory opinions are a suspect practice to begin with, and other states, including New York, have full-fledged legal opinions upholding even more stringent pledge-of-allegiance bills. We doubt that the Supreme Court would find the 1977 law unconstitutional; at most the issue is undecided.    What, then, should we make of the Governor's decision merely to ignore the law rather than enforce it? Our reading of the Constitution is that it is the duty of an executive officer to enforce the law. If anyone sues, the courts, including the U.S. Supreme Court, would decide. Imagine the outrage if President Reagan simply announced he would not enforce the plant-closing law. Yet Mr. Dukakis incredibly manages to see the issue as his opponent defying the law by saying he would have signed the bill Mr. Dukakis believes is &quot;unconstitutional.&quot; Yesterday the lawyerly Mr. Dukakis was on the stump proclaiming that President Reagan's dealings with Panama's General Noriega were &quot;criminal.&quot;    The pledge of allegiance has a noble past. It was written in 1892 to foster American values by an editor of the magazine Youth's Companion, ironically based in Boston. Congress enacted the pledge into law. By custom, schoolchildren have recited the pledge for four generations. Why did Governor Dukakis dig himself in so heavily against the Legislature in 1977, and again against George Bush in 1988?    The short answer is that deep down, Mr. Dukakis, a self-proclaimed card-carrying member of the American Civil Liberties Union, is way to the left of the Legislature in the only state to vote for George McGovern.    In 1977, the nation was still in the midst of the post-Vietnam malaise, and it's hard to imagine a more poignant example of the era's moral relativism than the view that it was evil to require teachers to lead the pledge. The campaign issue is, Who has the moral high ground? Those who put their hand over their hearts, or those who tell teachers they have no duty to lead the pledge?    What is especially telling, too, was Governor Dukakis's resort to an advisory opinion from five judges to overrule the clear opinion of the state's elected Legislature. Like liberals before him, President Dukakis will surely appoint judges eager to take controversial issues of public policy away from the voters and their representatives. Three elderly Supreme Court justices are biding their time for what could be a foot race for the door whoever is elected in November; anyone who wants them replaced with justices likely to rule against the likes of pledge recitations should vote for Mr. Dukakis.    We have learned that liberals prefer power in the hands of activist judges of friendly political stripe. Mr. Dukakis's pledge of allegiance is to more fundamentally undemocratic empowerment of the courts at the expense of the voters. Others of us believe that in a democracy people are supposed to have the biggest say in the law under which they live. </TEXT></DOC>