<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0140 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):After Justice Powell</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   The gentleman lawyer left the Supreme Court in typical fashion. Lewis Powell Jr. had no political motive for his resignation. But his decision opens the way for President Reagan to continue crafting a Supreme Court that will offer 21st century jurisprudence the best possible legacy.    Justice Powell is described as a &quot;swing vote.&quot; He often had the task of designing opinions that were faithful interpretations of the Constitution, but that had enough vagueness to satisfy the activist justices.    This sometimes led to a lack of coherence on the court, a problem nowhere so evident as in the 1978 Bakke decision, which Justice Powell says was his proudest moment. In separate concurring opinions, four conservative justices opposed discrimination and four liberal justices approved affirmative action; it fell to Justice Powell to thread the needle. So he wrote, in effect, that racial quotas in admitting students to a state medical school are illegal but &quot;preferences&quot; are all right. His distinction resolved the case against the Davis, Calif., medical school's quotas, but spawned a torrent of litigation.    Justice Powell wrote many brilliant opinions, including cases upholding commercial free speech and limiting inmate appeals. But he will probably be remembered as the justice who filled the breach when the eight others could not find agreement. President Reagan should look for someone who will help forge a new consensus on how the Constitution, statutes and precedents should be interpreted.    The court system is not in the best of shape. A general disrespect for the law arises partly from a public perception that the Warren and early Burger courts themselves had a certain irreverence for the Constitution and the rule of law. Cases in areas such as the death penalty, property rights, abortion and school prayer sometimes were decided by politically liberal majorities on the basis of personal preference, not on a close reading of the law and precedents. To hide political leanings, judicial activists turned to self-defined tests and standards of review.    Antonin Scalia is showing what a difference one justice can make. He has been relentless in taking his new colleagues to task for purporting to find rights where none exist in the Constitution. He has also insisted on black-line standards of right and wrong. We don't always agree with his opinions, but they are always clearly argued. He upheld the exclusion of evidence gained through illegal search and seizure, but made the strong point that the police need certainty about what evidence will be allowed, not ceaseless litigation.    White House advisers are fortunate in having a list of proponents of judicial restraint and original-intent jurisprudence who are highly qualified for the Supreme Court. Among them, for example, is Judge Robert Bork of the D.C. Circuit. A former Yale law professor, Judge Bork is the intellectual heir to Alex Bickel, who made early arguments against freewheeling judicial activism. Judge Bork has practiced as a judge what he preached in a 1971 law review article on &quot;neutral principles.&quot; He wrote that &quot;where constitutional materials do not clearly specify the value to be preferred, there is no principled way to prefer any claimed human value to any other. The judge must stick close to the text and the history, and their fair implications, and not construct new rights.&quot;    Judge Richard Posner of the Seventh Circuit may be the most energetic legal scholar of his generation. He is best known as a founder of the law-and-economics movement, but he has written wisely on many topics, including how judges should approach cases. He says that a lack of candor is the biggest problem. He detailed how liberal judges hide their political motivations behind complex formulations of the law. Judge Posner was the most widely published academic when he taught at Chicago, and now writes more appellate decisions than any other judge in the country. Other fine candidates already on the federal bench include Judges Frank Easterbrook, Laurence Silberman and Ralph Winter.    Of course, any of these potential nominees runs the risk of outraging some Democrats. Sen. Paul Simon (D., Ill.) wants Justice Powell to be replaced by someone to &quot;build coalitions&quot; on the court. Some White House advisers will counsel selecting Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) because he would presumably be confirmed easily out of senatorial courtesy.    What the Rehnquist court needs most of all is someone to help the other justices rediscover coherence. This means a new justice with enough intellectual firepower to help move the court back to serious consideration of the text of the Constitution, and the Founders' intent that this would be a government of limited powers, with the judiciary the least dangerous branch of all. </TEXT></DOC>