<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880705-0028 </DOCNO><HL> Gulf Crisis: Downing of Airliner Bolsters Most Militant Of the Iranian Leaders --- Some Retaliation Is Likely; Chances for a Warming To America Are Dashed --- U.S. Warships Will Remain </HL><AUTHOR> John Walcott and Robert S. Greenberger (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><IN> ARO AIR </IN><G> DEF EXE </G><TEXT>   The U.S. downing of an Iranian airliner is likely to ignite retaliation against Americans and strengthen the hand of Iran's most radical leaders in a growing battle for control of its Islamic revolution.    By bolstering Tehran's hard-liners, the tragic accident could wreck any chances of an early rapprochement between the United States and Iran. There is also some risk it might prolong the Iran-Iraq war, already eight years old.    In the U.S., the incident, in which the U.S. cruiser Vincennes in the Persian Gulf mistakenly shot down a civilian Iran Air jet carrying 290 people, could become a lightning rod for criticism of the administration's gulf policy and its peacetime military buildup. But the U.S. was quick to accept responsibility for what President Reagan called &quot;a great tragedy,&quot; and the initial domestic reaction was muted.    Democrat Michael Dukakis responded cautiously while reiterating his calls for the U.S. to rely on international action, not unilateral military moves, to resolve problems abroad. Still, George Bush, his expected Republican opponent this fall, may again be forced to defend policies he didn't initiate. The vice president expressed condolences for the deaths but said, &quot;It appears the captain of the ship followed the rules. . . . He did what he had to do&quot; in the face of a perceived threat.    The latest incident is likely to provoke a more extensive debate about the administration's policy and the military's rules of engagement as the presidential campaign accelerates. One question that is sure to arise is whether the U.S. should pay reparations to Iran or to grieving families. As for the U.S. naval presence in the Persian Gulf, President Reagan pledged that it would continue despite the accident.    The USS Vincennes was responding to attacks from Iranian patrol boats when its radar detected the plane. It mistook the airliner, an Airbus 300, for an Iranian F-14 fighter and fired two missiles after repeatedly warning the plane and receiving no response. (The U.S. account of the incident also said the plane was outside the civilian air corridor, flying unusually low and descending.) The ability of the sophisticated air-defense system aboard the Vincennes, one of the Navy's highly touted Aegis cruisers, to confuse an airliner with a wingspan of 147 feet with a sleek F-14 with a wingspan of 38 feet is the latest in a series of military embarrassments that raise questions about how much the expensive Reagan defense buildup really strengthened the U.S. military.    If the initial U.S. reactions were cautious, there was no such restraint in Tehran. The Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini called on all Iranians to &quot;rush to the fronts for a full-fledged war against America and its surrogates.&quot; The ailing leader, making his first pronouncement yesterday about the incident Sunday, also called the downing of the plane a warning to all air travelers.    The Iranians rejected the U.S. contention the downing was an error, and the emotion inside Iran seemed sure to strengthen the hand of the hard-liners who control Tehran's terror apparatus. These men also reject all calls for better relations with the West and continue to seek a clear victory in the war with Iraq.    Recently, the hard-liners, including Prime Minister Mir Hosein Musavi and Interior Minister Ali Akbar Mohtashami-pur, had appeared to be on the defensive as the Iranian economy sagged further and Iraq surged forward against demoralized Iranian troops. Just before the downing of the plane, parliament speaker Hashemi Rafsanjani, often considered a pragmatist, blamed recent setbacks in the war on Iran's diplomatic isolation and tendency to make enemies abroad.    Tehran has been seeking to improve relations with France, Great Britain and Canada, and Iranian officials have sent vague signals that they also wanted to explore a rapprochement with Washington. Some analysts speculated that Iranian moderates would move to end the gulf war and improve relations with the U.S. after the death of Ayatollah Khomeini, who is 87 and thought to be in poor health.    Now, &quot;whatever prospects there were have gone glimmering,&quot; says Gary Sick, an Iran expert and former Carter administration White House aide. &quot;It's very difficult to believe that anybody in Iran will even be prepared to raise the issue of better relations with the U.S. for some time.&quot;    Iran hasn't made good on its threats to retaliate for previous clashes in the Persian Gulf, but U.S. officials and outside experts believe this time may be different. Even before the disastrous U.S. move, American embassies and military installations around the world had been warned to be on guard against a possible terrorist attack during the July 4 weekend. Says Gregory Rose, an Iran expert at the University of North Texas: &quot;This is an atrocity. How far into a corner do we have to back them before they fight back? I think we've crossed that threshold with this incident.&quot;    Robin Wright, an Iran expert with Washington's Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, adds, &quot;The loss of so much life, particularly the children, is likely to mobilize public opinion in favor of some kind of revenge, even among those who want to end the war with Iraq and open doors to the outside world.&quot;    If the Iranians do choose to retaliate, they have a number of tools at their disposal. Marine Gen. George Crist, the commander of the U.S. Central Command, notes that Iran is building hardened bunkers for Chinese-made Silkworm anti-ship missiles close to the Strait of Hormuz, near the spot where a missile from the Vincennes downed the Iran Air plane shortly after Iranian gunboats attacked a U.S. warship. U.S. officers say the Silkworm poses the most serious threat to Navy ships in the gulf.    And thanks in part to the Reagan administration, Iran also possesses the ability to shoot down airliners. Using Hawk missile parts secretly sold to them by the administration, the Iranians have activated missiles with a 25-mile range near the mouth of the Persian Gulf.    Some airlines have reacted already. Pan American World Airways suspended yesterday's flight from Frankfurt, West Germany, to Karachi, Pakistan, which passes within 20 miles of Iran. A spokeswoman said the airline would try to find a new route for the thrice-weekly flight. Officials for Japan Air Lines and Cathay Pacific Airways said their airliners were flying new routes from the Far East to Europe to keep clear of the area where the Iranian jetliner was downed, the Associated Press said.    But some experts think Iran is more likely to plan terrorism against American targets than to fire missiles at Navy ships or civilian airliners. The Iranians know that if they fired Silkworms or Hawks, the U.S. probably would destroy all the remaining missiles and their launchers, says Don Kerr of London's International Institute for Strategic Studies.    Instead, he suggests, the Iranians might resume heavy mining of the Persian Gulf to impede oil shipping and defy the U.S. fleet, which is there to keep the waterway safe for commercial traffic. Some American officials worry that Iran's fanatical Revolutionary Guards, who sail the small Swedish-made patrol boats that began the latest gulf clash, might launch a major kamikaze attack on the Vincennes or another Navy ship. (As for oil prices, the heightened gulf tensions had little effect on them.)    Paul Wilkinson, a terrorism expert at Scotland's Aberdeen University, predicts a rise in &quot;unprovoked attacks on civilian merchantmen on the high seas,&quot; as well as an increase in Iranian terrorist attacks in Europe and elsewhere. The most vulnerable targets, in Mr. Wilkinson's view: U.S. diplomats, government offices, airliners and airport check-in counters. The developments prompted London's Heathrow Airport to cancel a planned celebration of America's Independence Day at a terminal housing Pan American and TWA. Instead of red, white and blue bunting, travelers found heavily armed police.    Iranian officials have built the world's largest state-run terror apparatus, one with the capacity to strike virtually anywhere, U.S. intelligence analysts say. Experts believe the Iranians haven't yet tried an attack inside the U.S. because it is more difficult than terrorism in the Mideast or Europe and because they see the risk of U.S. retaliation outweighing the sensational publicity to be gained.    Nevertheless, American intelligence officials believe terrorism remains an important element of Iran's foreign and defense policy. After Saudi Arabia restricted Iranian pilgrimages to the Moslem holy city of Mecca this year, Iran launched a dozen terrorist attacks at Saudi airlines and other targets as far afield as Malaysia and Nigeria. Major terrorist attacks, however, usually take months to plan; the 1986 hijacking of a Pan Am jet in Pakistan was at least eight months in preparation.    In the wake of Sunday's tragedy, some experts also worried that Iran might encourage its allies in Lebanon to execute some of their nine American hostages, who include a Marine lieutenant colonel, Richard Higgins. However, says Mr. Sick, the former Carter aide, &quot;The first 24 hours are the most dangerous, the most emotional. We've bypassed that and there are no reports of that, so the threat is declining.&quot;    Mr. Sick, who had argued that the Reagan administration should respond carefully to the Iranian peace feelers, now thinks it should make a concrete gesture -- such as an offer of reparations to the families of the victims -- to convince Iranian officials that the downing was an error. He notes that Iraq defused American anger last year by offering to pay damages after an Iraqi jet fighter mistakenly fired at the frigate USS Stark, killing 37 seamen. Former national security adviser Brent Scowcroft says such payments would be &quot;the humanitarian thing to do.&quot;    But Ms. Wright, of the Carnegie Endowment, doubts such a gesture would be enough to calm the Iranians. Besides such a move, she suggests, Washington should pressure Iraq to end the tanker war in the Gulf or to stop using chemical weapons.    President Reagan yesterday side stepped questions about paying reparations and said he has ordered an investigation. He vowed that despite what he called &quot;an understandable accident,&quot; U.S. forces would continue to patrol the Persian Gulf.    The stepped-up American presence in the region has enjoyed bipartisan support, despite the 1987 Stark tragedy and fears of Iranian retaliation. So far, that hasn't changed: Both Gov. Dukakis, an early opponent of the decision to protect neutral shipping in the gulf, and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, a vocal critic of the administration's use of military force, say they oppose a unilateral American withdrawal from the strategic waterway.    &quot;Clearly, we have the right to defend our forces against imminent threats,&quot; Mr. Dukakis said at a July 4 ceremony in Charlestown, Mass. &quot;And apparently the shooting down of the airliner occurred over what appears to have been an unprovoked attack against our forces.&quot; He chided the international community for not finding a way to end the Iran-Iraq war.    The Pentagon immediately opened an investigation of the downing, which Iran said killed all 290 persons aboard. Just as quickly, administration officials moved to fend off unwelcome comparisons with the Soviet Union's 1983 downing of a Korean Air Lines airliner that was far off course.    Adm. William Crowe, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, argued that unlike the Korean plane, the Iranian jet was flying over a combat zone, didn't identify itself, and didn't respond to seven warnings from the Vincennes. In the minutes before they fired, the cruiser's officers even turned to an airline guide to try to identify the plane, but failed because the guide lists flights by their destination, not their origin, a Pentagon official said.    Some U.S. officials believe that in time emotions will cool, and necessity once more will draw Iran toward normalizing relations with the U.S. But Mr. Sick, the former Carter aide, fears that in a theocracy that cherishes martyrdom, &quot;This is something that will be remembered for a long, long time.&quot;    ---   Joann S. Lublin and John E. Yang contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>