<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0037 </DOCNO><HL> Supreme CourtRules on a RightOf U.S. Courts---Justices Let Federal CourtsRequire Foreign FirmsTo Provide Data in Suits---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN LABOR MAN FIN JPM CMBAIRLINES (AIR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court, in an important decision for international business disputes, ruled that federal courts have latitude in deciding whether to require that foreign companies produce records and other evidence in U.S. lawsuits.    The high court ruled that an evidence treaty, signed by the U.S. in 1972 and in effect in 16 other countries, isn't the exclusive or even primary method of obtaining evidence in international disputes. The court said federal judges may use their own judgment about when to follow federal court rules, rather than the treaty, for pretrial proceedings.    The dispute over the Hague Evidence Convention, as the treaty is called, is highly technical. But it has considerable practical significance in antitrust, securities and product-liability disputes. It drew friend-of-the-court briefs in the Supreme Court from the governments of West Germany, France, Britain and Switzerland.    Under U.S. pre-trial rules, both sides in a case must exchange large quantities of files and records that relate to the dispute. But in many other countries, pre-trial proceedings are much narrower in scope and take place under more rigid procedures. In some countries, laws prohibit disclosure of business information.    The Hague agreement established procedures to enable the pre-trial gathering of evidence across international lines. But in rulings that have caused concern abroad, several federal courts have said the Hague rules aren't the only procedure for obtaining evidence in federal courts.    In yesterday's ruling, the high court unanimously rejected two extremes -- that the treaty doesn't apply at all when the foreign companies accept the jurisdiction of the U.S. courts, and that the treaty is the exclusive means of resolving pretrial disputes.    But the justices were split 5-4 on other issues. In a majority opinion written by Justice John Stevens, the high court rejected the argument by two French companies that federal judges must use the treaty procedures first, before ordering broader pretrial discovery under federal court rules. The court said judges should decide case-by-case when to use the treaty and when to require broader pre-trial production of evidence.    In a dissenting opinion, Justice Harry Blackmun, joined by Justices William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall and Sandra O'Connor, said that without more direction, federal courts will handle the task &quot;inadequately&quot; and will rely on the treaty &quot;infrequently.&quot; This will be, the dissenters said, &quot;to the detriment of the United States' national and international interests.&quot;    Peter Heidenberger, a Washington lawyer who filed a brief for the German government, said, expressing his personal view only, that the ruling leaves &quot;many things unresolved. It will not solve the problem.&quot;    The ruling came in a lawsuit involving the Rallye plane, made by Societe Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, a French government-owned company. A Rallye plane crashed in Iowa in 1980, injuring a pilot and passenger who sued the French company.    A federal appeals court in St. Louis ruled that the treaty didn't apply at all to the case. The Supreme Court yesterday told the appeals court to reconsider.    Airport Ban   The justices struck down, 9-0, a Los Angeles airport regulation that bars inside the terminal any &quot;First Amendment activities,&quot; such as collecting signatures or distributing pamphlets. The high court, in an opinion written by Justice O'Connor, said the regulation was too broad. Read literally, the court said, the regulation even prohibits wearing campaign buttons or reading and talking.    The regulation was challenged by Jews for Jesus Inc. But the high court declined to decide an important issue in the case -- whether the airport terminal is a public forum and therefore subject to fewer government restrictions than if it were nonpublic.    Interrupting Police   In an opinion written by Justice Brennan, the high court also found too broad a Houston law making it illegal to &quot;interrupt&quot; a police officer in the course of duty. The court ruled that the law violates the First Amendment because it interferes with the &quot;freedom of individuals verbally to oppose or challenge police action without thereby resisting arrest.&quot;    The vote was 8-1. Justice Brennan was joined by four other justices. Separately, Justices Lewis Powell, O'Connor and Antonin Scalia voted to strike down the law for other reasons. Only Chief Justice William Rehnquist said the Houston law wasn't unconstitutional.    Victims' Rights   The justices, by a 5-4 vote, ruled that the Eighth Amendment, which bars cruel and unusual punishment, prohibits the use of &quot;victim impact statements&quot; at the sentencing stage of a criminal trial in which the death penalty may be imposed.    The high court struck down a Maryland law requiring that victim information be considered by a jury in deciding whether to impose the death penalty. The information details the effect of the crime on the victim and the victim's family, describing emotional distress and any need for psychological help. Thirty-one states permit the use of this kind of information in sentencing, with most of those states allowing it even in death-penalty cases.    In an opinion by Justice Powell, the high court said the jury is supposed to focus on the defendant, not the victim, in deciding whether to impose the death penalty. The information, the court said, may &quot;inflame the jury and divert it&quot; from considering the defendant's record.    Justices Scalia and Byron White dissented and were joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice O'Connor.    Labor Arbitration   The high court ruled that states can't give workers the right to go to court over a disputed labor issue that their collective-bargaining agreement says will be settled in arbitration. When a contract provides for arbitration, the justices said, federal law strongly favors this alternative and overrides state laws that point to the courthouse. The 7-2 decision, written by Justice Marshall, invalidates a California law that permits lawsuits in disputes over wages, even where there is an arbitration agreement.    The ruling, from which Justices Stevens and O'Connor dissented, involved a dispute over securities commissions between a broker and his former employer, Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., a General Electric Co. unit. The broker wanted to pursue the issue in court, but the high court said the matter should go to arbitration.    Manville Notes   The justices refused to hear an appeal by American Savings andamp; Loan Association of California, a Financial Corp. of America unit, which was ordered by a federal appeals court to pay Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., a J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. unit, $10 million in a dispute over Manville Corp. notes. The dispute involved American Savings andamp; Loan's July 1982 purchase of two Manville notes with a value of $5 million each, due to mature in September 1982.    Manville in August 1982 filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, but Chase Manhattan Bank, which held the notes for American Savings andamp; Loan, presented them for payment in September to Manville's bank, Morgan Guaranty Trust. The two notes were paid to Chase, a unit of Chase Manhattan Corp., which credited American Savings andamp; Loan's account.    Morgan sued American Savings andamp; Loan to recover the $10 million, and the thrift filed a third-party suit against Chase to indemnify it. A district court in Los Angeles ruled in favor of American Savings andamp; Loan and dismissed the suit against Chase.    But a federal appeals court in San Francisco in November 1986 ruled for Morgan and upheld dismissal of the lawsuit against Chase, leaving American Savings andamp; Loan liable for the $10 million. </TEXT></DOC>