<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870213-0029 </DOCNO><HL> Insider Trading: The Scandal Spreads---Street Bombshell:Inside-Trading ScandalImplicates High AidesAt Goldman, Kidder---Chiefs of Arbitrage Arrested,Along With Third ManIn the Widening Fraud---Traders Watch a Handcuffing---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GE GOVMT UCLSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The nightmare that Wall Streeters had been fearing for months came true yesterday: The government's insider-trading investigation officially implicated high officials at two of Wall Street's most prestigious investment-banking houses.    The nightmare isn't over, either. It is clear, industry leaders say, that the investigation will spread to still other major securities houses and financial institutions.    At 10:30 a.m. yesterday, federal vans pulled up to the downtown Manhattan skyscraper headquarters of Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. and Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co.    At Kidder Peabody, a brigade of federal marshals and postal inspectors descended on the office of Richard Wigton, the head of arbitrage and over-the-counter trading. In full view of the firm's stunned traders, he was placed against the wall, frisked and handcuffed, and led away in tears.    About a block away, at Goldman Sachs, Robert Freeman, the head of the arbitrage department, was arrested in his office on the 29th floor. He was escorted from the building but wasn't handcuffed.    As the news coursed through Wall Street, leaving shock and disbelief in its wake, Messrs. Wigton and Freeman were joined at Manhattan's federal courthouse by Timothy L. Tabor, until recently head of arbitrage at Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and previously an arbitrager at Kidder Peabody. Mr. Tabor had been dismissed by Merrill Lynch Wednesday and was arrested at his upper East Side apartment later that afternoon. He was jailed overnight in the Metropolitan Correctional Center.    The three were formally charged with conspiracy as alleged participants in an elaborate insider-trading scheme at Goldman Sachs and Kidder Peabody; Merrill Lynch, which hired Mr. Tabor only a few months ago, wasn't involved in the complaint.    In its charges, the government said that Kidder and Goldman swapped inside information about their investment-banking deals with each other and that Kidder and Goldman's Mr. Freeman traded on the information. Goldman gave Kidder information on Unocal, and Kidder gave Goldman information on Storer Communications Inc., the government charged.    No mention was made in court of Ivan F. Boesky, the arbitrager who until now had been the central figure in the government's inquiry. The government wouldn't say whether his cooperation had led to yesterday's charges. But several people familiar with the investigation said that Mr. Boesky implicated another major person involved in the alleged Goldman-Kidder scheme.    That person, in turn, implicated Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor. The government referred to this person only as &quot;CS-1&quot; (an abbreviation for confidential source 1) and said he was a Kidder official at the time of the events described in the government's complaint.    CS-1, according to the people familiar with the case, is Martin A. Siegel, currently co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and a takeover specialist at Kidder during the events mentioned in the government's complaint. The people said Mr. Siegel is expected to plead guilty to two felony charges today, and is cooperating fully in the government's continuing investigation.    People knowledgeable about the investigation say that Drexel wasn't involved in the alleged Goldman-Kidder scheme.    Mr. Siegel, who has been a key participant in many of the most important recent takeover deals, rivals Mr. Boesky's knowledge of the inner workings of Wall Street, and his cooperation could prove invaluable to the government. Of CS-1, the government said his &quot;reliability and trustworthiness&quot; have been &quot;amply established.&quot;    &quot;It's a blockbuster,&quot; said former Securities and Exchange Commissioner James Treadway in Washington of the government's case. &quot;It spreads the scandal to two more houses, and Goldman Sachs has the reputation of being the cream of the crop.&quot;    Investment bankers were more guarded. &quot;It's another black mark against Wall Street,&quot; said Daniel Good, the head of merchant banking at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. &quot;I think everybody looks at this in almost stunned silence.&quot;    Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor couldn't be reached for comment. Stanley Arkin, Mr. Wigton's lawyer, said his client &quot;denies doing anything wrong -- he's an honest man.&quot; Lawyers for Mr. Freeman didn't return phone calls and Mr. Tabor's lawyers couldn't be reached.    A spokesman for Goldman Sachs said, &quot;Based upon our own internal review, we have no reason to believe there has been any wrongdoing on the part of the head of our arbitrage department or our firm. We have not been contacted by the U.S. attorney's office or the SEC.&quot;    Sources close to Goldman Sachs said that federal marshals had roped off the firm's takeover-trading area and were carting off documents yesterday afternoon. They added that Mr. Freeman hadn't been subpoenaed and that the firm hadn't had any warning that any government action was imminent. &quot;Everyone is in total shock,&quot; said one employee.    A Kidder Peabody spokesman said, &quot;We do not have any information as to the basis of these charges. The firm has had a longstanding policy against trading on non-public information, and as far as we know, it has been strictly observed.&quot; The firm added that it hasn't been subpoenaed &quot;for any further information related to this charge.&quot;    Mr. Siegel couldn't be reached. His lawyer, Jed S. Rakoff, declined comment. A Drexel spokeswoman said the firm hadn't any comment on Mr. Siegel. Previously, Drexel officials said they weren't aware of any wrongdoing by officials at the firm, which has received subpoenas in connection with other aspects of the government's case against Mr. Boesky.    As reported in this newspaper last November, Mr. Freeman and Unocal were among the names mentioned in government subpoenas issued at the time the Boesky scandal was made public.    Goldman Sachs advised Unocal in its 1985 takeover battle against Mr. Pickens, a battle Unocal ultimately won, though at a high cost. According to the government's charges, Mr. Freeman disclosed inside information about a key Unocal defense maneuver in a telephone call to CS-1. Mr. Freeman, the government alleged, told CS1 that Unocal would announce an &quot;exclusionary&quot; self-tender offer, meaning Unocal would buy stock from shareholders other than Mr. Pickens. He also allegedly revealed important details, such as the percentage of Unocal stock that would be subject to the tender offer.    CS-1, who was out of New York at the time, in turn called the Kidder Peabody arbitrage department to pass on the information to Messrs. Wigton and Tabor, the government alleged. They embarked on a sophisticated trading strategy involving put options on Unocal stock, based on their expectations that the market would react negatively to news of the self-tender, according to the government.    Kidder Peabody made &quot;millions of dollars of illegal profits&quot; on that and other transactions, the government said.    The government also alleged that inside information passed from Kidder Peabody to Mr. Freeman. The government charged that about the same time as the Unocal deal, CS-1 told Mr. Freeman of confidential plans by a Kidder Peabody client, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts Inc., a major leveraged-buyout firm, to launch a takeover bid for Storer. Mr. Freeman, the government said, already owned Storer stock for his personal account, and he used the inside information to help &quot;determine an appropriate price at which to sell call options,&quot; the government said. In such a strategy, an investor sells the right to buy stock at a fixed price.    The government made clear that the alleged scheme isn't limited to the Unocal and Storer transactions. In its charges, the government said the scheme lasted from about June 1984 through January 1986 and involved &quot;many specific significant corporate events in which such trading of material, non-public information occurred.&quot;    In Amarillo, Texas, Mr. Pickens said that he and other Mesa officials &quot;have had no contact from the SEC on anything related to Ivan Boesky or insider trading.&quot; He declined further comment. A Unocal spokesman declined comment. Spokesmen for Kohlberg Kravis and Storer couldn't be reached last night.    Securities-industry observers said that Goldman and Kidder could be open to lawsuits from Unocal and Storer, respectively, for unauthorized leaking of confidential information. And the SEC and the New York Stock Exchange might bring charges against the two investment banks for failure to properly supervise employees.    Wall Street was rocked as much by the way in which the government handled the arrests as it was by the serious nature of the charges. No one implicated in the Boesky scandal has been arrested since Dennis B. Levine, who spent a night in jail last May after the government learned that he was trying to secretly transfer his funds. He is awaiting sentence after pleading guilty to four felony counts last June.    People familiar with the government's methods said they don't believe any of yesterday's defendants were planning to flee or move assets. Indeed, Mr. Freeman was planning to leave this morning to go skiing in Colorado, and the government said he could proceed with his vacation as long as he was processed and fingerprinted first.    But the sources suggested that a recent decision by CS-1 to plead guilty had led the government to act quickly before the informant's identity was disclosed, leading the defendants to suspect that they might be implicated. They said, too, that the government's action sends a powerful message that wrongdoers should cooperate to avoid a similar fate.    The three defendants arraigned yesterday appeared somber but composed. Their appearance was hastily scheduled, and they were brought before U.S. District Judge John F. Keenan in a half-empty basement courtroom. The three waived a reading of the charges, and they won't respond until they enter pleas to an indictment that, under law, must be acted on by a grand jury by March 3.    Mr. Tabor, casually attired in white sneakers, slacks and a polo shirt, was released on a $500,000 personal-recognizance bond. Mr. Freeman's lawyer, Paul Curran, asked the judge to waive bail for his client, saying Mr. Freeman's account at Goldman &quot;exceeds $500,000.&quot; But Judge Keenan said some bail was &quot;appropriate&quot; and set it at $250,000. Mr. Wigton was also freed on a $250,000 personal-recognizance bond. All three were ordered to surrender their passports.    At a press conference following the court proceedings, U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani said the arrests were just the beginning of &quot;a very long and substantial investigation&quot; that isn't limited to insider trading. He defended the government's abrupt actions, saying, &quot;It's not at all unusual for us to arrest people for federal felonies.&quot;    In recent statements, Mr. Giuliani has called for stiffer prison terms for white-collar criminals and, in general, has been suggesting that insider traders should be treated like common criminals. &quot;If they had common sense, and some sense of morality,&quot; he said of securities-law violators, &quot;what they would do is cooperate and try to help the U.S. government clean up this mess.&quot;    Mr. Giuliani wouldn't say where the government's continuing investigation is headed. But he said that &quot;other institutions and people&quot; are being investigated.    ---   William Power contributed to this article.    ---   A CHRONOLOGY OF THE WALL STREET SCANDAL   May 12, 1986: SEC charges Dennis Levine of Drexel Burnham Lambert with making $12.6 million since mid-1980 from insider trading. SEC also names as defendant Bernhard Meier, Mr. Levine's broker at Bank Leu International in Nassau.    May 13, 1986: Mr. Levine is arrested and charged with obstructing justice for attempting to destroy records. He is released on a $5 million bond.    June 5, 1986: Mr. Levine pleads guilty to four felony charges and agrees to cooperate with the government in its investigation. Settling civil insider-trading charges, he agrees to pay $11.6 million.    July 1, 1986: SEC charges Robert Wilkis and Ira Sokolow, former investment bankers at Lazard Freres and Shearson Lehman Brothers, with exchanging confidential information with Mr. Levine. They settle with SEC. Mr. Wilkis allegedly made about $3 million from insider trading. Mr. Sokolow agreed to give up $120,000 in profits.    July 3, 1986: David Brown, investment banker at Goldman Sachs, resigns amid SEC investigation.    July 14, 1986: Ilan Reich, takeover lawyer at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen andamp; Katz, resigns amid government investigation.    August 19, 1986: Litton Industries Inc. sues Shearson Lehman and Mr. Levine, charging that Mr. Levine's insider trading made Litton pay more than necessary to take over Itek Corp. Suit seeks $30 million in damages.    Sept. 4, 1986: Mr. Sokolow and Mr. Brown plead guilty to criminal charges of passing stolen information to Mr. Levine.    Oct. 3, 1986: Mr. Reich is indicted by federal grand jury in the Levine case.    Oct. 9, 1986: Mr. Reich pleads guilty to two criminal counts for his role in the Levine case. Mr. Brown agrees to pay $145,790 to the SEC.    Nov. 6, 1986: Mr. Sokolow is sentenced to a year and a day in prison for his role in the Levine case.    Nov. 14, 1986: Ivan Boesky agrees to pay $100 million penalty for trading on insider information supplied by Mr. Levine from Feb. 1985 to Feb. 1986; agrees to plead guilty to unspecified criminal charges.    Nov. 18-19, 1986: Drexel is identified as being under investigation for possible securities-law violations in connection with the Boesky probe.    Dec. 18, 1986: FMC Corp., in a lawsuit similar to Litton Industries', accuses Mr. Boesky and others with inflating the cost of the company's recapitalization plan.    Dec. 23, 1986: Mr. Wilkis pleads guilty to four felony counts for his key role in the Levine case; Randall D. Cecola, formerly a junior financial analyst at Lazard, pleads guilty to two counts of filing false tax returns and settles SEC charges of participating in the Levine scheme.    Jan. 12, 1987: Mr. Brown sentenced to 30 days in prison on weekends and fined $10,000.    Jan. 23, 1987: Mr. Reich sentenced to a year and a day in prison.    Jan. 28, 1987: Michael Davidoff, former head trader for Mr. Boesky, pleads guilty to one count of securities fraud for violating capital requirements at Mr. Boesky's firm. Mr. Davidoff, who had close contacts with many Wall Street traders, agrees to cooperate with the government.    Feb. 9, 1987: Mr. Wilkis sentenced to a year and a day in prison.    Feb. 10, 1987: Mr. Cecola sentenced to six years' probation.    Feb. 11-12, 1987: Three top Wall Street figures -- Robert M. Freeman, a Goldman Sachs partner; Timothy L. Tabor, a former official at Kidder Peabody and Merrill Lynch; and Richard Wigton, a Kidder vice president -- arrested and charged with an information-swapping conspiracy that allegedly made Kidder millions of dollars in illegal profits. Mr. Freeman was also charged with trading for his own account on the information. </TEXT></DOC>