<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890907-0051 </DOCNO><DD> = 890907 </DD><AN> 890907-0051. </AN><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:@  Ariel Sharon: An Israeli General's Own Story@  ----@  By George Melloan </HL><DD> 09/07/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   Ariel Sharon's autobiography, &quot;Warrior&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 571 pages, $24.95), summons up vivid memories. In June 1967, with Egyptian tanks pouring into the Sinai and Jordan and Syria mobilizing forces along Israel's borders, I was camped with other correspondents at the Tel Aviv Hilton. A Danish TV newscaster, feeling the pressure, issued a lament that echoed down the hall: &quot;What's going to happen to this poor little country?&quot;    What happened, of course, is history. The Israeli Defense Forces defeated the combined armies of five Arab nations in six days. In the 19 years since Israel's war of independence, the IDF had become a formidable fighting force, likely the best, man for man, in the world.    Ariel Sharon deserved much of the credit. He had trained the paratroops and tankers. He conducted a decisive battle, routing the Egyptian forces at Abu Agheila to open the way for the Israeli dash to the East Bank of the Suez Canal.    Mr. Sharon's book, written with David Chanoff, has three levels, military, political and personal. Soldiers and military historians will learn much from his accounts of battle management. Describing the Abu Agheila clash, Mr. Sharon tells of his comrade Avraham Yoffe sending a tank brigade between dueling Egyptian and Sharon tanks, emerging unscathed to forge deeper into the Sinai interior.    Mr. Sharon denies that he was the &quot;king of improvization.&quot; He believed in meticulous planning, but he planned battles in such a way as to create the unexpected, believing that the Arabs, while brave, often could not cope effectively with surprises. He told his troops that they would never be left behind on a battlefield, even if recovering Israeli wounded or dead meant further casualties. The confidence and solidarity this engendered more than offset the risks, he believed.    He drilled his officers constantly on the importance of knowing the terrain intimately to gain tactical advantage, especially during night fights. His explorations of the Sinai during the 1956 effort to block Gamal Abdel Nasser's takeover of the Strait of Tiran and the Suez Canal stood him in good stead in the Six-Day and Yom Kippur wars. Interestingly, he makes little mention of how that 1956 effort, made jointly with the British and French, was undermined by U.S. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles. Some historians rank this as one of the greatest postwar U.S. foreign policy blunders.    Mr. Sharon's maverick image originated with the 1956 campaign. Ordered, mysteriously, to stay out of the strategic Mitla Pass, he requested permission to recover his wounded. But in doing that he also seized the pass, opening the way to the Western Sinai.    IDF commanders were as combative in strategy sessions as with the enemy, and Mr. Sharon was usually in the thick of the fights. Yet in the 1973 Yom Kippur war, he clearly saved Israel from a major defeat by demanding from a reluctant and confused high command permission to strike across the Suez Canal at Anwar Sadat's Soviet-supplied anti-aircraft (SAM) batteries, which were keeping the Israeli air force at bay. Later, the IDF changed its war doctrine to allow a field commander, subject to later court martial review, to disobey the orders of officers in the rear if it was clear they had no grasp of the tactical situation.    &quot;Warrior&quot; draws much of its richness from Mr. Sharon's gentler side, however. He gives a vivid account of a tour through Africa in 1964 with Mr. Yoffe and their discovery of a Jewish tribe in the wilds of Gondar, high on the Ethiopian escarpment. These Jews had been cut off from mainstream Judaism for millenia, &quot;yet still they nurtured their racial memories and they treasured their connection.&quot;    After Camp David, Mr. Sharon entertained at his farm the Egyptian officers he had fought against in the Yom Kippur war. &quot;I had never seen their faces before, but their voices were all familiar. In 1973, I had listened to them on the radio net.&quot;    Mr. Sharon's personal tragedies have a Biblical quality. His young wife, Gali, was killed in an auto crash, leaving him with their five-year-old son, Gur. Later, Gur was killed by a playmate's accidental discharge of an antique shotgun. In the Yom Kippur war, Mr. Sharon saw many of his dearest comrades fall in battle, which no doubt contributed to his bitterness about the conduct of that war. Later, Mr. Sharon married Gali's sister, Lily, and they have two sons, Gilad and Omri.    Mr. Sharon's individualism no doubt owes much to his parents. His father, Samuil, and his mother, Vera, fled to Israel from Tiflis in 1921 to escape the Red Army, which had no love for Zionists. Vera was never a very strong Zionist, and Samuil was not a socialist, which often put them at odds with the other residents of Kfar Malal, their &quot;moshav,&quot; or farm cooperative, on the Plain of Sharon. When young &quot;Arik&quot; was growing up, Jews and Arabs rubbed shoulders daily in Palestine. That changed when refugees from the Holocaust began clamoring for admission against Arab resistance and British temporizing. Further exacerbating the tensions, the Soviets began to promote Arab socialism, fomenting hatred of Jews as a unifying theme. The Soviets have sponsored almost every major assault on Israel and have not given up their Mideast designs.    Which brings us to today's Ariel Sharon, who as a leader of the conservative Likud government coalition is a major factor in Israeli politics. As minister of defense in 1982, Mr. Sharon launched an offensive against the Soviet-equipped PLO army in Lebanon in response to shellings of Israel's northern villages. As usual, the offensive was a military success. It resulted in the expulsion of a part of the PLO force from Lebanon and blocked off Syrian intervention.    But it also brought Mr. Sharon a major political setback. Christian forces, entering the West Beirut neighborhoods of Sabra and Shatilla to try to rout out PLO fighters, massacred Moslem non-combatants. Mr. Sharon was accused of instigating the massacre as a reprisal for the murder of Lebanese president Bashir Gemayel, who had become Mr. Sharon's friend.    An inquiry commission absolved Mr. Sharon of that charge, although holding him &quot;indirectly&quot; responsible. He later won a &quot;blood libel&quot; action against Time magazine for its claim of a &quot;secret appendix&quot; to the commission report alleging Sharon complicity. But the Israeli left used the Sabra-Shatilla affair as a cue for attacking the Menachem Begin government, and the hue and cry was picked up by leftists internationally. Mr. Begin asked Mr. Sharon to resign as minister of defense, although he continued in the government as a minister without portfolio.    Mr. Sharon is seldom critical of the U.S., a country he much admires despite the State Department's often-inept Mideast interventions. But he clearly is bitter about the bloodshed that has wracked Lebanon since the U.S. and his enemies, in effect, took matters out of his hands.    Which brings me another memory of 1967, giving three Israeli soldiers a lift in my rented car on the road to Jerusalem in the last stages of the Six-Day War. &quot;Are you going to give back the land you conquered?&quot; I asked. They looked at me mystified. Of course not.    Israel did give back some land to Egypt in exchange for peace. But Mr. Sharon cites a maxim he told his soldiers: &quot;To get the wagon up the hill, first you have to find a stone to put under the wheel. First is the stone. We should be secure, first of all, to enable normal life. Then we have to deal with all the rest.&quot;    &quot;Warrior&quot; will open new and rancorous debates in Israel's tempestuous politics. But the book may serve Mr. Sharon's political goals nonetheless by reminding Israelis how often, over 41 years, they have needed that stone.    ---   Mr. Melloan is deputy editor of the Journal's editorial page. </TEXT></DOC>