<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0086 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Sandinista Education: RevolutionaryBlessing or Totalitarian Curse</HL><DD> 10/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   The following are excerpts of two open letters between Nicaraguan Minister of Education Fernando Cardenal and U.S. Secretary of Education William J. Bennett:    Managua, 17 September 1987   Mr. Secretary:   I take advantage of your presence in Nicaragua to tell you that it is a surprise that you have come here only to talk about the Constitution of your country and not to learn about the damage that your government's permanent violation of that Constitution has done to our Fatherland, especially in the field of education.    Since in your rapid visit you have not realized the existence of such damage, I emphatically denounce some of the main direct damage that the military aggression -- trained, financed and directed by your government -- has done to us: 411 teachers murdered; 96 students murdered; 66 teachers kidnapped; 59 students kidnapped; 46 schools destroyed; 21 schools damaged; 555 schools temporarily closed, which means that some 45,000 students have been left without schooling, the majority in the rural sector, and 480 Centers for the Popular Adult Education closed. To this should be added more than 15,000 war orphans, 2,500 children disabled, the great majority young people who are in need of education.    If we were not victims of this unjust and criminal aggression this year, we would be attending to 250,000 more students than we are presently. In spite of this military aggression and the blockade that your government has illegally imposed on us, there have been significant advances acknowledged internationally in Nicaraguan education. And be sure, Mr. Secretary of Education, that our people will continue to accelerate and deeply extend their educational and revolutionary conquests. The difficulties have become a challenge for advancement and the aggression will not impede new and renewed achievements in education. . . .    While your government attacks us, promotes war, seeks more money for new aggression and boycotts the Guatemalan agreements of the Central American presidents, our people are working toward a firm and long-lasting peace. In this respect, our government has been faithfully complying with all the commitments that we undertook, even before the anticipated date, and has publicly manifested its determination to comply with them in their entirety.    Your visit to our country could have been positive for the aspirations and legitimate right to peace of Nicaragua and our other Central American brothers. We receive all the North Americans who, with feelings of respect or of fraternity, come to our Fatherland. But we reject the arrogance of those who, biased as you are, dare to give a press conference and give opinions about our country and its education after being here only 24 hours and without showing the slightest interest in the reality of our situation.    Fernando Cardenal, Minister of    Education of the Free Nicaragua   Washington, D.C., October 29, 1987    Minister Cardenal:   You complain that I used my visit to Nicaragua last month to speak of the principles embodied in the U.S. Constitution, and not of the bitter civil war that now divides your country. I am an educator and philosopher by training, not a soldier or professional revolutionary, and so in Managua I did not refer to battlefields and blockades, or to kidnappings and assassinations. Instead, I spoke of liberty, a topic you find &quot;surprising&quot; for its supposed irrelevance to your movement's &quot;realities.&quot;    I am not surprised by this acknowledgment of your government's indifference to liberty. The fact is that millions of Americans -- in my country, throughout Central America and in Nicaragua itself -- have come to view Sandinism and liberty as irreconcilable opposites. Last month in Managua I was fortunate to meet some of the bravest among them. &quot;The man on the street,&quot; one of them told me, &quot;cannot give his heart to the regime.&quot;    I came to Nicaragua already knowing something of your policies and practices as education minister. I knew that you exercise complete control over all Nicaraguan education, and that your laws establish a uniform national curriculum that severely restricts religious instruction -- even at religious institutions. I knew that unquestioning loyalty to Sandinism is the central message of this curriculum, and that it is also a prerequisite for employment as a teacher, for student promotion from grade to grade and for enrollment in higher education. I knew, too, that you have cynically garrisoned Sandinista soldiers in schools throughout the countryside, and have then depicted rebel attacks on those soldiers as assaults on children.    But not until I met individual Nicaraguans in their own country did I fully appreciate the true human toll of your assault on independent education. They told me of a 13-year-old boy whose class was assigned a report on three men whose lives have benefited mankind. The boy wrote well about Albert Einstein, Louis Pasteur and Jesus Christ, but received no credit. His teacher explained that in your new Nicaragua, Marx, Engels and Lenin are the only correct answers.    In Managua I listened to a distraught father describe, with tears in his eyes, how one recent afternoon his very young son came home from one of your schools innocently singing the words of Sandinism's rally hymn -- &quot;We will fight against the Yanqui, enemy of humanity.&quot; And later I heard the story of Sofonias Cisneros, the head of your country's Christian parent-teacher association. When in 1985 he dared join the Nicaraguan bishops in criticism of the rigid politicizations of your schools, he was arrested and savagely beaten by Lenin Cerna, head of State Security. Only after an official appeal by the Mexican ambassador was Mr. Cisneros released, naked and badly bruised, in the middle of a Managua traffic intersection.    Barricada {the party publication in which the minister's letter first appeared} calls you my &quot;Nicaraguan counterpart.&quot; Barricada is wrong; we are different. The United States was created specifically to ensure that no one man or single class of men should ever here assume the kind of sweeping power over public and private life that you and your party assert claim to in Nicaragua. And for all its flaws, present and past, the United States has remained true to its purpose.    I am not the comandante of my country's system of education. I do not supervise a disciplined, centralized effort to reshape the human mind by force, as you do; education in the U.S. remains under the control of parents and local communities, and is a project not of politics but of knowledge, skills and character. And my job is temporary. Citizens of the United States know that they may vote to remove my party from office, and that we will go, as our settled law and conviction of conscience require. About you and your colleagues the Nicaraguan people know no such thing for sure.    That is the difference of liberty. And as our President Lincoln proclaimed when the United States was consumed by its own bloody civil war, liberty &quot;is worth fighting for, to secure such an inestimable jewel.&quot; You tell me that you cannot see the connection between the idea of freedom and the political and military struggle in which your party finds itself today. I tell you that the Nicaraguans who oppose you see it clearly. That is their advantage. And that is why my country wishes them well.    William J. Bennett   U.S. Secretary of Education</TEXT></DOC>