<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870204-0162 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- The Gallery:Angst and Introspection---By Jack Flam</HL><DD> 02/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Inspiration is probably the most elusive of human achievements -- difficult to attain and even harder to hold on to. In our own century, especially, there have been a number of artists and writers who produced truly inspired work in their early years but later lost some essential part of their creative energy and spent the rest of their lives producing lesser works.    The Austrian painter Oskar Kokoschka (1886-1980) is an excellent example of an artist who faced this predicament -- as the retrospective exhibition of his work currently at the Guggenheim Museum makes clear. This well-installed and interesting exhibition also makes it clear that Kokoschka was an artist of uncommon courage. Although his period of greatness ended around 1915, he kept trying to make the flower of inspiration grow again by painting continually, experimenting with a broad range of techniques and styles, and traveling extensively, as if in search of a lost sense of self. And if he never again attained the quality of his early works, some of his later paintings are surprisingly strong.    While still in his early 20s, he made an impression in Viennese artistic circles with the striking works he showed at the progressive Kunstschau exhibitions of 1908 and 1909. He was also active as a poet and dramatist at this time, and in 1909 mounted his violent, expressionistic play &quot;Murderer, Hope of Women&quot; (which was presented at the Guggenheim). It was at this time that Kokoschka came to the attention of architect Adolf Loos, who not only pushed him in the direction of portrait painting but also gave him material assistance and put him in touch with many of his early patrons.    The portraits that Kokoschka painted between 1909 and the beginning of his military service in 1915 form the core upon which his reputation rests. Particularly striking is the way Kokoschka varied his painting technique in accordance with the character of his subjects. The chunky forms, energetic brush strokes and bold colors in &quot;Father Hirsch&quot; (1909), for example, suggest the earthy vigor of the man. The portrait of Joseph de Montesquiou-Fezensac (1910), by contrast, is rendered largely in transparent grays and drawn with nervous incised lines, suggesting by the technique itself an attenuated aesthete. In the portrait of Else Kupfer (1911), the woman and her small dog are evoked by gently applied, scumbled brush strokes, their forms barely discernible from the dark but sonorous background against which they are set. In the portrait of Egon Wellesz, done the same year, a similarly lyrical application of paint gives a very different effect, suggesting a luminous spiritual energy.    A number of Kokoschka's drawings are also shown, several adjoining the paintings for which they were studies. Among the most impressive of such pairings are the drawn and painted portraits of Lotte Franzos (1909). While the drawing is a straightforwardly probing (and melancholy) psychological study, the painting suggests an ethereal, almost disembodied, spirituality. An even stronger metaphysical quality is suggested in the great double portrait of the art historian Hans Tietze and his wife (1909), in which the forms glow with an unearthly light and the floating hands seem to grope toward some unfathomable mystery.    Kokoschka's great period came to a close in a painful moment of personal trauma and historical cataclysm. In 1912 he joined a distinguished club of geniuses who were lovers of Alma Mahler, the widow of the composer. The affair, as tempestuous as any fan of expressionism could hope for, did not prevent and may indeed have provoked some of Kokoschka's greatest paintings -- self-portraits, portraits of Alma, and double portraits of them both, suffused with emotion and painterly bravura.    By 1914, however, Mrs. Mahler's passion for Kokoschka had, inevitably, waned. He knew it and was able to paint his stormy sadness in the great double portrait called &quot;The Tempest,&quot; which is not in the show, and in the prophetic &quot;Knight Errant&quot; of 1914-15, which is: The armor-clad artist lies expiring on a wind-tossed shore.    In January 1915, Kokoschka began his military service with the elite 15th Imperial-Royal Regiment of Dragoons. In February, Alma Mahler left him for Bauhaus architect Walter Gropius. Shortly afterwards, Kokoschka volunteered for the eastern front, where in late August he was severely wounded.    Over the next several years, Kokoschka suffered great mental and physical anguish. In 1918, he had doll maker Hermine Moos make a life-size likeness of Alma, which he included in his disturbing, violently brushed self-portrait of 1920-21. During the '20s he took to traveling and painted views of London, Prague, Lyon, Vienna and New York. They all look curiously alike, despite their topographical detail. Similarly, his portraits from this time and later lose spiritual force as they become more visually descriptive.    There are some marvelous exceptions to this, however, such as the wonderfully haughty portrait of Kathleen, countess of Drogheda (1944-46), and the sharply animated portrayal of Agatha Christie (1969). Indeed, a number of the '60s paintings that are shown together in the large lower gallery are quite impressive for their energy, virtuosity and vividness.    A handsome catalog illustrates all of the works, but unfortunately does not give the much-needed background information on the individual paintings that was provided by London's Tate Gallery for a somewhat different version of the exhibition last year. The exhibition, sponsored by United Technologies Corp., will be up until Feb. 16.    Also on view at the Guggenheim until Feb. 16 is Claes Oldenburg's &quot;Knife Ship from &quot;Il Corso del Coltello,'&quot; a sculpture of a ship in the form of a giant red Swiss army knife, complete with two giant blades and a giant corkscrew. Originally conceived for a performance created in Venice in 1985 by Mr. Oldenburg, writer Coosje van Bruggen, and architect Frank O. Gehry, the 40-foot-long knife looks quite at home on the museum's ground floor. The stately movement of the blades and corkscrew is set against the relentless rowing rhythm of eight silver oars. Besides its inherent interest, this large construction also provides a witty contrast to the angst and introspection of the Kokoschka show. Indeed, after you have seen the paintings in the galleries above, the effect of the large red ship is not unlike that of sherbet after a heavy meal. </TEXT></DOC>