<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0140 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Economic Thought Over 1,500 Years---By George Stigler</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The history of economic thought is normally viewed as intellectual history, concerned with the actual theories and occasional facts that past economists have proposed or combatted. There is little of this in John Kenneth Galbraith's book, &quot;Economics in Perspective: A Critical History&quot; (Houghton Mifflin, 324 pages, $19.95). Mr. Galbraith is interested in economists and in public discussions of economic policy rather than in the detailed content of professional economic writings. One need not be an economist to read this book, and in fact only non-economists will find it fresh and slightly instructive.    Mr. Galbraith begins with the classical Greeks, but in their society and for the next 1,500 years or so of Western history, he repeatedly tells us that there could not be economics in the modern sense. &quot;Economics in all modern manifestations centers on the market; in a world in which the market was a subsidiary, even esoteric, aspect of life, economics as now known still {in the Middle Ages} did not exist.&quot;    No wage theory would emerge when slaves were the major labor force, no price theory would emerge when most goods were produced for personal consumption or at least did not enter markets in which numerous buyers and sellers dealt.    This attitude represents an incomprehensibly narrow reading of the nature of economic life. Even slaves must be trained (and bought and sold). It must be decided how much and which incentives will make them work well. Similarly, how are lands divided among people and crops chosen? How are marriages arranged and dowries set? Is custom a protector of the weak (as John Stuart Mill thought) or simply an efficient way to organize economic relationships under stable conditions? Whenever scarcity and choice are found, economic problems are present -- and are solved by the participants, however much they are neglected by philosophers. It is not an easy task to explain the near absence of economic writings during these earlier ages, but the absence of any need for prudent use of resources is not part of the answer.    Beginning with his discussion of Adam Smith, Mr. Galbraith deploys a second theme: Economists' work is governed by the economic problems of their time -- and usually bent to accommodate the interests of those in power. The first half of this theme has been proposed most forcefully by Wesley Clair Mitchell, the second part by Marx. Neither they nor Mr. Galbraith has made a serious attempt to buttress either proposition in detail. Of course economists are influenced by the world about them, but in no simple, direct or complete fashion. Economists virtually ignored the subject of population from 1850 to 1960, a period witnessing unprecedented rates of growth and migration of peoples. Economists began to study consumer behavior only in the 1870s -- but consumers were plentiful before that time. Similarly, most economists have been free traders continuously since Adam Smith's time, to the considerable displeasure of important manufacturing and agricultural interests. The challenging question is how and when economic and political conditions impinge on economic writings; it is not addressed by Mr. Galbraith.    The great majority of economists' theoretical work during the past hundred years has been on the determination of prices, outputs, and the payments to factors of production: so-called microeconomics. Mr. Galbraith has little respect for this area of work, which he believes has vanishingly small relevance in a world of ubiquitous monopolies, giant corporations, labor unions and all-embracing government regulations. He therefore devotes at least half of his pages for the modern period to economic and political history, with vignettes on money, the welfare state, the Great Depression, inflation and communism. The general reader will no doubt find these historical sketches more digestible than the theories of general equilibrium and oligopoly would have been.    It is only in treating of more recent times that Mr. Galbraith becomes animated. The fundamental economic problems of modern society, he believes, are the attainment of adequate aggregate demand and full employment of labor, and the avoidance of inflation. The classical economics of the 19th and early 20th centuries was helpless to deal with these problems because it was in the thralldom of Say's Law (explained as the proposition that there cannot be insufficient demand or serious unemployment; I am reminded of the suggestion that it should be called Hearsay's Law). J.M. Keynes emancipated economics (and modern societies) from this obsession in 1936. Keynesian policies together with the extensive adoption of social welfare programs saved capitalism. The failure of Republicans and/or conservatives to appreciate this rescue of capitalism is much lamented. Surprisingly tolerant comments are made about Milton Friedman's role in reviving monetarism to remedy the Keynesian failure to deal with inflation in a potentially feasible way.    In the adoption of both anti-cyclical fiscal policies and welfare policies, Mr. Galbraith attributes much influence to economists: Keynes in the former area, Arthur C. Pigou, J.R. Commons and other Wisconsin economists in the latter. This is a gratifying thought, but I believe that our influence appears to be powerful only when we support policies ripe for adoption. Consider the failures of near-unanimous professional opposition to protectionism, minimum-wage law and usury laws.    This book, as I have said, was not written to please the likes of me, nor has it inadvertently done so. I suspect that it will do little better with the non-economists: It is sufficiently conscientious to present much opaque commentary on economists, and insufficiently spirited to summon followers to the political and economic standard with which Prof. Galbraith has long been associated. I shall share Mr. Galbraith's curiosity, if not his interest, in the verdict of the market.    ---   Mr. Stigler is director of the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State at the University of Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>