<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880527-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Wide Seizure Net Snags War on Drugs </HL><AUTHOR> Mark Thompson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> REL </IN><G> TRN JUS </G><TEXT>   After the Coast Guard conducted some well-publicized seizures of yachts and other craft this spring when minute quantities of drugs were found on board, the Customs Service quickly released most of the boats when their owners paid modest fines. The Coast Guard now says it will not seize boats outside the U.S. 12-mile territorial limit unless it finds a quantity of drugs that indicates an intent to smuggle them into the country. It has hedged a bit on its policy within U.S. waters.    The Coast Guard's retreat from its &quot;zero tolerance&quot; crackdown on drugs apparently stems from a concern that the federal government's forfeiture laws, if applied to the property of casual drug users, would suffer a series of damaging setbacks in court.    The policy generated a lot of heat both in the press and within the Coast Guard, which recently suffered a 50% cut in funds for the interdiction of drug supplies. Some federal prosecutors had hinted that they wouldn't back up the forfeiture of yachts and other conveyances found with minute quantities of drugs if large numbers of dispossessed owners sought judicial review. If the cases were to get to that stage, judges would have good excuses to put limits on the tough statutes. And if taken to a jury, cases involving seizures of valuable property from casual drug users most likely would be shot down.    Forfeiture laws, fortified by a 1984 congressional act that allowed forfeitures to be carried out in conjunction with criminal proceedings, have been a major boon to law-enforcement agencies' efforts against drug dealers. While federal courts have ruled -- following several court challenges -- that real-estate seizures must be proportionate to the drug offense perpetrated, there is no such limit on forfeitures of other property.    According to a 1974 Supreme Court decision, Calero-Toledo v. Pearson Yacht Leasing Co., any conveyance, no matter how valuable, can be seized by the government even if it is carrying just a trace of an illicit drug. An owner can escape the sanction only by demonstrating that he neither knew nor had reason to know that any drugs were on the conveyance. Civil forfeiture statutes, which were the only such statutes at the time of the court decision, permit federal law-enforcement agencies to process the seizures in quick administrative hearings, with the property owner bearing most of the burden of proof on appeal.    In Los Angeles, the city with the most drug-related forfeitures, U.S. Attorney Robert Bonner says his office has 300 forfeiture cases -- both civil and criminal, involving both real estate and other property -- pending against traffickers. He hauled in $45 million in assets last year, and expects to take in $50 million this year.    The laws haven't been applied only against big-time dealers. In some cases, even small-time buyers have felt their sting. Local authorities in New York, for example, in conjunction with the Drug Enforcement Administration, recently completed their 1,000th seizure of an automobile driven by someone observed purchasing drugs. In Los Angeles, Police Chief Daryl Gates has set a 5,000-car target for a similar joint local-federal forfeiture drive that began last October.    But these programs work only because they have been implemented in such a way as to keep most cases out of the courts. Authorities have returned cars quickly to owners whose guilt wouldn't be easy to prove in court. People who have lost their cars have been so clearly guilty that few have bothered to appeal the seizures. In New York, only three cases have come under judicial review, says Pam Dempsey, an assistant U.S. attorney in Manhattan, and prosecutors have won each time. None of the dozens of auto forfeitures carried out in Los Angeles have been appealed, says Mr. Bonner.    Largely satisfied with the successes they've achieved, many prosecutors don't want to press their luck with the forfeiture laws. Yet the Coast Guard's zero-tolerance drive would have forced them to do just that.    Peter Nunez, the U.S. attorney in San Diego -- where the oceanographic-research ship Atlantis II and other expensive vessels were seized over tiny quantities of marijuana -- is bluntest in his criticism of the policy. He was &quot;hit cold&quot; with the Coast Guard seizures, he says, adding that he made it clear that his office &quot;will not be able to follow through on a large volume of such cases if they reach the court stage.&quot; Some of the cases, he says, wouldn't stand up in court.    Ron Sinoway, a California defense attorney who specializes in defending marijuana-cultivation cases, almost wishes the government would push the zero-tolerance policy to the limits. &quot;I think if they keep it up,&quot; he explains, &quot;they'll find some judges who won't go along with them.&quot; If judges decide to extend to the seizure of conveyances the rule that a forfeiture must be proportionate to the offense, &quot;zero tolerance would be meaningless,&quot; Mr. Sinoway says. He adds that the 1974 Supreme Court decision, because of peculiarities of the facts of that case, could be interpreted to apply only where the conveyance apparently had been used in a smuggling operation.    &quot;The government is scurrying to take reasonable positions. {Prosecutors} don't want to face a judge with one of these cases,&quot; says Peter Robinson, a Santa Rosa, Calif., defense lawyer, referring to the recent spate of yacht seizures. &quot;They go to such an extreme that they will offend most law-abiding citizens.&quot;    Mr. Robinson learned first-hand how low many citizens' threshold of tolerance for government seizures of property can be. For 1981 through 1987, he was an assistant U.S. attorney who specialized in attempting to seize the buildings and land of Northern California's industrious marijuana growers. In a drive to destroy the region's $1 billion annual crop, the joint federal-state Campaign Against Marijuana Planting has rooted out nearly 3,000 gardens since 1983.    Though federal authorities still talk tough about seizing entire land holdings if a pot patch is found anywhere on the property, in practice such efforts have never fared well. Only a dozen or so farms have been taken over by the government, and those have involved sophisticated commercial plantations with hundreds of $5,000-plus plants. In these cases, proportionality was met.    Mr. Robinson says that in the one land-seizure case in Northern California that headed into a jury trial, in 1986, prospective jurors were openly hostile to the prosecution when told the case would involve an attempted government grab of a local resident's land. The government accepted a fine and returned the land in a plea bargain. Since then, prosecutors have returned dozens of tracts upon payment of fines.    Prosecutors might well run even greater risks in taking zero-tolerance cases to a jury. Even in a civil forfeiture proceeding, an owner could seek a jury trial on grounds that the loss of valuable property over a tiny quantity of drugs is a &quot;quasi-criminal&quot; penalty, explains Donald Re, a Los Angeles criminal defense lawyer. &quot;When the government oversteps the bounds of reasonableness, {prosecutors} have to be concerned about whether jurors will go along,&quot; he says.    While polls indicate that many people are concerned about drug abuse, Mr. Re believes the seizures have been taken to such an extreme that they will provoke a backlash. As he sees it, many jurors will view as unreasonable any seizure of valuable property from a recreational drug user. &quot;When you impose that kind of sanction for conduct that most people don't consider all that horrendous,&quot; explains Mr. Re, &quot;it shows that the government has lost touch with its own people.&quot;    U.S. Attorney Bonner has broader criteria in considering whether to pursue a forfeiture case against a drug user. &quot;We are definitely going to pay attention to the maximum sentences that Congress has set,&quot; even for those caught with user-quantities of drugs, he says. &quot;But there are limits to what we can do.&quot; He says there is &quot;an enormous backlog&quot; of forfeiture cases against traffickers. In forfeiture cases against drug users, he adds, &quot;You can definitely get into something that's a question of being so disproportionate that you'd have to think of a sanction short of forfeiture.&quot;    ---   Mr. Thompson, a senior writer with California Lawyer Magazine, last wrote for the Journal in March on the Los Angeles crackdown on gangs. </TEXT></DOC>