<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881020-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Possible 'October Surprise': Arms for No Hostages in 1980 </HL><AUTHOR> Alexander Cockburn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM MDEST </CO><IN> MON ARO </IN><G> EXE JUS </G><TEXT>   The Dukakis campaign is almost certainly beyond saving, and only straws remain to be grasped at. On Tuesday night ABC News ran a story about Iranian overtures to strike, in this fall of 1988, an &quot;October Surprise&quot; deal, bidding to swap planes for hostages. The story, in raising a familiar pattern of election maneuvers over hostages, evoked one of Michael Dukakis's last remaining hopes that suspicions about an earlier guns-for-no-hostage deal will finally assume critical mass.    The imputation is that Reagan-Bush campaign officials in 1980 were terrified that Jimmy Carter would pull off an &quot;October Surprise&quot; release of the hostages in Iran and then sweep to victory in November. To prevent this, so persistent rumors have run, they bribed Ayatollah Khomeini with cash and promises of arms deliveries if he would hold the hostages till Mr. Carter was safely out of office.    What could be graver than the charge that the GOP campaign directors, led by the late William Casey, treasonously conspired with Iranian fanatics to leave American hostages in captivity for 72 more days of agony in order to gain electoral advantage? A 1984 congressional investigation established that Mr. Casey and company were low enough -- and anxious enough -- to filch the Carter debate briefing books, but were they so desperate and unscrupulous as to play with the lives of the hostages?    Let's start with some facts not in serious contention. Three officials of the 1980 Reagan-Bush campaign concede that they listened to the overtures of an Iranian emissary in the fall of that year, though they (Robert McFarlane, then an aide to Sen. John Tower; Richard Allen, Mr. Reagan's campaign foreign-policy adviser; and Laurence Silberman, a longtime CIA lawyer subsequently elevated to the federal bench) deny that any deal was struck. Mr. Allen has also told the New York Daily News that some &quot;self-starters&quot; in the Reagan-Bush campaign &quot;might have met some Iranians in Paris&quot; subsequently.    Carter administration officials say that in mid-fall, 1980, Iran suddenly switched from a deal-making posture to a more hard-nosed approach; also that Menachem Begin, then prime minister of Israel, permitted an arms shipment to Iran (to Mr. Carter's great fury when he discovered it). The hostages were released about 20 minutes into Ronald Reagan's inaugural in January 1981 and U.S.-sanctioned arms shipments to Iran began shortly thereafter. These are in fact the essential prima facie points to a deal.    The chief aficionada of intrigue is a 1980 Reagan campaign staffer and later White House policy analyst named Barbara Honegger. Prior to 1980 she worked at the Hoover Institution as assistant to Martin Anderson, the former Nixon domestic-affairs adviser. She had been briefed in the Reagan-Bush campaign headquarters about the establishment of an &quot;October Surprise&quot; office. This was headed by a retired Adm. Robert Garrick whose friends on active duty passed him confidential information about ship and troop movements that might provide clues to Mr. Carter's efforts to free the hostages. Ms. Honegger was at campaign H.Q. on Oct. 22, 1980, when -- so she asserts -- a jubilant fellow worker told her that &quot;October Surprise&quot; worries were over because &quot;Dick (Allen) has cut a deal.&quot;    Few examined Ms. Honegger's suspicions very seriously until the 1987 Iran-Contra hearings disclosed a later set of secret arms dealings with Iran, featuring many of the same cast of characters Ms. Honegger had fingered as participants in the 1980 imbroglio. Ms. Honegger, it should be added, has become somewhat carried away and spun a large web of conspiracy to which it is often impossible to give credence.    In recent months, new witnesses showed up. A self-styled former CIA operative named Richard Brenneke came from Oregon to testify to Iran-Contra committee probers and to John Kerry's Senate subcommittee on narcotics and terrorism that under the direction of Mr. Bush's national security adviser, career CIA officer Donald Gregg, he had taken part in a Contra arms-supply operation-initiated in 1983, shortly before Congress cut off aid to the Contras the following year-funded by the sale of Colombian cocaine.    On Sept. 23, 1980, Mr. Brenneke testified under oath in Denver before federal Judge James Carrigan after the bank-fraud trial and sentencing of an ex-Air America pilot named Heinrich (&quot;Harry&quot;) Rupp. Mr. Brenneke had flown with Mr. Rupp for the CIA in Vietnam -- so they both claimed -- and testified out of friendship for an old comrade whose defense had been that the currency deal in which he had been involved was in fact a national-security operation. Mr. Brenneke swore to Mr. Rupp's CIA past and also declared Mr. Rupp had been the pilot of a jet that flew Mr. Casey to meetings with representatives of Ayatollah Khomeini on Oct. 19 and 20, 1980, in Paris at which the arms-for-no-hostages deal was consummated.    Mr. Brenneke says he was himself at one of three Paris meetings as an arms dealer known to the Iranians, a token of readiness to get down to business. Mr. Rupp swears, according to his lawyer, Michael Scott of Denver, that he not only flew Mr. Casey but that he saw George Bush on the tarmac at Le Bourget airport on Oct. 19. Mr. Brenneke, in closed-court proceedings, later unsealed at the request of the Rocky Mountain News, did not testify that he actually saw Mr. Bush there. Since Mr. Bush had no campaign appearances from mid-evening on the 18th until a speech in Washington on the night of the 19th, he would theoretically have had time to jet to Paris and return. Mr. Casey, according to campaign records at the Hoover Institution, had no public schedule between Oct. 18 and 23. Mr. Rupp says he flew Mr. Casey from Paris to Frankfurt on Oct. 21.    Messrs. Brenneke and Rupp's statements have, of course, not gone unchallenged. The Secret Service maintains that Mr. Bush, out of the public eye on the date in question, was not in Paris. The CIA says it never even heard of Mr. Brenneke, a deviation from its usual policy of refusing to confirm or deny.    On at least three occasions this year former President Jimmy Carter has publicly expressed his suspicions of dirty dealing over the hostages in 1980. For example, in a letter dated Feb. 24, 1988, to Abbie Hoffman and Jonathan Silver when they were preparing an article on the affair for the October edition of Playboy, Mr. Carter wrote that &quot;I chose to ignore the reports (of backstairs deals by Reagan campaign officials)&quot; and added that he had later learned from former Iranian President Bani Sadr that &quot;an agreement was made involving McFarlane, George Bush, and, perhaps, Bill Casey. By this time the elections were over, and the results would not be changed.&quot;    Thus far the mainstream press has been reluctant to explore this story publicly, though the radical weekly In These Times as well as The Nation have covered it carefully. The prudence of the mainstream press may stem from the enormity of charging, in effect, a &quot;stolen election.&quot;    The 1980 election is, as Mr. Carter pointed out, indeed over, but the 1988 election is yet to be held. Why should Republicans be the only ones to set the agenda for October surprises?    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation and In These Times. </TEXT></DOC>