<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Judge Holds Insurers Liable for ClaimsIn Asbestos Cases, Absolves Ex-Makers---By Cynthia F. MitchellStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GAF ACK LPXCONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS) </IN><TEXT>   A California state judge's ruling in an asbestos dispute could dramatically increase the insurance industry's liability for billions of dollars in asbestos injury claims.    Superior Court Judge Ira A. Brown ruled Friday in San Francisco that four former asbestos makers don't have to pick up the tab for the claims from thousands of victims of asbestos-related diseases. Instead, more than 20 insurance companies that wrote coverage from the 1930s until about five years ago must bear the costs.    Legal experts said the ruling could have ramifications beyond the expensive and complex asbestos issue. If the ruling is upheld, it could affect insurers facing similar liabilities from other toxic-injury claims. But insurers' appeals in the San Francisco case, which are expected, are likely to drag on for years.    The ruling came in a trial billed as the nation's largest ever in terms of the number of participants. Five former asbestos makers had sued their 70-odd insurers over who should pay the claims. After out-of-court settlements, four of the companies and more than 20 insurers remain in the consolidated trial, which still has other issues to resolve.    Because asbestos, a mineral once widely used in piping and insulation, causes diseases that often don't show up for decades, the question of who should pay the claims has been a sticky one. Most asbestos victims have contracted diseases after being exposed to the deadly mineral in shipyards and other workplaces. Many courts have decided the issue in as many ways, but Judge Brown's ruling, if it stands, is expected to set a precedent, because of the trial's size and the huge quantity of detailed evidence the judge has examined.    The judge basically had three options -- to hold insurers liable for claims if they provided coverage when a claimant was exposed to asbestos; to make insurers pay claims if they had policies in effect when the claimant's disease was diagnosed; or to make insurers split the costs if they provided coverage from exposure to diagnosis, often a period of 20 or 30 years.    The former asbestos makers argued that the bill should be split by all the insurers, no matter when they wrote coverage. The insurers, however, weren't as united in their arguments. They each tended to argue for the decision that would aid them the most; insurers that wrote coverage in the 1950s, for example, sought a ruling that would have held liable those insurers that wrote coverage when the diseases were diagnosed.    Judge Brown's ruling is an even broader interpretation than the so-called triple-trigger -- a reference to exposure, manifestation and diagnosis as the point of injury -- that came out of a big dispute between New York-based Bairnco Corp.'s Keene Corp. unit, a former asbestos maker, and its insurers.    That ruling was consistent with the former asbestos makers' arguments in the San Francisco trial, to which Keene isn't a party. But Judge Brown held further that the former asbestos makers weren't liable at all -- even for time periods when they had no asbestos coverage or were self-insured. Moreover, the judge's ruling holds the insurers liable even after the diagnosis of the abestos-related diseases. &quot;Bodily injury,&quot; as defined by the insurance policies, occurs &quot;from initial exposure until death,&quot; Judge Brown said in his 107-page ruling.    Samuel J. Hayman, GAF Corp. chairman and chief executive officer, said, &quot;This adjudicates the breadth of the policies which are available to respond to not only current suits but future ones as well.&quot; Wayne, N.J.-based GAF, a former asbestos maker that faces 27,000 pending asbestos-related suits, is a party to the San Francisco suit, along with Armstrong World Industries Inc., Nicolet Inc., and the Fibreboard Corp. unit of Louisiana-Pacific Corp.    Insurance executives said that some smaller insurers likely haven't set aside adequate reserves to prepare for a broad ruling by Judge Brown, and might become insolvent if his ruling is upheld. The major insurers in the case are understood to have braced for the broadest interpretation of their liability.    Further, some insurers' attorneys noted that the ruling, if it stands, would probably force insurers to revise the language in future policies to specifiy that coverage is triggered only when a claim is made.    By spreading liability over all the insurers, Judge Brown's ruling practically eliminates the possibility that any other former asbestos makers will file for bankruptcy-court protection as a defense against asbestos claims. In 1982, Manville Corp. filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, citing a flood of asbestos-related lawsuits. The big Denver-based building and forest products concern was a party to the San Francisco litigation, but settled with its insurers as part of its massive bankruptcy-law reorganization plan, which was confirmed by a federal judge in December. </TEXT></DOC>