<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870810-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:U.S. Technology Is Overcontrolled</HL><DD> 08/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   Richard Perle, the former &quot;enfant terrible&quot; of the Defense Department, has added little to the debate on technology transfers, attempting instead to prey on our fears and bowl us over with non sequiturs in order to kill a constructive trade initiative (&quot;Making Sure Our Technology Stays Ours,&quot; editorial page, July 22). He is using the illegal sale of technology to the Soviet Union to make us afraid to rationalize and streamline our own export control system -- a system that threatens U.S. trade and undermines our national strength.    The fact that the technology that has helped the Soviet Union modernize its submarines came from Japan and Norway underscores an important point: The U.S. no longer enjoys a monopoly on high technology. Strangling our own manufacturers in red tape did not prevent the unfortunate Kongsberg-Toshiba affair, nor will it avert such incidents in the future.    Mr. Perle is correct that in order to avert future Kongsberg-Toshiba cases, we must urge our allies in COCOM to strengthen their enforcement of export controls. But there is little relationship between their enforcement and the number of items on our export-control list. Our security can be served best by focusing on goods that are militarily critical and culling the control list of products of no military significance to our adversaries.    A classic example is medical technology. Medical products such as CAT scanners and medical lasers are subject to costly and time-consuming export-licensing requirements -- even though there is no evidence that they have ever been diverted to military use. The export-control amendments passed by the House of Representatives would allow U.S. manufacturers of high-technology products, including medical products, to compete more effectively in the global market. U.S. high-technology firms need global markets to achieve economies of scale and generate enough Randamp;D funding to develop new products. They also need to build world market share because foreign competitors are working aggressively in the U.S. market. Export controls on products that are not militarily significant make the trade battle tougher and worsen the declining trade balance in high-tech products, which has shifted from a $27 billion surplus in 1980 to a $1.3 billion deficit for the first half of 1986.    Frank E. Samuel Jr.   President, Health Industry Manufacturers Association    Washington   ---   COCOM is weak, in part, because the U.S. has insisted on controlling too many products to too many destinations. There are problems with this approach to export controls.    First, the absence of an effective indexing mechanism that incorporates and recognizes the natural evolution of technology leads to a long list, which becomes unenforceable. Second, too much emphasis is placed on controlling items that can be routinely purchased, on a cash-and-carry basis, at the nearest computer or department store. Unfortunately, the U.S. is the architect of this situation.    Given today's burgeoning list of controlled items, it is not surprising that our allies are less than enthusiastic about COCOM. We need to slim down the control list so we can concentrate our limited resources on those items that truly make a difference. This is the intent of the amendment to the Export Administration Act passed by the House of Representatives that would reduce the control list by 40% over a three-year period.    We need to strengthen the consensus in COCOM to support development of a list of critical products. The U.S. should forgo its strident, unilateral stance that everything must be controlled, and demonstrate its trust by working with our COCOM partners to protect crucial products and technologies. We also need to devote at least as many resources to enforcement as we do to licensing. Even in the Kongsberg-Toshiba case, the diversion of technology didn't occur through undocumented shipments. In fact, export licenses were issued based on inaccurate applications. This underscores the need for more policing, not more clerks and regulations.    Last, we need to ensure that the penalties are both swift and painful enough to make diversions of technology an unprofitable venture. That Congress developed new legislation in this area is evidence that existing penalties are inadequate.    Michael Ciesinski   Manager of Government Relations Semiconductor    Equipment and Materials Institute Inc.   Washington</TEXT></DOC>