<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880113-0027 </DOCNO><HL> Letter From the Publisher: A Report to The Wall Street Journal's Readers </HL><SO> </SO><CO> DJ </CO><IN> PUB </IN><TEXT>      {This progress report carries forward a custom begun 11 years ago. It reflects our belief that publishing a newspaper is a public trust for which we are accountable first of all to you, our readers.}   To the Readers of The Wall Street Journal:   As we enter the new year of 1988 the questions facing our economy and society seem more serious and pressing than at any time in recent years.    Was the market crash of October an aberration or a portent of greater crisis to come? Will the embattled dollar continue to slide? Will Americans be lured by the easy promises of protectionism? Will America, and the world, avoid a serious recession in 1988?    The uncertainties are many, but there is also much promise -- industries such as autos becoming more globally competitive, geographic regions such as New England rebounding from past recession, consumers demanding higher-quality service in everything from banking to air travel, small-business people making bold investments in America's future.    Then too, 1988 is the year we will choose new leadership for a new decade. Election campaigns are full of drama and distractions, but as this election year unfolds the candidates will be addressing issues that affect us all -- in economic policy and foreign policy; on tax rates and trade barriers; arms-control agreements and Persian Gulf commitments.    With so much going on this year, the Journal will be challenged as never before by your needs and expectations as readers. You expect us to provide the hard news, and also the analysis that helps you tie events together, make sense of issues, and focus on broader trends. It's our job to make events and facts useful and relevant to you -- not just in your corporate or professional lives, but also as individual investors, consumers and concerned citizens.    We welcome these challenges and will do our very best to meet them. We will seek to maintain and strengthen the Journal's commitment to fairness, accuracy and honesty. We are pleased when the Journal is named, as it was in a 1986 Times-Mirror poll, as the most trusted national news medium. And we are proud when Dow Jones, publisher of the Journal, is named, as it was this month in a Fortune magazine survey, as America's most admired publishing company and third most admired company of any sort. Above all, though, we are pleased and proud to have your trust and we are dedicated to earning it every business day.    We also intend to make the Journal even more useful to you. Our staff -- from the editors selecting stories for tomorrow's paper to the delivery people who get that paper to you -- knows that time is enormously precious to you. So we work to separate the most essential, relevant and timely news from the humdrum, the ho-hum and the stale. We aim to organize, display and present it to you in even more effective and convenient ways. And, of course, we work to give you the earliest possible delivery of the latest possible news. We are committed to further improvements in all these areas in 1988.    The Journal never can be all things to all readers. It doesn't try to be. We are not planning sports sections or local news coverage, colored weather maps or stories on every minor crisis in the world. We do intend to remain America's National Business Daily and, with our expanding Asian and European editions, the Global Business Daily as well. That means focusing firmly on news that busy business people truly need.    We hope you will approve of improvements we're planning in the months ahead -- in coverage of global markets, marketing, technology, service industries and other subjects. We trust you also will approve of some coming changes in the organization of statistics, the design of some pages and the display of news. Yet, we also hope you will continue to tell us -- through surveys we initiate and the letters you send -- when you think we're doing things wrong and how you think we can do better. All of us like compliments, but we also welcome your criticisms.    The more than 600 Journal newspeople based in more than 40 business centers around the world and their colleagues in other Journal departments all are committed to making this newspaper even more valuable to you.    Some of these Journal people may be known to you from their bylines. Others work to serve you in far less visible roles. This letter offers me an opportunity to introduce you to a number of them.    Scores of reporters and editors in New York, Washington, Chicago, Tokyo, London, Hong Kong and other financial centers cooperated to provide massive coverage of the October market crash and its many ramifications for the global economy, corporations and individual investors. A month later, two exceptional reporters, Jim Stewart and Dan Hertzberg, produced an extraordinary page one story, based on scores of interviews, that put together the jigsaw of the market crisis and explained for the first time how very close to meltdown the markets came on Oct. 20, the day after the crash. The Brady Commission report of last week was in many respects an official echo of the Stewart-Hertzberg reporting.    It's this sort of reporting -- not simply what happened, but also why and what it means -- that the Journal prides itself on providing.    Journal reporters, as always, ranged way beyond markets and money to give business readers glimpses of American life that most of us never see. Alex Kotlowitz, a young reporter in our Chicago bureau, spent much of six months reporting in a Chicago ghetto -- a community where police protection is minimal and gangs rule the streets -- to chronicle the life and times of a ghetto child trying to surmount an environment of deprivation and brutality. Alex's haunting story from inside the ghetto captured the terror and trauma experienced by many thousands of ghetto children growing up in similar circumstances in all our great cities.    Another Journal reporter, Gerald Seib, experienced personal terror when he was arbitrarily arrested by Iranian security officials while on a reporting trip to that country. Jerry spent four days being interrogated at Iran's notorious Evin prison before finally being released. There never has been a rational reason given for his detention. The reasons for his release seem clearer. Jerry's own honesty, coolness and courage permitted him to survive extraordinary pressure. Meantime, his colleagues, and particularly Journal Foreign Editor Karen Elliott House, mobilized support from around the world -- from Turkish ministers to Vatican officials -- to press the Iranians to release a respected journalist. When Jerry finally gained his freedom his first priority was to write his story for Journal readers.    Not all news people get their names on stories. Many, like wire-room supervisor Rich Schuster, work behind the scenes to get the stories to readers. Rich, a 22-year Dow Jones veteran, oversees the Journal's central communications hub in New York, a 24-hour-a-day operation that links the paper's reporters and editors around the world to each other and speeds their copy on to Journal composing rooms and printing plants in 18 U.S. cities and five overseas. Rich's workday often runs almost round-the-clock, particularly during the recent months of global-market crisis. Yet he's never too busy to teach a new reporter how to code a message or an old reporter how to use a new computer.    Computers help speed many Journal functions these days, but it's still people who program them to perform. Carolyn Angell, Virgil Hollander and Dave Kile were key members of a team that spent many months devising and perfecting the Journal's &quot;Index to Businesses&quot; -- our new company index introduced in 1987 to help readers locate all mentions of a particular company anywhere in the paper. That innovation, like many others at the Journal, is aimed at saving you valuable time with a more accessible and convenient newspaper.    Getting that paper to readers -- quickly and reliably -- involves hundreds of Journal staff members in our production, circulation and distribution departments.    Two million people buy the Journal every business day -- making it far and away the largest circulation newspaper in America. Some of you buy the Journal on newsstands, some get postal delivery, and others -- more than 800,000 in 164 cities -- get early morning home or office delivery through our own National Delivery Service. That delivery team includes people like Jim Stamm of San Jose, Calif., who last year was hit by a truck while he was on his delivery route. Jim was taken to the emergency ward, received 12 stitches to close a gash on his head, and then drove off to complete his Journal deliveries. Then there's Bill Moody, whose delivery route is in San Antonio. Bill was tending his route in the pre-dawn hours when he discovered a robbery taking place. Bill gave chase, helped apprehend the robber, and then resumed his deliveries on schedule.    The Journal's advertising department is charged not only with sales, but also with ensuring the highest possible service to the paper's more than 6,500 display-advertising clients. For example, there's John Farrow, a service manager in our Naperville, Ill., plant. He grabbed an armload of Journals off the press, caught a night flight to New York, and hand-delivered the papers containing an important Midwest Edition advertisement, to clients landing on an early morning Concorde flight from London.    Our advertising people, like our reporters, operate world-wide. Sometimes they make unusual sales in unusual places. Dan Cates, based in New York, and Joachim Nunvar, based in Frankfurt, traveled to Moscow last winter and spent several weeks in sub-zero weather visiting Soviet offices. The result, published in August, was a nine-page Soviet advertising section -- a remarkable step for the Soviets and one that indicated the importance they, too, place on the influential audience that reads the Journal.    Remarkable is a word that applies to a final Journal individual -- Joe Guilfoyle. Joe, a tireless newsman who spurns elevators for staircases and small talk for news talk, retired last month after fully 60 years with the Journal and Dow Jones.    Joe began working for the Journal as a messenger in 1927 and joined the news staff five years later. He was one of the handful of reporters and editors who built the Journal from a small New York financial paper of 40,000 circulation. In his most recent position, as executive editor of Dow Jones News Services, Joe was still there at his desk each morning urging reporters to file faster and editors to edit more tightly and reminding all of us that readers are relying on us for news that is timely, accurate and fair.    It is an injunction all of us at the Journal will try our very best to follow in the months and years ahead. The start of a new year is a time to rededicate ourselves to our standards and values and to commit ourselves to building on them to serve you even better in the future. We appreciate your confidence and we will work to justify it every business day.    All of my Journal colleagues join me in extending to you and your families very best wishes for the New Year.    Cordially,   Warren H. Phillips   Chairman and Chief Executive,   Dow Jones andamp; Co.    Publisher, The Wall Street Journal</TEXT></DOC>