<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880708-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Indians Send Signals That Rile Neighbors Of Station WOJB --- Whites Have Reservations About Certain Programs; Spearing Fish in Wisconsin </HL><AUTHOR> Robert Johnson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TEL </IN><DATELINE> RESERVE, Wis.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Indians on La Courte Oreilles Reservation beat their drums around campfires less today than they do around microphones at the Ojibwas' radio station, WOJB-FM. From its nondescript building at the end of a dirt road, it sends a signal full of controversy and resurgent Ojibwa pride.    Tribesmen have painted the station's satellite receiver dish with a huge red Thunderbird, its wings outstretched. The creature of mythology, nesting in the clouds, brought messages from the spirit world in the form of thunder, lightning and rain. To protect the station -- and it does need protecting -- Ojibwa medicine men have erected a 25-foot pole topped with eagle feathers. They occasionally burn herbs to keep evil spirits away.    Like the 15 other Indian public-service stations around the country, WOJB has vociferous enemies. As a voice that carries Indian culture beyond the reservation -- 60 miles in all directions -- to a rural population of 7,500 Indians and 100,000 whites, it has become a target of hate. It has stirred anti-Indian sentiment by featuring various Ojibwa views on bigotry and on treaty-guaranteed spear-fishing rights. Fishing disputes and hatred are much in evidence in Northern Wisconsin, where bumper stickers abound suggesting, &quot;Spare a fish, spear an Indian.&quot;    Station manager Dick Brooks, who is white, covered a gathering last year of Northern Wisconsin whites who oppose the spear-fishing rights accorded exclusively to the Ojibwas in a 150-year-old treaty. Other fishermen complain that the two- to three-week season depletes fishing stock. (Also, some white fishermen would like to be able to go spear-fishing, too.)    Mr. Brooks tape-recorded one of the men present at the meeting saying that he believes Indians ritualistically kill and mutilate one another. &quot;That sort of thing should be aired, to expose it and to show that the races have to work harder at understanding,&quot; says Mr. Brooks.    But many whites say the station just stirs up trouble. &quot;WOJB brands anyone who disagrees with it a racist,&quot; says Reg Delwiche, a white high-school history teacher in nearby Park Falls and a former donor of money to the station. Other critics call the station leftist.    WOJB made still more enemies in its predominantly white, conservative Republican listening area last year by sending a reporter to Nicaragua. Several days of man-on-the-street interviews conducted there elicited much criticism of U.S. policy. Several listeners started calling WOJB &quot;Radio Managua.&quot;    &quot;The station is un-American; it shouldn't be on the air,&quot; says Larry Peterson, a paper-mill worker in nearby Park Falls. Elaine Huffman, a local retiree, says the station is &quot;against nuclear, against the Contras, against everything.&quot; Worse still, she adds, &quot;They play that horrible Indian music.&quot;    The station has endured bomb threats and pleas from some listeners to have the Federal Communications Commission suspend its broadcast license. In May, someone painted racial slurs on a WOJB billboard near the reservation. &quot;That hits us where it hurts; the station is one of the few things we have to be proud of,&quot; says Becky Carroll, an Ojibwa housewife on the reservation, where alcoholism and unemployment rates exceed 50%.    Actually, WOJB offers quite a range of programming, from the telling of Ojibwa legends, to contests in which participants pronounce and define words in the mostly forgotten native tongue. Indian-interest programming is most precious to the Ojibwa, whose elders are eager to prevent further erosion of tribal culture.    There is also plenty of folk and country music. And elders air their views on current events. One 75-year-old man, taking to the air, recently warned President Reagan against the Strategic Defense Initiative &quot;because we shouldn't tamper with the stars.&quot; He proffered as an alternative to Star Wars the traditional Ojibwa prayer asking the trees and animals for protection.    WOJB's cramped studio has antiquated equipment and no backup systems. Its audience is accustomed to the station's maintenance problems, which have resulted in dead air for days on end. Lack of money has reduced the staff to seven, half its size two years ago. Employees take turns missing paychecks when donations occasionally slow from the usual trickle.    The Ojibwas own the station. The 40-year-old Mr. Brooks, who has previous experience in public radio, runs it for the tribe. His $200,000 annual budget is financed 38% from listeners, 30% by federal grants and matching funds and the rest through bake sales, bingo and donations from the tribal council. Mr. Brooks's payroll -- $100,000 -- is down 26% from five years ago. He has slashed his own former $22,000 salary to $12,000 to help defray costs. Still, he says, he went five weeks without cashing his paychecks last summer during the worst donation drought.    Fund drives are earthy. When J.D. Chisholm, a white businessman in nearby Hayward, sat behind the microphone recently to solicit telephone donations, he got annoyed about the poor response. &quot;Homer Middlestadt, you S.O.B., give us $50,&quot; barked Mr. Chisholm. Mr. Middlestadt, an attorney, was listening and obediently phoned in his pledge.    Most of the nation's 16 Indian public-service stations, whose tribal listeners total about 250,000, according to the stations' own estimates, are fighting to survive similar straits. Federal support for housing, medical care and social programs on the reservations has dwindled 11% to $4 billion annually since 1980, strapping tribal governments and straining their efforts to subsidize their public radio stations.    KMHA-FM in New Town, N.D., which is owned by the Mandan, Hidatsa and Arickara tribes, is in the midst of a flap over tribal plans to start taxing the property of whites who own houses on the reservation. Six neighboring towns, in sympathy with the white homeowners, refused the station's request that they raise money under the state's charitable gambling law by adding blackjack tables to the ones they already operate in local taverns. Meanwhile, the station has trimmed its payroll and discontinued the United Press International newswire it subscribed to.    Bigotry will have been a factor if some stations fold, says Episcopal Bishop William Wantland, a member of a state-appointed committee that recently studied racism in Wisconsin. &quot;The stations are hand-to-mouth because white people, who have the money, either don't want to contribute or are afraid of being linked to them,&quot; he says.    Some contributors to WOJB, indeed, request anonymity. They cite incidents in which whites have bashed Indians' cars and burned their fishing shacks, apparently over the fishing-rights dispute. One white maintenance worker in Hayward, Wis., who asked not to be identified in this story, says his boss told him &quot;the only thing worse than an Indian is a white sympathizer.&quot;    Many listeners say the station was the only broadcaster in its area to carry, in their entirety, the Iran-Contra hearings and testimony on Robert Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court. When the station manager, Mr. Brooks, learned that the Department of Energy was to hold four days of hearings in Northern Wisconsin on potential nuclear-waste sites, he set up exclusive live broadcasts -- one of which lasted nine hours.    But efforts by the station to form a cultural bridge to whites have sometimes been painful. At the recent live broadcast of a powwow, a white school official was invited to introduce the guest speaker, a young Ojibwa teacher named Sonny Smart. But the white emcee committed a major gaffe by failing to first ask the customary approval of tribal elders. Mr. Smart apologized and yielded the microphone briefly to an 83-year-old.    Still, many say that this cultural exchange is invaluable. Consider, William Richey, a white logger and Vietnam veteran, who became a drug abuser and dropped out of society after the war. Last year, he was persuaded to attend WOJB's ceremony honoring veterans. The Ojibwa awarded him beads, took him by the hand and led him in a dance under the eagle feathers. &quot;Nobody else had welcomed me back from the war. I got chills; it was the best I felt in a long time,&quot; he says. Now he leads a weekly discussion on WOJB about veterans' issues.    The station does what it can to win people over. Mr. Brooks took a call from someone complaining that WOJB's signal was interfering with her television reception. She demanded that he send an engineer to fix it. Mr. Brooks promised to drop by and adjust her TV set himself. Hanging up, he explained, &quot;We need all the friends we can get.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>