<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880415-0030 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   FOUR NATIONS SIGNED a pact calling for a Soviet pullout from Afghanistan.    The U.N.-sponsored accord to end the eight-year intervention, signed in Geneva by U.S., Soviet, Pakistani and Afghan government officials, calls for withdrawal of Moscow's estimated 115,000 troops over a nine-month period beginning May 15 and resettlement of refugees. Afghanistan and Pakistan promised not to interfere in each other's affairs, but Secretary of State Shultz pledged continued U.S. aid to Afghan rebels, who vow to keep fighting the Kabul regime. Pakistan's President Zia-ul-Haq also pledged continued rebel aid.    Zia blamed saboteurs for an Islamabad arms-dump explosion Sunday. An arms dump at an Afghan camp in Pakistan blew up Wednesday, killing six.    ---   AN EXPLOSION DAMAGED a Navy ship in the Persian Gulf, injuring six.    The Pentagon said the USS Samuel B. Roberts, a guided-missile frigate, apparently struck a mine in the central gulf but was in no danger of sinking. Four crewmen suffered burns and two suffered back injuries. The Pentagon said that the injuries weren't life-threatening and that the sailors had been evacuated to another U.S. ship. The frigate, which wasn't on escort duty at the time, was to be towed to Bahrain.    Defense sources said sailors aboard the Roberts, which was steaming south, had spotted some &quot;mine-like&quot; objects in the water shortly before the explosion.    ---   HIJACKERS FREED another hostage after resuming negotiations in Algeria.    The white-robed man, said by Algerian officials to be from Kuwait, left the Kuwaiti Boeing 747 following a 20-minute visit by an Algerian negotiator last night. Negotiations had been suspended earlier on the 10th day of the hijacking after one of the estimated 32 hostages said over the plane's radio that the hijackers were threatening to kill all the passengers if 17 pro-Iranian terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait aren't released.    An independent Kuwaiti newspaper said that one of the hijackers was responsible for the kidnapping in Lebanon of U.S. journalist Terry Anderson.    ---   A car bomb exploded outside a USO club in Naples, Italy, killing five people and injuring at least 17. The Pentagon initially said one of the dead was a U.S. sailor, but later quoted Naples authorities as saying no U.S. personnel died. At least four Americans were injured. There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the blast.    ---   Israeli soldiers shot and killed two Palestinians in the West Bank town of Nablus during a Palestinian general strike that virtually shut down occupied areas. At least 146 Palestinians have been killed in recent unrest, according to U.N. figures. Israel's military also denied a U.N. doctor's charge that it was using toxic new anti-riot gases.    ---   The U.S. military stood by its claims that intruders entered a fuel-storage area at a military base in Panama, touching off a two-hour firefight Tuesday night, but said it has uncovered no evidence so far to support the story. Panama's state-run media have relentlessly lampooned the story, saying the Marines had fired at swaying palm trees.    ---   Contra negotiators said the rebel directorate and high-level Nicaraguan officials would meet for peace talks today. The announcement came following talks in Managua last night in which the government agreed to allow Contra officials to visit church leaders and the owners of the opposition paper La Prensa during their stay.    ---   The Senate voted, 63-27, to impose aid and trade sanctions on Mexico for failing to do enough in the war on drugs. Reagan said he would veto the measure, and there are remaining procedural hurdles to similar bills in the House, but lawmakers said they wanted to shock the Mexican government into blocking the flow of drugs.    ---   Denmark's parliament approved an opposition resolution to notify all visiting warships that Denmark forbids nuclear arms during peacetime. Denmark has had a nuclear ban for some time, but currently doesn't ask NATO ships if they carry such weapons. The government promised to study how the vote affects its ties to NATO.    ---   A top Honduran official resigned as adviser to the government in an apparent protest of the expulsion to the U.S. of suspected drug trafficker Juan Ramon Matta. Jaime Rosenthal said he was stepping down as President Azcona's economic adviser, but staying on as vice president. The expulsion sparked riots that killed five last week.    ---   A bipartisan group of 58 senators asked the Reagan administration to abandon its plan to sell Saudi Arabia $450 million in ground-support gear for U.S.-built AWACS planes. In the letter, the senators urged that the plan be dropped because of the Saudis' purchase of intermediate-range missiles from China.    ---   Shultz said that it was still possible for the U.S. and Soviets to sign a strategic nuclear arms pact at the Moscow summit next month, but that verification issues and interpretation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missiles Treaty remained unresolved. Both sides have said they would like to sign a pact halving strategic arsenals at the summit.    ---   Reagan said he will nominate Judith Hope, daughter-in-law of entertainer Bob Hope, to succeed Robert Bork on the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington. Bork resigned in February, four months after the defeat of his Supreme Court nomination.    ---   The EPA announced it won't toughen restrictions on sulfur-dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants to protect asthma sufferers. The long-awaited decision was attacked by health and environmental groups as favoring industry. An industry group had estimated that tougher rules could have cost as much as $5 billion. </TEXT></DOC>