<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871014-0157 </DOCNO><HL> Sea of Trouble:Conditions DeteriorateOn Ocean FreightersAs Owners Cut Costs---For Third World Crewmen,Pay Is Low, Danger HighIn the Slumping Industry---Why Seamen Put Up With It---By Daniel MachalabaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN><DATELINE> FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For more than two months last spring, 18 Greek and Filipino sailors endured food shortages, foul-tasting water and roach-infested quarters. They were docked here aboard their disabled ship, waiting to collect back wages and airfare home.    Conditions were so bad on the Greek freighter, the M/V Porto Coroni, that the first mate fled the ship and rushed to a local police station. &quot;Put me in jail,&quot; he pleaded. &quot;I will be happier in jail than on the ship.&quot;    Plagued by overcapacity and low freight rates, ship companies around the world are cutting costs to stay afloat, and crews are feeling the brunt of it. Pay is low and sometimes slow in coming. On many ships, maintenance and safety are no longer top priorities. Shipboard conditions, never for the fainthearted, are deteriorating for more and more seafarers.    Protesting, sailors say, is futile and risky. Because of the recession in the shipping industry and the advent of larger, more automated ships, the number of jobs is shrinking. A complainer could easily be replaced. Besides, with current registry laws, ever-changing ports of call and sometimes elusive shipowners, seamen aren't always sure where to complain.    That's how things were for the Porto Coroni last May. The U.S. Coast Guard had detained the ship until its owner, Defender Bay Shipping Co. of Piraeus, Greece, repaired the generators, radio, lifeboat, bilge pumps and firefighting equipment. The ship had broken down at sea and been towed to Fort Lauderdale.    Stranded in an American port aboard a Greek-owned ship flying the Panamanian flag, the crewmen didn't know where to get help. For a while, they lived on food donated by a local church.    Compounding problems, the ship's owner, Defender Bay, apparently tried to hide from the crew. Dimitrios Efstathiou, managing director of Leone Shipping Enterprises Corp., also of Piraeus, swore that his company only managed the Porto Coroni. &quot;We are not responsible&quot; for back wages, Mr. Efstathiou insisted. Although he denied it, the crew claimed Mr. Efstathiou headed both Defender Bay and Leone.    The stalemate ended in June when Afram Lines International Inc., based in Tampa, Fla., bought the Porto Coroni, made repairs and paid the crew back wages of $30,000.    As many as 20% of the world's one million seafarers face &quot;increasingly dilapidated conditions and deprivation,&quot; estimates Ernst Frankel, an ocean systems professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Most of those crewmen are from developing countries such as the Philippines. Seafarers on ships flying flags of traditional maritime nations, such as the U.S., rarely complain of such problems.    Developing nations now supply more than 60% of the world's seafarers, compared with about half that 20 years ago. Some of those sailors work as many as 100 hours a week for less than $75. They put up with appalling and often dangerous conditions because other jobs are hard to come by and because the pay, while low by U.S. standards, goes a long way back home.    Danilo Pineda, a Filipino ship's cook, says that in Manila the lines of seafarers at manning agencies are growing longer. He recently paid one such middleman $400 for a job aboard a cargo ship. Though illegal, the fees are common in the Philippines, the world's largest supplier of ship crews. There, 146,000 trained seafarers compete for about 50,000 jobs.    Mr. Pineda's wages are double what he would make in Manila. But he complains that shipowners shortchange him or send payment four months late, forcing his family to borrow from relatives.    &quot;I'm very sad, but what can I do?&quot; he says. &quot;I have to swallow my pride to get on board.&quot; When he went to sea in 1972, he adds, &quot;I earned good money and saw the world. I enjoyed being a seafarer.&quot; But when he ships out lately, it is often aboard vessels with problems.    One ship went without heat for months because the owner wouldn't buy parts for a boiler. To keep warm, Mr. Pineda wore a heavy jacket to bed. Drinking water ran out as the ship crossed the Atlantic, so the crew spread a tarpaulin on deck to catch the rain.    During a voyage on another freighter, Mr. Pineda recalls, the main engine caught fire. When the old, dilapidated fire hose split, the crew extinguished the blaze with buckets of water. &quot;We prayed for our lives, for our families,&quot; says Mr. Pineda. Escape would have been difficult, he adds, because one of the ship's two lifeboats had a broken propeller and engine.    &quot;More and more seafarers are finding their employment conditions intolerable,&quot; says Paul Chapman, the director of the Center for Seafarers' Rights of the Seamen's Church Institute in New York. &quot;Wages aren't being paid, and the traditional care and maintenance obligations are being neglected. In some cases, conditions are slipping back to 100 years ago.&quot;    Unlike other industrial settings, a ship is both workplace and home, providing little chance to escape the mounting stresses. And as morale slips, the crew starts contributing to the problems. &quot;When the crew is treated badly, the crew acts unseamanlike and maintenance starts declining,&quot; says Arthur McKenzie, the director of the Tanker Advisory Center in New York.    Shipowners say treatment will improve as marginal, poorly financed operators -- the ones most likely to slight crews -- are forced out of business by the shipping recession. Others say ship life already is becoming more comfortable for some seamen as shipowners strive to rebuild morale after they have reduced crew size.    Barber Blue Sea, a European ship company, for example, provides crews aboard its new automated cargo vessels with amenities such as artwork, chandeliers and potted plants. The ships &quot;look like fern bars,&quot; says Michael Gaffney, a consultant on ship design.    But where there are problems, sailors and shipowners rarely see eye to eye. Carnival Cruise Lines and Chandris Fantasy Cruises are accused of subjecting their Third World workers to low wages, long hours and crowded quarters. When this reporter toured the Amerikanis, a Chandris liner, for example, some crewmen said they earn less than $300 a month for workdays stretching from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m. A Chandris lawyer responded, &quot;They have many breaks.&quot;    In a small cabin with 10 bunk beds, crewmen sleep behind sheets and towels hung for privacy. The spokesman says the Amerikanis does have crew cabins with as many as 10 bunks, but &quot;we don't put 10 people in them.&quot;    Micky Arison, the president of Carnival Cruise Lines, also takes exception to charges of mistreatment. He says waiters aboard Carnival ships can earn more than $1,500 a month on tips alone, and &quot;that kind of money makes them kings in their home countries.&quot; He plans to fight unions that are lobbying Congress to extend U.S. labor laws to foreign-flag cruise ships that operate in the U.S.    Some crews, fed up with dismal conditions, retaliate. Last year, seamen aboard a cargo ship in Newark, N.J., held officers hostage until their back wages were paid. A seaman aboard another ship killed the first mate who had verbally abused him.    But often there isn't much to be gained through protest, as the Burmese crew of the M/V Albatross learned last June. Citing delayed wage payments, lack of fresh water and threats made by the captain against the crewmen, they struck the ship in New Orleans for eight days. But they were ordered back to work by an official of the Burmese Embassy in Washington, who says the walkout &quot;could have adverse effects on the image of Burmese seamen.&quot;    Other seafarers eventually give up and turn to jobs ashore. George Weeks, a Guyanese ship captain, is contemplating such a move. When he was captain on a small freighter a couple of years ago, the owner asked him to chip paint with the crew.    Recently, Mr. Weeks was relieved of his command four days into a voyage because another captain agreed to do the job for $1,500 a month, or $500 less. &quot;The standards of shipping are going down considerably,&quot; says Mr. Weeks.    Several groups, including unions, churches and government agencies, are trying to aid seafarers. So far, however, they have encountered frustration after frustration.    The Seamen's Church Institute has set up a legal-aid office for sailors and is petitioning courts to seize ships that owe back wages. Sidney Kalban, a lawyer representing seafarers, says such efforts often fail, however, because the vessel leaves port before it can be seized.    In 1978, the International Labour Organization, a Geneva-based United Nations agency, set minimum standards for food, accommodations and work hours. But enforcement, which is the responsibility of ILO's member nations, varies widely.    Aware that many ships aren't being policed, a group of 14 European nations is enforcing minimum crew and safety standards aboard foreign ships in its ports. Henk Huibers, who administers the program from The Hague, concedes that inspectors would rather check firefighting equipment than make subjective judgments about crew quarters.    &quot;We check if showers and toilets are clean, but even clean is on the brink of the subjective,&quot; Mr. Huibers says. The U.S. Coast Guard inspects foreign ships in U.S. ports for violations of safety rules but not for mistreatment of crews.    Inspectors from the London-based International Transport Workers Federation regularly search some ships for problems. The union then turns to sympathetic local unions to boycott the ship. But its effectiveness is waning as some countries ban secondary boycotts.    Besides, workers from developing nations usually aren't represented by labor unions, and those countries worry that union involvement would push salaries up too far. &quot;If we set our wage rates too high, we would be priced out of the market like the developed countries have been priced out,&quot; says Crescencio Siddayao, deputy administrator of the Philippines Overseas Employment Administration, which regulates Filipino seafarers.    The number of jobs for crews aboard American-flag merchant ships has dropped 50% to 11,000 in the past decade, and similar losses have occurred in Norway, Great Britain and Japan. But for seafarers from countries with strong unions, ship conditions and pay are considered adequate. &quot;The days of oppressed conditions are long gone for American seamen,&quot; says Shannon Wall, the president of the National Maritime Union in New York.    Colin Smith, a Halifax, Nova Scotia, advocate of seafarer rights and a former sailor himself, says: &quot;International seafarers exist in a regulatory black hole.&quot; He refers to the growing number of flags of convenience -- ships registered in countries different from the crews' or owners' origins. &quot;A ship can be owned in one country, registered in another, sail to ports of still other countries, none of which is the home country of officers and crews,&quot; says Mr. Chapman of the Seamen's Church Institute.    Under international law, crews are protected by the labor code of the country of the ship's registry. But seafarers say the safeguards have weakened under flags of convenience, which represent 30% of the world's merchant fleet, up from 20% a decade ago. Some flag-of-convenience nations are reluctant to inspect for crew conditions for fear of alienating clients and losing fees.    Shipowners &quot;have enough problems without some inspector checking on whether there is good housekeeping for the crew,&quot; says Clayton Wentworth, a retired American insurance executive who serves as deputy commissioner of the Republic of Vanuatu's ship registry. Besides, he says, if hassled, the shipowners would &quot;say they just heard of a new registry&quot; and switch over. </TEXT></DOC>