<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880916-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Korea Coming to Terms With Democracy --- Military, Students Realize Public Tires of Violence </HL><AUTHOR> Susan Moffat (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The general didn't like a recent article in a South Korean magazine that placed the blame for the ills of Korean society squarely on the shoulders of the military.    But he objected even more strongly when some of his fellow officers knifed the journalist who wrote the article.    In the old days, such attacks went unpunished -- and unreported in the government-controlled press. But this time, after widespread public outcry, two brigadier generals implicated in the incident were arrested, and their superior officer, the head of the Army Intelligence Command, was fired.    &quot;The days for that kind of thing are long over,&quot; says the general, who like most Korean military officers shuns any mention in the press.    As the post-Olympics era approaches, two of the groups that for decades have played crucial roles in the South Korean political drama are acting increasingly like embattled minorities. A military leadership that for almost 30 years steered the country with a sometimes iron hand is struggling to adapt to a more democratic environment. And on the left, students are discovering that ordinary people no longer automatically accepted them as the conscience of the nation.    After a year of dizzying political change and the sustained tension of preparing to host the Olympics that begin tomorrow, Korea's growing middle class is ready to get down to the more mundane task of making a living -- and making their own judgments about the country's needs. They say they want the students in the library and the army in the barracks; they are hoping politics will shift from tear-gas-filled streets to smoke-filled rooms.    &quot;There should be a change in our way of expressing political opinions,&quot; says a 35-year-old furniture salesman who gives his name only as Mr. Choi. &quot;Now we want the politicians to lead the country.&quot;    In recent months, the doomsayers have been warning of impending chaos once the Olympic political truce ends: They envision a military coup in the wake of massive social unrest.    But that scenario now appears less plausible. Military officers and people who know them well say that even army hardliners are aware that a politically emboldened public wouldn't stand for it.    &quot;If {President} Roh Tae Woo doesn't take strong action to restore order after the Olympics, he will lose his post,&quot; warns one graduate of the Korean Military Academy. But when asked what the army would do, he admits, &quot;Actually, it is impossible for the military to step in now.&quot;    The fact is, most military officers would rather leave politics to the politicians and stick to the job of defending their country against unpredictable North Korea. Many officers say they resent former President Chun Doo Hwan for soiling the name of the military with politics. &quot;There are a few politically ambitious officers, but we don't respect them,&quot; one colonel says.    Still, the 600,000-strong military will be an important social and political force as long as the North Korean threat remains, with the border just 25 miles from Seoul. &quot;If the Russians were in Baltimore, your military would have a bigger say in Washington, too,&quot; says a Korean officer.    Among the students, who were in the vanguard of the popular movement that forced former President Chun to introduce democratic reforms, political worries have been replaced by concerns about finding jobs after graduation. Professors say the recent beginning of the semester was the quietest in years. Sympathy for the activists' latest cause -- reunification with North Korea -- is widespread on campus, but few are acting on that ideological affinity.    The students' confrontational approach to the reunification issue, centered on unsuccessful attempts to march to the border to meet their northern counterparts, has so far failed to catch hold with the general public. The government pre-empted them with steps aimed at promoting dialogue with the North. Now, the authorities are even allowing university libraries to carry North Korean newspapers -- perhaps in the hope that their strident propaganda will discourage idealized visions of the Communist North.    As a result of the government measures and the broad desire for a peaceful Olympics, support for the students is low. In the last major demonstration, on August 15, the same shopkeepers who cheered the students a year ago threw rocks at them and gave juice to the riot police.    The government is trying to take advantage of the emerging conservative political consensus. On the one hand, it is distancing itself from extremist incidents like the attack on the journalist. But on the other, it wants to nudge the pendulum away from the rapid liberalization of the past year, back in the direction of public order and government authority.    That may mean a crackdown -- more arrests of students, less patience with labor strikes and some attempt to limit the outspoken press. But the authorities are carefully gauging what will be tolerated by the public. &quot;An excessive use of government force only encourages sympathy for the leftists,&quot; says Minister of Legislation Hyun Hong Choo.    The top priority right after the Olympics will be an investigation of corruption under the Chun regime, and the Kwangju incident, a 1980 uprising in which at least 200 civilians were killed by soldiers. Though many people are eager to see past wrongdoings brought to light, the opposition in the National Assembly indicates it will be circumspect in how far it pushes. The three opposition parties, which hold a majority of seats, say they don't want to punish former president Chun himself.    President Roh has met with the three opposition leaders, and political observers believe genuine bargaining, rather than the standoffs of the past, is beginning in earnest.    Opposition leader Kim Dae Jung has been trying to mend fences with the army, which still deeply distrusts him, and is making highly publicized visits to military installations. Kim Young Sam, leader of the No. 2 opposition party, has discouraged students from radical action. And Kim Jong Pil, who commands the swing vote of the third party, is waiting to use his influence to achieve his conservative aims.    But as politics moves toward the center, politicians can't expect a completely docile public. Even among the middle class, which is generally interested in stability and prosperity, discontent remains. At a recent student demonstration, a 31-year-old engineer from Hyundai Motor Corp. watching from the sidelines says he wants to join their cause. &quot;I can't now -- I'm middle class. I could lose my job.&quot; But, he says, &quot;I still hate the government.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>