<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870317-0135 </DOCNO><HL> VW Fraud CaseRaises QuestionOf Regulation---West German Companies'Free Rein in OperatingBank Activities is Cited---By Terence RothStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> FRANKFURT, West Germany </DATELINE><TEXT>   The suspected foreign-exchange fraud at Volkswagen AG has raised the question of whether West German companies' internal banking operations should be reined in.    Banking analysts specifically cite a lack of regulation of corporate currency operations, which have surged in volume as West Germany's major companies have expanded abroad in the past two decades.    West German companies essentially regulate their banking activities themselves. Corporate accounts are policed by outside auditors, who have an unofficial watchdog function. But in the case of VW, auditors didn't discover the auto maker's open currency position until fraudulent forward dollar contracts came due and were rejected by banks, which had no record of the transactions.    &quot;Many auditors studying company accounts often don't know enough about complicated currency instruments to catch possible problems,&quot; said Prof. Karl-Werner Schulte, a management instructor at the European Business School in Oestrich-Winkel.    VW last week reported that &quot;criminal manipulation&quot; in its huge foreign-exchange positions has cost it as much as $259 million. The fraud, which is being investigated by local and federal authorities, has prompted the resignation of VW's chief financial officer and the ouster of its foreign-exchange manager.    German companies with at least 50% of their revenue generated abroad, such as VW, trade in billions of dollars annually, often taking hedged positions to protect against erratic currency shifts. But the rules that regulate banks' currency positions don't apply to corporations.    &quot;Non-banks have no regulatory controls in this respect, and it becomes a problem when they effectively trade like a bank, but aren't required to act like one,&quot; said a Frankfurt bank economist.    Rules laid down by West Germany's bank regulator, the Supervisory Office for Credit Business in West Berlin, require banks' foreign-exchange operations to account for their currency assets and liabilities at the end of every trading day. The regulators also establish a system of checks and balances for bank currency trading, including the division of functions between dealer, executor and booking of transactions.    However, most analysts say that even the most rigorous management and government controls can't always prevent the kind of fraud -- by way of doctored computer programs and erased data banks -- said to have caused VW's foreign-exchange loss.    Even so, the opposition Social Democratic Party has submitted to Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg a list of questions concerning the VW case. Opposition officials indicate that the VW situation is further evidence of the need to bring the expanded bank-like operations of West Germany's big industry into tighter controls.    &quot;We are going to carefully study the questions arising out of the VW affair,&quot; said Uwe Jens, senior Social Democratic member of parliament's economics committee. &quot;If large corporations are developing sideline banking operations, now may be the time to expand the banking laws to cover those operations.&quot;    If banking laws are enacted to cover corporate finance operations, the change would require a legislative amendment to West German banking laws. With the VW case only a week old, it's too early to talk about pending legislation. But West Germany has a proven record of ushering in new laws in reaction to economic scandal.    The VW case, which is believed to be the worst case of foreign-exchange manipulation on record, has prompted management experts to reexamine the role of comptrollers in West German companies. Currently, the role of comptroller isn't emphasized in German management structure.    In the U.S., the comptroller is responsible for monitoring and auditing a company's cash and payments positions. In West Germany, when a company doesn't have such a position, the managing board member for finance commonly acts as an unofficial comptroller.    Ironically, VW's former chief financial officer, Rolf Selowsky, who resigned over the weekend, last year had objected to plans by VW's chairman, Carl H. Hahn, to appoint a comptroller for VW. The comptroller, who would have encroached on Mr. Selowsky's responsibilities, would have, among other things, assumed direct control of the company's cash and foreign currency positions.    The resignation of Mr. Selowsky, who was scheduled to retire in six weeks, and the suspensions of two senior executives working under him, suggested management failure to prevent the suspected currency fraud.    ---   VW and Hungarian Bank   Special to The Wall Street Journal    FRANKFURT, West Germany -- The National Bank of Hungary's name was used on forged documents apparently linked to the suspected foreign-exchange fraud at Volkswagen AG, a local representative of the bank said.    He added that the Hungarian bank helped identify falsified documents presented to it by VW. The representative, who declined to be identified, said the bank had no part in any wrongdoing.    Der Spiegel, a West German magazine, has reported that VW's suspicion of criminal action in the case solidified on Feb. 18, when the National Bank of Hungary declined to recognize a dollar futures contract that VW's records showed it had. </TEXT></DOC>