<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881103-0005 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Film: A 'Good Mother' Tries to Have It All </HL><AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The movie version of Sue Miller's potent first novel, &quot;The Good Mother,&quot; dispenses with the obligatory background material in a rather pallid, encapsulated opening sequence. We see Anna, the heroine, as a shy youngster, spending summers in Maine with her vast extended family. They are New England gentry, hale folk who sing &quot;We're here because we're here&quot; on the way to their big communal lunches. None of them would dream of questioning the patriarch, the domineering grandfather -- except his youngest daughter, Anna's rebellious Aunt Babe.    Prim little Anna, with her braids and straw hat and buttoned-up shirts, worships the daring Babe, with her bare midriff and cigarettes and moonlight rendezvous with boys. It is Babe who ends up drinking too much because she never wins her battles against family convention and it is Babe who comes to an early, tragic end.    Just when you've just about had it with this force-feeding of information, the picture flashes forward to Anna years later, at home with her own daughter, a six-year-old named Molly. That's when the movie really begins, jolted to life by Diane Keaton. Yes, she is a celebrity, a major movie star. You know all that but you forget it almost immediately. Her portrayal of this &quot;ordinary&quot; modern woman reaches levels of truthfulness few actresses would even know how to try for.    This is an incredibly sophisticated performance, intellectually and emotionally precise. Ms. Keaton draws on everything she has learned over the years, but so naturally she makes it seem instinctive. (It may be instinctive by now, though it wasn't always so. Just take a look at the early Keaton, in &quot;The Godfather.&quot;)    When the story catches up with the adult Anna, she is recently divorced from her husband; she earns a living doing laboratory drudge work and teaching piano. She's failed her family's expectations, professionally and personally. Her life is tight, repressed.    Except when she's with Molly.    Ms. Keaton is the rare adult who can play with a kid like a kid, without condescending and without letting either of them forget she's also a grownup. The first time she fully demonstrated this talent was in &quot;Shoot the Moon,&quot; where she was wonderful as the mother of four daughters. The precocious pixie who plays Molly, Asia Vieira, just beams when she's around Ms. Keaton. You can see why. Ms. Keaton isn't a big person and she may be best known for her Annie Hall &quot;mmmm's&quot; and giggles, but around children she seems as rooted and comforting as an oak.    With Molly she is sure of herself. She doesn't doubt her decision to leave a stable but loveless marriage; she isn't insecure about her lack of ambition (or at least the kind of ambition that would please her grandparents).    The wonder of Ms. Keaton's performance is the way she captures the contradictions in Anna's character. She wants to live life by her own rules, she believes in the course she's set, yet she falls into girlish indecision when she has to defend herself. When she refuses her grandfather's offer for money to hire a private nurse for Molly (instead of day care), she explains, stammering, &quot;It's independence . . . It's being my own person.&quot; She looks sheepish, even though she's saying what she believes, as though she's hearing the words the way her grandfather hears them and thinking they sound silly.    The story is about the ways society exacts a price from women who don't want to or can't conform to the old standards. While Anna is alone simply raising her child in ways that may seem eccentric to some fogeys, she is subjected only to the disapproval of her family. But when she becomes a single mother trying to combine motherhood and a sexual life of her own, she becomes a public threat.    The Anna Ms. Keaton plays isn't a veteran of the sexual revolution; she hasn't been out looking for her Mr. Goodbar. While she was married to her husband for seven years, she tells a friend, &quot;sex between us was so . . . nothing.&quot; You can see why she married him when he picks Molly up; he's a good-looking man who is warm and playful with his daughter -- he's a lawyer, very appropriate.    After her divorce, Anna meets a man with whom sex is something. She doesn't abandon her child for wild nights of lovemaking. She just looks juicier, happy. In fact, she and Leo, her new boyfriend, quickly settle into a rather conventional domesticity. As she was before Leo came on the scene, Anna is progressive, though hardly radical, in her attitudes toward her child's sex education. She teaches the little girl the basics from a children's text that is illustrated with cartoon drawings; she and Leo take showers in Molly's presence. One night, when Molly interrupts their lovemaking because she's had a bad dream, Anna sleepily lets the frightened kid crawl into bed next to her.    This relaxed atmosphere leads to an event -- it would be unfair to say exactly what it is -- that in the harshest terms tells Anna she can't have it all. She risks losing her child, and Ms. Keaton makes you feel the reverberation of what that means to Anna. She looks like someone sliced her open and drained everything vital out of her.    Behind all this is Leonard Nimoy, formerly the extraterrestrial Mr. Spock of &quot;Star Trek,&quot; who has now moved up a degree, so to speak, into a directorial Dr. Spock, dispensing earthy wisdom to parents. His debut was &quot;Three Men and a Baby.&quot; This second try at a film about adults and young children is a fine, understated job of directing emotionally charged material. He decided to shoot the sex scenes discreetly, and to keep the critical event offscreen -- all of which actually enhances the picture's authenticity.    All the actors are quite good, especially Liam Neeson as Leo; Jason Robards as the Brahmin lawyer who represents Anna in the custody fight that becomes part of the story; and Teresa Wright and Ralph Bellamy as Anna's grandparents.    But the picture's intensity burns from Ms. Keaton. There's a point in the film when Leo starts challenging her, nagging her about her lack of passion for work. Much as she loves him, she looks at him with the ferocity of a hungry lion eyeing someone who's standing between her and lunch. &quot;Molly is my commitment,&quot; she says with the flush of coherent rage. &quot;I hate to be told there's no honor in it.&quot; Only when the movie is over will you realize how heartbreaking a moment that is. </TEXT></DOC>