<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871229-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Brian Boitano FacesLife as an Ice Skater,His Coach by His Side---Linda Leaver Has NurturedProdigy From 'Pixie Boy'To the Calgary Olympics---By Ken WellsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> BERKELEY, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Brian Boitano entered his first ice-skating competition at the age of eight. He strapped on his skates and paced the sidewalk outside a neighborhood rink, waiting for his coach, Linda Leaver.    &quot;He was this really cute kid,&quot; Ms. Leaver recalls, &quot;and so eager. He kept asking me, 'How will I know when it's my turn? How will I know?'&quot; Ms. Leaver promised she wouldn't let him miss out. She didn't, and Brian won his first of many skating events, in the &quot;pixie boys&quot; division.    Sixteen years later, Ms. Leaver is still looking out for Mr. Boitano as he skates around an empty rink, training now for an international skating competition.    Quick as a bird leaving a branch, he rises from the ice, seeming to defy gravity. Only after four revolutions does his skate touch down in a swift, clean slash on the ice. Mr. Boitano currently is the world's sole practitioner of this maneuver, the quadruple jump, and it has never been done successfully in competition. In February, in his quest for the ultimate prize in men's figure skating -- the Olympic gold medal -- the 24-year-old Californian may give it a shot.    And though his skates have carried him to a world arena far beyond his neighborhood rink, Mr. Boitano isn't likely to try the leap without first consulting the suburban San Francisco housewife who first spotted his talents. Theirs is a rare allegiance in the cold climes of Olympic figure skating. Promising skaters and professional coaches tend to form alliances based on less enduring considerations -- a skater's ranking, the Olympic medals a coach's skaters have won, the prestige one person might bring to the other.    To have a skater and a coach stick together &quot;from the neighborhood rink to the Olympics&quot; is unheard of, says Peggy Fleming, the 1968 women's Olympic gold medal winner, who went through 10 coaches en route to her Olympic triumph. Ms. Fleming observes that Ms. Leaver, a wife and mother of two who also insists on having a home life, brings a &quot;refreshing normalcy&quot; to a sport whose participants often can't see beyond the glint of medals.    &quot;Their relationship is very unusual,&quot; adds Carlo Fassi, the Italian-born dean of coaches; he has to his credit four Olympic figure-skating champions, Ms. Fleming among them. &quot;In one way, Brian has been very loyal to Linda, yet she has rewarded him because she has devoted practically all of her time to him.&quot; Mr. Fassi adds: &quot;She is an excellent coach.&quot;    For 10 years a competitive skater herself, the 42-year-old Ms. Leaver never doubted that she would coach, though her ambitions were modest. She thought perhaps she would take a part-time job at a local rink. Thus, three years into her marriage, when her husband, David Leaver, landed a fellowship at Stanford University in Palo Alto, she took a job giving group lessons at a rink in nearby Sunnyvale, Calif.    Little more than a year later, in 1971, however, young Brian Boitano, a daredevil roller skater banished from the sidewalks by his worried parents, ice-skated into her class and changed her life.    When Ms. Leaver describes the evolution of her relationship with Mr. Boitano, she sometimes forgets to talk about skating. She says it was pretty clear even at an early age that Mr. Boitano was a tireless worker, with equal amounts of determination and perfectionism.    &quot;This has been the daily process of trying to be the best in the world at something. How can it be anything but exciting?&quot; she says. If it leads to a gold medal, so much the better: &quot;Brian loves to win, and so do I.&quot;    Which doesn't mean there haven't been stresses and conflicts. Rival coaches have tried to woo Mr. Boitano away with the pitch that Ms. Leaver, a relative unknown among the 35 most important American coaches, lacked the experience and the influence to guide him through the grueling, and somewhat political, climb to an Olympic medal. Those who follow skating say the sport's tight-knit cadre of judges often continues to evaluate skaters between events, sometimes letting a skater's attitude or diligence influence scoring.    Ms. Leaver's response: &quot;If I felt Brian could get better coaching elsewhere, I would have let him go.&quot; Mr. Boitano says he has never seriously considered leaving, because Ms. Leaver understands him so completely.    &quot;I'm my hardest critic; I never let up on myself, and Linda knows that,&quot; he says. &quot;I also don't accept constructive criticism very well -- except from Linda. I accept it from her because I know she has absolute faith in me, that whatever she asks me to do, it's because she believes it's in my best interests.&quot;    There are disagreements, &quot;but we work things out,&quot; says Mr. Boitano. He adds, laughing: &quot;Actually, Linda manipulates me. She'll make a suggestion in practice, I'll say no way -- I hate to give in. Then the next day, after I've thought about it, I'll find myself doing it her way.&quot;    Ms. Leaver confides one of her secrets of reducing conflicts: &quot;I skip the first half-hour of his practices. He can be grumpy then.&quot;    Three-time U.S. champion since 1985, Mr. Boitano won a world title in 1986. But that long, glamorous trip hasn't been without mishap.    A knee injury nearly ended Mr. Boitano's career at the age of 12. In 1986, acupuncture, determination and what Ms. Leaver calls Mr. Boitano's &quot;amazing motion memory&quot; allowed him to overcome chronic tendinitis to defend his U.S. title and win a stunning come-from-behind world championship. This past February, Mr. Boitano narrowly missed a quadruple jump -- his fourth unsuccessful try in competition -- and lost his chance to repeat his world title.    For the Leavers, there were two children to bring up -- Jennifer, now 14, and Lindsay, six. And a wrenching decision had to be made about David Leaver's promising engineering career. To remain Mr. Boitano's coach meant that Ms. Leaver would have to stick close to his California base -- and for David Leaver that meant turning down job opportunities elsewhere. He helped start an engineering consulting firm so the couple could remain in California, but he says doing that &quot;was certainly an adjustment.&quot;    For Ms. Leaver, her dedication to Mr. Boitano has meant years of rising at 5:30 a.m., six-day practice weeks, and missed family occasions during long stretches on the road. And although her association with Mr. Boitano has brought offers to coach other talented skaters, she has limited herself to one other student, Yvonne Gomez, a contender for Spain's Olympic team.    For all this, friends of hers say Ms. Leaver earns the equivalent of factory wages. She won't discuss her salary. And when, perhaps shortly after the Olympics, Mr. Boitano decides to hang up his skates, Ms. Leaver has pledged to quit for at least two years, if not for good. &quot;This isn't,&quot; she says, &quot;about money.&quot;    A clue to what it is about was evident in October in Calgary, Alberta, at an event held in the same rink where Mr. Boitano will skate for an Olympic medal. Over the first two days, Mr. Boitano hadn't skated well, which didn't mean, in Ms. Leaver's mind, that he wasn't doing his best. &quot;He's always doing his best,&quot; she insists.    The event was the final pre-Olympic showdown between Mr. Boitano and Brian Orser, the Canadian champion, who is also the current world champion and Mr. Boitano's toughest Olympic rival. A stumble by either man might give the other an important psychological edge when the two return in February to compete for a gold medal.    Thus, when Mr. Boitano took to the ice for his final program, in second place behind Mr. Orser, the pressure was palpable. He and Ms. Leaver exchanged glances. At times like this, she never gives pep talks; she thinks them. &quot;We can read each other's minds,&quot; Mr. Boitano says matter-of-factly.    At an early breakfast the day of the event, she and Mr. Boitano considered what needed rehearsing and what didn't. Later, at practice, adjustments were made. Certain steps in Mr. Boitano's routine were made bouncier; a flourish of hands was made more dramatic. Gauging his mood, Ms. Leaver decided whom Mr. Boitano should see during the day and who should be avoided. A reporter, for example, was banished from rinkside.    On this night, as Mr. Boitano finished his routine, Ms. Leaver heard affirmation that attention to small details pays off: A highly partisan Canadian crowd gave him a thunderous ovation. Though he hadn't tried a quadruple jump, he had skated daringly and almost flawlessly. Nevertheless, Canada's Mr. Orser won the competition, by nurturing his lead with a mistake-free, albeit conservative, program.    Afterward, Ms. Leaver remained at the rink for hours. She sought the advice of the Soviet judge on how Mr. Boitano might improve his routine. She buttonholed other coaches, asking what they thought. What she herself thought was that Mr. Boitano deserved to win but hadn't and that if he skates as well in the Olympics, he just might take the gold. </TEXT></DOC>