<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880812-0027 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE APPROVED a $282.6 billion Pentagon budget measure.    The bill, approved 90-4, includes provisions aimed at restricting defense consultants and at getting allies to bear a greater share of military spending. When combined with funds already approved for military construction and for the Energy Department's management of the nuclear arsenal, the bill would bring the total military budget for fiscal 1989 to $292 billion. Reagan vetoed a defense measure last week because of reductions in the budget for his space-based antimissile project.    The legislation must be reconciled with a House appropriations bill that would provide less money for several arms programs, including Star Wars.    ---   BUSH HAS NARROWED Democratic rival Dukakis's lead, a new poll shows.    A nationwide Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey shows that the Massachusetts governor still leads the presidential race by a margin of 49% to 39% among those people who are considered likely to vote in November. But that 10-point margin is down from the 17-point spread registered by a Journal/NBC poll taken just after the Democratic convention, and suggests that a good convention for Bush might pull the vice president within striking distance of his presidential opponent.    The GOP's platform panel is expected today to complete the document, which will be presented at the party's convention next week in New Orleans.    ---   THE HOUSE APPROVED sweeping sanctions against South Africa.    The legislation would end all U.S. investment in South Africa, requiring corporations and individuals to divest their holdings. Imports from South Africa would be banned, except for certain minerals, publications, and goods from black-owned companies. The bill was passed 244-132 as a protest of apartheid, and it is far more stringent than the sanctions passed over Reagan's veto in 1986. The measure, which goes to the Senate, is almost certain to be vetoed by the president.    The bill was cleared after the White House sent two high-ranking officials to Capitol Hill to urge House members to put off the vote until September.    ---   Burmese troops killed at least 15 more people as anti-government violence spread to Rangoon's suburbs, official media said. At least 95 people have been killed in three days of rioting. Burma's military commander warned against &quot;anarchy,&quot; but the government said it would consider the people's &quot;legitimate requests.&quot;    ---   Iraq accused Iran of firing hundreds of artillery shells and missiles at Baghdad's military positions near the Shatt al-Arab waterway, where the Persian Gulf war erupted eight years ago. The attacks, if confirmed, would be the first serious fighting reported since both nations agreed Monday at the U.N. to begin a cease-fire Aug. 20.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir rejected a proposal by right-wing groups that Israel annex the occupied territories following Jordan's move to sever administrative ties with the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He said the status of the territories should be the subject of negotiations with Palestinians who don't belong to or identify with the PLO.    ---   The Senate voted to confirm the nomination of Richard Thornburgh as attorney general. He succeeds Meese. The former Pennsylvania governor is a friend of Bush, and is considered essential to the GOP effort to counter Democratic allegations of ethical lapses in the Reagan administration.    ---   The cancer institute's director resigned after nearly a decade as the architect of the federal cancer research program. Dr. Vincent DeVita, who presided over a National Cancer Institute budget of more than $1.6 billion, is expected to become chief of staff at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Research Center.    ---   South Korean police detained about 400 demonstrators protesting a government ban on a meeting Monday between North and South Korea students. About 2,000 students rallied in several cities. They plan to discuss reunification of the peninsula and Pyongyang's demand to be a co-host of the Olympics.    ---   Ecuador restored diplomatic relations with Nicaragua in one of the first official acts of the new government of Rodrigo Borja, who was inaugurated Wednesday. The moderate leftist, however, also said he wanted good relations with the U.S., and pledged an emergency plan to end Ecuador's current economic crisis.    ---   Nicaraguan Contra leaders criticized a new $27.1 million aid package approved Wednesday by the Senate that includes food, clothing and medical supplies for the antiSandinista insurgents. The officials said failure to grant immediate military assistance would jeopardize the survival of the rebels. The package was cleared 49-47.    ---   Navy officials said the skipper of the USS Dubuque will be relieved of command tomorrow pending an inquiry into allegations that the ship failed to adequately assist a boatload of Vietnamese refugees in June. Nearly 60 people died during a 37-day crossing in the South China Sea. Those who survived reportedly resorted to cannibalism.    ---   The state of Arizona filed suit against former Gov. Mecham, asking that he relinquish all money remaining in a protocol fund as of April 5, the day after his impeachment conviction. The Republican, who was convicted on two counts and removed from office, has said there is about $80,000 in the fund, which he contends is private money. </TEXT></DOC>