<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0139 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business: Why Interest Rates Will Keep Rising </HL><AUTHOR> Lindley H. Clark Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN BNK ECO </IN><G> FED </G><TEXT>   Interest rates usually are hard to predict, but it's a safe assumption that this week's increase in the Federal Reserve's discount rate -- the fee on loans to banks -- will be followed by more increases in the weeks ahead. The reason? A large slice of America's population, including many people who deal in the securities markets, fears we face more inflation.    Inflation fears can be powerful. Over the past couple of years, the U.S. Treasury has been pleading with West Germany to stimulate its economy so that it will import more and reduce its current-account surplus. To the Treasury this seemed a reasonable idea since Germany has high unemployment and almost zero inflation.    It does not, however, seem reasonable to the Germans, who are instead mulling a tax increase to shore up a leaky government budget. As for the U.S. comments on German inflation, a typical German might respond, &quot;Zero inflation? What's wrong with that?&quot;    Those Germans still alive who actually experienced that inflation of 1923 won't forget it. Nor will their children and grandchildren. The inflation reached its peak in October 1923 when wholesale prices rose 29,586% from the level of the prior month. John Maynard Keynes, the British economist, reported that Germans would order two beers at a time because the beer would grow warm and stale more slowly than the price was rising.    No German politician would think of advocating a program that actually envisioned even a modest rise in inflation.    The U.S. hasn't experienced anything like Germany's 1920s, but 1973-82 was bad enough. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries had a hand in the U.S. inflation, but U.S. policy through most of the period was singularly inept. Other countries hit by the OPEC increases, such as Japan, did a much better job in dealing with them. At times, price controls and pleas to turn down the heat seemed to be all that occurred to the government.    The 1973-75 recession got the inflation rate down to 3.8% by early 1976, but the government let it get away again. By late 1979 and early 1980, the consumer price index was soaring at an annual rate of nearly 16%. It took the 1981-82 recession and the near-collapse of OPEC to get inflation down to what are now considered tolerable levels.    It was a horrendous experience, and few Americans have forgotten it.    The current business expansion, already the longest in peacetime history, is charging toward its sixth anniversary next November. For the past two years, many economists have been predicting that the business cycle was about to slow down, heading off any fears of inflation. When the stock market crashed last October, there were widespread forecasts that a recession would begin early this year. The expansion may have hesitated briefly after the crash; the Federal Reserve was concerned enough that it adopted a highly stimulative monetary policy. Before long, however, the economy once again was off to the races.    The Fed thereupon switched to a more restrictive policy. &quot;More&quot; is the operative word. The central bank has some control over the federal-funds rate -- the fee the banks charge on reserves they lend to one another. It influences the funds rate by influencing the supply of reserves. When the Fed sells government securities it pulls reserves out of the system; when it buys securities it puts in reserves. The Federal Reserve also is paying more attention to the money supply than it was a couple of years ago, modestly slowing its growth.    The hope here has been that the Federal Reserve has been pursuing a gradualist approach, of the sort that the incoming Reagan administration urged on the Volcker Fed in 1981. The Reagan economists figured it would take four or five years to cut the inflation rate to a level that the nation could accept. Maybe it was impossible. In any case, the Federal Reserve opted to do the job quickly and by late 1982, toward the end of a deep recession, the consumer price index was rising at an annual rate of only about 1%.    Perhaps the Fed is pursuing gradualism, but success in such an endeavor demands that the effort be credible. The Fed's increase in the discount rate is a step in the right direction, although it should have come sooner. The federal-funds rate has been pushing close to 8%.    The spread between the discount rate and the funds rate still is so wide that in theory banks could borrow at the discount window and turn a profit by relending the funds. Borrowing at the discount window has risen sharply, but the rise is largely accounted for by the continuing troubles of Texas banks.    The problem of the funds rate and the discount rate could be avoided if the Federal Reserve would tie the discount rate to a market rate, such as the rate on short-term Treasury bills. Such an arrangement has been suggested a number of times but never accepted.    Changes in the discount rate actually play only a small role in Fed policy. Banks seldom are encouraged to borrow by a drop in the rate or dissuaded from borrowing by a rise in the rate. Markets, how ever, read a lot into discount-rate changes that isn't there. Stocks dropped sharply when this week's increase was announced.    The Fed, of course, likes to keep a low profile up to and through presidential elections. Chairman Alan Greenspan, long a hard-working Republican, surely wants it that way. And Mr. Greenspan, a careful student of the economy, must know that the current situation requires that his gradualism, if that's what it is, continue to become a little less gradual.    Last Friday the Labor Department reported that the unemployment rate edged up slightly. But it also said that payroll employment rose by a strong 283,000 in July and, at the same time, sharply increased the rise in nonfarm jobs in June. On Monday of this week the Wall Street Journal's quarterly survey showed that corporate profits in the second quarter jumped 101% from a year earlier. Although most of the rise was due to the fact that big banks in last year's second quarter made big additions to their foreign-debt reserves and reported huge losses, corporate America even without the banks had a highly profitable quarter.    Economists have been predicting that the economy will slow in this year's second half. The reasoning is that consumers will finally decide enough is enough, reduce their spending and start adding to savings. Maybe they will, in time, but so far there's precious little evidence of it. The 51 analysts interviewed monthly by Blue Chip Economic Indicators, a Sedona, Ariz., newsletter had been predicting a fairly sharp slowdown in the second half, but this month on the average they raised their forecast for second-half gross national product from 2.45% to 2.75%   The Fed obviously feared that a discount-rate increase would shock the markets, as it did. But the funds rate and the discount rate have been out of line for so long that the markets should have discounted an increase. In any case, with inflation expectations rising, the real interest rate -- the nominal rate minus inflation expectations -- may have been falling. And it's real rates, not nominal rates, that chiefly influence business activity.    The Fed needs to take further steps to increase its credibility. </TEXT></DOC>