<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870423-0173 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Trade: Enemy Is in the Mirror, Not in Japan---By Hodding Carter III</HL><DD> 04/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan arrives in Washington next week, long after the blossoms have faded from the cherry trees along the Potomac and the bloom from U.S.-Japanese relations as well. The president has announced a small set of economically meaningless but symbolically catastrophic trade sanctions, and a thoroughly buffaloed Congress is rushing to get ahead of the special-interest curve with trade legislation that ignores the lessons of the early 1930s. It's hard to think of an easier way to get a cheer from a Washington audience these days than with an attack on Japanese economic perfidy.    Which is more than a little strange if you look at the situation in nonpolitical terms. The $60 billion American trade deficit with Japan can be attributed only in a minor way to Japanese restrictions. The nation's overall $170 billion trade deficit last year speaks far more honestly to the root causes of our difficulties. Not too surprisingly, it is hard to find anyone who privately contends that the elimination of all unfair Japanese trade practices would change the balance by more than $10 billion.    But no one who counts looks at the trade deficit in nonpolitical terms. Since we live in a democracy, politicians tend to be political, and beating up on the Japanese is the moral equivalent of a free ride. It appeases popular passions and avoids confronting the unpalatable reality that we are the architects of our own disaster. Few officeholders ever won votes by forcing their constituents to look in the mirror to find the enemy.    The mirror reflects an unpleasant mosaic. There is the matter of debt. Personal, corporate, state and national are at an all-time high and getting higher. America is on a consumption binge for which it is perfectly willing to have someone else, in some long-distant time, pay the bill. Productivity growth, outside the relatively healthy 20% of gross national product attributable to manufacturing, has been declining. It fell from an anemic 1% in 1985 to an invisible 0.7% in 1986. The U.S. is now the world's largest debtor, with $150 billion owed and rising rapidly. Individual savings rates continue to fall and are now less than half the abysmal rate of 1980.    None of these figures can be attributed to nefarious Japanese practices, unless some assume that Tokyo has no right to economic vitality. Hard as it is to say and harder even to articulate in a political arena, we have been slipping into international economic trouble because we long ago got fat, dumb and slothful. We collectively decided that the great gift of World War II, our unchallenged economic supremacy, was in the divine order of things. Even if we had done everything right, even if we had run a lean, mean and taut ship on which today's pleasures were postponed for tomorrow's health, a slew of nations such as Japan and Germany eventually would have clawed their way back into competitive balance with us.    But we didn't do everything right. Arrogance, coupled with the delusion that what goes up may never come down, contributed to a precipitous decline.    Throw in a government that encouraged our worst instincts. Throw in politicians of both parties who resolutely denied the truth of what was happening. Do all this, and you have set the stage for the current obsession with protectionism. It's patent medicine for a real ailment. While its ultimate effects could be fatal, it has the political benefit of tasting good as it goes down.    Someone is bound to be yelling, &quot;There you go, blaming America first.&quot; So let's concede that the Japanese, along with a dozen other nations, have gotten well in part because we tolerated practices in the days of our hegemony that we can't tolerate today. They have also prospered in part because we assiduously helped them revive their postwar economies.    But the fault nonetheless lies basically in ourselves. As Gary Hart said some time ago, &quot;Don't get angry, get competitive.&quot;    Behind the slogan lies bitter medicine. It means short-term pain for long-term gain. The American standard of living is already being crunched, but it should be crunched by deliberate choices rather than involuntary circumstances. Reducing the deficit, with emphasis on budget cuts in middle-class benefits as well as new taxes, preferably on consumption, is an absolute necessity. Wage rates, starting at the executive-suite level, must be restrained, with an explicit trade-off tied to shared benefits later from increased productivity and sales. While our society shouldn't even try to be like that of the Japanese, it can (and must) educate our youth as thoroughly as the Japanese educate theirs, which means longer school years and school days, and infinitely more parental involvement.    Edwin Reingold, a Time magazine reporter stationed for eight years in Tokyo, recently returned and wrote of the civility and efficiency he had come to expect in Japan. He came home to &quot;bureaucracy, ineptitude, mean spirit and lackadaisy.&quot; Where, he asked, was the old American pride in competence, work well done and pride in service? Allowing for hyperbole, it is a question that arises in various ways, and until it is answered correctly, the threat from abroad will remain acute. It can't be answered by building protectionist barriers that lock inefficiency and incompetence into permanent place.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>