<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870204-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. CONDUCTED an underground nuclear test, ignoring Soviet warnings.    The Energy Department announced that a nuclear device was exploded in Nevada, hours after Moscow's chief arms negotiator declared in Geneva that the first U.S. nuclear test of 1987 would prompt Moscow to end its 18-month arms-test moratorium. Following the U.S. announcement, the Soviet news agency Tass said the test raised the possibility of a resumption of nuclear blasts &quot;with redoubled force.&quot; A Foreign Ministry spokesman, however, refused to say whether Moscow had scheduled any tests.    Senate Republican leader Robert Dole said Reagan appeared to support the early phased deployment of a space-based antimissile system.    ---   IRAN SAID it holds a Journal reporter amid conflicting reports on his status.    Reports emerging from Tehran left unclear the status of Wall Street Journal correspondent Gerald Seib, who has been held since Saturday. Tehran Radio identified Seib as a &quot;spy for the Zionist regime, who entered Iran disguised as a journalist.&quot; It was the first time that the government radio in Iran had confirmed his detention. Meanwhile, diplomatic sources in Tehran suggested that Seib might be released as early as this morning.    As press organizations from around the world called for his release, a small news agency said Seib would be freed &quot;within the next 48 hours.&quot;    ---   Moslem kidnappers in Lebanon said four hostages, including three Americans, were moved out of Beirut to foil any U.S. attempt to rescue them. The change of location came as U.S. warships and Marine assault forces were reported within 50 miles of Lebanon. A militia leader said the U.S. would &quot;pay a very high price&quot; if it attacked.    ---   Federal health officials scheduled a public meeting Feb. 24-25 on a proposal to make AIDS blood tests mandatory for patients admitted to hospitals and applicants for marriage licenses. The test for AIDS virus antibodies currently is required only for blood donors.    ---   The Senate voted to allow states to raise the speed limit to 65 mph on rural segments of the interstate highway system, setting up a confrontation with the House, which supports the current 55 mph speed limit. The Senate's vote reflected intensifying dissatisfaction with the current law, particularly in western states.    ---   The House voted 401-26 to override President Reagan's veto of the $20 billion Clean Water Act. The Senate is expected to complete the override today. Reagan had vetoed the legislation as too costly.    ---   China's Communist Party expelled propaganda chief Zhu Houze, an advocate of liberal change and the second-highest official ousted in a campaign against liberal influences. Zhu was regarded as a protege of former party leader Hu Yaobang, who was dismissed Jan. 16 by party officials.    ---   South Africa's foreign minister said U.S. foreign policy is &quot;hopeless,&quot; and he rejected congressional anti-apartheid sanctions as unwarranted meddling in Pretoria's affairs. R.F. Botha also called Shultz's meeting last week with African National Congress leader Oliver Tambo &quot;an evil thing.&quot;    ---   Patrick Buchanan said he would leave his job as Reagan's communications director March 1. Buchanan, who recently considered and rejected a presidential bid, said he believes he can better serve the conservative cause without the constraints of his White House job.    ---   Attorney General Meese said Reagan has decided to consolidate federal anti-drug efforts under a new cabinet-level policy group, in an apparent attempt to defuse congressional criticism about inadequate coordination and funding for U.S. drug programs.    ---   Philippine President Aquino plans to demand sworn allegiance from the military following this week's approval of a new constitution. Opposition leaders conceded defeat as unofficial returns from the vote indicated an overwhelming endorsement of the charter, and showed Aquino firmly in charge of her government.    ---   A U.S. grand jury indicted five companies and nine individuals on fraud and corruption charges stemming from an alleged bribery ring at the Defense Personnel Support Center in Philadelphia. The center is a Pentagon agency that buys uniforms for all military services.    ---   Justice Department lawyers now believe that funds involved in the Iran-Contra affair may have been misappropriated from the government, Meese said. The attorney general previously had indicated that the funds belonged to some of the middlemen involved in the arms sales to Iran and the diversion of some proceeds to Nicaraguan rebels.    ---   A number of shuttle astronauts expressed concern that planned tests of the orbiter's redesigned booster rockets won't simulate adequately forces on crucial joints during launch, the Houston Post reported. Separately, NASA's administrator said the Soviet Union may have taken the lead from the U.S. in manned space flight.    ---   A senior U.S. official met with a group of Czech dissidents in Prague, but said he was &quot;distressed&quot; that some activists were prevented from attending the meeting. Deputy Secretary of State Whitehead said the U.S. and Czechoslovakia have &quot;serious diffences&quot; on a host of issues. He was to meet today with Bulgarian officials. </TEXT></DOC>