<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871117-0072 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   One of the Reagan administration's proudest accomplishments, a nearly completed agreement with the Soviet Union on nuclear-arms reduction, has become a focal point of bitter intraparty debate among Republican candidates battling to succeed the president.    Of the six Republican presidential candidates, only Vice President George Bush has embraced the unfinished Intermediate Nuclear Forces, or INF, treaty, which would eliminate all U.S. and Soviet medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe. Mr. Bush's rivals all have either attacked the agreement, or in the case of Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole, pleaded for more time to study it.    In a speech last night, Alexander Haig, President Reagan's first secretary of state and a former NATO commander, launched the most forceful attack yet on the pact, which Mr. Reagan is expected to sign next month at a summit meeting with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Calling it &quot;a step in the wrong direction&quot; that will weaken rather than strengthen deterrence against war, Mr. Haig told the World Affairs Council here that &quot;the result is to create a crisis of confidence in the future of the Atlantic alliance precisely at the moment when the new leader in Moscow should be impressed with our strength, our unity and our resolve.&quot;    The prospect of securing the first major arms-control treaty with the Kremlin since 1979 is pitting a pack of GOP candidates anxious to get their campaigns off the ground against a popular and conservative Republican president eager to leave the stage on an upbeat note. The dispute threatens to aggravate strains between the party's moderate and conservative factions that have intensified recently amid charges that the president has lost his conservative moorings on such issues as arms control, taxes and the Supreme Court.    Vice President Bush and Sen. Dole, who are ahead of the pack, have little maneuvering room on the arms-control issue. Mr. Bush already has made his loyalty to the president a major theme of his campaign. And although Mr. Dole has said he wants to read the fine print in the pending arms treaty before embracing it, he would be expected to back ratification as Senate minority leader.    But the four other Republican candidates, who have been cultivating the right in hopes of boosting their ratings in the opinion polls and propelling themselves out of the pack, now are seeking to exploit conservative suspicions that the Soviets would never sign an arms agreement unless it was advantageous to them and damaging to the U.S.    &quot;Republicans get very, very nervous when other Republicans put deals together with the Russians,&quot; says Lance Tarrance, a GOP pollster aligned with Rep. Jack Kemp (R., N.Y.), who has accused the administration of &quot;rushing into an agreement that threatens to denuclearize Europe.&quot;    Ironically, some of the Republican right's traditional betes noires, including former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, are voicing similar criticisms of the European missile deal, warning that it could erode European confidence in the U.S. unless steps are taken to correct the imbalance between NATO and Warsaw Pact conventional forces in Europe.    Criticizing the still-unfinished INF agreement offers Rep. Kemp, Mr. Haig, former Delaware Gov. Pierre du Pont and former television evangelist Pat Robertson a chance not only to woo the right, but also to differentiate themselves from Vice President Bush and Sen. Dole. &quot;George is cheerleading for something he hasn't seen,&quot; says Mr. du Pont in a telephone interview.    Rep. Kemp, whose struggling campaign desperately needs a boost from movement conservatives, has warned against possible Soviet cheating on the INF treaty and has said that Mr. Reagan must not compromise his Strategic Defense Initiative in an effort to secure a blockbuster arms treaty halving the superpowers' arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles.    From the start, Mr. Kemp has sought to transform the election into what he calls a &quot;referendum&quot; on space-based missile defenses, popularly known as Star Wars. So far, that effort hasn't taken hold, but Mr. Kemp's strategists now hope that attention on the summit and the INF treaty may invigorate his campaign.    The issue plays to Mr. Haig's only strong suit, his experience as diplomat, military man and former White House chief of staff. In 1981, he opposed a Pentagon proposal to forgo the deployment of U.S. medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe in exchange for the removal of all similar Soviet weapons, but his complaint then wasn't that such a deal would weaken the West, but that the Soviets would never accept it.    The administration only has itself to blame for some problems. Some officials' eagerness to clinch an arms deal with the Soviets has generated fears that they may jettison something important in their scramble to revive the president's political fortunes. &quot;This attitude of signing on now and negotiating later is dangerous,&quot; warns Mr. du Pont.    Second, Mr. Reagan used the same tactics himself in 1980, claiming the SALT II arms treaty was &quot;fatally flawed&quot; and couldn't be verified.    Last night, however, Mr. Haig said that even if the INF agreement can be adequately verified, it &quot;will still be dangerously defective,&quot; and he proposed that the U.S. should halt the dismantling of medium-range and short-range nuclear missiles in Europe after two years if the Soviets don't agree to reduce their conventional forces and their strategic nuclear arsenal.    But arms control is more popular among the populace than it is among Republican conservatives, and wooing GOP conservatives by opposing Mr. Reagan's INF treaty could prove costly to the GOP in next November's general election.    &quot;This is an awkward situation for these Republican candidates,&quot; says Morris Fiorina, a Harvard University political scientist who is chairman of the nonpartisan National Election Studies. &quot;Here is a position that is by far the majority position in the country, and yet there is a wing in the Republicans' own party that feels very strongly the other way. These candidates are feeling primary-election pressures that could hurt them in the general election.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>