<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870226-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Wrong-Way Corrigan---By Doug Barnard Jr.</HL><DD> 02/26/87</DD><SO>  </SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has just unveiled a comprehensive and forward-looking regulatory blueprint for the financial-services industries, and in so doing he has made an important contribution to the gathering debate in Congress over how to revise the nation's banking laws. It is only a matter of time before Congress acts in some manner to permit banks, securities houses and other financial firms to compete more fully and directly with each other, and Mr. Corrigan's vision of banking and financial-industry structure deserves careful congressional consideration.    Mr. Corrigan is correct to label his proposals financially conservative. His policy paper reveals a troubling concern within the Fed system over issues of payments-system risk, principally the risk to the banking and financial system as a whole from a massive breakdown in the electronic wire transfer networks that now handle more than $1 trillion daily in the U.S. Mr. Corrigan places top priority on getting these risks under better control, and the rest of his analysis is thus tempered by a concern that any lifting of the competitive barriers among banks and other financial firms must not add more risk to the already vulnerable electronic payments networks.    In a similar spirit of caution, Mr. Corrigan also warns against the dangers of permitting commercial and industrial conglomerates to own depository institutions that enjoy the special protection of the deposit insurance system. He strongly urges, in order to protect the soundness of the system and to avoid stifling regulation, that commercial and industrial firms be prohibited from owning insured banks or thrifts, and, moreover, that all commercial/industrial firms that already own insured institutions be required to divest them. He thus places himself in direct opposition to one of the major issues Congress will be considering: the consumer bank that could be owned by a retailer or other commercial/industrial firm with an interest in expanding its role in consumer financial services.    Mr. Corrigan's hard-line position on the separation of &quot;banking&quot; from &quot;commerce&quot; raises a number of troubling practical questions, however. On balance, this is the one element of his financial industry blueprint that appears to be derived more from customary Federal Reserve doctrine than from fresh creative thought.    Nobody, least of all the commercial/industrial firms that seek to enter banking or already have done so through the thrift or nonbank-bank loopholes, seriously suggests that there is no longer any need for a clear and tight functional separation of banking from commerce. On the contrary, the need for an effective functional separation is taken for granted in this debate. The traditional Federal Reserve position, which Mr. Corrigan has now put forth again, amounts to saying that we cannot have effective functional separation if there is common ownership. That is, there is no feasible scheme of legal constraints and regulation that can effectively insulate an insured bank or thrift institution from financial abuse if it is owned by a commercial/industrial firm.    Many people both in and out of Congress would seriously question that view today. We have made enormous strides in the past two decades in enhancing the effectiveness of our bank supervisory system, as demonstrated in part by the relative ease with which the commercial banking system has passed through the recent period of financial upheaval that has decimated the more haphazardly supervised savings-and-loan industry.    I have no doubt that a congressional directive to the bank regulators to take the necessary steps to ensure the functional separation of banks from their nonbank affiliates and owners, if accompanied by suitable legal authority, would be carried out responsibly. If we want tough regulation of financial holding companies, we can get it, no matter who owns them.    Furthermore, the same functional separation will have to be maintained between banks and their securities-underwriting, insurance or other financial affiliates under the Corrigan plan. Banks will obviously have to be carefully insulated from the risks and possible conflicts of interest in their securities and insurance affiliates, and Mr. Corrigan apparently has no concerns about the feasibility of achieving adequate functional separation in that context. One wonders, therefore, what the difference is that makes it so much harder to ensure separation and effective insulation when a bank's owner is a commercial/industrial firm.    The most serious practical problem with Mr. Corrigan's position on nonfinancial firms going into consumer banking is political, because it can and will be construed as an anti-consumer position. The consumer side of banking is vitally important to many congressmen, and I can foresee great difficulty in passing any legislation through Congress to implement Mr. Corrigan's general plan for the banks if it is specifically designed to stifle and keep out a major new source of competition for consumer banking services.    Put more simply, new competition from strong firms like Sears, Ford and J.C. Penney would shake up the consumer banking business and place some of the less efficient banks under competitive pressure. Mr. Corrigan's proposal for keeping out the commercial/industrial firms ends up sounding like a plan to protect inefficient banks.    The second practical problem with Mr. Corrigan's approach of keeping out the commercial/industrial firms is the danger that this attitude may encourage the very systemic risk that he seeks to minimize.    To his credit, Mr. Corrigan does not try to perpetuate the myth that we have heard previously from the Federal Reserve that bank ownership by commercial/industrial firms would seriously threaten the electronic wire transfer networks. The main risk in the payments networks, as he recognizes, arises from the current activities of the big banks themselves and would not be significantly affected by granting access to a few more banks affiliated with commercial/industrial firms.    His policy paper fails entirely, however, to come to grips with the equally important issue of systemic risk arising from the burgeoning growth of uninsured and relatively unregulated financial assets outside the banking system -- and thus outside the stabilizing and protective net of the Federal Reserve and the deposit insurance system.    The best example of this is the phenomenally successful money-market funds, which amount essentially to uninsured depository institutions. The recent experience with the failures of state-insured savings institutions in Ohio and Maryland does not inspire confidence in the ability of such uninsured institutions to survive a sudden loss of public confidence. We need to ask ourselves some tough questions about how vulnerable the whole financial system would be to a liquidity crisis originating outside the banks.    Moreover, the proliferation of other financial instruments in recent years -- the repos, swaps, financial futures, index options, etc. -- provides more opportunities for relatively unregulated institutions to get themselves, their customers and the system into a serious liquidity crisis.    The difficulty with Mr. Corrigan's proposal to keep the commercial/industrial firms out of the banking &quot;club&quot; is that they will then have no choice but to offer quasi-banking services in other ways, thus adding still more momentum to the expanding realm of finance outside the banks. It is exceedingly difficult to evaluate the risk of severe disruption to the financial system from some kind of breakdown outside the insured banking system, and I don't wish to suggest that we have anything resembling an impending disaster on our hands. Nevertheless, given these troubling trends, it is far preferable to encourage the commercial/industrial firms with financial expertise and ambitions to pursue these ambitions as banking-system insiders rather than as outsiders.    Finally, it is appropriate to question the equity of Mr. Corrigan's idea that Merrill Lynch and E.F. Hutton, as independent firms, should be allowed to set up or acquire banks, while Dean Witter and Kidder Peabody, which are subsidiaries of commercial/industrial firms, should not. Purely in terms of equity and fairness, shouldn't the qualifications for bank ownership be set in functional and operational terms (sufficient capital, capable management, etc.) rather than in terms of the prospective owner's &quot;parentage&quot;?    Mr. Corrigan is not only a forceful and creative advocate of banking reform but also a real thinker, with the insight to weigh honestly the merits and weaknesses of the old arguments of the past. I expect that he himself would characterize his ideas as a &quot;first cut,&quot; open to further fine-tuning. I would submit to him, therefore, that his plan for liberalizing banking's market structure, much of which I find very persuasive, requires reconsideration as far as the treatment of commercial/industrial firms is concerned. The objective should be nothing less than a completely level playing field for open competition in all phases of our dynamic financial markets.    ---   Rep. Barnard (D., Ga.) is chairman of the House Subcommittee on Commerce, Consumer and Monetary Affairs. </TEXT></DOC>