<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Afghan Pullout Must Be Unconditional </HL><AUTHOR> Mohammad Hasan Kakar </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> PESHAWAR, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The problem of how to end the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan has assumed a new urgency since December's summit meeting in Washington. General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev, other Soviet spokesmen, as well as the United Nations' mediator, Diego Cordovez, say the round of talks that begin Wednesday in Geneva will be the last and perhaps the decisive one.    The Soviets claim to have made many concessions. Mr. Gorbachev has stated that the Soviet Union will pull its troops out of Afghanistan in 10 months, starting May 15, if an agreement is signed by mid-March. According to Soviet and U.N. spokesmen, everything hinges on whether the U.S. and other resistance supporters agree to stop all aid to the mujahedeen from the moment the Soviet Union starts recalling its troops.    Let us suppose the U.S. government agrees, what will happen then? At the very least, the Soviets probably will leave behind the vast quantities of weapons they have stored in Afghanistan ever since their invasion. It is also likely that before they leave, the Soviet forces will launch a major offensive to exhaust the weapons supplies of the mujahedeen.    We Afghans have become sufficiently realistic -- or sufficiently wise -- to be extremely cautious when dealing with the Soviets. By their own deeds, especially after their invasion of our land, they themselves have taught us to mistrust them. We have come to know two kinds of Soviet rulers, the pre-invasion ones and the post-invasion ones. The first showed themselves as considerate, sympathetic, helping and trustworthy, while the second proved to be just the opposite and more. Prof. Anwar Khan summarized what we have learned about them. &quot;The Russians are ruthless rulers,&quot; he writes. &quot;They are oppressive in the primitive sense. They go for owning everything, from land to the individual and his conscience.&quot;    Now there is a good opportunity for Soviet leaders to prove their sincerity by allaying the mistrust they themselves have created by pulling their troops out unconditionally, instead of demanding that U.S. and other military aid to the mujahedeen first be stopped.    This may sound impractical to those who argue that the Russians simply cannot pack up the way the Americans did in Vietnam. I see no reason why they can't if, as they contend, they are confident about the correctness of their position. They would win the admiration of the world for what would be viewed as a magnanimous action. An atmosphere of greater trust in international relations would be created and pave the way for other major advances. More to the point, an unconditional pullout would compensate for the lack of representation of the Afghan people in the Geneva talks.    For the smooth and full implementation of any negotiated solution, it is imperative that all Afghan participants in domestic politics abide by it. This would be the case if their views about the future of their country are taken into account. The resistance rightly questions why after all the suffering Afghans have experienced, they should settle for less than the unconditional withdrawal of foreign troops from their soil and full independence for their country. Mr. Gorbachev claims to be dropping the demand for a &quot;nonaligned and neutral Afghanistan&quot; but he continues to talk of a coalition &quot;government of reconciliation&quot; based on the Afghan Communist party.    The resistance regards both as limitations on the sovereignty of Afghanistan. It is true that before the Russian invasion, we were &quot;nonaligned and neutral&quot; in our foreign policy, but this was our own choice, not imposed on us. The inclusion of any such requirements would limit the sovereignty of our people and would make it impossible for a future government to become a member of, say, a regional grouping if it came into existence and furthered our interest. At any rate, it is for the Afghans to decide, not for others to dictate.    The resistance movement is based upon one essential point: full independence. What will happen if the Geneva accords -- if agreed upon -- are not accepted by resistance leaders, who, after all, control 80% of Afghanistan? In that case there will certainly be chaos of a different kind. If all parties seeking peace in Afghanistan really believe the principle of self-determination to be the cornerstone of a nation's life, then they should leave the Afghans free to decide their own affairs.    Setting up a joint government is, of course, the most difficult problem. Many groups inside Afghanistan are armed to the teeth, and the custom of revenge is still a dominant feature of our national life. The animosity between Communist party members and other Afghans is beyond the imagination of outsiders. Communist regimes in Kabul, encouraged by the mighty power of the Soviet Union, have over the past 10 years committed such atrocities that they have rendered quite ineffective the healing potential of the relatively milder policy of &quot;national reconciliation.&quot;    It is therefore out of the question for any member of the seven-party alliance or other significant resistance leaders to form a coalition government with the Kabul regime. Those trying to bring about such a coalition are simply wasting their time and may in fact actually be opposed to a solution to the Afghan crisis. Many of the solutions advanced by outsiders are unworkable because they have not taken into account the hard realities of Afghanistan.    This does not mean, however, that the crisis defies solution. If the Soviet Union genuinely wants to bring about a workable solution, it can play an effective role.    First, it must remove about 5,000 top leaders of the Communist party (People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan) to the Soviet Union. That is a negligible number of people when compared with the more than five million Afghan refugees living in Pakistan, Iran and elsewhere.    Second, in order to monitor the phased withdrawal of the Soviet troops and at the same time serve as a deterrent to more chaos and bloodshed, it is essential for a United Nations peace-keeping force and an international supervisory commission to operate inside Afghanistan, along with an interim government whose leaders are at least acceptable to the majority of the people, until a representative government starts functioning.    Third, following the pullout of the Soviet troops, Afghans must be left free to bring about a government of their own choice. Afghanistan is not a new nation, and we don't need to be told how to organize a state for ourselves. In this respect we are much experienced: We have well-tried, centuries-old social and political conventions and traditions; our main problem always has been foreign interference. Despite our economic and technical backwardness, our concern for independence always has been the most forceful element in our national life. Just as our forefathers preferred independence to material progress, so today the overwhelming majority of Afghans unwaveringly follow in their footsteps, even in a confrontation with a superpower. We are tired of war -- but we will not sue for peace on the enemy's terms.    If these basic steps are followed, an agreement on the formation and composition of a broad-based interim government is possible. With the removal of Afghan communist functionaries and the pullout of Soviet troops, the first major steps will have been taken toward ending hostility and returning to normality.    The interim government should exist for a relatively short period, during which a commission should be set up to draft a new constitution and a Loya Jirga (supreme national council) should be convened to debate and adopt it. This will pave the way, finally, for the establishment of a free, indigenous, representative government and the return of lasting peace.    ---   Mr. Kakar, former head of the history department of Kabul University, was imprisoned by the communist regime in Afghanistan from 1982 until last March for the &quot;crimes&quot; of trying to form a human-rights group and distributing &quot;anti-state literature.&quot; He recently escaped from Afghanistan. This is condensed from a forthcoming article in Freedom at Issue. </TEXT></DOC>