<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0168 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): Financiers---Look Not Toward the Havens:Planning to Avoid Taxes? It's TimeTo Forget About Overseas Shelters---By Cynthia Crossen</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES FORGN </IN><TEXT>   FOR U.S. CITIZENS, the offshore tax haven is at death's door.    In recent years, federal law has made the use of such tax refuges more and more difficult, both for individuals and corporations. But with the passage of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, individuals will find that there are, for all practical purposes, no legal ways to save money by using overseas tax havens. And corporations will find using such tax havens more complicated and less valuable.    Long before the 1986 act, U.S. citizens were taxed on their world-wide income; no matter where the money came from, it had to be reported to the Internal Revenue Service. Americans could -- and still can -- find banks abroad, in places like Luxembourg, Liechtenstein and the Channel Islands, that would keep their accounts secret from the U.S. government. But not reporting the income is fraud.    There were also a few intricate, though legal, ways that wealthy U.S. individuals could use tax havens. For example, an American could join a foreign citizen in setting up a company in a country like the Cayman Islands. If the American owned 50% or less of the company, his earnings wouldn't be subject either to Cayman Islands taxes or U.S. taxes as long as the earnings continued to compound offshore.    When the American sold his part of the company, he would pay the lower capital gains rate, rather than income taxes, on the difference between what he had invested and the sale price of the company.    The 1986 tax act includes a provision specifically aimed at that kind of arrangement, says Eli H. Fink, national director of international tax services at Deloitte Haskins andamp; Sells. The provision says, &quot;'If you want to do that, OK, you don't have to pay tax currently,'&quot; says Mr. Fink. &quot;But the U.S. isn't going to lose anything. When you sell your shares, you have to pay tax at ordinary rates plus interest on all the deferral. Some people might want to pay tomorrow instead of today, but that interest isn't deductible, and it's high.&quot;    In addition to the new tax law's restrictions on offshore tax havens, the vows of secrecy that used to protect foreigners' accounts aren't inviolable anymore. Using economic leverage, U.S. officials have negotiated treaties with several Caribbean countries that give authorities greater access to bank records. And two countries, Switzerland and the Bahamas, both long known for secrecy, recently agreed to cooperate with U.S. authorities investigating the overseas accounts of former White House aide Lt. Col. Oliver North and Dennis Levine, the Wall Street broker convicted of insider trading.    The use of tax havens is almost as old as civilization. In ancient Athens, some merchants would detour 20 miles to avoid a 2% tax on imports and exports. In the U.S., the use of havens dates to 1721, when the colonies shifted their trade to Latin America to avoid paying duties imposed by England.    But the prototype for the modern tax haven is Switzerland, which first developed as a haven for capital, rather than tax avoidance, for people fleeing political or social upheaval in other countries. Today, most major havens are also offshore financial centers -- centers for international borrowing and lending in non-local currency.    Tax havens are defined by the IRS as &quot;locations outside the U.S. that provide a favorable tax climate for American taxpayers.&quot; But a report on tax havens prepared for the IRS in 1981 offers a more cogent definition: &quot;A country is a tax haven if it look likes one and if it is considered to be one by those who care.&quot;    The report names six other characteristics besides low or no taxes that distinguish tax havens from other countries whose taxes may simply be lower than U.S. taxes. They are very strict rules on bank secrecy, even where a serious violation of another country's laws may be involved; the extreme importance of banking to the country's economy; availability of excellent communications and transportation facilities; lack of currency controls; active solicitation of financial business; and, usually, the absence of tax treaties.    While most other countries allow their citizens to retain their citizenship even after they establish residence and pay taxes in a tax haven, an American must sacrifice his citizenship to avoid U.S. income taxes. If he's a U.S. resident with a green card, he must relinquish that.    It's simpler for foreigners to take advantage of tax havens, because they give up only their residence, not their citizenship, says Edward J. Saperstein, partner at Ernst andamp; Whinney International in New York. &quot;For example, residents of many countries can go live in the U.S. for five years and then go back to home. That's much easier than giving up your citizenship. And if an American gives up his citizenship for tax avoidance purposes, there's absolutely no guarantee that he will ever get it back.&quot;    So Americans who use tax havens often do so illegally. A recent congressional study cited in Walter and Dorothy Diamond's book, &quot;Tax Havens of the World,&quot; published by Matthew Bender, says that of the 1.8 million Americans living outside the U.S., 61% don't file tax returns. That amounts to an annual loss to the Treasury of $620 million to $2.1 billion.    The IRS's overseas enforcement usually has been weak. According to the Diamonds, in fiscal 1985 the IRS recommended only 213 cases of offshore tax shelter abuse for prosecution; only 10 of those led to convictions and 39 to guilty pleas. But the Treasury Department now says that having a tax shelter in a foreign tax haven is &quot;like waving a red flag at criminal investigators.&quot;    For corporations, the situation has been different: They have been able to use a far broader range of tax havens. Now, because of the 1986 tax act, their options have been narrowed.    Earlier tax law already divided U.S. corporations' offshore earnings into &quot;good,&quot; on which no taxes would be due until the offshore company paid dividends to the parent, or &quot;tainted,&quot; on which taxes would have to be paid on a current basis. The 1986 act expanded the tainted category to include some previously excluded banking, shipping and airline income, among other types.    So, for example, under the old law, if a U.S. company had a Bahamas bank subsidiary doing business outside the U.S., the income would have been tax free until the company paid dividends to the U.S. parent. With the 1986 act, that income would be currently taxable.    There's a reasonable argument to be made for allowing U.S. companies to defer taxation, says Arthur Hoffman, a partner at Oppenheim, Appel, Dixon andamp; Co. A company that's organized in Switzerland for legitimate reasons -- to be closer to its markets, for example -- has to compete against other Swiss companies, he says. &quot;The other companies are getting taxed at a lower rate. If we impose a U.S. tax, they won't be able to compete.&quot;    Many corporations may still seek tax havens as a way to balance their overseas tax load. If a company has a subsidiary in a high tax area such as West Germany, for example, it might be paying 50% local taxes on that unit's profits, says Raymond A. Majewski, tax partner at Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. in Chicago.    Some of those overseas tax payments can count as a credit against U.S. taxes. But they are usable only up to the applicable U.S. tax rate of 34% of profits. By also earning profits in a low tax area, a company could show an overall overseas tax rate closer to the U.S. 34%. That would allow it more efficient use of the German tax credits, Mr. Majewski says.    The 1986 tax act may have removed the allure of offshore tax havens for many Americans, but its lower rates could also make the U.S. itself a tax haven. &quot;The tax rates will be low enough to make it interesting to residents of certain countries,&quot; says Mr. Hoffman. &quot;There has always been a flood of money to the U.S. anyway on the theory that it's secure.&quot;    But Mr. Fink of Deloitte Haskins says he believes foreign residents looking for tax havens will approach the U.S. with skepticism. &quot;The thing that foreigners are wary of is the stability of U.S. (tax) rates,&quot; he says. &quot;People are already talking about raising taxes and putting on surcharges.&quot; Although the maximum U.S. tax rate on individuals is due to fall to 28% in 1988, Mr. Fink says, that &quot;may be viewed as a temporary thing -- until the next Democratic president.&quot;    ---   Ms. Crossen is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>