<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870618-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Birth Dearth:Some Thinkers ExpectPopulation to DropAnd Trouble to Result---The Falling Fertility RateHas Economic PortentsFor the Year 2025, Maybe---Mr. Wattenberg's Crystal Ball---By Alan L. OttenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like some modern Paul Revere, Ben J. Wattenberg is about to get on his horse and gallop across the country warning, &quot;The birth dearth is coming. The birth dearth is coming.&quot;    What worries Mr. Wattenberg, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute here, is the record long-term low level of U.S. fertility. He and a small but increasing number of people in and out of government see a time somewhere around the year 2025 when the U.S. population will level off and then slowly begin to slide downward. And that decline, they fear, portends serious domestic economic problems and a steady loss of world influence for the U.S. and democratic allies similarly losing population.    &quot;We in the West have about one generation to, first, understand and, then, reverse this fertility free fall,&quot; declares Mr. Wattenberg in a forthcoming book. &quot;Otherwise, we will pay for it.&quot;    While this Spenglerian scenario remains very much a minority proposition, it is getting some attention now that several conservative politicians have taken up the theme. GOP presidential aspirant Jack Kemp, for instance, warns that &quot;no nation can long remain a world power when its most precious resource is a shrinking resource.&quot; Fellow candidate Pat Robertson frequently refers to &quot;the depopulation of the West&quot; and argues that current low fertility &quot;means a gradual diminution of demand and a shrinking of our market.&quot;    And President Reagan's domestic policy adviser, Gary Bauer, says the recent White House Working Group on the Family turned up &quot;a lot of very worrying evidence&quot; on population decline. &quot;It isn't only what that might say about future economic growth but what it says about {people's} lack of confidence in the future and other value-related issues,&quot; he says.    So far, most demographers, economists and other population specialists dismiss such concerns as alarmist hyperbole. &quot;It's not all nonsense, but it is seriously exaggerated,&quot; says demographer Michael Teitelbaum, a program officer at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. &quot;A lot of these worries go to population projections 100 years out, and we don't have the tools to predict that far out. In fact, the most unlikely thing is that events will actually come out that way.&quot;    Other experts say that even if the population-decline projections ultimately prove correct, it doesn't follow that, in this technology-dominated world, a loss of population must inevitably lead to a loss of economic and geopolitical power.    &quot;Germany and Japan are much farther along than we&quot; in falling fertility, says the Urban Insitute's Thomas Espenshade, &quot;and they seem to be getting along pretty well.&quot;    Concern over a population decline, surprisingly, comes only 30 years after the height of the baby boom and just 20 years after such books as Paul Ehrlich's &quot;The Population Bomb&quot; raised the specter of an overpopulated world. Indeed, many people continue to worry about the population explosion, particularly in the less developed world. But in the U.S. and other Western democracies, total fertility rates -- lifetime births per woman -- have been dropping rapidly over the past quarter-century.    From a baby-boom high of 3.77 in 1957, the U.S. rate in 1972 slid below the 2.1 rate needed to keep the population steady, and for the past 14 years the rate has hovered at around 1.8. The Census Bureau, assuming a 1.9 fertility rate, some immigration and a slight further drop in mortality rates, projects that the current U.S. population of 243 million will rise to 305 million by 2030 and then level off. By 2080, the population would be only 311 million. The birth-dearth scenario assumes slightly lower fertility than the Census Bureau does and, thus, a more imminent flattening and decline.    Worries over population decline haunt almost all the Western democracies. West Germany and Denmark already are losing population; Sweden and Belgium will soon join them. Germany, the worst-case scenario, has a fertility rate below 1.3.    Declining fertility throughout the developed world has a number of causes: urbanization, rising education levels, increases in the number of women employed outside the home, fewer marriages and more divorces. Young adults wanting to enjoy higher standards of living opt for fewer or no children; the availability of better contraception and legal abortion helps them achieve their goal.    Many birth-dearth Cassandras subscribe to a notion some call &quot;strategic demography.&quot; That is, they argue that maintaining military, political and cultural influence requires growing numbers of people. Mr. Wattenberg, a devout anti-communist, frets that a slow slump in democratic nations' population, combined with modest growth in the Soviet bloc and a continuing explosion in the Third World, could mean that the West will have only 9% of the world's population in 2025, against 15% today and 22% in 1950. That represents a major setback for democratic influence and values, he says.    &quot;Even in an age of missiles and submarines,&quot; he writes in his new book, &quot;The Birth Dearth,&quot; &quot;no nation or group of nations without a substantial population can hope for lasting global influence.&quot; For example, he says, &quot;if you are talking about a Star Wars, you need a helluva huge tax base and enough people and enough industries to make this technology possible.&quot; In the same vein, defense analyst Edward Luttwak questions how long West Germany can continue to supply 12 military divisions to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.    Meanwhile, &quot;supply-side demography,&quot; an economic approach advanced by administration officials and other conservatives, holds that population growth is essential to economic progress. They contend that more people create demand, jobs, economies of scale and rising standards of living. By contrast, they say, slower population growth or a shrinking population means less demand domestically and in the other industrial countries losing population.    Declares University of Maryland Prof. Julian Simon, &quot;Whatever the fertility rate . . . an additional child is a benefit.&quot; He stresses that population growth means more innovation. &quot;More minds mean more ingenious minds,&quot; he says.    Many conservatives regard falling fertility as not just a result but also a cause of the decline of the traditional family, with its male wage earner and female homemaker. Allan Carlson, the president of the Rockford Institute, a social-policy think tank, worries that the population decline &quot;will accelerate as it did in West Germany,&quot; undermining the family as society's basic building block.    The birth-dearthers have differing and conflicting prescriptions. Most call for higher tax exemptions for people with children and for other help for families in which wives aren't employed outside the home. But while some favor more child care and assistance for women who want children and salaried employment, others fear that such steps merely mean costly new government programs. A few want easier immigration policies to keep population growing, while others see great political opposition to that.    Even critics of the birth-dearthers concede that low fertility aggravates one existing trend: an aging population, with fewer working people to support a growing number of retirees. But the critics say that lower benefits, a higher retirement age, small tax increases and other steps can solve this problem -- politically difficult, to be sure, but not impossible.    Although most population specialists concede that continued low fertility is the likeliest prospect, they aren't alarmed. &quot;I certainly think these things have to be discussed, but I don't think we need to panic yet,&quot; says C. Alison McIntosh, a University of Michigan political scientist. &quot;Demographic changes move very slowly, and we have plenty of time to adjust.&quot;    Many point out that population decline has been a recurring worry in the West for more than 100 years, ever since France lost the Franco-Prussian War. Concern was particularly widespread when birth rates plummeted during the Depression of the 1930s -- but the postwar baby boom put to rest some of the fears.    Moreover, some say that current fertility rates may be a poor indicator of future trends. For instance, Carl Haub, a demographer with the Population Reference Bureau, suggests that once society assimilates the huge increase in working women, &quot;it probably will provide day care and other benefits that make it easier for women to work and have kids -- and not just one, but two or three.&quot;    Some firmly believe fertility rates will soon turn up. For example, economist and demographer Richard Easterlin of the University of Southern California argues that as members of the post-baby boom generation enter a labor-short market, they will see a bright economic future for themselves and start having children.    And many experts reject the notion that political opposition will keep immigration policies from being liberalized so as to overcome population shortages. Says University of California anthropologist Eugene Hammel: &quot;Immigration has always been a more important source of population than mere natural increase. I anticipate we will continue to see that pattern.&quot;    And what is so awful, many experts demand to know, about a population's leveling off or even declining?    &quot;Strength in the modern world seems to be more in proportion to GNP and technological power than manpower numbers,&quot; says Richard Danzig, a military manpower expert. &quot;If it were just manpower, then the two superpowers would be China and India rather than the Soviet Union and the United States.&quot; Education levels, alliances and other factors also play a larger role, the specialists maintain.    And even with level or falling population, the strategists say, there will be plenty of people to fill manpower needs for many decades. West Germany, for example, is meeting its NATO quotas by lengthening enlistment terms slightly.    The birth-dearthers' economic case is similarly challenged. &quot;The wellspring of growth is education, technology and capital,&quot; says James Howell, the chief economist of Bank of Boston. &quot;There is no reason, as birthrates fall, why productivity and economic growth can't be maintained or even accelerated by the substitution of capital for labor.&quot;    Some critics of the birth-dearth alarm also dispute the suggestion that population decline in the industrialized democracies inevitably means a setback for democratic values throughout the world. &quot;Where I take particular issue is the contention that, somehow, democratic institutions and democratic culture must be perpetuated by people with Western genes,&quot; says University of Pennsylvania demographer Samuel Preston. &quot;Look at the spread of democratic values to India and other countries.&quot;    Finally, most demographers question whether much can be done to change the situation. Government policies aimed at stimulating births in both Western and Eastern Europe have thus far had &quot;nil or negligible&quot; results, says Paul Demeny, a vice president of the Population Council. Child allowances, lengthy paid maternity leave, widespread day-care facilities, special housing for families and similar benefits appear to increase birthrates slightly for a few years. But then the effect begins to wear off, and fertility decline resumes.    &quot;The evidence from Europe is fairly clear,&quot; says the Urban Institute's Mr. Espenshade. &quot;Governments can't buy babies.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>