<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870121-0156 </DOCNO><HL> Equity Skimming:New Mortgage FraudHurts Home SellersWith VA, FHA Loans---Skimmers Assume FinancingBut Skip Their PaymentsWhile Collecting Rents---Why Credit Isn't Checked---By Joann S. Lublin and Robert GuentherStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Rampant mortgage fraud has become a national housing scandal.    In Houston, a teacher beset by medical bills sold his suburban house for $54,000 in late 1984. The buyer collected rent from a tenant but never made payments on the Veterans Administration-backed mortgage he had assumed. The VA foreclosed last November and paid the lender the VA's maximum $27,500 guarantee. Now the VA wants the cash back -- from the teacher.    No one knows the full extent of such mortgage fraud. But current scams appear to be the biggest and costliest ever, surpassing the housing scandals of the late 1960s. More than 25% of residential foreclosures, now at record levels, may stem from fraudulent practices, private and federal investigators believe.    &quot;Fraud is a greater problem today than it has ever been in my 15 years in the business,&quot; says Mark Pollack, the executive vice president of Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corp., a leading mortgage insurer based in Milwaukee.    Combined fraud losses at the VA and the Federal Housing Administration, which back about a third of single-family home loans, have reached &quot;tens of millions of dollars, if not $100 million, in the course of the last few years,&quot; says Thomas Greelish, the U.S. attorney in Newark, N.J., who is leading prosecutions of widespread mortgage fraud in the Camden area.    Although frauds hit all kinds of mortgage loans, federally backed mortgages are especially vulnerable because they can most easily be assumed by a buyer, usually with no credit check. Scam artists earn profits through inflated real-estate commissions, insurance payments on foreclosures, or rent collections from dwellings on which they fail to make mortgage payments. The rip-offs could cost all home purchasers and taxpayers, as lenders and the federal government make them share the tab for mounting foreclosure losses.    The VA and the FHA have widened their loan-fraud investigations to include about 75 major U.S. cities. The Justice Department has made such white-collar crimes one of its priorities, too. Since 1984, the three federal agencies' efforts have produced 270 indictments and 183 convictions of speculators, mortgage-company executives and real-estate brokers in New Jersey, Washington, D.C., Houston, Tulsa, Nashville, Denver and Seattle, among other places.    But the scams are hard to stop. Sellers in distressed markets often are driven by desperation; prosecutors have inadequate resources with which to pursue wrongdoers; and buyers assuming mortgages often aren't subjected to credit checks. &quot;With a copying machine, three felt pens and a little Wite-Out, you can do anything,&quot; says a former San Jose, Calif., mortgage broker who spent two years in prison for mortgage fraud.    A look at Denver, a boom town depressed by the oil-industry slump, shows how one leading type of mortgage fraud can fester and disrupt people's lives. The scam is called equity skimming because the seller gives up what is often a small equity in a home in order to get out of the loan. It typically works this way: A real-estate speculator assumes the seller's federally backed mortgage for little or no money down, rents the house to tenants and doesn't make mortgage payments. When the lender forecloses and collects the federal insurance or guarantee -- a process that can take months or even years -- the government, particularly the VA, often considers the original owner responsible for the loan.    Several dozen Denver-area con artists have fraudulently acquired at least 800 houses that way in the past three years, investigators estimate. Overbuilding, rising joblessness and heavily discounted mortgage rates make the rip-off common in the Mile High City, where foreclosures last year exceeded the 1985 level by about 50%. Values of town houses and condominiums are plunging the most, forcing some anxious owners to pay buyers as much as $5,000 just to assume their (often delinquent) mortgage payments.    &quot;You can't give 'em {condos} away, even with nothing down,&quot; complains Shirley McAthie, a 41-year-old paralegal. She tried to sell her one-bedroom condominium apartment in the Denver suburb of Aurora for six months before investor Mary Pennetta bought it with a $1 down payment in the fall of 1985 and took over the FHA-insured mortgage. Ms. McAthie says that Ms. Pennetta made just one mortgage payment after installing a tenant. Foreclosure is under way.    The FHA has amassed about 20 similar complaints against Ms. Pennetta and has begun an investigation. She has denied to FHA investigators and in an interview that she has engaged in equity skimming. She says, &quot;I make payments on some of them {the properties}.&quot;    When equity skimming leads to foreclosure, previous owners often suffer -- losing their homes, their equity and their good credit rating. &quot;I'm sure if I went to get another FHA loan, it {the foreclosure} would be sitting there&quot; to block the mortgage application, says Carey Ball, a 31-year-old construction contractor whose two-bedroom Denver home was foreclosed on in 1985.    David Carlson, Mr. Ball's purchaser, was indicted in federal court in Denver last July on 15 federal charges of equity skimming and mail fraud. The indictment accused him of taking 14 properties. Prosecutors believe that Mr. Carlson and three associates skimmed more than 200 dwellings. (Mr. Carlson, convicted in 1977 of unrelated fraud charges, brags that he invited the indictment because &quot;I want a public 'not guilty.'&quot;)    &quot;Is a man supposed to take 200 houses and not pay a penny for them?&quot; asks Mr. Ball, who paid his buyer's closing costs. Hugging his furry Afghan dog in his chilly rented house, he adds, &quot;We're going to teach her to bite like David Carlson does.&quot;    Homeowner associations and tenants are victimized as well. To maximize their profits, skimmers who rent out their purchased units typically don't pay associations' required monthly fees.    Nine Denver-area condominium and town-house associations have sued Mr. Carlson to recover about $30,000 in allegedly missed assessments on his properties.    Another case illustrates that in complex circumstances it is difficult to determine whether equity skimming has taken place. An Aurora town-house association, unable to collect $10,000 in assessments from a landlord, shut off water in his delinquent units over Labor Day weekend. Fifteen families had to move out within hours.    &quot;My kids were upset. I was upset. It was a hell of a summer,&quot; recalls Shirley Ortibez, a 37-year-old Yellow Pages sales representative forced to move abruptly after renting a two-bedroom town house in July.    Dan Kingland, the units' owner, agreed to pay for tenants to stay temporarily at the nearby La Quinta Inn. But their $1,474.45 bill has yet to be paid. &quot;I know we're never going to see this money. It just makes me sick,&quot; says hotel manager Penny Warren.    Mr. Kingland, who runs a real-estate renovation business, says the rents he collected didn't even cover his expenses. He blames delinquent mortgage payments (which have led to pending foreclosure action) and delinquent assessments largely on financial difficulties suffered by the previous owner of the town houses.    Mr. Kingland says he intends to sue the homeowners' association for shutting off his tenants' water. He explains that he hasn't paid the La Quinta Inn's bill yet because of the pending litigation. &quot;I'm acting on the advice of my attorneys,&quot; he says.    Catching, convicting and recouping losses from mortgage-fraud artists can be very difficult. In some cities, officials can't handle the soaring volume of complaints. In Denver, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the FHA's parent, employs just four investigators to ferret out fraud in a six-state area.    &quot;When we get enough complaints that they break my desk, then we open an investigation,&quot; says Wayne Zigler, HUD's beleaguered top investigator in Denver. He says he must ignore the dozen equity-skimming allegations that he receives weekly until an alleged skimmer has ripped off at least 20 homes.    Lincoln Service Corp., an Owensboro, Ky., mortgage-banking concern, tried to turn over a major mortgage-fraud case in Florida to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, &quot;but we're told that they're too busy chasing hard-core crimes,&quot; says Jeffrey LeClaire, Lincoln's president. The company stopped making mortgages in two Florida counties after suffering more than $4 million in fraud-related losses between 1983 and 1985. &quot;In Dade County, we found a company whose sole purpose was to defraud mortgage lenders&quot; by selling falsified tax returns and employment records to would-be home buyers, Mr. LeClaire says.    Prosecutors in Houston have acted more aggressively. Since mid-1984, the Harris County district attorney's office has indicted, convicted or begun investigating two dozen equity skimmers allegedly involved in defrauding almost 5,000 homeowners in the area. In early November, a state judge in Houston sentenced Donald Foti, a paroled forger, to 18 years in prison for equity skimming. He was caught while driving a Cadillac and carrying $22,000 in cash -- mostly that day's rent receipts from some of his 100 skimmed homes.    The federal government only recently began efforts to recover mortgage-fraud losses from convicted wrongdoers. Last spring, the Justice Department filed its first such civil suit, demanding $632,705 for 26 foreclosed homes from Francis Heck. He is the imprisoned former president of Bonafide Investment Corp., a defunct Camden, N.J., real-estate firm. His concern had obtained a $19,000 mortgage in the name of a four-year-old girl, then pocketed both a commission and the profit on a house the company had purchased for just over $3,000. He is serving a three-year prison term for fraud.    HUD officials concede that it is unlikely that the government will recover much money from Mr. Heck. &quot;People will take the risks {of mortgage fraud} because the potential return is so great,&quot; says Paul Adams, HUD's inspector general. And the VA doesn't even try to collect foreclosure losses from con artists; instead, it pursues sellers. A VA loan is considered a veterans' benefit, and the original borrower is responsible even if someone else assumes his loan.    Other experts complain that a major problem is inadequate controls by lenders and federal agencies to check for dubious loan assumptions. They argue that lenders should bear a bigger burden for faulty underwriting, especially with federally backed loans. &quot;It's a built-in flaw&quot; that most lenders' foreclosure losses &quot;aren't enough to change the system,&quot; contends Jim Winzenburg, a Denver attorney for 40 homeowners' associations.    &quot;The system is beatable,&quot; agrees Cecil Rhodes, who owns National Investigation Agency, a San Jose, Calif., concern that investigates mortgage fraud for private mortgage insurers. &quot;It's a system that relies on trust. Lenders want to believe people.&quot;    The mortgage-fraud cancer may grow unchecked. During fiscal 1986, which ended Sept. 30, the FHA received mortgage-insurance applications, including refinancing, for more than two million homes -- nearly double the previous record set in 1971. And the VA guaranteed a record $21.8 billion in home loans for veterans, nearly double the $11.45 billion guaranteed in 1985.    The added activity &quot;could just make the {fraud} problem much more severe,&quot; warns Rep. Gerald Kleczka, a Wisconsin Democrat. &quot;We face a time bomb that could explode months after. . . .&quot; The lawmaker intends to revive a bill, introduced during 1986, that would require tighter FHA administrative controls and stiffer criminal penalties for equity skimming.    The FHA already is imposing new curbs on its own. For instance, individuals will have to undergo credit checks if they take over any FHA-backed mortgage made since Dec. 1 during the first two years of the loan, a period during which the original borrower's equity is usually small. The credit checks, which could make equity skimming harder someday, are under court challenge by the National Association of Realtors, which contends that the checks would increase buyers' costs.    Critics claim that HUD's fraud crackdown doesn't go far enough in discouraging unscrupulous mortgage transactions. Credit checks only during the first two years aren't adequate to prevent skimming, insists one federal prosecutor, because after that &quot;somebody could come along and be an equity skimmer and not provide any financial information.&quot;    But if the government completely barred insured loans from being assumed without a credit check, a HUD spokesman says, &quot;the Realtors and everybody else would raise hell.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>