<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871109-0122 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Louis Lowenstein</HL><DD> 11/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   Wall Street needs a tranquilizer. It is being overwhelmed by a rising tide of trading and speculation.    What goes on in the financial markets long ago stopped being a stage in the investment process and became an end in itself. By focusing on market values rather than business values, institutional investors have diverted attention from the fundamentals that are the markets' proper concern.    Stock-index futures have been a favorite scapegoat for the collapse of the stock markets last month, and it has been suggested that margin requirements, which until last month were less than 10%, be increased dramatically. Even in 1929 speculators didn't have it so good.    Index futures, options on stocks, options on futures, even synthetic futures, were originally welcomed as a way of increasing liquidity, but now there is far more trading of options and futures than of stocks. Not much of it represents hedging or anything but outright speculation.    But the problem is more deep-rooted than just futures. Trading in stocks on the New York Stock Exchange has long passed the point of virtue. At the beginning of the 1960s, three million shares a day traded, rising to an average of 47 million in 1981. These days, something approaching 200 million shares of composite trading a day is becoming the norm. In 1960, the turnover of Big Board issues was 12% of the total shares outstanding; by 1986, it had risen to 87%, including trading off the exchange. This year, it will exceed 100%, a level not seen since 1929.    Trading of stocks isn't like a commodity market, a process that advances something like wheat from the farmer to the baker. Rather, as John Maynard Keynes noted, stocks are an almost wholly secondary market: They don't go anywhere. By the end of any year, institutions as a group own almost precisely the same stocks they did at the beginning of the year.    Except for brokers' profits, what's so good about all this frenzy? Not much. The frantic trading has undercut the financial community's proper functions of investing clients' money, allocating new capital and monitoring corporate managements. It has channeled the intelligence and energies of the financial community into short-term trading rather than long-term investment. It has turned shareholders into traders and investors into gypsies with only a trivial interest in voting their shares or otherwise acting as guardians of the corporate store.    The total costs of trading -- commissions, market impact, back office, etc. -- now amount to about 17% of the profits earned by the corporations whose securities are being traded. The costs are about equal to the amount raised by new issues, the primary purpose of a stock market.    Some institutional investors have coped with this new environment by creating so-called index funds that invest in a broad selection of stocks, tracking, for example, the Standard andamp; Poor's 500 Index. A buy-and-hold strategy makes some sense and by mid-1987, over $400 billion of equity funds was so indexed.    However, by leaving their stock selections to the statisticians at Standard andamp; Poor's, fund managers obligate themselves to buy (and sell) stocks without regard to price and value. These managers cannot possibly remember the names of 500 companies, much less what the companies are doing. The perennial problem of how to follow closely a great number of companies has been solved by following none. Fearful of choosing between Ford and GM, the fund manager flees to the safety of a once-and-for-all decision that chooses both.    This worked well as the Sandamp;P 500 tripled in five years. On the downside, it seems fund managers are prepared to see their clients' worth drop by 30% or more, as long as the losses are within a fraction of those suffered by everybody else. Will fund managers now begin to have second thoughts as they did about every other one-decision strategy?    Consider the Main Street analogy where there are only 20 shareholders of local businesses. With no stock market fostering the belief that stocks have some independent life of their own, it is unlikely that those 20 shareholders would play the high-turnover game or adopt indexing. Some might own shares of one or more local businesses while others would reach different conclusions about which -- the manufacturer of toasters, the department store, etc. -- would make the better investment. But having become shareholders of the department store in January, they wouldn't change their minds in July and again in December. And it is almost inconceivable that they would buy shares of each and every company operating on Main Street and not of those on Vine Street.    The puzzle is why, as the number of shareholders increases in a national financial market, those same 20 investors behave so differently. The pursuit of price appreciation within a few weeks or months isn't consistent with a proper concept of investment, because its success depends more on a prompt change of attitude in the market than on anything in the underlying business.    Speculation may fill the gaps in trading, providing a more continuous market, but its social value is limited. While investment is always desirable, speculation is useful only within limits, beyond which its direct and indirect costs are mere burdens on the process. Once the wheels have been lubricated, added grease helps only the merchants of grease. No one has attempted to estimate the point at which the grease no longer lubricates but merely helps the market to skid and lose direction.    Some 50 years ago, Keynes suggested the discouragement of stock trading. Just last year, Warren Buffett, the chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., an investment holding company, proposed the elimination of short-term speculation in much the same way that short-swing trading rules under the Exchange Act curb in-and-out trading by corporate insiders: Tax all gains on stocks held for less than one year.    This excellent idea doesn't mean that, even if share turnover amounted to 10% annually instead of 10 times that rate, the shareholders of large public corporations would behave like the 20 shareholders of a family business. They are much too addicted to the Wall Street Rule that if you don't like how the company is being managed, don't do anything about it, just sell.    Only when hyperactive trading is stopped will it become possible to encourage shareholders to act more like the owners of a local factory and less like holders of parimutuel tickets.    ---   Mr. Lowenstein, director of the Center for Law and Economic Studies at Columbia University's School of Law, is the author of a forthcoming book, &quot;What's Wrong with Wall Street&quot; (Addison-Wesley). </TEXT></DOC>