<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880412-0139 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: More Companies Prefer Liaisons to Marriage </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   When federal Medicare officials fixed rates for hospital reimbursements five years ago, executives at 3M and Abbott Laboratories separately began to worry about how their sales to hospitals would be affected. Their concerns deepened when Medicaid and private insurers moved toward similar limits.    The fears were justified. An estimated 60% of hospital revenues now are subject to insurer ceilings. &quot;I don't know of a single well-run hospital with a five-year plan that doesn't show declining revenue or declining income, providing they're making income,&quot; says Charles J. Aschauer Jr., executive vice president of Abbott.    To try to keep their salesmen welcome with hard-pressed hospital administrators, Abbott and 3M independently began looking for ways hospitals could cut costs. After learning that they were pursuing the same idea, the two companies last October did something that has been gaining popularity with American companies. They formed a strategic alliance.    Alliance savings are to be achieved by a computerized order system and the combined shipment of Abbott and 3M products. Don Murray, a 3M marketing executive, thinks many hospitals could save 15% to 20% of controllable costs through better management of orders and inventories.    Abbott and 3M are equal partners in the new venture, which they appropriately called &quot;Corporate Alliance.&quot; They will control it but will invite in other companies that can contribute some further dimension. IBM recently signed up to offer its computer-networking expertise as the basis for electronic ordering and, potentially, billing and payments.    Alliances have become a popular response to cost pressures resulting from low inflation and more intense private competition. At a seminar conducted last year by the Diebold Group, management consultants, Kathryn Rudie Harrigan of Columbia Business School cited estimates that alliances are growing at an annual rate exceeding 20%. This covers formal joint ventures as well as working arrangements of the Abbott-3M type. The latter has been made easier by a relaxation of antitrust laws and enforcement policies applying to certain forms of business cooperation.    In the 1970s, it was a different story. A succession of Justice Department antitrust chieftains took a dim view of almost any form of corporate togetherness. Mergers and acquisitions were sometimes blocked even when the risk of excessive industry concentration was low. The word oligopoly was used freely and there was a widely believed theory that prices were &quot;administered,&quot; rather than set by competition in some industries. Efforts to rig markets are by no means rare in American economic history. But the real problem of the 1970s was not that companies were boosting prices through collusion. Rather, federal monetary policies were generating inflation and business was taking the rap.    Times have changed. Antitrust still prosecutes price fixing, as it should. But both Congress and business are more concerned about international competition, Japanese competition in particular. One reaction has been to emulate Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and Europe's ESPRIT program for information technologies by allowing American companies to engage in cooperative research and development. The National Cooperative Research Act of 1984 was one measure to legalize joint research. One rationale is that research is becoming too expensive for companies to do singly as science moves into areas of greater complexity.    Federal money has been poured into some cooperative efforts. Sematech, a joint federal and computer-industry creation, is setting up shop in Austin, Texas, to spend something like $250 million over the next six years -- half of it federal money -- to try to advance computer-chip manufacture. The National Center for Manufacturing Sciences in Ann Arbor, Mich., has industry and Pentagon backing for research on factory automation.    Elsewhere, federally approved joint operating agreements in 20 cities let competing newspapers publish from the same plant, although the Detroit News-Free Press case shows that approval is not automatic. International alliances have sprung up. Among many examples, GM has teamed up with Toyota, and Corning Glass Works has a fiber-optics venture with Siemens of Germany.    Corporate Alliance gives some idea of how these things come about. Abbott and 3M, in separate research, concluded that materials management in hospitals had become chaotic in the carefree days of unlimited third-party insurance. &quot;Most hospitals today don't know how much inventory they have,&quot; says Mr. Aschauer. &quot;In half they send stuff up to the floors, most of which goes into boxes and closets. They expense that and it is actually cash flow sitting there in the hospital that they don't know is there.&quot;    Abbott concluded that hospital buying habits will change. Physicians will continue to specify medically important specialized items, such as surgical equipment. But everything else -- needles, paper goods and the like -- will be standardized and treated as a commodity. Both 3M and Abbott believed that hospitals would turn to computerized ordering and fund transfer, getting away from what Mr. Murray describes as &quot;having 10 or 15 people sitting around writing purchase orders.&quot; Rather than have five different trucks pull up at five different times, and hiring workers to handle that, they would have one delivery at a certain time during the week and that's it. &quot;They're looking at product mass,&quot; says Mr. Murray. &quot;It's cheaper for them to deal with 20 companies rather than 200 companies.&quot;    The 3M people liked the looks of Abbott's low-cost distribution system, which uses public warehouses and mostly independent haulers. By consolidating shipments, the two companies will have more full truckload lots, which carry lower rates than less-than-truckload lots. As other companies join there will be even greater possibilities for load consolidations.    Despite the more moderate antitrust climate, however, lawyers for the two companies advised them to steer away from alliances with direct competitors. Future members of the alliance might be companies supplying housekeeping goods, such as cleaning materials, foodstuffs and the like. They also were advised that the computer software designed for hospital purchasing should be usable for non-alliance purchases and that it be completely under the control of the hospital. Justice Department watchdogs are not completely asleep.    Clearly, alliances are not the answer to every problem. There is legitimate skepticism, for example, about what a government-backed Sematech can accomplish that could not be done better by individual companies. The use of alliances as a barrier to new competition is a worthwhile antitrust concern. Some companies find that their &quot;corporate cultures&quot; are so different that cooperation doesn't work.    But at Abbott and 3M &quot;the two management styles and temperaments are such that we seem to be able to go through all the problems,&quot; says Mr. Aschauer. If so, and if hospitals really do save money, there seems little room for complaint. </TEXT></DOC>