<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880203-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Family Affair: Abuse of the Elderly By Their Own Children Increases in America --- Old People Fear Reporting Cases of Assault, Neglect; Deficiencies of the Law --- How Mrs. Billingslea Died </HL><AUTHOR> Clare Ansberry (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The 72-year-old woman lifts her thin, gray curls to reveal a two-inch scar in the middle of her forehead. She had been struck with an iron skillet.    &quot;And see this line here?&quot; she asks. She points to a jagged mark between her eye and the bridge of her nose. &quot;That's where I got kicked with a steel-toed shoe.&quot; That injury landed her in the hospital for a month.    It was no mugger who assaulted the elderly woman. She says her unemployed son and daughter-in-law did it. They live with her in her cramped apartment on the edge of downtown. They won't let her use her own stove or refrigerator, so she cooks and eats meals at a neighbor's. The night before Thanksgiving, her landlady found her sitting outside crying. Her son had locked her out.    With each beating, the old woman, who doesn't want her name published, vows that &quot;next time&quot; she will call the police and file charges, but she is reluctant to see her son locked up. &quot;Next time,&quot; she says, she will kick him and his wife out.    &quot;It's always next time,&quot; says a frustrated Michael McQuay, a caseworker with the Texas Human Services Department.    The Dallas woman is among the growing number of abused old people. And although Americans might prefer to believe that most such attacks occur at the hands of strangers, surveys indicate that nearly six in seven (86%) of the abused aged are mistreated by their own families.    The extent of such abuse isn't known: States define and report cases differently, and one study suggests that as few as one in 14 incidents is reported. Still, the House subcommittee on health and long-term care estimates the number of assaults at 1.1 million annually. In Texas alone, reports of abuse have increased fivefold in the past five years.    Suzanne Steinmetz, a family sociologist at the University of Delaware, assumes the incidents will increase in number, if only because the population is aging. By the year 2000, the number of people 85 and older will rise by two-thirds. Who will care for them? Perhaps not the children of aging parents who have careers and youngsters of their own to take care of.    &quot;Put all these things together, and you have a pot ready to explode,&quot; Ms. Steinmetz warns.    The aging process makes many old people as helpless as children, and that explains some of the parallels in abuse cases. Like children, the elderly often are dependent, afraid of being left alone, terrified of being put in an institution. Like children, they may be confused, embarrassed and ashamed to admit that a loved one gave them a black eye or locked them in their room.    But, unlike most children, the elderly are often isolated. In their case, no schoolteachers or playmates' parents exist to notice telltale bruises or an unexplained absence. Since the elderly are naturally more prone to broken bones and to black-and-blue marks, it is harder to identify abuse.    Mistreatment takes many forms. The most obvious is physical. In his report &quot;Elder Abuse: National Disgrace,&quot; Democratic Rep. Claude Pepper of Florida, who is himself 87 years old, tells of a Nevada woman who beat her incontinent mother and rubbed feces in her face as a punishment. Mary Joy Quinn, an investigator for the California Superior Court in San Francisco, tells of a 78-year-old woman brought to a hospital emergency room by her son. She suffered blood clots on the brain, which required surgery, bruises on her stomach and wounds on the neck that appeared to be bite marks. The son, who later applied to the court to become his mother's conservator, said that she had fallen. He was suspected of inflicting the injuries, but his mother wouldn't cooperate with an investigation.    The abuse can involve mental cruelty. A malnourished 80-year-old New York man said he was afraid to eat because his daughter had threatened to poison his food. His case is recounted by Andrea Nevins, the project director of the Mount Sinai Victim Service Agency/Elder Abuse Project, who believes that he was, in fact, abused.    The story, however, also illustrates how hard it can be to prove abuse. Many charges are never substantiated. Rhoda Thomasson of the Witness Victims Service Center in Cleveland says that of 148 cases involving the elderly, she found 15 cases in which the elderly person was paranoid. It is not unusual for an older person to imagine that someone is trying to harm him.    Abuse also can involve neglect. Rep. Pepper was told of an 80-year-old woman, crippled with arthritis and dependent on her son for care, who was left in 90-degree heat, tied to her bed with just a few saltines and a jug of water to sustain her.    Frequently, abuse has to do with money. A wealthy New York businessman, the guardian of his bedridden sister in Massachusetts, let her live in a burned-out house without water and adequate electricity, according to Craig Fox, a regional supervisor of the Massachusetts Elder Protective Services program. The businessman, who controlled her $500,000 estate, said she was accustomed to a spartan life. Mr. Fox said the man made improvements once the state took an interest.    Finally, some cases involve sex. In New Jersey, according to Rep. Pepper, a 74-year-old woman was beaten and raped by her son-in-law. Her daughter demanded that she keep silent, telling her, &quot;You won't have a home to sleep in if you say anything about this.&quot;    The motives for abusing the elderly are often complex. An abuser may himself have been mistreated as a child or may have an alcohol or drug problem or may be emotionally unstable. Stress frequently serves as the catalyst for abuse. A New Jersey man claimed that the only way to get his senile mother's attention was to hit her. In Massachusetts, a man handcuffed his wife, who had Alzheimer's disease, to her bed lest she wander off when he was out of the house.    Geraldine Turner, a 38-year-old Alabama housewife who cared for her elderly parents for 2 1/2 years, says she knows how difficult caring for an aged parent can be. Her alcoholic father, an invalid, swore at her and chased away nurses and housecleaners. He would call her at 2 a.m., insisting that she come over. At the same time, paying for her mother's medication depleted her own family's savings.    &quot;At times you want to put them up in an attic and pretend they aren't there,&quot; she says. &quot;I never did that, but I can identify.&quot; Her father has since died, and her mother is in a nursing home.    Jacqueline Lelong, who operates a counseling and education agency in Austin, Texas, says people responsible for the care of the aged often are themselves like prisoners. &quot;You can't leave. You have someone wandering around who doesn't know where the bathroom is, who can't feed himself. No one knows what it's like unless he's been there,&quot; she says. &quot;We must be very careful before we pass judgment.&quot;    Indeed, rendering judgment in abuse cases can be a legal and ethical nightmare. Should children be compelled to care for parents? States typically establish no such obligation.    Consider the case of Hazel Billingslea, who lived with her son and his family. When a caseworker arrived at the 94-year-old Dallas woman's home in the spring of 1984, she found Mrs. Billingslea in bed, covered with ulcers so severe that her heel and part of her back had been eaten away to the bone. She lay in her own waste. A few weeks later, Mrs. Billingslea died at Parkland Memorial Hospital.    Her son, Ray Edwin, who had quit his job to care for his mother, was found guilty in 1986 in the 291st Criminal District Court in Dallas County of inflicting &quot;injury to an elderly individual.&quot; Mr. Billingslea was sentenced to 99 years in prison. But the conviction was overturned last summer when the Texas Court of Appeals in Dallas ruled that while Mr. Billingslea's behavior was &quot;reprehensible,&quot; he had no legal obligation to care for his mother, even though he was &quot;obviously under a moral duty.&quot;    Most states have what are called adult protective-services laws -- which are intended to protect vulnerable adults, including the elderly and mentally ill -- but enforcement is spotty and penalties are weak. In Alabama, for instance, the same penalty -- a six-month prison term -- applies to a person who beats an elderly parent and to anyone who fails to report suspected abuse. Often people aren't aware that laws require them to report abuse. Doctors and other professionals often don't like to report abuse, in part for fear of being sued.    Once cases are reported, strapped agencies can't always do much. Even finding emergency shelter is difficult. Since 1981, the primary source of federal financing for state protective services -- the social-service block grants -- has been reduced by 32%. Ms. Steinmetz, of the University of Delaware, says overworked caseworkers argue at meetings over whom to protect: small children or the elderly. &quot;Some say invest in the future with children. But what about the people who have already invested in society? Can't they get some sort of return on their investment?&quot; she asks.    Even when authorities do their best, it isn't always enough. The case of Cassandra Life has shaken the town of York, Pa. There, the woman's two sisters, both in their 80s themselves, were blamed during a coroner's inquest for the beating death last year of the 81-year-old Mrs. Life.    Stephany Romano, the patient representative of the York Hospital, continues to wonder whether she could have done more. &quot;We keep banging our heads over this. How could we have saved her life? What could we have done differently?&quot; she says.    Mrs. Life was admitted to the hospital twice last summer. She had fractured ribs, black eyes, a mark resembling a footprint on her back, and a loop-shaped bruise on her thigh &quot;like something had been wrapped around it,&quot; says Ms. Romano.    The woman told hospital staff workers her sisters had beaten her to get her money and her house, according to Mrs. Romano. The hospital offered to locate emergency shelter and legal advice for Mrs. Life. Doctors told her she could stay until new living arrangements were made, even though the hospital wouldn't be reimbursed for her stay. But Mrs. Life wanted to go home. So the hospital arranged home visits by nurses, neighbors and members of a social-service agency.    The nurses made several trips but were told that their services weren't needed any longer. About 10 days after the nurses' last visit, Mrs. Life died. The coroner determined she had died of &quot;unnatural causes&quot; -- a brain hemorrhage and severe bruises to the head, arms, leg, abdomen, chest and groin.    &quot;It would have been easy if she wasn't coherent,&quot; says Dr. Lawrence J. Guzzardi, the director of emergency medicine at York Hospital. &quot;We could have decided for her.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>