<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871110-0054 </DOCNO><HL> Threat to Apartheid:South African FissuresGrow as a Few WhitesResist Military Service---'End Conscription Campaign'Is Tiny, but Armed ForcesTake It Very Seriously---The Conversion of Ivan Toms---By Roger ThurowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> CAPE TOWN, South Africa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The harassment began, Ivan Toms recalls, when someone loosened a wheel of his car so that it came flying off while he was driving down the road.    He wasn't hurt, but things got worse. Bags of hog manure were dropped on his doorstep. Rumors arose that he had AIDS. Graffiti were scribbled on his car, his house and walls throughout the city: &quot;Hang Ivan Toms.&quot;    Hanging is what they do to traitors here, and in the eyes of his tormentors, that word aptly describes Dr. Toms, a 35-year-old physician. He is a moral objector to South Africa's system of military conscription, which requires that during their lives all white men serve a total of four years in the Defence Force. Dr. Toms has served two, in quieter days when troops mostly whiled away their time in barracks. But since they have moved into black townships, bearing arms against fellow South Africans, he has taken a stand.    On Thursday, Dr. Toms is due to report for a one-month call-up. He will be there, he says, without his uniform but with his lawyer. And though he won't hang, he could go to prison for up to three years. &quot;The state,&quot; he reckons, &quot;is out to break me.&quot;    For the state, it is indeed vital to stop Ivan Toms. For the moral dilemma that has brought him to face prison is also gnawing away at the collective white conscience, led by a small but determined group called the End Conscription Campaign. &quot;The ECC,&quot; Defence Minister Magnus Malan has said more than once, &quot;is just as much an enemy of the Defence Force as the African National Congress.&quot;    In one way, it is more dangerous. The ANC wages its armed struggle from outside the country, seeking to end white minority rule, but the ECC strikes from within. &quot;We are expressing the basic conflict in the white community,&quot; says Adele Kirsten, the national secretary of the ECC. &quot;Whites realize they are having to pay a price to maintain their privileged position, and this price is having their men -- fathers, sons, brothers -- called up in a war situation. It touches every white family.&quot;    The government has tried to muzzle the ECC under the state of emergency, now 16 months old, which outlaws anything that discredits or undermines conscription. Some 80 activists of the ECC -- whose very name is a violation -- have been detained at times. Dozens more have been forced into hiding or gone into exile.    And among white South Africans, the government's effort has plenty of support. Many, particularly the Afrikaners who have been defending their way of life for three centuries, strongly back the army's campaign against Communist forces in Angola and Namibia. They are equally determined to repel African National Congress terrorism inside South Africa. To these people, the ECC is nothing but a band of left-wing cowards.    But though the state of emergency has hurt organizing by the ECC, as the military casualties add up -- 12 South African soldiers died in Angola last week -- the questions the group poses become more pressing. Recently, there have been a few signs that military objection, long restricted to a few defiant individuals, may be building into a bigger movement.    In August, Dr. Toms and 22 other young men -- together known as the Group of 23 -- publicly pledged to disobey their call-up orders, saying they wouldn't bear arms to defend apartheid. It was the first time a group of South Africa's white sons had taken such a united stand. (Blacks and those of mixed race aren't required to serve but can volunteer.)    Last month, several hundred people attended an ECC-sponsored meeting in Johannesburg to hear a report on the military's role in Angola. Someone called in with a threat to detonate a bomb in the hall if Cuba's role wasn't discussed too. (No one left, the Cubans were mentioned briefly, and no bomb went off.)    And several weeks ago, at Rhodes University in Grahamstown, ECC supporters filled a church hall to celebrate the organization's fourth birthday. While police maintained a distant watch outside the hall (the gathering was within emergency guidelines), the party-goers performed anti-war skits, read anti-war poetry and cut into a cake shaped like the Defence Force headquarters.    ---   Ivan Toms isn't in a festive mood as he contemplates his impending confrontation with the military. &quot;I know it will be horrific,&quot; he says, staring down at his lunch, &quot;but it is important to take this stand. I think individuals can make a difference.&quot;    Despite such resolve, Dr. Toms's journey to the doorstep of prison has been a slow and reluctant one, typical of the gradual disillusionment shared by a host of liberal-minded white South Africans.    After finishing his medical education in 1977, he got his first call-up, for the two-year stint that normally is followed by 720 days of call-up camps over the next 12 years. Dr. Toms had already decided to stop voting in white elections, because apartheid denied his black and Indian medical colleagues the vote. He thought about leaving the country and even bought a plane ticket to London.    &quot;I canceled the day before I was supposed to go,&quot; he says. &quot;I didn't really want to leave South Africa -- it's no real solution. So I decided to go into the service and try to cope. I went in very unhappy.&quot;    He came out even more disenchanted. He served nine months in a hospital in the black homeland of Ciskei, where, during an early briefing, he says, he was told that the role of doctors included spying on the black patients. Then he was sent to the border of Angola and Namibia, by this time with non-combatant status that excused him from carrying a gun. But &quot;the Namibians rejected me as a doctor because I was still wearing the uniform and was seen as a representative of the group that had brought death to the area for 16 years,&quot; he says.    After his two-year stint, Dr. Toms set up a clinic in the black squatter camp named Crossroads, outside of Cape Town. Soon, clashes between the residents and police and between various black factions broke out over repeated government attempts to move the squatters elsewhere. Eventually, the army he had recently served in moved into Crossroads.    &quot;Every day the security forces would come in and tear down the temporary shelters the people had built with branches and plastic,&quot; he remembers. &quot;One day a woman held on to her branches, and fighting broke out. There were rubber bullets, dogs, tear gas. I had a lot of people to treat.&quot;    He pauses, reflecting on that day. &quot;Before, I knew intellectually I could never serve in the Defence Force again. But this convinced me emotionally. Right then, I knew I could never put on that uniform again.&quot;    He hopes that by taking a stand he will force the government to consider expanding the options for conscientious objectors. Currently, unless one is a universal pacifist or strict religious objector, there is no escaping some kind of military service. The only options are to leave the country or go to jail for up to 1 1/2 times the period one has left to serve.    &quot;I don't think this government listens easily,&quot; he says, &quot;but I'm giving them the option to hear if they want to hear.&quot;    ---   At Stellenbosch University, the cradle of Afrikaner learning, the ECC is, in effect, banned from campus. But its spirit is alive in the bars nearby.    &quot;People are always coming into pubs and talking about the army, about whether they would go and what would happen if they didn't,&quot; says Jaco Malan, a 23-year-old political-philosophy student. &quot;And if the state of emergency had never happened, that's probably all we would be doing -- talking. But the emergency made us want to do something. We got to the stage where we couldn't analyze anymore or worry about the consequences. We wanted to make a statement.&quot;    So, on Aug. 3, a group of Stellenbosch students joined a group from Cape Town and issued what has become known as the Statement of the 23. It is a sweeping condemnation of apartheid and of the Defence Force's role in South Africa.    The group includes both Afrikaans and English speakers, from blue-collar as well as well-educated families. The government hasn't yet acted against any of the 23, but they have paid a price. Some have lost their friends, some have blown their careers. &quot;You can see from this group that the whole issue of the Defence Force is causing a lot of uncertainties and tensions in families,&quot; says Mr. Malan.    Most of the 23 have deferred their initial two-year stints until they graduate, meaning that possible six-year jail terms loom in the future. &quot;Next year,&quot; says David Green, a final-year medical student at Cape Town, &quot;I'm either leaving the country or going to jail.&quot;    For Mark Behr, a political-science student at Stellenbosch, consequences may come sooner. He served his initial two years in the army before going to college, and a couple of weeks ago he got a call-up for a month of camp.    &quot;Standing at the post box, reading this call-up notice, it hit me for the first time what we had done,&quot; he says. &quot;But then I realized I wasn't alone. Perhaps the Group of 23 will give more people the courage they may be lacking at the moment.&quot;    ---   Philip Wilkinson stood before a judge in the Port Elizabeth magistrate's court. &quot;For all of us there comes a point when we can no longer compromise,&quot; he was saying. &quot;A situation becomes so difficult to live with that we have to stand up for what we believe in, no matter what the cost. . . . I will not sacrifice my life or lend my body to the defense of apartheid.&quot;    That was last May, at Mr. Wilkinson's conscientious-objector trial. The 23-year-old social worker's ECC activities had already strained his relationship with his mother, who once threatened to disown him. Like Dr. Toms, he had been harassed, and then he was detained for 111 days. The trial was his first chance to speak out, and he was painfully uncomfortable, a shy person in the spotlight. Now, he is an antip-apartheid hero.    &quot;It is something I had to do,&quot; Mr. Wilkinson says today. &quot;I had to show that you could be a conscientious objector, go to trial and come out of it.&quot; The judge fined him 600 rand ($300) for failing to report for a camp call-up, something he could face for each subsequent camp call-up.    &quot;The whites are the pillar of support of the state,&quot; he says, calculating the impact of military objection. &quot;If we start to question things, it's much worse than thousands of blacks challenging the government.&quot; The Defence Force fears that he may be right. </TEXT></DOC>