<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881116-0082 </DOCNO><HL> The Road to European Unity -- 1992 --- Embracing Europe: Spain's Businesses Rush To Love the Free Trade The EC Plans for 1992 --- Shucking the Provincial Past, Firms Merge, Streamline, Cut Deals With Foreigners --- Too Busy to Fear the Future </HL><AUTHOR> Philip Revzin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> TNM MON </IN><DATELINE> BARCELONA, Spain  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For Spain, 1992 is triple witching year.    Barcelona will play host to the Olympics. Seville will hold a World's Fair marking the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America. Spain will become a fully integrated member of what is to become a fully integrated Common Market.    The Olympics and the World's Fair will be important, Spaniards say. The full absorption of Spain into Europe will be fun.    More than any other people in the European Community, Spaniards are yearning for 1992. They say a united Europe is Spain's best guarantee that the breath of democracy the country has enjoyed since 1977 will become natural respiration, that the door to the world will stay open, that Spain each day will become a little more like West Germany and a little less like Mexico.    &quot;Spain is truly a European country now,&quot; Jaime Martorell Suarez says proudly. &quot;We've left the Third World far behind.&quot; Mr. Martorell, marketing manager for a U.S.-Spanish microchip joint venture, recalls the great fear Spain had of a flood of imports after it joined the Common Market two years ago and lowered its tariffs. &quot;You don't hear that fear about 1992,&quot; he says. &quot;All you hear is the sound of opportunity.&quot;    Determined to seize it, Spaniards are busily forming joint ventures that bring technology and jobs. They are turning family yarn firms that can't compete without tariffs into diversified textile companies that can. They are merging small Spanish banks and companies to form medium-sized European ones. They are seeking knowledge and profit from helping foreign multinationals invest here. They are becoming more entrepreneurial inside Spain, and poking their noses outside. They are trying to switch over from welcoming short-stay tourists to becoming Northern Europe's retirement home.    All this activity stems from an unswerving optimism about 1992 despite the crises facing once-protected Spanish industries like chemicals and textiles as tariff barriers fall. The optimism overcomes queasiness about the influx of foreign investors eager to conquer Europe by using Spanish labor that is up to 50% cheaper. It overcomes concerns, for instance, that Spain could become simply Europe's garage: Spain is the world's sixth-biggest car maker, but not one of the car plants here is Spanish-owned.    Jordi Alberich, secretary of a Barcelona business group, shrugs at such worries. &quot;If the jobs are here, who cares who owns the plants?&quot; he asks. &quot;If we want to be a leading country, we've got to be open, to act like a leading country.&quot;    Spain is. With a suddenness that surprises even them, Spaniards who a decade ago seemed cut off from the world -- the legacy of 40 years of Francoism -- chat knowledgeably about the Dow Jones industrials, Eurobond interest-rate spreads and the London Interbank Offered Rate. They bustle along wide avenues in Barcelona and Madrid that house more foreign banks than Frankfurt. They borrow from Manufacturers Hanover, Deutsche Bank and Barclays. They buy, with the relish of the long-starved, Cote d'Or chocolates from Belgium, Electrolux refrigerators from Sweden, Buitoni pasta from Italy. They read the news in English, French, German, Italian.    What the Spanish don't do is worry about 1992 the way their neighbors do. The French worry about the removal of most European trade barriers in four years because their companies aren't as big as German companies. The Italians worry that their parliament doesn't work as well as Britain's does. The British worry about everything concerning 1992.    &quot;We're not afraid of anybody,&quot; says a Barcelona businessman, Carlos Barnils Deulonder. &quot;We're probably wrong, but we're not afraid of anybody.&quot;    They're too busy to be afraid. Mr. Barnils, for instance, has time only for a quick, though tall, gin and tonic in a crowded Barcelona bar after a day spent huddling with his West German supplier of refrigerators. He readily concedes that his refrigerator-components business grew comfortably behind 40% tariffs that kept all competition out. Under Spain's agreement to join the EC, those tariffs have come down to 7%, and they will vanish in 1992. To survive, he has joined the enemy in joint ventures, trading his knowledge of the Spanish market for products and know-how. In the middle of describing his venture with Westinghouse Electric of the U.S. and his talks with a Japanese company for a similar deal, Mr. Barnils has to leave for a 9 p.m. dinner with the Germans.    Andreu Soldevila gets to his Barcelona office at 9 the next morning to continue changing nearly everything about the family business he and his brother took over five years ago. He has a computer on one corner of his desk and a thick wad of printouts in the middle of it. His father and grandfather made cotton yarn in Barcelona and sold it mainly in Spain. The younger Soldevilas -- Andreu is 40 -- cut their work force to 1,200 from 1,500 and plan to get down to 800 by 1992, all the while introducing new machines to keep yarn output exactly the same.    Meanwhile, they have diversified into fancier, customized yarns -- &quot;stuff the Third World producers can't make yet&quot; -- as well as into real estate and hotels. As factory workers are laid off, multilingual salesmen are added. A subsidiary has been opened in Portugal, and offices in West Germany and Denmark are planned. The company now exports 15% of its output and hopes to double that by 1992. The business he will leave to the next generation won't look at all like the one he inherited, Mr. Soldevila says. &quot;We're not worried about 1992,&quot; he says. &quot;We're getting ready for it.&quot;    Also getting ready are many smallish Spanish companies and banks. In recent months, mergers have joined four of Spain's seven biggest banks. Combining, too, are two of Spain's oldest industrial rivals, Grupo Cros and Union Explosivos Rio Tinto S.A. (which is partly owned by the Kuwaitis), into Spain's biggest chemical company. The merger was forced when French and Italian producers amassed a stunning 30% of Spain's fertilizer market within a year of tariffs' coming down.    Josep Pique, a bright-eyed 33-year-old executive, runs an electroplating division of the merged businesses. Sitting in temporary quarters in an oak-paneled board room under the benevolent gaze of founder Mateo Cros, Mr. Pique chomps a big Havana cigar and talks strategy. &quot;Spain's problem is competitiveness and provincialism. We need to cut costs and project ourselves abroad,&quot; he says. The merger will help with costs, he says, and plants may be built in North Africa. &quot;We must take the offense in order to defend ourselves.&quot;    It will have to be a come-from-behind defense, because much of the rest of the world is already here. On a patch of dusty brown country 12 miles northwest of Madrid sits Spain's entree to the world of high technology, a sprawling $220 million structure in which American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and Spain's Telefonica will make ultra-sophisticated microchips for Europe's future phones, cars and computers. The plant has the cleanest room in Europe, 100,000 times cleaner than a hospital operating room, boasts an ATandamp;T official. Behind glass, technicians in what look like spacesuits test chip-making equipment. On the other side of the glass, high-speed Spanish mingles with American drawls as engineers confer in cubicles decorated with Miro posters and Green Bay Packers pennants.    &quot;Spain is a little like the California of Europe,&quot; says Mr. Martorell, head of sales and marketing for the chip venture. He should know: He spent 14 years in Silicon Valley before coming home. He gestures out at ATandamp;T's man-made lake. &quot;We've got the climate, nice surroundings, a well-trained work force.&quot; Like most foreign companies investing here, ATandamp;T, which owns 80% of the venture, will use Spain as a base for the European market. It hopes to sell 85% of its production elsewhere in Europe. Having a Spanish plant also protects against any possible post-1992 European requirement for high &quot;local content&quot; in technology sold here. &quot;We're local,&quot; says Mr. Martorell.    Local, too, are Sanyo of Japan, Goldstar of South Korea, Fiat of Italy, and hundreds of other multinationals that are entering Europe-1992 through Spain-1988. General Electric of the U.S. said last month it will invest $1.7 billion in a plastics and silicon-sealants factory in Cartagena. A giant contract to build a high-speed train network will go to either French, German or Japanese companies. &quot;On one level, 1992 is being played out among the multinationals,&quot; says Francesc Santacana i Martorell, coordinator of Barcelona 2000, a planning group. &quot;Spain doesn't have any.&quot;    Instead of vainly trying to develop multinationals 30 years too late, argues Mr. Santacana at countless animated meetings, Spain should make a virtue of preparing the playing field. &quot;We need to develop and coordinate dozens, hundreds, thousands of small and medium-sized suppliers to the ATandamp;Ts and Sonys of the world,&quot; he says, sketching interlaced star patterns on a sheet of paper. &quot;We can sell them parts, we can offer them skilled labor, we can build their roads and clean their factories.&quot; To do this properly, he continues, now drawing concentric circles, requires one largely missing ingredient: home-grown entrepreneurs. &quot;That's where Italy is ahead of us. They've got famous guys like De Benedetti and Agnelli. We don't.&quot;    Spain may soon have its own famous entrepreneurs, in part thanks to Italy. Jose Ramon Alvarez Rendueles is the head of Corp. Financiera Reunida SA, or Cofir, the private investment arm of Carlo De Benedetti. Like Mr. De Benedetti's Cerus SA unit in France, which led the wild and ultimately unsuccessful charge at Societe Generale de Belgique earlier this year, Cofir is supposed to shake up the Iberian business scene.    A former governor of the Spanish Central Bank, Mr. Rendueles has started fast: In its first year Cofir has bought stakes in a fruit company called Pascual Hermanos, a health-insurance company called Sanitas, and N.H. Hoteles, a hotel chain. It is looking next at Portugal, he says. &quot;Spain's future is as a services economy, like everywhere else in the modern world. We'll never compete in steel, but we've got plenty of competitive advantages in agriculture, in taking care of our people's health and in welcoming more and more tourists.&quot;    Cofir's hotel investments so far are aimed at business people. Others are thinking about vast retirement communities for sun-starved Scandinavians and British. &quot;After 1992 people will be able to retire here as easily as at home,&quot; says Mr. Santacana. He figures that a West German insurance company could sell a pension offering not just a steady income but also a home in Spain. &quot;We're Europe's Sun Belt,&quot; he says. &quot;The only difference between Spain and California is the freeways. And we're building those.&quot;    Spanish business strategists even think the country could emulate high-fashion Italy, transforming the shoes and clothing it now turns out cheaply. This would require a change in mentality, both in designers and in shoppers. There is an elegant men's shop in Barcelona that features brightly colored sweaters, expensive broadcloth shirts and highly styled blue blazers. The shop and its merchandise could have been flown in from Milan. It calls itself Massimo Dutti.    &quot;It makes me furious,&quot; says a Barcelona businessman. &quot;These guys come from a 400-year-old Spanish family and make this stuff 10 miles from Barcelona. Massimo Dutti? You'll know Spain has really arrived in Europe when they call the shop Pedro Martinez.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>