<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870113-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Mom Suits Up Daily for an Endless Marathon---By Carole Gould</HL><DD> 01/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   My husband ran the New York City marathon last fall. He didn't finish first, or anywhere near there, but completing the race was an indisputable accomplishment. He has a medal and a couple of leftover complimentary granola bars to prove his success. But more important, he has that wonderful feeling that comes from working hard to reach a goal.    People notice, too. Cousins called from around the country; friends looked properly respectful as he recited the particulars of his experience: the man from the Washington, D.C., think tank with whom he ran five miles, the woman in the Bronx who proffered a much-needed banana, the ambulances that claimed the not-so-fortunate on the 59th Street bridge.    Sam, our 18-month-old son, and I took up our positions along Fourth Avenue in Brooklyn. In the colorful stream of bodies pouring by, I saw my husband wearing the bright orange shirt with &quot;Sam's Dad&quot; stenciled on the front.    As the crowds cheered &quot;Go, Sam's dad! You can do it!&quot; I tried to take pictures of him and, at the same time, keep Sam from running into the street, splashing in a nearby puddle or eating the orange peels that runners kept throwing our way.    No one cheers for me as I do these things for Sam, though he is my main concern now. Although many people warned me of the difficulties of motherhood, no one mentioned what I find most onerous: There are no tangible signs of success in the task of raising a child -- no promotions, no raises, not even interim performance reviews -- nothing along the way to tell you that you are moving in the right direction. Maybe older parents, watching their grown children lead happy, independent lives, can congratulate themselves on parenting well done. I'm in my 30s, though, and that eventuality doesn't do much to lighten the day-to-day chores of child rearing.    Women of my generation may feel this lack of feedback and recognition especially hard. We were schooled in the competitive '70s, when success was easily and quantifiably measured in a steady procession of alphabet tests: SATs, LSATs, GREs, MCATs. The computer printout that arrived in your mailbox with your score also ranked you in a percentile, so you knew where you stood relative to your peers.    Whether those standardized tests fairly or accurately measure one's ability to perform academically is an issue I won't get into here. The point is that my generation was taught from a very early age to be goal-oriented, to set a pattern of work and accomplish it. And accomplishment was equated with success.    In motherhood, I found, there are no such clear guideposts, no measuring how well I do my job. So we seek guidance in the ways we can. One mother I know dressed her toddler in a clown suit for a Halloween party we recently attended, a marvelous, colorful concoction that she whipped up on her sewing machine, she said. Sam showed up wearing a bow tie and suspenders, carrying a volume of Proust. He was supposed to be a college professor, a costume that, unlike the clown suit, required significant explanation.    Another mother I know made her daughter a playhouse from a discarded dishwasher box that she picked up off someone's curb. It's painted white, with green-shuttered windows, a door that opens and shuts, even a doorknob made from two large buttons held together with a leather thong. It's beautiful, and Sam loves it.    In recounting the difficulties of motherhood, no one told me that clown suits and playhouses would be enough to make me feel inadequate. I realize, of course, that motherhood consists of much more. Still, it's hard to wake up each morning to the same routine: changing diapers, preparing a breakfast that ultimately serves as decoration for the floor and walls, reading &quot;Green Eggs and Ham&quot; for the millionth time, keeping controlled and patient during a 45-minute temper tantrum. No one gives me medals or granola bars for doing this day in and day out. No one praises me because I never run out of diapers or clean baby clothes. Why should they?    If there's stress built into the job, that's a large part of it. Being a mommy is much like running the marathon, but there is no beginning, no end and no cheering crowds along the way.    With a business background and legal training, I should be well equipped to transfer those skills to my new tasks. But MBO (Mommy-by-Objective) is not an approach that seems to work in the household. It's catch-as-catch can: a question of belief and faith and focus on a star that may rise above the horizon in 20 or 30 years or so.    ---   Ms. Gould is a Brooklyn, N.Y., mother who plans to run a marathon one day. </TEXT></DOC>