<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870924-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Up the Revolution of the Soviet New Left---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 09/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   Almost entirely unreported to the West thus far was last month's conference in Moscow of left-wing reformers. It is the first such conference in more than 50 years ago. The conference brought together about 600 representatives of 50 ecological, cultural and grass-roots socialist groups. It ended with calls for a monument to Stalin's victims and expanded democratization. In many ways the assembly would have been familiar to anyone living through the radical and youth movements in the West in the past quarter-century.    According to Jonathan Steele, who provided an exclusive account of the gathering to the British newspaper the Guardian on Sept. 12, ecological activism is flourishing in the Soviet Union. Activists waged a successful battle against the vast scheme to divert the flow of major Soviet rivers from south to north; progressive ideas about town planning are being discussed; and there has been resistance, with sit-ins, against planned destruction of such famous landmarks as Leningrad's Hotel Angleterre and Moscow's 17th-century Shcherbakov Palaces. Shoulder to shoulder with these preservationists and radical architects are the young rock and heavy-metal groups who are pitting their proposed reforms of the system against the conservatism and outright racism of those who want to beat up the long-haired hippie trash and get back to the socially, ethically, politically and aesthetically conservative traditions of Josef Sixpack.    Two associations, both self-avowedly socialist in fundamental ideological stance, came out of the conference. Mr. Steele supplied the Guardian with the declaration of one of the associations, the Federation of Socialist Clubs. For anyone chaffing against the &quot;iron ceiling&quot; of either late-capitalist or Stalin-Brezhnevite dogma, it is an uplifting document.    It opens with an expression of support for the &quot;socialist model of development for our country,&quot; and the goal of moving toward a classless society. Of course, this could be pro forma boilerplate, but the document then gets specific: In the political arena, it calls for legal status for independent organizations and movements along with democratization of the electoral system; the right to put forward representatives to councils of people's deputies &quot;at any level of government without any limit on candidates' free access to the mass media&quot;; bigger budgets and complete autonomy for councils of peoples' deputies; and of the right to &quot;prosecute officials for illegal activity, independently of any complaints made at the administrative level,&quot; which was one of the original goals of the precursor of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union.    In the economic field, the statement calls for drastic reduction in administrative bureaucracy; self-managed enterprises; democratization of the planning system; and &quot;free development of all forms of socialist ownership,&quot; while &quot;firmly safeguarding&quot; workers' social rights such as full employment, the minimum wage and guaranteed pensions.    On the cultural front there is a denunciation of &quot;every kind of pre-censorship&quot; along with a removal of &quot;all administrative obstacles preventing independent organizations from enjoying their constitutional rights and freedoms, such as speech, press, street marches and demonstrations.&quot; The document concludes with expressions of support for ecological activism and for &quot;revolutionary liberation and democratic movements in the capitalist world and developing countries.&quot;    One of the organizers of last month's conference was a 29-year-old sociologist named Boris Kagarlitsky, imprisoned under Brezhnev for propagating &quot;Euro-communist views.&quot; The July/August issue of the British publication New Left Review (of whose editorial committee this writer is a member) carries an article by Mr. Kagarlitsky. In it, he analyzes cultural trends in the Soviet Union, from what is self-consciously described as a &quot;new left&quot; position.    &quot;The chief weakness of the New Left,&quot; Mr. Kagarlitsky writes, &quot;is the persistent gap betwen 'high' culture and the 'low' culture of the youth. Among the representatives of 'high' culture, the ideas and people of the sixties predominate. . . . In essence, the activity of the young rock groups, or the discussions organized by rebel architects protesting against the destruction of our old towns, may prove to be more important cultural events than the publication of (the long-suppressed books) &quot;The Executioner's Block' and 'The Doleful Detective.' The new left looks on the liberalism of the sixties as a heritage from the past. In their opinion, many 'children of the 20th Congress,' who have now attained a respectable age, have failed to draw the lessons from their mistakes. Sixties liberalism was indifferent to social problems and, as a rule, felt no particular interest in the masses.&quot;    In other words, Mr. Kagarlitsky is calling for a profound replenishment of the revolutionary imagination in the Soviet Union. He denounces the liberal intelligentsia that has showed itself &quot;incapable of any constructive initiative of its own, preferring just to laud Gorbachev's decisions.&quot;    It would be facile to attempt too much equation between Mr. Kagarlitsky's &quot;new left&quot; and the &quot;new left&quot; of the 1960s in the West, but there are some thought-provoking parallels. In the U.S. the ideals of the new left often ran athwart those of the blue-collar white working man who was still prospering in the high noonday of the great postwar American boom. For the Soviet working class, the first 10 years of Brezhnevism was similarly a noonday in terms of material progress.    Today, polls taken by the groups with which Mr. Kagarlitsky is associated show the Soviet working class is in favor of glasnost but deeply suspicious of perestroika, or economic reform, which many of them see as an attempt to erode their position and improve the perquisites of other social sectors such as the intellectuals.    There is no question that the forces associated with Mr. Gorbachev have concluded that radical reform now is essential since otherwise a combination of forces -- economic, technological, political and military -- could move decisively against the Soviet Union. It is also evident that economic restructuring may make life worse in the short term for the bulk of the population. It is inconceivable the Soviet leadership would seek a confrontation with any section of the working class. So the vehicle of promulgating reform has to be the long ossified Communist Party, refreshed by an invigorated political atmosphere.    Hence the importance of the September manifesto quoted above. Mr. Kagarlitsky is conscious of its importance, for he says, &quot;The events which have taken place in our country are important not only for us. The wave of conservatism which swept over the world in the early eighties is beginning to subside. The need for radical reform is beginning to be realized by ever wider circles in countries of every type. Socialist ideas may once more become attractive to public opinion in the West. How well the progressive forces in the U.S.S.R. cope with their new role will determine more than their our future.&quot;    The types of changes sponsored by Mr. Gorbachev in the Soviet Union do not, it is well to remember, imply the conversion of that society or its ideals to Western capitalist norms.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>