<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0154 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Canadian Activists in Solidarity Against Trade Bill---By Jean-Luc Migue</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDAMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> QUEBEC CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When President Reagan visited Ottawa two weeks ago, a few thousand activists from a smorgasbord of movements congregated in the streets of the city to protest the visit. This collection included representatives of the peace movement, environmentalists, unionists, members of the &quot;cultural&quot; industries, spokesmen for the large churches and nationalists of all stripes. The demonstrators were united by one common trait besides their anti-Americanism: They belonged to those segments of Canadian society that are among the most heavily subsidized and protected by the Canadian government and by provincial governments.    This is no accident. On the eve of entering perhaps the most far-reaching agreement ever on trade with the U.S., Canada cannot fail to upset those elements who fear for their privileged positions in Canadian society. Characteristically, the most ardent defenders of protectionist legislation are also the most vocal partisans of more activist &quot;stabilization&quot; policies, of an expanded industrial policy and in general of increased government involvement in the economy. While this grouping can be observed everywhere, its meaning can be more easily grasped in Canada where, because of the magnitude of foreseeable changes from the proposed free-trade pact, the battle lines are more clearly drawn.    The real goals pursued by opponents of free trade in Canada were unequivocally stated by a former minister of the Pearson-Trudeau era in a March 19 column in the Globe and Mail, probably the prime forum of nationalist thinking in Canada. Said Mr. Mitchell Sharp: &quot;A free-trade agreement would curtail the freedom of action of the people of Canada, through their governments, to make decisions.&quot; Implicit in this view is the Rousseauist vision of government as the faithful embodiment of some abstract collective will of the people. A more illuminating statement of the impact of free trade on political independence should read as follows: A free-trade agreement would curtail the ability of governments to make decisions against the will of the people, while enhancing their ability to make efficient decisions.    In both Canada and the U.S., any given inefficient intervention by a government in any field imposes a higher cost on residents under a free-trade arrangement than within a protectionist framework. This follows from the simple fact that actions that raise costs or prices of domestically supplied goods bring about a more rapid and more pronounced substitution of foreign goods for domestic ones. As a result of higher competition from abroad, producers in sectors struck by cost-increasing government interventions experience a greater decline in income and/or employment opportunities. In the jargon of economists, opening the economy through freer trade results in higher demand and supply elasticities. Any public action has a greater impact on producers and consumers in open economies.    It is therefore correct to suggest that under a free-trade arrangement, discriminatory wage and employment policies foisted on Canadian producers by the Canadian and Ontario affirmative-action programs would involve greater job and income losses to Canadian and Ontario women and workers in general. Similarly, cost-increasing language policies in Quebec would result in higher job and investment losses to Quebec residents under free trade. Maintaining a higher tax burden on Canadians relative to U.S. residents would entail a higher overall dead-weight loss for Canadians within a free-trade framework. The list of differential effects could be lengthened at will. The message remains the same: Bad economic-policy decisions are more costly in an open economy.    Now from an economist's standpoint, and presumably from the standpoint of all free people, the mechanism above is a virtue. Competition always is. Just as federalism is deemed a superior form of government -- because in a federal state, competition between governments constrains provincial or state governments to follow policies more in line with the interests of local residents -- so does competition from abroad protect Canadians and Americans from the heavy hand of their national governments. Free trade would help citizens in both countries escape from the excessive monopoly power of their centralized federation. As they would feel more strongly the burden of arbitrary decisions, citizens would more forcefully resist encroachment by their governments on their freedom to produce and to consume. Freer trade means a freer society.    This is ironic. For if the reasoning above has any validity, it helps expose the real goals of nationalists and opponents of free trade, particularly in Canada. What these self-appointed spokesmen of political independence for Canada are out to defend is really the power of Canadian governments to adopt inefficient policies. In other words, the power to make decisions against the will of the people. This is all the more apparent by virtue of the wealth effect induced by free trade; Canadians in particular would be more free and more apt to pursue their own goals, individually or through their governments, simply because they would be richer.    If it is really true that Canadians want more locally produced cultural activities than their U.S. counterparts, more publicly supplied services, a more encompassing social-security system or a more balanced regional development, they will be in a position to afford more of these with their higher income under free trade. On the other hand, if under present protectionist conditions they have more of these publicly supplied goods than they really want, Canadian governments should find it difficult, once a more competitive environment is in place, to coerce them into accepting the enormous transfers of wealth associated with these policies. My view is that Canadians today are afflicted with more public interventions than they have bargained for. A more open economy would help determine if I am correct.    Whatever the final judgment on this matter, one result is clear: Lobbyists and activists from the cultural industries, representatives of the bureaucratic and union establishments and beneficiaries of the growing &quot;poverty&quot; industry will all lose some of the power that they now wield in our protected economy. They should find it more difficult to shift the burden of their own privileges on the rest of us. By the same token, because they are the beneficiaries of the present conditions, it is useless to attempt to convert them to the cause of a freer trade and a freer society.    Far from limiting the ability of Canadians (and U.S. citizens) to pursue their own objectives -- individually or through their governments -- a free-trade pact will enhance it by making them richer on average. And a free-trade arrangement will indeed limit the power of government monopolies to arbitrarily transfer wealth from the mass to the privileged and protected few. Free trade will strengthen the power of governments to do good, while reducing their power to abuse the people. One can hardly conceive of a better deal.    ---   Mr. Migue is professor of economics at Quebec University's National School of Public Administration. </TEXT></DOC>