<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861215-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/15/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CASEY WAS TOLD in early October of the Iran-Contra link, sources said.    According to the intelligence sources, the deputy director of the CIA testified before Congress that Lt. Col. North made a &quot;clean reference&quot; to a link between Iranian arms sales and covert aid to Nicaraguan rebels during an October luncheon with the CIA chief. Casey has denied knowing any details of the diversion of funds until November. Separately, U.S. officials suspect that profits from the arms sales have been moved out of Swiss banks, and the government's inquiry is focusing on Caribbean-area banks believed to have been used to funnel funds to Nicaraguan rebels.    GOP leader Dole, appearing on an NBC-TV interview, urged Reagan to let someone other than Chief of Staff Regan advise him on the Iran-Contra affair.    ---   Nicaragua's foreign minister said an American was arrested at an air base northeast of Managua on suspicion of spying. The man was identified as Sam Nesley Hall and said to be the brother of a U.S. congressman. Nicaragua's government said Hall was carrying maps and sketches of military targets when he was arrested.    ---   The aircraft Voyager took off from Edwards Air Force Base in California in the first attempt to fly around the world nonstop and without refueling. The experimental aircraft, however, dragged and damaged a flexible wing on the runway. Despite the damage, the plane headed over the Pacific for what is expected to be a 10-day flight.    ---   Philippine creditors have reached a consensus on resuming debt talks with the Manila government, bankers said in New York. The talks, on rescheduling $3.6 billion in foreign debt, broke down last month. On Friday, the chief creditor banks granted Manila a three-month moratorium on debt payments.    ---   A senior NASA official is to meet this week with an engineer who believes flawed joint seals weren't the sole cause of the space shuttle Challenger's explosion. If the theory is confirmed, it could affect the redesign of the shuttle's booster rockets and preparations for the next launch, currently targeted for 1988.    ---   South Africa released a Swiss couple and returned them to neighboring Swaziland, where they had been seized Friday by Pretoria's security forces. South Africa's foreign minister had initially accused the pair of aiding the outlawed African National Congress. Separately, officials said an ANC member died in a gunfight with police.    ---   Rioting erupted in Karachi during a Pakistani government crackdown on drugs and arms trafficking. Witnesses and hospital officials said at least 54 people were killed and about 310 injured during the ethnic unrest, which was sparked by police searches in Pathan neighborhoods.    ---   About 40,000 demonstrators gathered in Basel, Switzerland, and other communities along the Rhine River to protest pollution of the waterway, organizers said. Many of the protesters -- prompted by a series of toxic-chemical spills -- formed human chains to block bridges and obstruct traffic.    ---   Palestinian guerrillas refused to withdraw from positions captured in clashes with Shiite Moslem militiamen, scuttling a Lebanese peace plan proposed by Iran. The Shiite Amal militia had announced a cease-fire in the fighting in Beirut and southern Lebanon, but fighters loyal to the PLO's Arafat clung to their posts.    ---   A White House panel recommended increased use of state demonstration projects for changes in the welfare system. The task force on welfare overhaul, in a report to Reagan, said changes in the system shouldn't be proposed or supported &quot;unless locally tested, with evidence of reduced dependency.&quot;    ---   East German officials said the cause of Friday's crash of a Soviet airliner near East Berlin hasn't been determined. At least 69 of the 81 people aboard the Aeroflot jetliner died when the plane crashed upon its approach of Schoenefeld airport.    ---   Soviet experts will return to industrial projects in central Iran, including work at a steel mill and power plant in Iran's third largest city, newspapers in Tehran reported. The move followed high-level Soviet-Iranian economic talks last week.    ---   Vietnam is to open its sixth Communist Party congress in Hanoi today. Delegates are expected to approve broad economic policies and possible changes in the party's leadership. The four-day congress also is scheduled to review foreign policy, which led to Vietnam's war with Cambodia.    ---   Officials in China said students at a provincial university in Hefei, near Nanjing, will be allowed to nominate student candidates for the regional legislature. More than 1,000 students had protested what they called undemocratic election procedures. Several thousand students from other colleges had joined the protest. </TEXT></DOC>