<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880516-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Afghanistan: Not a Second Iran </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Kempe </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST MDEST </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> PESHAWAR, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Afghan resistance leader Gulbeddin Hekmatyar makes U.S. officials wonder whether the $2 billion of covert aid they funneled to the insurgents over the past eight years may end up merely substituting one sort of trouble for another.    Through the wild black thistle of his beard, he attacks the Reagan administration with venomous passion, charging that Washington conspires with Moscow against the rise of Islam in Afghanistan. Even his appearance is disturbing: His dark eyes are piercing darts, his turban is charcoal black, and he fingers white prayer beads in a manner so deliberate as to be disquieting.    As the Soviets retreat, U.S. officials worry that Mr. Hekmatyar, the most stringent fundamentalist among the Afghan resistance leaders, has emerged with the most disciplined, best armed and most ideologically committed supporters. Most unsettling is the prospect that Mr. Hekmatyar would seek to form a united Islamic front with Iran and Pakistan. The last thing the U.S. wants is for Iran to win more friends, especially ones that are armed to the teeth with U.S. and Soviet-supplied arms.    The U.S. officials worry too much. Mr. Hekmatyar is far less likely to seize power and create a fundamentalist regime than many nervous Washington pundits fear. And even if he does, Afghanistan's history of weak central governments and its moderate, Sunni tradition ensure that the country will never be a second Iran.    Any U.S. effort to stop Islam in Afghanistan would be futile, anyway. One of the most lasting changes brought by the war against the Soviets is an increase of Islamic consciousness in Afghanistan. Afghans have fought for eight years in Allah's name. For them, the war has been more a holy struggle, or &quot;jihad,&quot; against godless invaders than a simple nationalist conflict against the Soviets.    Commander Amin Wardak, not particularly fundamentalist himself, told this reporter in 1984 that he encouraged Islam among his troops because it motivated them best. And in the teeming refugee camps of Pakistan, religion has come to play a larger role than it did in pre-war Afghan villages. Mullahs have taken on greater importance in closer quarters where villagers have more problems.    Instead of resisting the rise of Islam in Afghanistan, the U.S. should seek to establish a healthy relationship with what surely will be the world's next Islamic regime. &quot;It could be a help if Moslems see, through Afghanistan, that America isn't necessarily their enemy,&quot; says Khrushid Ahmad, a Pakistani senator from the Jamiat-i-Islami Party and one of Mr. Hekmatyar's firmest backers.    A friendly, Islamic Afghanistan could serve Washington's interests well. Islam is the only stabilizing force in a country that will have little else to unify its feuding tribes once the Soviets leave. While a chaotic Afghanistan would provide far more opportunity for Soviet meddling, a relatively stable Islamic government would be a greater ideological challenge to Moscow. It could encourage greater Islamic consciousness among Soviet Moslems, who will constitute about 40% of the Soviet population by the year 2000.    As for Mr. Hekmatyar, his influence will decline when his party ceases being a conduit of weapons, and as more pragmatic guerrilla commanders gain political influence. He lacks a strong regional base. Moreover, Afghanistan is 90% Sunni, and Sunni clerics traditionally behave more like friendly and innocuous village priests than like politically motivated Iranian Shiite mullahs.    Supporting an Islamic government for Afghanistan certainly would improve Washington's credentials in the Moslem world. The war against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan marks the first time the U.S. so clearly has backed Islamic insurgents. Indeed, Washington has done a better job of picking friends in Afghanistan than even the Palestine Liberation Organization, which has cynically nurtured its relations with the Soviet puppet regime.    America's closest ally in the region, Pakistan, also is well-positioned to maintain beneficial ties with an emergent Islamic government in Afghanistan. For eight years, Pakistan has been gracious host to 3.2 million Afghan refugees. That could prompt an Islamic Afghan regime to mend a hundred-year feud over borders. A long history of each country trying to stir up unrest inside the other's borders also could be ended.    Mr. Hekmatyar already has given Pakistani President Zia-ul-Haq private promises that he would be a friendly neighbor. &quot;Pakistan and Iran are our true Islamic brotherly countries with whom our relations will have particular significance,&quot; Mr. Hekmatyar says.    Historical and religious tensions are likely to limit cooperation between Iran and an Islamic Afghanistan, though. For one thing, Iran has backed primarily Shiite guerrilla groups in the Hazara region of Afghanistan. These guerrillas have been the outcasts of the war, receiving little or no Western assistance. That has made Afghanistan's Shiites fruitful ground for Iran, but they number only 10% of the population.    Seeking to broaden its influence, Iran recently hosted a visit by Burhannudin Rabbani, who heads a Sunni resistance party that includes some of the best known and most successful commanders. Reagan administration analysts believe Mr. Rabbani is using Tehran and its weapons to gain greater leverage in his rivalry with Mr. Hekmatyar, who enjoys Pakistani backing. Mr. Rabbani is a Tajik who can speak Persian with the Iranians, while Mr. Hekmatyar hails from the larger Afghan tribe of Pathans, whose linguistic and cultural links are to Pakistan.    Of course, better relations with Afghanistan won't cure U.S. problems with fundamentalist Islam. As Daniel Pipes noted in Foreign Affairs last year, the BBC, Hollywood and the Riviera will always be a far greater threat to Islamic values than Radio Moscow, Soviet films or Crimean holidays. U.S. backing for Israel also remains an impediment. But Afghanistan does draw attention to the fact that the U.S. may be less of a threat to Islamic nations than Moscow, which colonized Islamic lands even before invading Afghanistan.    So, while Islamic fundamentalists may never consider the White House an ally, Mr. Ahmad of the Pakistani Senate argues, they needn't see the White House as an enemy either. &quot;You should decide whether you want clients or friends,&quot; he says. &quot;If you want clients, you are heading for disappointment. Either Iran is going to be an inspiration for Muslim youth, or Afghanistan {is}. It can't be the Washington model.&quot;    ---   Mr. Kempe is the Journal's diplomatic correspondent. </TEXT></DOC>