<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Banks Increasingly Sell Parts of Their Loan Portfolios---Credits Are Taken Off BooksAs Investors Buy Asset-Backed Securities---By Leonard M. ApcarStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BAC ONE RPT SPCBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><TEXT>   More and more banks are offering parts of their loan portfolios to investors in what is becoming one of the most popular bank balance sheet strategies in years.    Until recently, banks grew by making loans and keeping them on their books until borrowers paid them off. Now, some banks are reversing course and getting loans off their books by selling them.    What began with the sale of mortgage loans is spreading to the sale of auto loans, credit-card accounts and, in some cases, even a bank's worst loans.    About $10 billion in loan-backed securities were sold publicly last year, mostly by firms other than banks. But banks, securities firms and bank analysts say that is just the beginning, as an increasing number of banks are deciding whether to shed some loans. The sales aren't without risk to the investors, of course, and regulators are scrutinizing the offerings closely.    The strategy goes like this: Banks package some loans that they use to back a certificate or note. The income from the loans pays interest on the securities and -- because the bank receives a higher interest rate on the loans than it pays -- allows a profit for the bank, which continues to handle the loan record-keeping for the accounts. The bank wipes the loans off its books and uses the proceeds from the securities sale to make new loans. The loan sale also gives the bank additional room under regulatory capital-to-loan guidelines to make new loans.    &quot;If you can have a stream of income without tying up equity,&quot; Scott D. Jackson, a senior vice president at RepublicBank Corp. of Dallas, asks, &quot;why wouldn't you do that all day?&quot;    Last week, BankAmerica Corp. began a public offering of $400 million in credit-card-backed certificates, expected to mature in about two years, with a 6.95% yield. In January, RepublicBank's Delaware credit-card bank held the first public sale of $200 million in credit-card-backed notes, secured by nearly $240 million in balances outstanding of Visa and MasterCard accounts. The notes were quickly gobbled up by institutional investors that liked its 7.25% yield with an average three-year life. Other banks say they are considering following BankAmerica and RepublicBank.    The first public issue of asset-backed securities was about two years ago, when Sperry Corp. offered securities backed by computer leases. Soon after, the finance units of General Motors Corp. and Nissan Motor Co. flooded the market with securities backed by auto loans.    Pawning part of a bank portfolio was unthinkable only a few years ago. For generations, banks grew by booking more assets on their balance sheets; the greater the loan portfolio, the greater the bank's capacity for making loans and profits.    But banks are quickly becoming some of the most innovative players in the sale of asset-backed securities. They have the most diverse loan portfolios of any lenders. And because capital levels are set by government regulators, they are under pressure to invest carefully. &quot;The game has really shifted from asset size to capital management,&quot; says James J. McDermott Jr., a bank analyst with Keefe, Bruyette andamp; Woods Inc., New York.    A big reason for selling bank loans is to better use a bank's capital, the financial cushion that banks are required to have to protect deposits. In recent years, some big banks have had to scrape to maintain adequate capital levels. Only a few years ago, lower capital levels were permissible. But now, regulators view capital as a sign of a bank's strength and they require banks to maintain capital levels of at least 5.5% to 6% of a bank's assets.    In simplest terms, the capital rules mean that for every $100 in loans, a bank needs about $6 in capital coverage (which consists of a bank's shareholders' equity, loan-loss reserves, retained earnings, and other equity).    &quot;If they want to keep growing, they are going to run into capital constraints,&quot; says Saul Sanders, a Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. vice president. &quot;If you sell assets rather than hold them, it diminishes your need for capital,&quot; he adds.    Capital isn't cheap and raising it in the debt or stock markets may dilute the holdings of existing bank shareholders. Or, banking firms with stocks selling considerably below book value, such as BankAmerica and RepublicBank, may want to avoid issuing new stock now.    Asset-backed-securities sales have other advantages, too. They allow banks to match long-term loans with long-term funds. Instead of funding a four-year auto loan with certificates of deposit of a year or less, banks can raise the money to fund the loan with a longer-term note with a fixed interest rate. &quot;Banks with balance sheets under pressure are looking for ways to secure liquidity,&quot; says a Patricia Jehle, a Salomon Brothers Inc. director. And if deposits don't grow, the securities offering assures a funding source for the bank's loans, she says.    Before the RepublicBank offering, its credit-card receivables were funded with deposits raised mostly by its big Dallas bank, which like all banks, included a mix of time deposits with varying maturities. By raising funds for its credit-card loans with a securities sale, the credit-card operation has a fixed funding base for its credit-card loans and the big Dallas bank has more capacity to deal with the short-term funding needs of the rest of RepublicBank.    Security Pacific Corp. of Los Angeles is moving aggressively into asset-backed-securities sales for other reasons. In the past year, it sold more than $1 billion in mortgage-backed securities and it is weighing the possibility of offering securities tied to credit cards and auto loans.    It has been selling off its mortgages so that it can make more mortgage loans and take a larger share of the home lending market. By removing loans from its books and selling them, the bank figures it's lowering its overall cost of lending, thus allowing it to shave a quarter to one-half percentage point off a home loan. &quot;We want more velocity to our capital,&quot; says Frederick T. Waldeck, Security Pacific's executive vice president and managing director of the merchant bank group.    Under the old rules of banking, Mr. Waldeck says Security Pacific would have set a limit on how much of its loan portfolio would be set aside for mortgage lending. And when the bank reached that level, &quot;traditionally, we would have turned off our spigot,&quot; he says.    At first, bank regulators were skeptical of allowing banks to wipe the assets off their books. Their concern was that if the loans' borrowers defaulted, the investors who purchased the securities backed by the loans would seek damages from the bank. Thus, as long as the bank could be liable for losses from the loans, the loans had to remain on the books and had to be properly capitalized.    But last year, bank regulators gave the green light to selling bank loans for a privately placed offering of credit-card receivables for Banc One Corp. of Columbus, Ohio. In a ruling by the Federal Financial Institutions Examinations Council, an agency made up of bank regulators, the government ruled that banks can eliminate the loans through a securities sale so long as the asset-backed-securities investors haven't any recourse to the bank that first made the loans.    To ensure this, the Banc One offering and others that followed gave investors a cushion in a separate reserve fund, which was designed to help pay off investors should a portion of the borrowers default on their loans or credit-card balances. The reserve fund is injected with an initial amount of funds from the bank and funded regularly from the loan income. To provide more of a safety net, the offerings usually are backed by a letter of credit from a foreign bank -- which has fewer restrictions --for extra protection. The combination of the two usually earn a top rating for the offering from the debt rating concerns.    &quot;We believe that under any reasonable scenario, the investor won't take a loss,&quot; Craig J. Goldberg, a First Boston Corp. vice president, says. Over the years, most banks say that the loss rate on auto loans is less than 1% a year, and credit-card losses average between 3% and 4% annually. The reserve fund and a letter of credit together cover loss rates many times those levels.    Experts say that the next step is for banks to package home equity loans to back offerings of securities. And Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has designed an offering package that would allow a bank to sell its nonperforming loans to investors at a deep discount. Drexel believes that a banker might be willing to accept 50 cents on the dollar for a bad loan today instead of waiting for a higher percentage of the loan over 10 years. With 50 cents on the dollar now, the funds can be reinvested in such a way to allow the bank to recoup the total amount of the loan in fewer years, Drexel says, plus an amount to cover the charge to capital for writing down the bad loans.    Selling off the past-due loans now could help a bank avoid a loan-loss disaster later, Charles W. Peabody, a Drexel analyst, says. But, he adds, &quot;politically, it is very difficult for a bank to accept. For them to do this, they have to admit that they made bad loans, and that is a bad political pill to swallow.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>