<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880713-0142 </DOCNO><HL> Sanctions Work, but Only If Hard and Fast </HL><AUTHOR> Alan Tonelson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   America's humiliation in Panama has yielded lessons as self-serving for the critics as they are useless to policy makers, who cannot permit the status quo to continue. What the failure to oust Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega shows is not, as liberals argue, that superpowers can no longer dictate to client states, and that only by working with regional countries can the U.S. achieve its objectives.    And the Panama fiasco does not show that military force is Washington's only reliable foreign-policy tool, as some conservatives maintain. Nor does it prove, as other voices on both sides have argued, that &quot;sanctions don't work.&quot; Instead, the lesson of Panama is that sanctions don't work if they are imposed timidly in order to split the differences among flatly contradictory goals.    Across-the-board sanctions are still much likelier to dump Gen. Noriega and reduce Panamanian government involvement in drug trafficking than any alternative suggested thus far. Public Latin American criticism of U.S. pressure and even gestures of support for Noriega reveal the regional, multilateral approach to be a non-starter. And whatever its merits, overthrowing Gen. Noriega militarily maybe is beyond the political pale short of an immediate threat to the Panama Canal or the Americans stationed there.    More important, with a stranglehold over Panama's currency and dominance of its foreign trade, the U.S. has more than enough power to get rid of Gen. Noriega without sending in the Marines. Sanctions failed only because, for all the bluster from Washington, overthrowing Gen. Noriega was never America's only goal in Panama.    From the start, Washington had two other objectives. First, it sought to avoid offending Latin American opinion by following the lead of the Panamanian opposition and its Washington lawyers, who devised the plan to dry up the country's supply of dollars. Deferring to their judgment that relatively mild measures could trigger a successful anti-Noriega revolution, the administration refrained from tougher sanctions, such as a full trade embargo. Second, the U.S. has tried to squeeze Panama's economy without destroying it, both to spare ordinary Panamanians further suffering and to permit recovery once Gen. Noriega goes.    For a time, the balancing act seemed effective. And economic chaos seemed to be hurting Panamanians just enough to spark protests strong enough to topple the dictator. With even the military growing restive, Gen. Noriega's rapid exit seemed certain.    Yet Latin American opposition to U.S. policy grew despite Washington's cooperation with the Panamanian opposition. This past March 29, 22 Latin states ranging politically from Cuba to Chile criticized U.S. economic pressure and pledged to consider Panamanian aid requests. In May, a Caribbean basin conclave endorsed similar positions. Just as important, U.S. humanitarian concerns for Panamanians' welfare clashed with the plan to foment revolution by creating economic chaos. For the more tolerable the Panamanians found life, the less likely they would be to rise up in anger.    Ultimately, conflicting goals led the administration to impose sanctions much too gradually. U.S. pressure started smartly enough in 1987, when bilateral aid was halted after a former aide's claims about Gen. Noriega's crimes touched off major disturbances in Panama. But even without drug profits, the $26 million affected was dwarfed by other public and private flows of U.S., multilateral, Western European and Japanese resources into Panama -- including aid, trade, investment, loans and user fees for the Panama Canal.    Worse, the next U.S. sanctions didn't come until last March, after Gen. Noriega dumped his handpicked president, Eric Arturo Delvalle. But after Washington froze Panamanian government funds in U.S. banks, created an escrow account for canal fees and withdrew trade preferences for Panamanian products, another month passed before step three: the halting of all payments to Gen. Noriega's regime by U.S. citizens, corporations or their Panamanian subsidiaries. Yet U.S. trade with and corporate activity in Panama continues, as do most flows from non-U.S. sources.    Ever since the late nuclear strategist Herman Kahn described how escalation works in theory, U.S. leaders have been enamored with the idea of slowly turning up the screws on adversaries until America's boundless power either cracks them or cows them. But as Vietnam revealed 20 years ago, and as Panama has just demonstrated, in real life gradualness only confounds escalatory strategies. Above all, it gives the target time to absorb each blow and prepare for the next. Thus, Gen. Noriega has had the chance to hit foreign businesses for early tax payments, tap Panamanian assets in Europe, seek external aid from abroad and even beef up his armories.    The way to topple Gen. Noriega economically was to knock him completely off balance with a sanctions blitz that would have made the Panamanian economy scream (as the Nixon administration tried to do to Salvador Allende's Chile). If President Reagan still wants to force him out -- and Gen. Noriega's drug trafficking makes this imperative -- he should embargo Panama completely and immediately, and urge other countries to follow suit. West European and Japanese cooperation shouldn't be impossible to secure; the Panamanian market is small change for them, and they might welcome a low-cost opportunity to curry American favor.    The administration could more easily construct an international anti-Noriega coalition -- including some Latin American states -- if it made clear that halting drug peddling, not imposing democracy, is its prime concern. After all, Panama has never known democracy, and most hemispheric governments stifle political freedoms as well. Moreover, focusing on drug dealing might convince those Panamanian officers not involved that ousting Gen. Noriega is the military's best hope of retaining political control. Washington should also announce that the Panama Canal treaties are on ice as long as Panama is run by a drug pusher.    If U.S. allies don't cooperate, ousting Gen. Noriega may require blockading Panama. Panama's trading partners would cry &quot;foul,&quot; but it is more important for Washington to stop the resources of a sovereign state from being used to poison Americans. If Gen. Noriega somehow survives these measures, further military moves will have to be considered. But in the event that the public demurs, the damage done by total sanctions may still make other foreign populations think twice about letting drug pushers hold political power.    A tougher anti-Noriega policy need not launch a new round of U.S. meddling abroad or even a global anti-drug crusade. Many governments involved in crimes against Americans will always remain outside America's reach. But the U.S. has the right and the power to stop Gen. Noriega's aggression against its youth and inner cities. Continuing the current policy of waffling is a confession that, for all America's squawking, official drug trafficking is something we can live with.    ---   Mr. Tonelson is writing a book for The Twentieth Century Fund on redefining U.S. foreign-policy interests. </TEXT></DOC>