<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: History of Line-Item Veto </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   In recent months, Journal editorials and columns have promoted the line-item veto as a solution to the increasingly serious federal budget deficit. These proposals have included spurious references to constitutional history.    Forrest McDonald (editorial page, March 7) asserts that the Framers of the Constitution intended to create an item veto from the beginning. This position is untenable. Leaders of the American Revolution saw the veto as the instrument of a despot. In justifying rebellion, the Declaration of Independence cites the king's refusal to &quot;Assent to Laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.&quot; So repulsive was this power, that America's first attempt at national government, the Articles of Confederation, contained no executive veto.    Recognizing that they had gone too far in rejecting central authority, the leaders of our young nation reassembled at the Constitutional Convention to fashion a new form of government. Prof. McDonald argues that the Framers were trying to reintroduce the English veto system, which he also claims included the item veto. No recorded discussion at the convention can be found to support this position. Quite to the contrary, the Framers set out to design something uniquely American.    Moreover, no president has ever assumed he had item-veto authority -- although many have asked for it. President Grant, who first advocated it at the national level, came to the idea not from the Constitutional Convention of 1787, but rather from the Confederate Constitution of 1861. The item veto is a revolutionary idea, but its advocates are citing the wrong revolution.    Stephen Glazier in his March 18 editorial-page article also maintains that the president always has had something similar to the item veto masquerading under the label of &quot;impoundment.&quot; This argument raises impoundment to a level out of proportion to its historic role. Because of the congressional practice of voting lumpsum appropriations, the president has some limited latitude in determining when and occasionally whether to expend certain appropriations. This power to impound was used narrowly, often when circumstances changed after enactment.    Richard Nixon attempted to expand impoundment into a new tool of presidential power. Congress responded with the Impoundment Control Act of 1974, which formalized the president's ability to influence post-enactment spending by granting him two techniques -- deferral and rescission. Because of the Supreme Court's decision in INS v. Chadha, deferral is no longer available. But the president still has rescission, which Mr. Reagan has made little use of in recent years. Mr. Reagan's exercise of the regular veto also has been very limited. The president's three vetoes in 1987 gave him one of the lowest single-year veto records in the 20th century.    Mr. Reagan has never proposed a balanced budget. He uses his current veto and rescission authority only sparingly. Before the president is given an additional tool such as the item veto, shouldn't he first be expected to use his existing powers more effectively?    The item-veto debate is not about fiscal responsibility. The real issue is the impact on the balance of power between the president and Congress. The item veto has not been effective in reducing state government expenditures. Its main use is to enhance the governor's role in shaping public policy. The same result can be expected at the federal level and that is the reason presidents as different as Franklin Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan have supported the item veto. The debate needs to focus on this central issue. All else is dangerous distraction.    Honesty compels us to recognize that deficits cannot be cured by structural tinkering. The item veto will not produce fiscal responsibility. That can only come as the result of old-fashioned political leadership.    Calvin Bellamy   President and CEO   Calumet National Bank   Hammond, Ind.</TEXT></DOC>