<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881109-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Shaky Mandate: Bush's Clear Victory, Less Than Resounding, Bodes Conflict Ahead --- Heavily Democratic Congress Suggests Big Tug of War; Cabinet Takes Shape Soon --- Will Darman Get Budget Job? </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Perry and Gerald F. Seib (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Republican George Bush held on against a late surge by Democrat Michael Dukakis for a clear electoral victory but missed rolling up a massive triumph in the popular vote.    Mr. Dukakis, campaigning finally with fervor, managed a respectable showing by recent Democratic standards, carrying such varied states as New York, Oregon, Minnesota and Wisconsin. With returns still incomplete, it looked as though Mr. Bush would win about 53% to 54% of the popular vote and pile up 350 or more electoral votes. He needed 270. By contrast, President Reagan in 1984 won 59% of the popular vote and 525 electoral votes.    Mr. Bush and his running mate, Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana, will take office without a mandate or a strong signal that voters are enamored of Republican policies. Those same voters sent another key signal by leaving Congress solidly in the hands of the Democrats. Mr. Bush won this election without any coattails.    The Democrats' improved performance in the presidential election -- Mr. Dukakis carried more states than the party's standard-bearer in either 1980 or 1984 -- and their powerful showing in the Congressional elections may force the new administration to move with caution on Capitol Hill.    Although the Democrats avoided the drubbing they had been expecting, they have now lost five of the last six presidential elections.    Mr. Dukakis conceded defeat at his campaign headquarters in Boston at 11:20 p.m., saying he had called Mr. Bush in Houston to congratulate him on his victory. He compared the campaign to the Boston Marathon. &quot;We reached Heartbreak Hill and then we found the strength to make that final kick.&quot; The headquarters crowd interrupted him with chants of &quot;'92. '92.&quot;    In Austin, Texas, Mr. Dukakis's running mate, Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, declared the Democratic ticket &quot;waged a campaign that's worthy of the American people. We told you the truth and we stepped up to those issues.&quot; Mr. Bentsen was able to manage a celebration of his own: He was easily re-elected to the Senate.    Moments later, Mr. Bush appeared before his supporters in Houston to respond to his victory. &quot;We can now speak the most important words a democracy can offer,&quot; he said. &quot;The people have spoken.&quot; He complimented Mr. Dukakis and his &quot;valiant family&quot; for waging a good fight and vowed he would do his &quot;level best&quot; to reach out and work with the Democratic Congress.    The battle for the presidency was fought, finally, in the nation's heartland, and it was close. There, the bad news for Mr. Dukakis began to unfold as networks projected that Ohio, scene of a bitter campaign fight, would fall to Mr. Bush. Soon, Michigan followed.    Even though he fell somewhat short of a resounding mandate, Mr. Bush now seems ready to move quickly in other ways to put a personal stamp on his administration. Aides say they expect Mr. Bush to promptly announce some of his top appointees so they can begin moving the government from the Reagan administration to the Bush administration.    Mr. Bush, who has scheduled a press conference for this morning in Houston, may move as early as today, some Bush aides said last night. He may name his director of the Office of Management and Budget and perhaps either his chief of staff or director of his transition before leaving for a Florida vacation, the aides said.    The likely choice for OMB director, Bush aides say, is Richard Darman, former deputy Treasury secretary and a protege of one of Mr. Bush's closest friends, former Treasury Secretary James Baker. Mr. Darman, who also served under Mr. Baker on the Reagan White House staff, is a shrewd bureaucratic operator who emerged over the last few months as one of the Bush campaign's principal advisers. Mr. Darman is viewed as a pragmatist acceptable to conservatives.    The choice for White House chief of staff is less clear. Mr. Bush's current chief of staff is Craig Fuller, a low-key former Reagan White House aide. He has been Mr. Bush's constant traveling companion throughout the year-and-a-half campaign. Mr. Bush's aides say the vice president has grown so comfortable with Mr. Fuller's unflappable style that he may name him to the job.    But some Bush aides think the vice president needs a more senior man than the 37-year-old Mr. Fuller, who some fear may lack the stature to forcefully carry out the president's orders. Conservatives favor New Hampshire Gov. John Sununu, who was instrumental in helping Mr. Bush win the crucial New Hampshire primary. Some aides say Bush pollster and political confidant Robert Teeter may be considered, or Mr. Bush could turn to Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, a longtime friend, in the unlikely event he decides against leaving Mr. Brady at Treasury.    Whoever he chooses, Mr. Bush himself is now at center stage. The road to the White House was never supposed to be easy for him. When he entered the race, he was widely seen as a vice president who spent most of his time going to state funerals. He could boast of no compelling record of accomplishment in any of the many offices he has held, from congressman to GOP national chairman to United Nations ambassador to director of the Central Intelligence Agency. A national magazine asked in its cover story if, in fact, he was a &quot;wimp.&quot;    Tough, hard-hitting Sen. Robert Dole of Kansas, the experts said, would be more than the aristocratic Mr. Bush could handle in the primaries. And, indeed, Mr. Dole won the first event on the election calendar, the sub-zero caucuses in Iowa in January. Mr. Bush, who had beaten President Reagan in these same caucuses in 1980, came in third, also running behind evangelical preacher Pat Robertson.    Mr. Bush, at that point, was supposed to &quot;implode&quot; -- fall apart under pressure from Mr. Dole. Instead, Mr. Bush moved on to New Hampshire in February and took the fight straight to Mr. Dole. It was Mr. Dole who seemed to begin the process of &quot;implosion.&quot; Mr. Bush won the New Hampshire primary and moved on to Super Tuesday in March and to southern states, where he was always favored as the logical heir to Mr. Reagan, a folk hero in that part of the nation. Mr. Bush swept to victory in 16 of the 17 states at stake, and all but wrapped up the nomination.    What people generally overlooked is that Mr. Bush is a tenacious campaigner, working with a bulging treasury, the best team of strategists in either party and a workable campaign roadmap.    And throughout, Mr. Bush stuck to his own internal clock, refusing early entreaties from aides that he separate himself more clearly from President Reagan and the Iran-Contra scandal. He insisted instead that he would continue to act as vice president until Mr. Reagan passed the torch to him at the Republican convention in August, and campaign as his own man thereafter.    &quot;People always wanted him to change his pace,&quot; says New Hampshire Gov. Sununu, an early Bush supporter. By sticking to his pace, Gov. Sununu says, Mr. Bush turned President Reagan into an enthusiast. The result, Mr. Sununu says, is &quot;we got an outgoing president who was very comfortable with him.&quot;    The Democrats' nomination campaign was a lot messier.    Next to Rev. Jesse Jackson, a political force of his own, the best-known candidate early in that race was former Colorado Sen. Gary Hart, but he was forced to withdraw in 1987 in the face of widespread reports of marital infidelity (he returned to the race in 1988, but was never again a serious factor).    The race was almost more distinguished by the Democrats who were not running than by the ones who were. On the sidelines were Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York and Sens. Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Sam Nunn of Georgia. Instead, the field was made up of candidates such as Gov. Dukakis, Sens. Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee and Paul Simon of Illinois, former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona and Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri. &quot;Dwarfs,&quot; the pundits said.    By Super Tuesday, when Mr. Bush had just about wrapped up the GOP nomination, the Democrats were still in disarray -- with Mr. Jackson, the most liberal candidate in the race, winning hands down on charisma, though trailing Mr. Dukakis by a handful of delegates.    The Democratic race was such a blur that some observers speculated no one would be able to wrap up the nomination by the end of the primary season.    But Mr. Dukakis had been underrated, too. He also turned out to be a tenacious foe, cool and skilled in debate and more adept than anyone else at raising cash to pay the bills, month after month. Mr. Dukakis staggered to victory, with Mr. Jackson in second place.    His campaign reached its high-water mark at the party convention in Atlanta, when he was introduced to a nation that still knew little about him. Mr. Dukakis's speech accepting his party's nomination was his best speech of the year. Some polls showed him surging to a 17-point lead over Mr. Bush.    But then, he went home to Massachusetts, devoting much of his time to routine state house duties instead of focusing on the campaign. Mr. Bush wasted no time in opening an attack on the governor for being just another in a long line of liberal Democratic politicians out of touch with the American mainstream.    It wasn't until the last 10 days of the campaign that Mr. Dukakis did what his advisers had been urging for months -- he came out fighting, as a class-conscious, meat-and-potatoes Democrat. And, to an extent, the strategy was succeeding. Finally, his position in the polls began to improve.    In the last hours of the campaign, as Mr. Dukakis crisscrossed the country hour after hour without sleep, both he and his senior advisers began to feel better about what they had accomplished. They had almost erased the despair they had felt three weeks earlier.    John Sasso, the campaign manager, insisted as the campaign aircraft logged its final miles that the Dukakis campaign still had a chance. &quot;We have to thread the needle,&quot; he said. The ticket had to win five big states. &quot;It's an inside straight,&quot; he reasoned. &quot;But sometimes people buy inside straights.&quot; On Tuesday, however, it didn't happen. </TEXT></DOC>