<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870615-0044 </DOCNO><HL> Australian Beer Baron's Property BingeIn Hong Kong Arouses Some Skepticism---By John BerthelsenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST CCIREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><DATELINE> HONG KONG  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Australian beer baron Alan Bond, the man who took the America's Cup away from the Americans for four years, seems to be taking real-estate deals away from Hong Kong's wheeler-dealers these days. But some people are questioning if, this time around, the results are worth celebrating.    Peter G. Lucas, managing director of Mr. Bond's fast-growing Hong Kong empire, Bond Corp. International Ltd., harbors no such doubts. To hear him tell it, seven-month-old Bond International beat out a horde of investors in February to buy an eye-catching office building in Hong Kong's Central business district for 1.9 billion Hong Kong dollars ($243.6 million), held it for three months and then sold half of it to a Japanese partner for a handsome profit.    &quot;We knew what to do,&quot; boasts Mr. Lucas. &quot;It was difficult, but we put it together when nobody else could. We spend a few months putting a few more glass panels on the building, and we sell half of it for 128 million dollars in profit.&quot;    Not everybody is so enthusiastic about Bond International, though. Market analysts acknowledge that the brash Australian group has pulled off at least one coup since it was formed in October: the purchase of the 1.4 billion dollar Hongkong Land Co. residential portfolio that same month. But they say the subsequent 1.4 billion-dollar purchase of a 23.7% stake in the HK-TVB Ltd. television-and-media company from the Shaw Brothers media empire may have been based on questionable strategy.    As for the glass-facade office complex on which the Australian tycoon has hung his name -- calling it Bond Center -- they say he may have paid too much money for the two towers, currently under construction.    So, while Mr. Bond's admirers view him as a financial genius, his detractors say he has overextended his empire through dubious purchases that now must be paid off at a time of higher interest rates.    They note other signs that things aren't going all that well for him. In the process of raising his stake in Hong Kong, Mr. Bond raised a few eyebrows when he was forced into a public apology by the Hong Kong attorney general for publicly overstating the net asset value of Bond International's Hong Kong properties. Now, his attempt to raise money through a 1.53 billion dollar rights issue is faltering, and Bond International's share price, which hit 5.3 dollars (68 U.S. cents) on Jan. 13, has slumped to about two dollars in a bull market.    There also is concern in the financial community that Mr. Bond's operations are having trouble maintaining good relations with banks and other institutions. In February, Wardley Ltd., the merchant-banking subsidiary of Hongkong andamp; Shanghai Banking Corp., and Jardine Fleming Holdings Ltd. backed away from underwriting a Bond International rights issue. In addition, a director of Citicorp International Ltd., the Hong Kong-based subsidiary of Citicorp, says privately that the New York-based financial giant won't do business with Bond companies, although he won't go into details.    Mr. Lucas says the Citicorp controversy &quot;goes back a long, long time,&quot; to when Mr. Bond's Australian operations &quot;tended to be highly geared on properties that weren't income-producing.&quot; That situation, he says, has changed, and Mr. Bond is wooing Citibank again.    Bond Center has become the latest lightning rod for criticism, with skeptics asking whether it is as attractive a proposition as Bond International claims. The ground floor of the twin-tower complex just outside the Central business district is nearly surrounded by thoroughfares that pedestrians can't easily navigate, they note. And there isn't any parking on the site.    So far, Bond Center has no committed tenants, although Bond International's property agent says he has serious offers for at least half of the building's space when it is finished late this year. Critics say it faces stiff competition from Pacific Place, the mammoth development that Swire Pacific Ltd. is putting up nearby.    &quot;I can tell you that when you've got a million square feet to fill, it takes a long time to do it at 3,000 square feet at a time,&quot; says a property analyst.    Certainly, Mr. Bond -- who faced immediate payments to his bankers of hundreds of millions of dollars -- had difficulty in finding a partner to help pick up the debt load, bankers and other businessmen in Hong Kong say. Harunori Takahashi, principal shareholder of Tokyo-based EIE Development Co. and a partner with Bond International in other ventures, considered undertaking a joint venture at the Bond Center site in February, then backed away, Mr. Lucas acknowledges.    After several months of wooing other prospective buyers, Mr. Bond returned to Mr. Takahashi in April and persuaded him to buy in. Neither Mr. Takahashi's representatives nor Mr. Bond's will say whether Bond International substantially dropped the price of Mr. Takahashi's share in the final purchase.    Mr. Takahashi &quot;is just like us,&quot; says Mr. Lucas. &quot;He is expansionary, quietly aggressive.&quot;    Few analysts question the impressiveness of Mr. Bond's first Hong Kong transaction, made through Bond Corp. International Holdings, the Australia-based parent company, of 19 pieces of prime residential real estate for 1.4 billion dollars. Mr. Bond announced that the property would form the nucleus of his Hong Kong-based company and demonstrate his long-term commitment to the British colony, which is to revert to Chinese rule in 1997.    Many in the local financial world say the purchase of the Hongkong Land portfolio by Bond was brilliant because Bond got the properties so cheap-near the bottom of Hong Kong's property market, which has since turned upward with a vengeance. David S. Davies, a Bond International director and its property agent, estimates residential prices have appreciated by more than 25% since Bond purchased the portfolio. So far, Bond International has sold off an additional 213 million dollars in property, which is 22 million dollars in excess of the aggregate valuation of the parcels when Bond bought them.    That ability to act fast and make a profit, Mr. Lucas says, has inspired a good deal of envy in the business world that has contributed to Bond's problems here. </TEXT></DOC>