<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880921-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Nuclear Medicine for Energy Ills </HL><AUTHOR> John Sillin </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> NUK UTI PET LNG </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   The U.S. is stumbling toward another energy crisis thanks to public policies that discourage utilities from investing in new electric generating facilities, particularly nuclear ones.    Four years ago on this page John Siegel of the U.S. Council for Energy Awareness and I raised the prospect of an electricity shortage before the end of the decade. We thought it would be caused by: 1) increases in demand for electricity of 4% to 5% a year between 1982 and 1990 (roughly twice industry forecasts), due to sustained economic growth and falling electricity prices; and 2) few commitments to new electricity supply. Recent developments show our predictions were very close to the mark.    Last year, electricity demand rose 4.5% in the U.S.; it is growing at a higher rate this year. Assuming a continuation of this trend for the rest of 1988, annual demand growth will have averaged 3.7% since 1982. These increases reflect real economic growth averaging 3.8% over the same period. Electricity prices, adjusted for inflation, will have declined by more than 15% between 1982 and the end of this year. By 1990 they will have declined by 20% due to stable fuel costs and improved utility operating efficiencies.    Growth in electricity demand would have been even higher in the past six years had manufacturing not contributed so little to economic growth in 1985 and 1986, when industrial electricity usage fell 4%. This situation has changed, and industrial production rose more than 4% in 1987 and is increasing at a 7% rate this year; electricity demand growth has outpaced GNP growth over the past 18 months. Positive economic conditions should continue and, with continued electricity price declines, should sustain 4%-plus growth in electricity demand through the early 1990s. The implications are ominous.    First, any surplus of electricity will disappear by 1990. As a result, a new electricity supply is needed. During the 1990s, the U.S. power network will need to expand 30% to 50%. This is roughly equivalent to adding 60 large power plants a year. Because such plants have lead times of between five and 10 years, there will be years of inadequate supplies and the economy may suffer increasingly severe economic disruption.    Given the lack of alternatives, utilities will be forced to increase their use of oil to generate electricity. This increase from about half a million barrels a day in 1987 to between two million and three million barrels a day by 1995 will increase both the trade deficit and U.S. dependence on the unstable Persian Gulf. If acid rain and the greenhouse effect turn out to be real, this increased fossil-fuel use will exacerbate them.    What is being done?    In the early 1980s, the reigning assumption that electricity demand would be low contributed to regulatory policies that discouraged utilities from investing in conventional coal and nuclear generating plants. State regulators did not allow utilities adequate financial return on new plants, and many utilities still don't know how much return will be allowed on plants currently operating. Frequently utilities with new nuclear plants have had to cut or discontinue dividends, and one has declared bankruptcy. While overall corporate profits rose 20% in the second quarter and energy sales increased, utility profits declined 20%.    Utilities are directed by state regulators to pursue a planning approach that emphasizes demand-control programs and energy purchases from small third parties. This approach doesn't fit today's situation.    Demand growth is not easily controlled during a robust economy. Electricity uses are too numerous to count, and new ones are being developed all the time. And there simply are not enough small, third-party sources of electricity to meet high growth in demand. Energy from such sources accounts for about 1.5% of U.S. electricity supplies -- despite 10 years of subsidies and guaranteed markets.    The results of these policies are apparent. This summer, voltage cuts and load curtailments occurred along most of the Eastern Seaboard and parts of the Midwest. Next summer, brownouts will reappear, becoming more chronic and increasingly severe.    Electric utilities are responding to the strains by attempting to purchase power, as in the New England utilities' efforts to import Canadian electricity. This works as long as sellers outnumber buyers, but many utilities are already short of capacity and by 1990 there will be little power available for purchase anywhere. Also, U.S. utilities are buying combustion turbines fueled with oil and natural gas -- quick to install, costly to operate. The industry pursued this option in the 1960s in response to brownouts; the oil shocks of the 1970s demonstrated the risks inherent in this approach.    What needs to be done? Re-establish nuclear power as an option to meet increased electricity demand. This is the path that most other industrial countries are following. Nuclear energy satisfies more than 70% of France's electricity needs, 66% of Belgium's, 53% of South Korea's, 50% of Taiwan's, 45% of Sweden's, 38% of Switzerland's, and 30% of Japan's and West Germany's. (By contrast, only 18% of electricity needs in the U.S. are supplied by nuclear power.) In addition, these and other industrialized countries are proceeding with the installation of large, advanced reactors, frequently of U.S. design.    These countries have successful nuclear programs because plants there can be built much more expeditiously, and thus at much less cost, than those in the U.S. Also, actual usage as a percentage of potential output is about 75% -- compared with about 65% in the U.S., where the average is dragged down by about a dozen plants that are underperforming or closed.    What can be done to make nuclear power as successful in the U.S. as it is overseas? First, basic reforms can be made to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which has authority over licensing nuclear plants for construction and operation. The NRC should be governed by a single administrator (versus the existing five commissioners), whose job would be to ensure that all nuclear plants are built and operated safely. The licensing process often becomes politicized because no single commissioner has sufficient authority to set policy and direct staff activities.    Second, the NRC should approve standard nuclear-plant designs. After approval, each plant of such design would not have to undergo the current licensing process, which can take several years. Third, legislation allowing for one-step licensing should be passed. Currently, utilities must first get a construction permit to build a plant, and then an operating permit once construction has been completed. This can result in delays, and a utility has no assurance the plant will be allowed to operate even after construction is completed. One-step licensing would reduce the delays and eliminate the uncertainty by addressing plant design, construction and operating issues at the outset.    There already have been a few steps in the right direction.    The Senate has passed and the House is considering measures that, while not perfect, would improve the structure of the NRC and allow for standardized plants. Also, there have been a few recent decisions on emergency planning that have been favorable toward nuclear power. These measures would prevent irresponsible state politicians from holding multibillion-dollar nuclear projects hostage, as happened at Seabrook and Shoreham. An executive order that covers much the same ground awaits the president's signature.    The nuclear utilities themselves have established the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, whose objective is to encourage operational excellence at all U.S. nuclear plants. For example, INPO has identified and established performance targets to be used by plant managers. It monitors progress in meeting these targets by reviewing plant operations, maintenance and training activities. And while the institute has no official enforcement authority, it is not hesitant to recommend strong corrective action when there are deficiencies.    Utilities have taken several other steps to improve plant management. Utility chief executive officers have become more directly involved in nuclear-plant management, and utilities have separated nuclear operations from the rest of their companies in recognition of the special skills required. Utilities that can't operate nuclear plants to high standards are subject to pressure from fellow institute members to make necessary improvements or divest themselves of the nuclear assets.    The NRC is cooperating in this by allowing transfers of nuclear plant operating licenses. There have been few such transfers so far, but they may become more frequent given that there are about a dozen closed or underperforming plants and that the reliability of the electricity supply is deteriorating.    Some other steps are needed. Rate-regulation policies need to reflect the greater financial risk associated with investing in plants with low operating costs, such as nuclear and large coal projects, by allowing higher rates of return on investment. Second, investors in large power projects should not be subject to onerous regulations from which small projects are exempt, particularly the Public Utilities Holding Company Act. This gives small power projects an unfair competitive advantage and discourages investor risk-taking.    The nation's economic health is at risk if the U.S. fails to develop new electricity supplies. Nuclear power must play a greater role, but this requires government policies that encourage new investment and a nuclear industry performing at the highest standards of excellence.    ---   Mr. Sillin is a consultant with Management Analysis Co. and Science Concepts Inc., energy service and advisory firms. </TEXT></DOC>