<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870402-0082 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Beyond Baby M</HL><DD> 04/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Judge Harvey R. Sorkow carefully reasoned his way through the Baby M case and came up with the expected answer: that little Melissa will be the legal daughter of her father, William Stern, and his wife, Elizabeth, rather than her natural mother, Mary Beth Whitehead.    We have no intention of second-guessing Judge Sorkow, who had very little precedent to work with on the subject of surrogate motherhood. Lawyers for the Sterns argued sanctity of contract -- they had contracted to pay Mrs. Whitehead $10,000 to produce the baby. Lawyers for Mrs. Whitehead argued that the contract was invalid, since it is illegal under New Jersey law to sell a child, a principle supported by laws throughout the country. Judge Sorkow ruled that this point did not apply because Baby M was Mr. Stern's &quot;biological genetically related child.&quot;    Mrs. Whitehead will appeal; her sympathizers ask why she should be legally deprived of a baby that is biologically and genetically as much hers as it is Mr. Stern's. The judge said his decision was based on the welfare of the child, and complained about Mrs. Whitehead's behavior. But we find little reason to suspect she was motivated by anything other than the motherhood instinct. It is a powerful instinct indeed, and should be.    The case has obviously troubled the public, with strong sympathies on both sides. We ourselves, as devoted as anyone to free markets, are troubled by attempts to reduce a fundamental biological function of the human species to the level of contract law. Therein, we think, lies the primary lesson of the Baby M case.    Public policy in the U.S. for a good many years now has been aimed, perhaps unconsciously, at trivializing a basic natural force -- procreation. Sexual acts become nothing more than a means of gratification in the popular culture. Abortion becomes a &quot;right&quot; in public debate. Public support for unwed mothers becomes an entitlement defended by a large welfare bureaucracy. And now, we have lawyers earning very large incomes by arranging contracts between childless couples and young women who are willing to be impregnated with the husband's sperm, bear children and collect a fee for their services.    Those in our society who raise objections to all of these practices are brushed off by sophisticates as prudes or reactionaries. While the sophisticates have held sway for years now, we detect, not least in the soul-searching over the Baby M case, a rising level of concern among reasonable people over some of the outcomes of abandoning traditional ideas about sex and procreation.    One way to ponder those attitudes is to lay aside the new topic of surrogate motherhood and take up the old topic of adoption, a clear alternative for childless couples. Mothers offering children for adoption sometimes have misgivings and second thoughts, of course, just as Mary Beth Whitehead did. But at least the adoptive parents normally play no part in enticing the mother into her predicament. And the popularity of surrogate motherhood in part reflects not only the ability to perpetuate the father's genes, but also the declining number of adoptions.    According to the National Committee for Adoption, which represents agencies, a 1982 survey (the latest available) found that there were only 50,720 adoptions of unrelated children in the U.S. The committee identified some two million couples of childbearing age consulting infertility specialists, and that would be only a part of the large numbers of couples who want to adopt. In short, there is a huge imbalance between the number of people who want to adopt and the number of adoptable children.    Now why is that? Many reasons. Women postponing childbirth in favor of careers, thus risking reduced fertility. The ready option of abortion available to unwed mothers. The availability of welfare to unwed mothers who choose to bear and keep children. The reduced availability of maternity homes for young women who might prefer childbirth and adoption to abortion. Objections by social workers to inter-racial adoptions. And finally, the sheer red tape in adoption laws that are designed to prevent any mistake.    William Pierce, president of the National Committee on Adoption, believes that public policy has neglected childbirth and adoption because of a bias within the social-services community in favor of existing systems that serve the interests of large bureaucracies. Yet, providing maternity and adoption services to a mother would be far cheaper than providing welfare services to her and her child.    In the Baby M case we are dealing with one corner of the enormous complexity surrounding the most fundamental of human drives and instincts. That is no doubt why it has generated so much emotion and contention. If it causes U.S. society to reflect more seriously on our views toward sex, family and child welfare, the controversy over Baby M will have yielded an important public service. </TEXT></DOC>