<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0096 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><DATELINE> AUSTIN, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If you should need a list of 638 personality traits, 58 ways in which elephants resemble stars or 45,540 what-if questions about toxins, Patrick Gunkel is your man.    Mr. Gunkel is inventing a new field, which he calls ideonomy. Simply described, it is a computerized spinning of ideas. But Mr. Gunkel defines it in grander terms -- as nothing less than &quot;the science of the laws of ideas and of the application of such laws to the generation of all possible ideas in connection with any subject, idea or thing.&quot; All ideas? On anything? Mr. Gunkel often sounds so far out, one doesn't know quite what to make of him. But his notions intrigue just about everyone who knows of them.    &quot;He has provocative ideas on artificial intelligence,&quot; says Edward Fredkin, the former director of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's computer science laboratory. &quot;He has encyclopedic scope,&quot; says Frederick Seitz, the president emeritus of Rockefeller University. Adds Robert Clark, a Harvard University law professor, &quot;Gunkel is undoubtedly the most interesting person I've ever met.&quot;    The 40-year-old Mr. Gunkel flunked out of high school and never attended college. But supported by occasional research grants, he has wandered for 20 years among universities and think tanks, following his nose from subject to subject and acquiring an astonishing breadth of knowledge. Ask him about black holes, economic cycles or pigs with wings, and he will discourse on the subject at length. He has recorded all this learning in the form of lists.    In fact, heaps of them litter his apartment here. There are lists of odors, newly coined words, diseases and brain functions. There are lists of analogies, archetypal shapes and lists of other lists. Mr. Gunkel sometimes even speaks in rapid-fire lists: &quot;With ideonomy, we can design new kinds of clothing, textures, political systems, sports! Flowers! Dogs! Dance movements!&quot; If asked, he will reel off the 14 kinds of soda pop he has on hand.    Lists are the raw material of ideonomy. Weaving them together in a personal computer, Mr. Gunkel attempts to replicate, in some sense, what happens when, in a flash, human minds make connections.    Combining lists of objects' sizes, for example, he invented an educational game based on such analogies as this: &quot;A blood cell is to a pea as an oil tanker is to the atmosphere.&quot; For another mind game, he combined lists of personality traits and emotions in order to generate 84,496 two-word descriptions of psychological states, such as &quot;arrogant affection,&quot; &quot;practical hostility&quot; and &quot;insecure acceptance.&quot; Many of the phrases are senseless, he says, but ones that click on a fast reading can suggest new insights about people.    Such simple &quot;idea combinatorics,&quot; as Mr. Gunkel calls this matchmaking, is just a playful warming up for ideonomy's more serious goal of suggesting insights to scientists and other researchers. Mixing lists of natural phenomena and fallacies, for instance, he generates reams of questions, such as &quot;Can arteries have rashes?&quot;    Most of them are gibberish -- except to someone as wildly imaginative as Mr. Gunkel, who once wrote several thousand words on fallacies about ant slavery. But occasionally his method hits the eureka button. Combing through Mr. Gunkel's printouts, a visitor recently stumbled onto the question, &quot;What are the structural irregularities of superconductors?&quot; Independently of ideonomy, this question recently became a hot topic among physicists studying new materials that conduct electricity without resistance.    But can arteries have rashes? When recently visiting Mr. Gunkel, Austin pathologist Michael T. O'Brien was faced with that question. &quot;At first, I thought it was nonsense,&quot; he says. But on reflection, he remembered that, like skin, some large arteries are supplied with blood by tiny vessels. Then, he realized that such vessels might indeed become inflamed and dilated, as do those in the skin.    &quot;I don't know whether something like this makes any difference in a disease or not,&quot; says Dr. O'Brien. &quot;But it seems like something somebody should be researching.&quot;    Though ideonomy seems surprising -- or downright bizarre -- to the uninitiated, it has plenty of precedents, says Mr. Gunkel, pulling out a list of them from one of his stacks. In the 19th century, for example, the British philologist Peter Roget devised a kind of universal idea map as part of his well-known thesaurus. And the periodic table found in any high-school chemistry book, says Mr. Gunkel, shows how combining lists -- of families of elements, in this case -- can reveal previously unseen connections.    Mr. Gunkel recalls that he first began thinking ideonomically when, as a child, he visited Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry and had a religious experience with all the diagrams, graphs, meters and audio recordings he encountered there. In his teens, he discovered Joyce's &quot;Finnegans Wake,&quot; the ultimate novel of hidden connections. &quot;It has 16 levels of puns!&quot; he marvels.    Soon after that, he blasted off into intellectual outer space, leaving behind such mundane concerns as schoolwork, jobs, marriage, eating and sleeping. In rapid succession, he failed as a student, mailman and park-maintenance man. Even the Army found him unfit. When drafted, &quot;I just pretended to be myself, and they thought I was nuts,&quot; he says, emitting staccato barks that sound uncannily like a list of laughs.    Meanwhile, he was researching and writing books -- 16 so far, all of them unpublished -- on everything from the science of sidewalks to theories about the brain. Occasionally, he would materialize without warning in the offices of various luminaries, spouting ideas with the fervor of a boy scientist who has just produced dynamite in the basement.    That's how he met MIT's Mr. Fredkin, who, ironically, was discussing misunderstood geniuses with colleague Marvin Minsky one day in the early 1970s when Mr. Gunkel barged in. With his rail-thin build, manic gestures and torrential ideas, the young stranger &quot;seemed to be a living example of what we were talking about,&quot; recalls Mr. Fredkin, who soon brought him to the school for a two-year research stint.    The late Herman Kahn, a co-founder of the Hudson Institute, met Mr. Gunkel under similar circumstances and reportedly hired him after their first rap session. Over the years, a trickle of money from such friends has been Mr. Gunkel's life-support system as he has explored the distant planet of his own mind.    That voyage has left him little time to socialize, a part of life that he cheerfully says is &quot;totally mysterious to me.&quot; But after 15 years of reading, writing and ranting in Boston's academic circles, Mr. Gunkel last year moved to Austin in search of more sun and new friends. To find them, he pored over the University of Texas phone book, made a list of 52 students and faculty members living near his apartment and went knocking on doors. Introducing himself is a snap, he says: &quot;I just show them one of my lists.&quot;    Meanwhile, he is beginning to write his magnum opus on ideonomy, a project financed by a five-year unsolicited grant he was awarded in 1984 from New York's Richard Lounsbery Foundation, a nonprofit supporter of research. The $20,000-a-year grant, like most of Mr. Gunkel's awards through the years, was arranged by academic friends who regard him as the ultimate long shot -- one that just might pay off big.    The jury is still out on ideonomy. But it already has helped some researchers. Ideonomical analogs, says Mr. Clark, the Harvard law professor, helped inspire him to write a research paper comparing the structure of plants with human hierarchies. And a Gunkel list enumerating mistakes that people make may help in the design of artificial-intelligence systems that can recognize and correct their own mistakes, says Douglas Lenat, a researcher at Microelectronics andamp; Computer Technology Corp., a high-tech consortium in Austin.    But can there really be a science of ideas? Even Mr. Gunkel isn't quite sure whether the notion is bonkers or brilliant. And even if it is possible, it might be too unwieldy to be practical. Indeed, brainstorming with Mr. Gunkel is a bit like being hit over the head by the muse with a sledgehammer. &quot;He puts people off,&quot; says Mr. Lenat.    To help a biologist interested in toxins, Mr. Gunkel within minutes had his computer generate 45,540 questions on the topic. Paid a penny for each of the interesting thoughts he is producing, Mr. Gunkel might someday be a millionaire. &quot;He pours out about 60 ideas a minute, and 59 of them are bad,&quot; says Mr. Fredkin. &quot;But even with one good idea out of 60, it's still an amazing accomplishment.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>