<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871109-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Insulating Japan From Market PanicGets Harder as Interdependence Grows---By Kathryn GravenSpecial to The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If the Japanese learned anything in the wake of the New York stock-market crash, it was that panic caused Wall Street's woes. And now everyone here -- from individual investors to institutional investors to financial authorities -- is wondering whether Tokyo can be defended from such market panic.    To the chagrin of the Japanese, a sudden sense of investor insecurity and uneasiness is taking hold. In seminars and elsewhere, investors repeatedly are being implored to hold on, to retain their shares and to believe in the Japanese economy. The message: If everyone cooperates, everything will be all right.    But Japanese such as Hiroko Nozawa, a 68-year-old widow, are torn between the classic stick-it-out Japanese response to crisis and the unsettling realization that global interdependence threatens efforts to insulate the Tokyo psychology from other markets. Mrs. Nozawa has lost a small fortune on paper and wants to know whether she should hold on to her shares of Sony Corp. &quot;I'm getting old. I may not be around when the market goes up again. What should I do?&quot; Mrs. Nozawa asked at a recent investment seminar.    The pressures on Mrs. Nozawa and other nervous investors will only increase in the coming days. This week, the government will sell 1,950,000 shares of Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp. The Finance Ministry says it is confident that investor interest in the telecommunications giant hasn't waned. Then, in December, the government plans to offer its 34.5% stake in Japan Air Lines.    The most troubling test, and the one that may drag on the longest, comes from the instability in the foreign-exchange market. Investors holding shares in export-oriented electronics companies, for example, become jittery when they see the dollar falling against the yen, because it makes exports more expensive. Last week, the tumbling dollar reached a 40-year low against the Japanese currency; it was quoted in New York Friday at 135.03 yen. Overall the Japanese have remained calm, and the Tokyo market has been less volatile than New York, though it did drop 14.9% the day after the U.S. market plunged. Many Japanese say the answer lies in cultural characteristics. Americans are prone to panic, the argument goes, while the Japanese prefer to wait and see. Americans spend beyond their means, while the Japanese are compulsive savers.    This may be true. But some Japanese caution that there is a flip side to their character that could one day bring the Tokyo market crashing to the ground. &quot;Japanese investors watch closely and think hard before they do anything,&quot; says Toshio Miura, a managing director at Nomura Securities. &quot;But if they all think and then decide to be bearish, that's when it would really get scary.&quot; Still, while the initial reaction here to the New York crash was one of shock, by and large most investors sat tight.    Yasuko Nando, a 65-year-old grandmother of five, woke up her husband, Kunio, at 6 a.m. on Tuesday, Oct. 20 -- when it was the end of the afternoon of Oct. 19 in New York -- to catch the latest news. The two of them sat in front of the radio, with the television on as well, listening for every detail they could glean.    They have the majority of their savings, more than 30 million yen ($220,000), tied up in the securities market, half in Japanese mutual funds and the other half in individual stocks. But the Nandos didn't panic and rush to sell.    Takashi Nakayama, a director in Daiwa Investment Trust andamp; Management Co.'s investment-advisory department, hasn't been a big seller, either. Mr. Nakayama sits on a 10-member board that decides Daiwa Investment Trust's strategy for investing about 7.4 trillion yen ($54 billion). On &quot;Black Tuesday&quot; in Japan, Mr. Nakayama watched his screen flash all the familiar shares, but without any prices. During the morning session, no one was buying. Toward the end of the day, however, Mr. Nakayama was ready to get back into the market. &quot;We haven't changed our constructive view. We keep getting new funds every day that we have to invest,&quot; he says.    A week later, despite a second market meltdown that began in Tokyo, Mr. Nakayama was still bullish. On Oct. 26, the Nikkei average fell 4.7%, and the negative sentiment quickly tainted the London and New York markets. Mr. Nakayama decided there were bargains to be had, and he started buying Japanese blue chips.    But there were cracks in Japan's facade of confidence. As the Tokyo market opened weaker on Oct. 26, the mighty Finance Ministry was beginning to worry that Tokyo might become the cause of the next downward spiral. And in a move that suggested that institutional investors hadn't been doing their part to support the cause, the ministry invited representatives from the three largest trust banks and the three largest insurance companies over for an exchange of views.    Whatever was actually discussed, and amid the appearance of collusion, the meeting had the intended effect of buoying the market. Investors seemed reassured that the &quot;invisible hand&quot; of the Finance Ministry had worked, at least temporarily.    Up to this point, the foreign-exchange market had been relatively stable, propped up by confidence in the Louvre Accord and the willingness of central banks to defend the U.S. dollar. But by the morning of Oct. 29, following overnight weakness in New York, confidence in the U.S. currency was slipping. And it didn't take long for the fear of renewed instability in the foreign-exchange market to spill over into the stock market.    On that day, at the Ginza branch of Nomura Securities Co., Yuzuru Kajiyama tried to address this fear. He reminded a room packed with investors that the currency market was like any other market with its ups and downs. And he advised them to focus on stocks of companies dependent on domestic demand, insisting there isn't any need to worry about investments at home. &quot;In the U.S., individuals lost a lot of money,&quot; he says. &quot;But in Japan, individuals are buying. Japan has savings, and corporate earnings are good.&quot;    In his lecture, titled &quot;What Nomura Is Thinking Now,&quot; Mr. Kajiyama covered a lot of political and economic territory. He discussed war in the Middle East, a U.S. Treasury offering and the role Japanese investors play in such offerings, and the need to stimulate domestic demand. By the end of the session, however, it was clear that the world's largest brokerage house was thinking what it is always thinking: that this is a good time to buy stocks.    It remains to be seen how long the Japanese can sustain this bullish view of the market. They have never liked the idea of a bear market, so they are sure to go all out to avoid one. </TEXT></DOC>