<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan Already Has Line-Item Veto---By Stephen Glazier</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Contrary to popular misconception, the Constitution already grants the line-item veto to the president. President Reagan should immediately use it to reduce federal spending and the budget deficit without raising taxes.    The line-item veto lies in the language of the Constitution. Article I, Section 7, Clause 2 gives the president veto power over all bills passed by Congress. Any veto may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of each house.    At the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, on Aug. 15, 1787, according to James Madison's published notes of the debate, Madison commented on Clause 2: &quot;Mr. Madison, observing that if the negative of the President was confined to bills, it would be evaded by acts under the form and name of Resolutions, votes, etc. -- proposed that 'or resolve' should be added after 'bill.'&quot;    In other words, Madison was concerned that Congress would subvert the presidential veto by merely labeling its actions &quot;Resolutions, votes, etc.&quot; instead of &quot;bills.&quot; (&quot;Etc.&quot; apparently refers to whatever an imaginative future Congress might invent.) The &quot;or resolve&quot; language was Madison's first shot at all-inclusive language. But the convention did not find it adequate. &quot;After a short and rather confused conversation on the subject,&quot; it rejected Madison's wording and adjourned for the evening.    That night, Madison apparently talked with Edmund Jennings Randolph. The next morning, the convention came to order to hear an improved and expanded proposal. &quot;Mr. Randolph, having thrown into a new form the motion putting votes, Resolutions, etc. on a footing with Bills, renewed it&quot; with the language that was accepted that day by the convention and was inscribed as Clause 3 of Section 7 of Article I.    &quot;Every Order, Resolution or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary&quot; would also be subject to the presidential veto in the same manner as described for bills in Clause 2. Randolph had found the broadest possible formula in the language of his day to describe the inventions that Madison feared. It remained only for future Congresses to invent them and name them, in order for the president to be able to veto them.    Madison records only one note on the debate that preceded the convention's adoption of Randolph's proposal. &quot;Mr. Sherman thought it unnecessary, except as to votes taking money out of the Treasury.&quot; Although Roger Sherman appeared to be no great fan of the veto, he did comprehend that Congress's main motivation to subvert the veto, and the main reason the Constitution needed to defend it, would be the temptation for Congress to spend irresponsibly.    Why does the Constitution not speak specifically about the &quot;line-item veto&quot;? At the time of the convention, the phrase did not exist. It was not until the chaos preceding the Civil War that Congress, in order to subvert the presidential veto and experiment with large deficits, first began the abusive practice of attaching appropriations riders to bills. It was only after this practice was invented that the term &quot;rider&quot; was developed along with the term for the corrective response -- &quot;line-item veto.&quot; Only in the Civil War environment of national fratricide and a weak, minority president could Congress have initiated this subversion of the executive.    When the Confederacy wrote its own constitution during the war, on many procedural points it merely restated the U.S. Constitution in light of the practice and language of the day. President Jefferson Davis was provided with a line-item veto described as such.    After the Civil War, Congress returned to fiscal responsibility, although the use of riders continued. Much later, however, when the welfare state ideology created by the Depression ran headlong into the demands of World War II and the Cold War, Congress responded with a &quot;tax a lot and spend more&quot; formula for fiscal fairy tales. The Republican Renaissance has stemmed from the tax side of this formula, but the Democratic Congress remains unchecked on the spending side, with a metastasized deficit as a result. The recent world-wide collapse of the equity markets is merely the first serious symptom of this potentially fatal disease.    Since no president has ever vetoed a line item, the courts have never had an opportunity to bless the action. In fact, judges have had almost no chance to say anything about Clause 3, although what little they have said has been correct. Hence, if the Supreme Court ever gets a chance to pronounce on the line-item veto, it will be directly interpreting, on first impression, fairly clear and unobstructed constitutional language. The prognosis for any such decision would be favorable.    There is one 1889 Supreme Court case, U.S. v. Stockslager, that states that a joint resolution of both houses approved by the president has the same effect of law as if it were called a bill. Presumably, such a joint resolution could also be vetoed by the president. By extension, a president could determine that a &quot;bill&quot; contained implicit &quot;joint resolutions&quot; by Congress for each line item or appropriations rider, and then veto selected &quot;resolutions&quot; within a bill at his discretion. If Congress plays the game of &quot;form and name&quot; to subvert the president, then the president must likewise defend himself. This is the point of Clause 3.    The only other Clause 3 case of interest, a 1982 case from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, Consumer Energy v. FERC, comes no closer to explicit comment on the line-item veto. However, citing Madison's notes, the court states: &quot;Clause 3 was inserted to prevent Congress from evading the requirements of Clause 2 by merely calling its actions something other than a 'bill.'&quot; Or, if a line item has the force of law, then a line item may suffer a veto.    A possible Democratic response might state that budgets may be vetoed, but not line items or riders. At first glance, this appears to have some merit. But this argument would allow Congress to destroy the veto by bunching bills together. Taken to its extreme, each Congress, which sits for two years, could deter mine that all its actions for that period would, on the last day, be bunched together into one huge bill. All the individual bills that would have passed over the course of the two years would be merely &quot;preliminary&quot; procedural steps to the leviathan bill. The president then would have the choice of forgoing the veto or vetoing two complete years of legislation and perhaps destroying our government in the process.    This is the very game of &quot;form and name&quot; that inspired Clause 3. If the clause means anything, it means that the president can unbunch such bills by vetoing line items and riders.    Congress is already using this bunching gambit for the budget. Under the budget rules, Congress passes only one &quot;omnibus&quot; budget bill per year. Obviously, today's line item is yesterday's bill, and the president can veto either.    Whatever result the courts ultimately may reach, the president's use of the line-item veto offers everything to gain and nothing to lose. The courts can deliver no worse than the status quo. Any other legal result would be an improvement over current practice.    Indeed, with the collapse of the world equity markets on Oct. 19, and the subsequent drift toward the fiscal abyss by a Congress that has no seniority system, no party discipline, too many subcommittee chairmen, and, under its current rules, no leader with the institutional means to cut a deal and make it stick, President Reagan has no choice but to use his constitutional power to act unilaterally. The question is not one of narrow partisan contest, but whether we shall have effective government and a productive economy, or increasing chaos and poverty.    ---   Mr. Glazier is a lawyer in New York. </TEXT></DOC>