<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0090 </DOCNO><HL> At Odds With Free Trade;Isolating Soviet Projects---Will Japan Be Beneficiary?---By Tim Carrington and Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST CDA CYRCOMPUTERS (EDP)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   When Caspar Weinberger traveled to India last fall, he was welcomed with garlands of roses, sitar music and painted elephants. The first U.S. defense secretary to visit New Delhi, he promised an &quot;increasingly warm and friendly relationship&quot; and suggested more sales of U.S. technology.    In Washington, though, a bureaucratic battle is raging over how warm the ties should be and how much technology should be sold. The debate centers on a high-technology jewel that the Indians consider vital to their modernization -- a state-of-the-art supercomputer that, among other things, could help them decipher the mysterious patterns of their yearly monsoons. The fight is particularly intense because, U.S. officials say, few countries present so great an opportunity and so great a security threat as India.    But the battle is also symptomatic of the Reagan administration's schizophrenic attitude on trade policy. It pits the Republicans' traditional support for free trade against a fervent desire to protect national security. And the result has often been chaos.    &quot;A coherent U.S. policy doesn't exist when it comes to export controls,&quot; says Rep. Don Bonker, a Washington Democrat who is the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on international economic policy and trade. &quot;There are two forces within the administration with different views. . . . If U.S. firms want to do business abroad, they have to deal with delays, sometimes with denials and at all times with uncertainty.&quot;    The administration is trying to streamline its export rules by relaxing the licensing procedures for certain technology exports to Japan and North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies and for shipping fairly common products -- such as machine tools -- that are readily available elsewhere. But controls on high-tech exports, particularly to countries outside the alliance, will remain tight.    Diplomats argue that selling a supercomputer to India, the world's largest democracy, could help cement U.S. ties with the strategically important south Asian nation. Corporations and free-trade advocates say that it could help open up a bountiful market for U.S. goods.    But a group of hard-line Pentagon officials organized by Assistant Secretary Richard Perle worries that expanded trade with India will increase the risk that U.S. technological secrets will seep into the hands of the Soviet Union, India's major military supplier and a longtime friend. Mr. Weinberger appears to come down on both sides of the issue. Despite his warm words in India, he says he worries that &quot;every sale creates a national-security problem.&quot;    The supercomputer negotiating is being watched by other developing nations that need transfusions of U.S. technological know-how. They see it as a test of the way that the Reagan administration will reconcile the conflicting goals of pushing free trade internationally and guarding U.S. technological secrets more tightly.    Increasingly, business executives and some administration officials worry that in its zeal to protect technological secrets, the U.S. risks falling behind in international trade. Says Paul Freedenberg, the Commerce Department's assistant secretary for trade administration: &quot;You don't want to so disadvantage U.S. exporters that you affect their ability to compete in world-wide trade, where the real market is, and undermine your technological base.&quot;    But that process may be under way. The congressional Joint Economic Committee says that 1986 was the first year that the U.S. registered a deficit in high-technology trade; exports fell $2.6 billion below imports. In 1980, by contrast, the U.S. ran a $27 billion surplus. A committee report blames U.S. export controls and other &quot;foreign-trade distorting practices&quot; for contributing to the decline.    Forfeiting a portion of the global high-tech market to Japan is a major issue in the supercomputer fight. According to an official involved in the negotiations, Japan has promised India that it will sign a supercomputer agreement within 30 days if the U.S. deal falls through. The U.S.-Indian talks have been dragging on for about a year. India was initially drawn to the U.S. because American computers have a reputation for superiority and because it wanted to broaden its technological relationship with the U.S. But American companies worry that if Japan does snatch the Indian supercomputer sale, it will be perceived by other countries as the supplier of choice.    When India first began seeking a supercomputer 18 months ago, the Pentagon was determined to block it. Only about 165 of these sophisticated computers exist, nearly all of them in the U.S., Japan or Western Europe. American technology for supercomputers, which can perform hundreds of functions simultaneously, is about a decade ahead of Soviet know-how. Pentagon officials thought they had snuffed out the initiative until Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi visited the U.S. in June 1985 and Vice President George Bush announced that there would be a sale if the necessary safeguards could be worked out.    Setting safeguards and defining the type of supercomputer to be sold is still consuming hours of negotiating time for both sides. Pentagon officials say that they have agreed to let the Indians buy a Cyber 205, made by Control Data Corp., but that the Indians are pushing for a more advanced model by Cray Research Inc. The Defense Department has vowed to veto the sale of such an advanced machine.    To try to move the negotiations forward, State Department officials have suggested that the U.S. and India first agree on security safeguards, then on the type of computer. But Pentagon and National Security Agency officials are resisting. They contend that once the two sides agreed on the safeguards, the Indians would have a foot in the door to push for a more sophisticated computer than the defense establishment is willing to sell.    Meanwhile, the companies await the outcome anxiously. The Cray computer costs $15 million to $17 million, and the Cyber computer sells for at least $10 million. &quot;It's terribly important for Cray to be able to expand its international markets,&quot; a spokesman says.    Other companies have also been frustrated. Recently, the Pentagon killed a proposed sale of sophisticated antenna equipment to India by Scientific-Atlanta Inc. &quot;We had a lovely, long conversation with them,&quot; says Karunkara Menon, the general manager for research at India's state-owned Bharat Electronics Ltd., &quot;until we found out that it wasn't going to be approved.&quot;    Says a Scientific-Atlanta official: &quot;It's a significant piece of business to let go to a competitor.&quot; He adds that a West German company was ready to compete for the contract the moment the U.S. scuttled the sale. Currently, Scientific-Atlanta is trying to get the plan, or at least a scaled-back version of it, back on course.    Northrop Corp. also ran into Pentagon obstacles when it tried to give the Indians a briefing on its F-20 fighter jet, even though John Poindexter, who was then President Reagan's national security adviser, had agreed to help reduce Pentagon resistance to the idea.    During Secretary Weinberger's visit, Arun Singh, India's minister of state for defense, pounded a conference table and told the U.S. delegation that &quot;we will not countenance the diversion of technology on our soil.&quot;    U.S. officials don't question India's sincerity, but a recent U.S. intelligence report concluded that the Indian government, whatever its intentions, isn't capable of fully protecting sensitive U.S. technology. Pentagon officials worry that the Soviets could easily pick up U.S. technology in India. &quot;If they can steal it from Silicon Valley, they can steal it from Bangalore,&quot; the Indian high-technology mecca, a senior Pentagon official reasons. Russian MiG-21 and MiG-27 fighter planes are co-produced in India, as are Russian T-72 tanks. Although India says that it keeps Soviet and Western projects separate, U.S. officials worry that personnel may travel back and forth. For example, a Pentagon official says that he was once able to enter a plant where a Soviet MiG wing was being tested.    Another Pentagon official recalls visiting an Indian manager who boasted that sensitive blueprints were locked in a metal cabinet each night and that he took home the key. Then the Pentagon man saw the cabinet. &quot;You could get into it with a can opener,&quot; he says. His complaints were taken to heart, though. Now the blueprints reside in a husky, Pentagon-style safe.    Experiences with other countries have added to U.S. skittishness. Several years ago, Digital Equipment Corp. sold some VAX computers to a company in South Africa called MRI. Although MRI's warehouse passed routine inspections, it turned out that the company was stacking the outer frames of the computers in the warehouse and sending the innards to the Soviet Union.    Despite internal fights and delays, though, the U.S. is approving exports to India that it would have rejected four or five years ago. For example, after India agreed in 1984 to improve its technology safeguards in return for more exports, the administration gave its blessing to the sale of about $500 million of business computers by Control Data. The sale, which occurred last year, included a supply of parts so that India can begin assembling computers in its own factories.    India realizes that the Soviet Union, long the country's principal military supplier, doesn't have much high technology to offer. Says Bharat's Mr. Menon: &quot;As far as electronic technology is concerned, there's not much point in collaborating with the Russians. What we find is that these people are very much behind in technology.&quot;    That disenchantment creates new foreign-policy possibilities for the U.S. as well as commercial opportunities. High technology, says former Republican Sen. Charles Percy, &quot;is part of foreign policy that is even more fundamental than diplomacy. It's a way to bind us together with other countries.&quot;    The tension over technology exports to places like India doesn't lend itself to easy answers. Freer sales of U.S. technology could create new espionage opportunities for the Soviets and, in the end, erode the technological edge the U.S. enjoys. But overly restrictive export controls could hobble U.S. companies by making them less competitive in world markets.    No one expects the battles to subside. Says a State Department official: &quot;What India wants is the stuff that's going to be the most difficult to approve.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>