<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861222-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Investors and Borrowers Alike LostMillions in Mortgage Dealer's Fall---By Jacob M. SchlesingerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/22/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><TEXT>   Nearly all of the several hundred people who crowded into the Southfield (Mich.) Civic Center on Oct. 6 were lower middle class and elderly. Many nervously clutched manila envelopes filled with financial documents they could barely understand. Some who forsook regular driving long ago drove as far as 200 miles in a steady autumn drizzle to find out what had happened to their life savings.    The reason: The Detroit-area investment firm A.J. Obie andamp; Associates and its affiliate Diamond Mortgage Corp. had collapsed.    &quot;My clients need their money immediately to buy bread and butter,&quot; one attorney representing 40 investors told the federal bankruptcy judge presiding over the meeting. &quot;They are committing suicide over this.&quot; When an assistant state attorney general assured the crowd that a criminal investigation was under way, one man cried out, &quot;Hang them all!&quot;    As many as 3,800 people in Michigan and Illinois are alleged to have lost as much as $73 million through Diamond/Obie and related companies, which closed down in August.    In Michigan, the companies are being liquidated in bankruptcy court as the state attorney general pursues criminal fraud charges against two top former officers. Both have pleaded not guilty and have said they weren't aware of the scope or nature of the problems. The Illinois companies, which operated semi-independently, are trying to reorganize their finances in bankruptcy court and stay in business. The state of Illinois has sued for securities fraud, but lawyers for the companies say that the problems there were not as serious as in Michigan, and that they are cooperating with the state in its investigation.    Diamond/Obie (which is unrelated to Diamond Mortgage Corp. of Charlotte, N.C.) belonged to a new breed of mortgage lender that has cropped up across the country lately, soliciting business from homeowners unable to obtain credit from conventional lenders. The new firms make these loans, but at above-market rates. They then sell the mortgages to investors, promising safe, high returns.    Such companies aren't inherently illegal, and in fact can provide much-needed money for people who can't easily get credit. But a growing number of businessmen have taken advantage of the format to defraud investors. A half dozen states -- including Arizona and California -- have reported problems with such firms.    In typical problem cases, money is taken from investors and, instead of being turned over to borrowers, is absorbed through mismanagement or fraud. Rather than securing investors with real mortgages, the company pays them off with the investments of later clients -- a technique common in so-called Ponzi schemes. Inevitably the company collapses, and investors find their investment has disappeared.    What makes the failure of such businesses particularly tragic is that those who lose out are usually people with little financial experience who may have just received a chunk of money from their pensions or individual retirement accounts -- a description that fits many of Diamond/Obie's investors.    For example, Gayland Smith, a retired construction worker living in Monroe, Mich., put $36,000 into Diamond/Obie in 1985, lured by the promise of a 14% return. &quot;My wife had a nervous breakdown due to this&quot; loss of savings, he says. &quot;She's in bad, bad shape.&quot; Although Mr. Smith had earlier had two heart attacks and a stroke, he has had to go to work part-time.    The three top officers of Diamond/Obie were: Barton Greenberg, the 44-year-old chairman who founded the companies in 1973; Leslie A. Lupovich, 35, who served as vice president and secretary-treasurer; and Gary L. Mitchell, 51, who started as a consultant for the companies in 1980 and ended up as president.    In October, Mr. Greenberg pleaded not guilty to 73 criminal counts, many of them for securities fraud. He and his lawyers declined to discuss the case for this article, and they haven't yet filed responses to specific allegations in court. But Richard P. Zipser, one of Mr. Greenberg's attorneys, did say that some former company employees have testified in preliminary hearings that &quot;Mr. Greenberg was shocked and horrified when he learned of the circumstances surrounding the company.&quot;    Mr. Mitchell pleaded not guilty to the 69 criminal counts facing him. He says he notified the state of some problems he uncovered that he couldn't deal with internally because Mr. Greenberg held such tight control of the companies. Mr. Lupovich, in a plea-bargain arrangement in November, pleaded guilty to one count of violating Michigan's secondary-mortgage-loan act, a misdemeanor, and has testified for the state that he uncovered some problems and notified his superiors about them.    After years of modest growth, Diamond/Obie took off in the late 1970s. At a time when the secondary-mortgage market was gaining popularity among institutional investors, the companies used a big-money advertising campaign -- featuring the actors Lloyd Bridges and George Hamiltonto sell mortgages as an investment option for the general public.    The formula seemed to work. A photograph of Mr. Greenberg in 1978, taken for a Detroit News profile, showed money sprouting from trees in his office. In 1985, the companies drew $20 million in new investments, 50% more than during the previous year.    The operations were widely viewed as a good place to put money. BarclaysAmerican Corp., a subsidiary of London-based Barclays Bank PLC, bought about $3 million of mortgages in 1985; around the same time, Diamond/Obie opened offices in Ohio, Georgia and North Carolina to fill an anticipated rise in institutional sales.    As recently as July, Mr. Mitchell told his employees they were &quot;making a mark, and other firms around the country are looking at us as a model,&quot; recalls Charles Boone, a former Diamond/Obie salesman. The mood at the company, he says, was that &quot;we were getting ready to blow the roof off the mortgage-security business.&quot;    Instead, the roof was about to cave in. In Michigan alone, the company had sold $74 million of mortgages -- but had only about $24 million in its portfolio, says Neal Sutherland, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court.    Where did the rest of the money go? Mr. Sutherland says he has had problems tracking it because the records were in disarray. But he believes mismanagement was probably one major reason. He says that the companies didn't charge enough in fees even to cover expenses, and were losing as much as $1 million a month.    In addition, personal expenses may have bled the company. Mr. Sutherland last month filed a lawsuit in federal bankruptcy court in Detroit against Mr. Greenberg and his family. Aimed at retrieving assets, it detailed &quot;by way of example only&quot; almost $3 million of company funds spent on: a personal helicopter and jet, luxury cars, construction of a lakeside house (as well as its property taxes and the salaries of some employees there), his daughter's tuition at Boston University and her parking tickets in Boston.    Mr. Greenberg and his brother Sheldon, a company official until his death in 1983, kept a ledger comparing their daily expenses and raced to rack up the larger total, according to Phillip J. Shefferly, Mr. Sutherland's attorney. &quot;The man paid for everything out of the company, right down to his socks,&quot; he says.    Faced with a cash crunch, investigators contend, Diamond/Obie last year began relying heavily on more creative -- and illegal -- business techniques.    Investors, after turning over their money, would sometimes have to wait months to be assigned a mortgage -- if they got one at all, says Mr. Sutherland. Some got mortgages that were in foreclosure. Mr. Lupovich testified he discovered that others received ones already assigned to someone else.    Borrowers say they, too, lost out.    Many describe experiences similar to that of Dolores Stone of New Haven, Mich. Though she signed the loan documents in March, had a legal lien put on her house and had her mortgage sold to an investor, she never received her money from Diamond/Obie. Mrs. Stone, on sick leave from her job, says she has had to sell her jewelry to avoid bankruptcy, but may still be forced to make mortgage payments. Mr. Shefferly says several such borrowers have actually faced foreclosure.    As time went on, Diamond/Obie had repeated run-ins with Michigan securities regulators about the veracity of its advertising and steady consumer complaints. In fact, one Corporations and Securities Bureau regulator wrote to his superiors in November 1982 that by allowing Diamond/ Obie to stay in business the bureau had &quot;simply sanctioned a further sacking of the company and withdrawal of its assets.&quot; He recommended &quot;that all sales and other activities cease.&quot;    The suggestion was overruled by his superiors. But the complaints continued, and state examiners went in to look at the books again in June. Their findings led to the subsequent shutdown.    At this point, it's still unclear who will lose what. Since the collapse, more and more Diamond/Obie borrowers have been defaulting, further eroding the value of the secured investments. Even many of those investors who think they hold legitimate mortgages can't get their payments, as officials try to sort through the mess.    And victims have been set upon other victims. Mr. Smith of Monroe says the borrower for the mortgage he holds told him he never got his money. Nevertheless, Mr. Smith plans to start foreclosure proceedings. &quot;I hate to hurt him,&quot; he says. &quot;But it's a dog-eat-dog world.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>