<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871221-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Congress Extends Spending AuthorityBy a Day as Talks Fail to Yield Budget---By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and John E. YangStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT LATAM TAXES JAPAN LABOR MDESTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)UTILITIES (UTI)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congress voted itself an extra day to complete a budget for the fiscal year that began three months ago.    Slowing progress over the weekend were disagreements about the Fairness Doctrine, Medicare and Medicaid spending, rural electrification loans and proposed cuts in the U.S. Postal Service budget.    The biggest obstacle to concluding the two budget bills was overcome last night when congressional and White House officials agreed to a plan that would provide $8.1 million in aid to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.    The arrangement also would establish a procedure for congressional handling of future White House requests for Contra funds. The package was a victory for the Reagan administration, but the president didn't get all he wanted.    Some congressional Democrats, however, were preparing to defy the president, and tempt a veto, by keeping in one of the bills a provision dear to many party members: to enact into law the Fairness Doctrine, which requires broadcasters airing controversial material to give opponents free response time. The Federal Communications Commission earlier this year rescinded a regulation imposing the doctrine on broadcasters, and the president vowed to veto any bill that would codify it.    &quot;I can't conceive of the president of the United States vetoing it and letting the whole government come to a halt because he's against fairness,&quot; said House Speaker James Wright (D., Texas).    Despite a weekend of intense, back-room negotiations, lawmakers were unable to finish the two massive bills that are designed to consummate the budget accord Congress and the White House reached four weeks ago. Federal spending authority expired at midnight Friday, and lawmakers had hoped by yesterday afternoon to extend that authority until Sept. 30, 1988, the end of the fiscal year.    Instead, the House and Senate fell short of their goal, and voted to extend the government's spending authority until midnight today to prevent federal offices from closing down, and to give lawmakers extra time to tie up loose ends on the pending measures.    &quot;It's just the nature of the beast,&quot; said Mr. Wright of the deadline-breaking deliberations. &quot;People of strong wills and powerful opinions sometimes play brinksmanship with one another.&quot;    In a rare Sunday session, the House voted 207-178 for the extension, and the Senate, which was nearly empty, approved the extension by voice vote. President Reagan signed the one-day extension late last night, the fourth temporary extension this year.    Yesterday's actions were being driven by the overall budget accord reached Nov. 20 after prolonged negotiations between leaders. It calls for $30.2 billion in reductions from the projected deficit for fiscal 1988, which began Oct. 1.    The components of the agreement include $7.6 billion in savings, contained in an omnibus spending bill for fiscal 1988. The second bill holds the remainder of the savings, comprised of a tax increase of $9 billion, along with asset sales, accounting changes and reductions in Medicare and farm subsidies.    The full-year, $600 billion omnibus spending bill, which congressional leaders hope to approve as early as today, contains provisions that would allow President Reagan to prevent Japanese firms from participating in federally-funded construction projects; designate Nevada as the future burial ground for the nation's high-level nuclear waste, and delay sanctions for metropolitan areas violating the Clean Air Act, among other issues.    Talks on the contents of the second budget bill, which contains the bulk of the deficit-reductions slated for this year, continued last evening, with the participants saying that progress was being made in areas where argument persists, such as Medicare and Medicaid. Lawmakers also hoped for a vote on that measure as early as today.    &quot;We're close. We're much much closer than we were,&quot; said Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.). The major suspense today will likely be the fate of the Fairness Doctrine. But Sen. Dole said it may be necessary, for any number of reasons, for lawmakers to continue deliberating tomorrow and perhaps Wednesday.    The approval of both bills is necessary to rescind the across-the-board $23 billion in cuts under the Gramm-Rudman law that were put into effect last month by presidential order. Lawmakers have said the replacement of the Gramm-Rudman cuts with legislated budget savings is necessary to assure the financial markets that Congress and the president can govern effectively.    The Democratic-controlled House hadn't included any new funds for the Contras in its version of the omnibus spending bill, while the Senate, in concert with the administration, had voted to give them $16 million.    During talks that lasted all weekend, lawmakers and White House negotiators agreed to provide $3.6 million in non-military aid and an additional $4.5 million to pay the cost of transporting food, clothing, shelter and medicine through Feb. 29, 1988.    Under the agreement, those deliveries, for the first 12 days of 1988, also could include previously purchased but undelivered arms and ammunition. Deliveries of all aid would be suspended for one week in January when the presidents of the five Central American nations are scheduled to meet to assess the peace process.    Unless President Reagan certifies that a cease-fire has taken hold in Nicaragua, he could resume delivery of the military aid on Jan. 19 and continue it until Feb. 4. The accord calls for a vote that day in both the House and Senate for additional aid to the Contras. If Congress agrees to continue funding the Contras, lawmakers could vote on an additional aid request no sooner than July 1, regardless of when the request is made.    The final stumbling block on Contra aid wasn't the amount of money, according to lawmakers on both sides of the issue, but the Reagan administration's desire to ensure that the already purchased military aid was delivered to the Nicaraguan insurgents in case the peace process breaks down.    About $500,000 of the $100 million appropriated last year for both military and nonmilitary purposes remains to be spent before the end of the year. The authority to transport that material to the Contras ends at the same time, and administration officials say some of it will still be awaiting delivery on New Year's Day.    Over the weekend, lawmakers agreed to include in the spending bill a measure that would allow the president to prevent contractors and suppliers in foreign countries from bidding on or supplying construction projects funded by the U.S. if those countries prevent U.S. companies from participating in their projects. The provision, authored by Sen. Frank Murkowski (R., Alaska) and Rep. Jack Brooks (D., Texas), is aimed particularly at Japan.    Lawmakers expanded the provision to include all federal projects; an earlier version of the bill was more selective. The prohibition would affect only future federal construction and could be waived for a variety of reasons, including a determination that foreign participation is &quot;in the public interest.&quot;    One lawmaker involved in developing the provision said that, although they might grouse publicly, Reagan administration officials have assured him privately that they favor the provision because it probably won't impede continuing talks about opening Japanese markets to the U.S. What's more, the provision could be used as a bargaining chip in those talks, the lawmaker said.    Another provision lawmakers yesterday placed into the second bill would significantly alter the regulation of pension plans. Under the provision, employers whose pension plans are underfunded would be forced in 1989 to put more money into their plans faster than under current law. Starting next year, in addition, the employer-paid fee to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. would rise to at least $16 from the current $8.50 a year for each employee. Employers with underfunded pensions could pay as much as $50-an-employee under the new scheme to help the burdened federal agency.    The provision wouldn't contain a requirement, as proposed by some lawmakers, that some excess assets from terminated pension plans be distributed among employees.    Under pressure from the White House, lawmakers retreated over the weekend from their earlier decision to allow rural electrification cooperatives to pre-pay $5 billion in high-interest loans from the federal government. Instead, the amount was limited to $2 billion. Telephone cooperatives would be allowed to refinance $300 million in loans and receive other low-interest loans from the government. The pre-payments would represent a loss to the U.S. in the form of forgone interest payments.    At the same time, however, lawmakers were considering counting toward deficit-reduction a similar provision that would allow Israel, Egypt and some other countries to pre-pay high-interest loans from the U.S. Analysts said the provision could result in a $5 billion gain in fiscal 1988, but a loss of perhaps $1 billion over the long term.    On Medicaid, which provides low-income individuals with health benefits, lawmakers agreed to provide $600 million in additional funds over three years, far less than the $2.3 billion increase contained in a House-passed bill. The compromise funds would go to several programs, including one aimed at reducing infant mortality rates.    On Medicare, negotiators dropped a proposal to raise the $75 deductible for doctors' care, and were close to compromise over a dispute between the House and Senate over payments to hospitals. House members were trying to protect big-city hospitals from sharp cutbacks; senators were being more protective of rural and suburban hospitals.    Lawmakers also agreed to modify proposed cuts affecting the postal service. Instead of taking $850 million from the service in fiscal 1988, as proposed in the budget accord, one-third of that sum would come from a new law on federal retirees. That law would prevent federal retirees from getting more than 60% of their pension in the first year that they elect to take the pension as a lump sum payment. Currently, federal retirees can get all of their retirement payments up front. </TEXT></DOC>