<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870702-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Remembrance of 50 Golden Years---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 07/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   We are a people much given to celebrating the special events in our past. A few years ago it was the signing of the Declaration of Independence. This year it is the bicentennial of the Constitution.    This pleasant habit carries over into our private lives. We like to celebrate our birthdays, especially those that mark the passing decades. The anniversaries of our high school or college graduation, especially the 50th anniversary, find us gathered to see old friends and reminisce about former times when, as we recall it, we were young and gay.    So do we mark other milestones along our life. Just last year I took note, though the world did not, of my 50th anniversary of writing for The Wall Street Journal.    Now, this June my Frances and I celebrated the 50th anniversary of our marriage, and we were happily surrounded by all our children and grandchildren as well as nine members of the original 12 in our bridal party. Other friends also gathered to quaff a toast.    Our golden anniversary was not unique. Earlier this year some contemporaries marked theirs and later this summer we will help other friends mark theirs with due celebration. But if our 50th anniversary was not unique it is an occasion becoming rarer in our modern times.    For one thing, the calendar dictates that it be a ceremony limited to an older generation. You must be a septuagenarian, or nigh unto it, before enough years will have accumulated to reach that anniversary. And among younger generations there are fewer who seem destined to complete so many married years.    Despite what the actuaries tell us about our longer lives, there is no warranty that both parties to a marriage will survive the 50 years. Among our own generation death has often intervened. My own brother, newly married, fell in World War II, leaving a young widow to find a new life with a new husband.    Besides that, fashions in marriage change as in other things. That line in the wedding ceremony about &quot;until death do us part&quot; seems nowadays a tie less binding than in former times. We not only read in our public prints of those who slide easily from one marriage to another, sometimes three or four before middle age. We also know them among our friends.    This changing of partners as in a square dance is not always because a marriage has become intolerable. Very often it is no more than impatience with the inevitable adjustments necessary to join two lives. It takes much love to do that, and when it is wanting nothing else will make a happy life for two people together.    I am not one of those outraged by the rising divorce statistics; I do not think they mark the deterioration of society or the collapse of the family. All too often in times past two lives were made miserable because they were imprisoned one with another by law or the artificial pressures of society.    What I feel, rather, is a sadness for those who mistook something else for love and so were ill-armed against the inevitable pressures of living together.    When I think back to my own wedding that June of 1937, what sticks in mind is that phrase &quot;for better or for worse.&quot; I marvel that my Frances took me at all, for I was a young man of small prospects. My job would hardly support me, much less a wife, and we began in a third-floor walk-up with a bedroom and a combination kitchen and bathroom; there being no kitchen sink, the dishes were washed in the bathtub. We survived financially only because she, too, went to work.    Then for a while there were better times, a small house, a first daughter. They lasted until followed by the worst of times. For five years I was away at World War II, leaving my Frances with that new daughter to care for alone and somehow manage daily living. Many such marriages of that time collapsed under the strain; it took a deep mutual love to sustain one.    Afterward for us came better times; another daughter, many moves to roomier abodes, unaccustomed prosperity. As the marriage ceremony foretold, there were also times in sickness as in health. We paid our dues to hospitals in Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan and North Carolina. Now, in our later years, we have acquired those ills of age and decrepitude. None of it, be the times better or worse, has altered the bond forged those years ago.    But enough. If it is true that all happy marriages are alike, then only the details differ. That's why storytellers do not tell them; I suppose the story becomes tiresome after the words &quot;and they lived happily ever after.&quot; Not so for the happy few who lived them. What seems tiresome to us is the coupling and uncoupling in ceaseless search for a treasure always in reach where love abides.    I wish I knew what lesson to draw from such reflections on a 50th anniversary. Then I could pass it along to a granddaughter among our celebrants, whom I remember, newborn, as a little wisp of Heather and who now is marking her first year in marriage. Only 49 years to go.    Yet I have no wisdom to offer her from many years of living. All I can tell her is that if she and her Joe reach that far-off day, the joy will not be in the celebration but in the remembrances of the 50 golden years.    ---   Mr. Royster is Editor Emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>