<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871006-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Medical Debate:Doctors Who OpposeThe Spread of HMOsAre Losing Their Fight---Public Seems Much AngrierAbout High Health CostsThan Any Erosion of Care---Senior Citizens Voice Gripes---By Rhonda L. RundleStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> INSURANCE (INS)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Nine weary-looking physicians meeting in a tiny office hear the reports from the battlefront: They are still taking a licking.    Members of the Southern California chapter of Physicians Who Care, they are trying to halt the inroads that health maintenance organizations are making in health care. HMOs allow patients to use only those doctors and hospitals the HMO has contracts with, usually at discounted rates, and operate in a way that tends to reduce referrals to specialists and to limit their fees. Doctors like those in the little room here say HMOs are degrading the quality of medicine, but they haven't been able to do much to stop them.    The local group, one of eight chapters nationally, has seen its dues-paying membership slip to 550 from 600 in recent months, and only a couple of dozen doctors are truly active. &quot;The speakers' bureau is tired,&quot; says one member at the meeting. Another, ophthalmologist Kenneth Hoffer, says glumly: &quot;Nobody comes, nobody contributes, they think it's a lost cause.&quot; The chapter has had to drop its public-relations firm because it was costing $3,000 a month. A recent attempt to get support from senior citizens was an abysmal flop, and response to ads has been poor.    Then the chapter's president and chief cheerleader, 53-year-old dermatologist Ronald Bronow, tries to rally his troops. He brings a packet of checks from supporters. He cites publicity the group has gotten. He declares that &quot;our ideas are getting across.&quot;    But he appears to be whistling past the graveyard. Here and across the country, independent physicians battling the onrush of HMOs are losing, and losing big. Their ranks are thin, their funds short and their spirits wilting. The HMOs are simply rolling over them. &quot;I feel like Custer, making a last stand here,&quot; says an activist physician in Huntsville, Texas.    The doctors have spent heavily to convince the public that HMOs provide inferior care, only to find that people seem a lot angrier at the high fees charged by private physicians. Unaccustomed to collective effort, the activists also have been unable to form any large, influential national organization. Divided even among themselves, they can't agree on constructive alternatives to what HMOs offer.    They are also hamstrung by the antitrust laws, which bar concerted action that would hamper free competition. A spokeswoman for the Group Health Association of America, a big HMO trade group, says the HMOs now view the opposition as &quot;gnats.&quot; She adds that if independent doctors did organize in anticompetitive ways to oppose HMOs, the Federal Trade Commission would probably &quot;come down on them like a ton of bricks.&quot;    HMOs, meanwhile, continue to log big gains. In the past five years the number of such plans has nearly tripled, to more than 650, and so has the number of people they cover, to about 28 million. These figures don't include an unknown but rapidly growing number of so-called PPOs, or preferred provider organizations, which contract with employers to treat their personnel at discounted rates.    The HMOs' biggest surge has come within the past two years, following their acceptance as approved health-care providers to Medicare patients. This was a heavy blow to their opponents; older patients provide an outsized proportion of most doctors' income.    Dr. Bronow of Los Angeles says that &quot;senior citizens are being herded into HMOs by the federal government to save money. They don't understand that they are losing their medical rights and their freedom to choose their own doctor.&quot;    But many independent physicians charge more for treatment than Medicare allows, and their patients often have to pay the difference. HMO plans ordinarily accept whatever Medicare pays. So when HMO fighters bad-mouth the quality of HMO care and urge people to stick with &quot;traditional&quot; medicine, they often get a chilly reception from oldsters who believe the doctors are more concerned about their own fees than anything else.    Dr. Bronow's group has made senior citizens a primary target but has had little success with them. When it held a widely publicized meeting last December (&quot;Are HMOs Hazardous to Your Health?&quot; the fliers read), most of the 200 people who showed up were doctors and their wives. Subsequent meetings have drawn even sparser audiences; one in April cost $5,000 to put on but attracted just 35 people. A member of the Bronow group calls it &quot;a total, unmitigated failure.&quot;    At one session, the seniors listen patiently to the handsome, silver-haired Dr. Bronow for an hour before some turn combative. One man rises to complain bitterly about a $600 bill he got from a doctor for treating a simple itch, and a woman grouses about $2,000 in charges from specialists who didn't accept Medicare as payment in full.    Though activist physicians in Los Angeles and elsewhere deny that they are interested mainly in their own incomes, more than a few protests, including some mounted by doctors already working for HMOs, focus on fees.    In Minneapolis-St. Paul, for example, dissident doctors working for the area's biggest HMO, Physicians Health Plan, recently fought for and won representation on its board. A major issue: The HMO cut the amount it pays its physicians for various procedures, and some of them are screaming that the new fees barely cover their overhead.    Although many such protests and allegations of HMO deficiencies have been widely publicized, HMO growth hasn't been slowed.    Cardiologist Brant Mittler, the national president of Physicians Who Care and head of its San Antonio chapter, has been interviewed by scores of newspapers and has been on ABC's &quot;Good Morning America&quot; and NBC network news shows. But the national group has only about 2,000 doctors in its eight chapters; the one in San Antonio has shown little or no growth in six months, and funds are tight.    Dr. Mittler, who has failed in his attempts to get support from drug and medical-supply companies, wishes more doctors would join and sweeten the kitty of Physicians Who Care. They think nothing of spending $300 on a dinner, he complains, but won't give a third of that for dues. Independent physicians, moreover, are individualists who often have strong opposing views about goals and strategy, preventing the anti-HMO forces from presenting a united front.    One organization, Independent Doctors of America, tried to weld a dozen scattered physicians' groups together last year, but the meeting in Dallas broke up in disarray after some physicians objected to the group's &quot;far-right&quot; orientation. It opposes Medicare as &quot;socialistic,&quot; and one doctor says its brochures read like &quot;something from the National Rifle Association.&quot; Physicians Who Care, with more moderate views, was formed after that meeting.    Many doctors who oppose HMOs nevertheless see little sense in jumping aboard a sinking ship, and some who were aboard are getting off. Psychiatrist Sara Feldman, who dropped out of Dr. Bronow's Los Angeles group after attending two meetings, says: &quot;I failed to see what I would get out of paying dues to something I don't see any results from.&quot;    Even within the American Medical Association, historically the champion of private practitioners, the rebels now are viewed as stubbornly unrealistic. James Todd, senior deputy executive vice president, says that they &quot;represent an obstructionism that is unhealthy for the profession. It flies in the face of reality to think that you can roll back something that has gained general acceptance.&quot;    The very breadth of that acceptance weakens the anti-HMO forces by dividing younger doctors from established ones. More than half the nation's 450,000 practicing physicians already have ties to HMOs or similar plans; younger physicians in particular, those trying to build up their practices, believe they can't afford to shun HMO business even though they may oppose such plans in principle.    The &quot;gatekeeper&quot; operating method used by most HMOs also weakens opposition by driving a wedge between the interests of primary-care physicians (usually internists and general practitioners) and specialists. Under gatekeeper plans, a primary-care physician gets a certain amount of money per head to take care of the needs of an assigned batch of patients. If he makes too many referrals to specialists, his profit suffers; if he makes few, the specialists suffer.    These differing interests make it difficult for doctors to come up with widely acceptable alternatives to HMOs. One promising experiment: health care at discounted prices offered by a network of about 100 South Florida doctors, who have cut rates by forging a series of joint ventures embracing primary-care and specialist physicians, a major hospital, pharmacies and laboratories.    The idea, which appears to be working in South Florida, is to compete with HMOs by giving patients what they seem most interested in: lower fees. But the plan hasn't been adopted widely. When it was offered as an HMO alternative last year at the Dallas meeting called by the Independent Doctors Association, specialists contended that they would bear most of the burden of the rate cuts. One New York oncologist loudly declared: &quot;This is not a remedy. This is the seed of our own destruction.&quot;    Beset by such divisions, dissident doctors also have to contend with antitrust implications when they organize a campaign to keep HMOs out of their area or take action that might harm the HMOs' business.    The Federal Trade Commission is currently investigating several cases, including the refusal by virtually all the specialists in Huntsville, Texas, to sign up with the two HMOs in town -- a possible antitrust violation if the doctors acted in concert. In apparent retaliation, the HMO physicians who make referrals have been sending patients, including some private ones, as far as 30 miles out of town to other specialists.    One recalcitrant physician, urologist Michael deBerardinis, says lost referrals have cost him more than $60,000 over the past 2 1/2 years. That could be only the beginning, he adds, if the FTC, which has issued subpoenas and questioned doctors under oath, files a complaint. &quot;Win, lose or draw, we could each spend $30,000 just to get through this,&quot; he laments.    Elsewhere on the battlefront, optimism is dying hard. Sooner or later, dissident leaders still maintain, their colleagues and the public will pull their heads out of the sand and join the fight. &quot;We're not just a bunch of greedy guys out to protect our pocketbooks,&quot; says Dr. Bronow in Los Angeles. &quot;This fight is a moral duty. Eventually, the {HMO} concept of restricting care will be thrown out.&quot;    But he isn't sure how that can be achieved. &quot;I don't have the answer,&quot; he admits. &quot;We're still searching for it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>