<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880318-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Line-Item Veto Hides Under and Alias </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Glazier </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   Critics of the presidential line-item veto say that use of this power would be a radical departure from past precedent and a dangerous, unpredictable new practice. But it is the limitation of this power -- granted by Article I, Section 7, Clause 3 of the Constitution -- that is dangerous and unpredictable. Moreover, the limitation of the power is relatively new. The only truly innovative aspect of the current proposal for the president to use the line-item veto is the use of that term to describe a practice found in history under another name.    When Washington and Adams were president, Congress passed very general appropriations bills and expected that the president would make specific spending decisions. Congress, in effect, was acknowledging a form of &quot;line-item veto,&quot; though the term used back then was &quot;impoundment.&quot;    Later, Congress began to pass more detailed appropriations bills. Even with more specific appropriations, though, presidents often freely &quot;impounded,&quot; or chose not to spend, funds appropriated by Congress. For example, President Jefferson once informed Congress that funds appropriated for gunboats were not to be spent, since his purchase of the Louisiana Territory had eliminated the danger that he construed to be the motivation for the appropriation.    After Jefferson, presidents continued not to spend funds appropriated for specific items. Then, in an 1838 Supreme Court case, Kendall v. U.S., that policy was questioned.    A Mr. Stokes, who had a contract to deliver mail for the government, made claims for credits that the postmaster general found excessive. Frustrated, Mr. Stokes petitioned Congress, which sided with David, not Goliath, and helped sling the stone. The stone was a bill that directed the payment in full of Mr. Stokes's claims. The postmaster general insisted on paying only the amount he thought justified, and, acting for the president, he impounded the balance.    In Kendall, the court determined that the executive powers of the president provided in Article II of the Constitution did not permit the president to impound a specific appropriation that would require no presidential discretion to administer. Mr. Stokes was paid his full claim and Congress took back a bit of the president's impoundment-veto power.    But even after this case, impoundment continued as a common practice. Most line-item appropriations were more general than that at issue in Kendall, and presidents freely claimed reasons to impound that would avoid the Kendall precedent: &quot;Changed circumstances,&quot; &quot;frustration of congressional purpose,&quot; and &quot;dissipation of previous necessity&quot; were among them.    Throughout this ad hoc inventive process, all parties were happy to settle the issue on their own terms and ignore the clear constitutional language regarding the line-item veto. Congress even legislated impoundment powers for the president in the Anti-Deficiency Act of 1950, and in a 1950 omnibus appropriations bill allowing the president to take advantage of opportunities for savings after any appropriations bill was passed. These bills were passed in disregard of the veto clauses of the Constitution.    After World War II, as Congress's compulsion to spend staggered out of control, presidents began to use impoundment openly as a purely fiscal policy tool. Presidents Truman, Eisenhower and Kennedy all impounded funds appropriated by Congress for specific projects. In 1966, President Johnson impounded $5.3 billion to curb inflation caused by military spending in Vietnam. His Great Society projects for highways, housing, education, agriculture, health and welfare were not immune.    Under the Nixon administration, the impoundment issue came to a head, as Congress made a grab for the constitutional powers of a weakened and beleaguered president. Confronted with fiscal fantasy in Congress in the face of a grueling war in Vietnam, President Nixon impounded $12 billion in 1973. This included an impoundment of $6 billion for sewer projects that Congress had passed over Mr. Nixon's veto in 1972. The response to these impoundments was litigation and legislation.    The Impoundment Control Act of 1974 amounted to a de facto -- and illegal -- amendment of the Constitution. Under the act, the president was allowed to temporarily impound any line item, but only until either the House or the Senate passed a resolution to override that impoundment. The president's power of impoundment was struck another blow in a 1975 case, State of Louisiana v. Brinegar, when a federal district court determined that the president could not impound line items of a bill that explicitly prohibited its own impoundment. Both the Impoundment Act and Louisiana v. Brinegar gutted the impoundment power of the president, and eliminated the deterrent effect of presidential threats of impoundments.    Then, in 1983, some presidential power was restored. In INS v. Chadha, the Supreme Court ruled that provisions of legislation that permit just one house of Congress to overrule acts of the executive branch were unconstitutional and void. This means that the congressional override provided for in the Impoundment Control Act was also unconstitutional, leaving intact only that part of the act that allows the president to impound specific items.    In other words, after two centuries of beating around the line-item-veto bush, Congress (after Supreme Court correction and under a different label) has legislatively arrived at something very close to the line-item veto of the Constitution. Indeed, the remains of the Impoundment Control Act of 1974 would go even further than the Constitution, throwing out the president's 10-day veto deadline and the option of a two-thirds override vote by both houses of Congress.    The expansion and contraction of the impoundment power over the years has had little reference to the veto clauses of the Constitution, and everything to do with momentary political advantage. It is urgent now to settle this issue by adhering to the Constitution.    Use of the old name for the line-item veto, &quot;impoundment,&quot; served as a semantic excuse to avoid review of the constitutional clauses relating to &quot;veto.&quot; The label game of impoundment vs. veto did not begin to break down until relatively recently. In 1973, in the debates over the then-proposed Impoundment Control Act, Sen. Sam Ervin let the cat out of the bag when he equated impoundment practice with a line-item veto. Later, Harvard law professor Laurence Tribe, in his treatise on constitutional law, pursued at more length the theme and nomenclature of impoundment as line-item veto.    In retrospect, it is startling how the Constitution's explicit provisions on the veto could be ignored and extralegally amended by Congress for so long.    It is time to clean up this mess.    It is no coincidence that the federal deficit began its explosion at about the same time that Congress eliminated the president's impoundment power. The president needs a constitutional, working line-item veto, by whatever name, to keep Congress's compulsive spending from destroying the economy.    The Constitution provides the president with a line-item veto and the power to veto any part of any bill, but he has a 10-day deadline to use it, and Congress can override it with a two-thirds vote of both houses. Congress cannot, by mere legislation, grant or deny a line-item veto or a part-of-a-bill veto, because the Constitution grants these powers to the president. And the Constitution cannot be amended by putting a different label on the same old facts.    Since George Washington was president, Congress and the president have agreed that the president has some sort of line-item veto. They just could not agree on what it was. They could not agree because they would not look to the Constitution for guidance. Congress's compulsion to spend irresponsibly now requires that the issue be settled by calling the line-item veto a veto, not an impoundment, and accepting the Constitution as originally intended. In the short term, a return to vigorous use of the line-item veto, in its constitutionally correct form, seems to be the first step to a cure to our deficit crisis.    ---   Mr. Glazier is a lawyer in New York. </TEXT></DOC>