<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): Cover --- The Final Frontier: Japan Assaults the Last U.S. Bastion: Its Lead in Innovation </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   IN THE BEGINNING, the Japanese made things cheaper, but we derided the stuff as junk.    Later, in the 1960s and 1970s, the Japanese started to make things cheaper and better, and we began to worry -- with good reason. Japanese cameras, calculators and cars weren't junk, they were competition.    All the while, though, we had one big consolation. The Japanese were essentially copycats. Maybe it was true that whatever we could do, they could do better. But we had our creativity, our new ideas, our Nobel Prizes. With these, we could keep climbing to higher and higher levels of technology, and stay ahead. This would be our ultimate refuge, our enduring competitive weapon.    No longer.    Today Japan is challenging us even here, on the slippery rockface of new ideas, innovations, new technologies. Having caught up with the U.S. in many older technologies, Japan is struggling to pass the U.S. in new ones. It is struggling mightily to be first.    Japan's &quot;outflanking&quot; strategy is the word that management guru Peter Drucker uses to describe the new competition: Outflanking the U.S. in the growth industries of the 1990s and beyond -- computer software, genetic engineering, exotic new materials and others. Or passing the U.S. with 300-mile-an-hour passenger trains, or with robots that mix chemicals in space.    In the new phase, Japan will still lean on the U.S. and Europe, but its technological borrowings will be mostly at the precommercial stage. Japanese visitors to the U.S. don't photograph many American factories anymore. They visit M.I.T. professors. They cut deals with U.S. national laboratories. They bankroll Silicon Valley start-ups.    As in the past, the U.S. is being threatened by its own science and technology. There's a cruel irony there. For decades U.S. science has been second to none. Yet both the U.S. government and U.S. industry have sometimes been better at giving technology away than at commercializing at home.    U.S. companies have sold their ideas to Japan, to Korea, to Taiwan, to Europe. The royalty payments added a few cents to the bottom line. The executives figured the plans and blueprints would never come back to haunt them, but the blueprints came back as competing products. In technological circles, they call this the boomerang effect, and we have been boomeranged out of existence in some industries.    Now rises a great cry of protectionism from some of the most severely boomeranged. Even the free-trading Reagan administration succumbed at one point to the protectionist war cry. Last year the White House closed the gates to non-Americans at a scientific conference on superconductivity, but like most protectionist measures, this one didn't work. The information got out anyway.    Perhaps the more-rational solution is to stand and fight, to compete in a tough world of global business. Lately, more American business leaders seem to have realized this.    U.S. companies are using American lawyers more skillfully to tie up adversaries in legal knots -- at home and abroad. Computer companies are learning to cover their design tracks, to make their new machine almost clone-proof, to keep the knock-off artists at bay. Computers themselves are beginning to revolutionize more and more American factories, allowing people to make things faster, better, cheaper.    The U.S. can also draw on a vast reservoir of entrepreneurial spirit. Here there still is a willingness to form new companies, to take risks on a scale that is unthinkable in any other country, including Japan.    As the 1990s unfold, these American strengths -- and some Japanese weaknesses -- will probably emerge more clearly. Yet some American problems are very deep-seated -- for example, the U.S. propensity to overspend and undersave. At the same time, the Japanese industrial strategy is so methodical and well financed that the most plausible outcome is for Japan to grow even stronger and richer in the 1990s and into the 21st century.    What would that mean? Some loss of control for Americans, for sure. A great deal more money will flow into Japanese hands, and the flow of financial assets from the U.S. to Japan will be accompanied by a shift in decision making to Tokyo. These are decisions of more than passing interest to millions of Americans; with financial control goes the right to decide where to build the factories, what to produce, whom to employ.    It may seem indelicate to use the language of war to describe the battles of two nations that fought a real war less than 50 years ago. But for all the alliances in the geopolitical sphere and despite all the joint ventures and so on in the economic sphere, the biggest economic battle of the future is likely to be more of the same.    It will be America vs. Japan. </TEXT></DOC>