<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Small Business (A Special Report): The Dark Side --- Woebegone Agency </HL><AUTHOR> Eugene Carlson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   LET US CONSIDER the Small Business Administration, the Cleveland of government agencies.    Like the much-maligned city on Lake Erie, the Small Business Administration has an image problem. It's just sort of there, a tiny box on the government's giant organization chart, home to fewer than 4,000 faceless bureaucrats. Its day-to-day work as management counselor and lender of last resort is known to a relative handful. Its larger reputation, to the extent one exists, is a little grimy.    Thousands of businesses can trace their origins to a start-up loan from the 35-year-old SBA. Victims of natural and man-made disasters of all sorts are regularly bailed out by the agency.    But how does the SBA make news? Petty politics. Budget battles. Minority loan defaults. Wedtech.    Even Cleveland gets better press.    &quot;The agency is not good at telling its own story,&quot; says John Paul Galles, executive vice president of National Small Business United. Adds John Satagaj, president of the Small Business Legislative Council: &quot;It has the reputation of being a dumping ground&quot; for unemployed politicians.    James Abdnor, a 65-year-old South Dakotan who was drafted as SBA administrator last year after losing a hard-fought senatorial re-election race, served 14 years in Congress and admits he knew practically nothing about the agency when he was offered the top job. &quot;Many people think all we do is loan interest-free money that we never collect,&quot; Mr. Abdnor says.    The typical SBA loan, in fact, goes to a fledgling company that banks aren't crazy about financing without the safety net of an SBA guarantee. Mr. Abdnor says 97% of the SBA's deals are guaranteed bank loans. The rest are &quot;direct loans&quot; from the SBA itself, usually made to veterans, handicapped, and others singled out by Congress as worthy of special treatment.    Still, it is one of the SBA's ironies that taking the entire world of small business into account, few small-business executives ever come in contact with the agency. Nearly every farmer is beholden in some way to the Agriculture Department. Defense contractors have a longstanding love affair with the Pentagon.    But support for the SBA among its natural constituency &quot;is a mile wide and an inch deep,&quot; says Frank Swain, the SBA's chief counsel for advocacy. A lobbyist for the National Federation of Independent Business, the nation's largest organization of small-business owners, speculates that if he asked his group's half-million members to decide the fate of the SBA, they would probably vote to kill it.    &quot;The vote could be close,&quot; he says. Some consolation.    There is, of course, precedent for capital punishment where the SBA is concerned. Ronald Reagan, as popular on Main Street, U.S.A., as any recent president, expressed his affection for the SBA by marking it for extinction, along with Amtrak, the Export-Import Bank, the Economic Development Administration and other programs deemed to be drinking too deeply from the federal budget trough.    An SBA acting administrator was recruited from the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank, to serve as funeral director. He fired five of the agency's 10 regional directors his first day on the job.    This take-no-prisoners strategy brought anguished wails from Capitol Hill. The minuscule, but feisty, small-business lobby rallied to the agency's side. And the Reagan administration's attempts to emasculate the SBA by cutting its purse strings, liquidating its $9 billion loan portfolio and secreting its officials in the bowels of the Commerce Department, went for naught.    The SBA may have a shortage of friends in its own constituency, but it has the ally that counts -- the U.S. Congress. The SBA and the lawmakers don't see eye to eye on a lot of issues, but these days it owes its very life to members of Congress who, over the years, have used the agency to funnel money and influence to favorite hometown causes.    Some of this largesse is in the guise of &quot;disaster loans.&quot; The SBA is the dispenser of low-interest loans to victims of tornadoes, floods, earthquakes and the like. Some 10,200 such loans were made in the latest fiscal year. But Congress, and occasionally the executive branch, have adroitly expanded the disaster definition.    Item: Two California and Washington lawmakers drafted a bill that channeled emergency loans to West Coast fishermen who claimed that the ocean current phenomena El Nino had caused fish populations to dwindle.    Item: An amendment sponsored by then Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield authorized the SBA to give low-interest loans to any business hurt by the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. A Montana executive complained that his company suffered when an Air Force base was closed as part of the SALT I treaty.    Item: After the first Mexican peso devaluation in 1984, Rep. E (Kika) de la Garza, Democrat of Texas, sponsored an amendment authorizing hardship aid to companies on the U.S. side of the border whose business had been hurt by the currency decline.    Disaster loans have been authorized for ski resorts after winters with little snow; for auto dealers during an industry slump, and for South Florida's tourist industry after publicity about a crime wave caused by Cuban boat people tarnished the area's reputation as a holiday destination.    There was even SBA aid for victims of a &quot;disaster&quot; created by the government itself -- the payment-in-kind, or PIK, program that resulted in lost sales for farm implement, seed and fertilizer companies.    Congress has also used the SBA to befriend universities, creating a network of 52 Small Business Development Centers on campuses in 45 states. Supporters say the centers give small-business executives the sort of service farmers get from county extension agents. &quot;They're crucial in helping communities learn how to nurture small business,&quot; says Mr. Galles of National Small Business United.    &quot;The Assistant Professor's Relief Act,&quot; grumbles the SBA's Mr. Swain, who says the government-subsidized centers have grown like topsy and are viewed as a cash cow by financially strapped universities. They also usurp the roles of bankers, lawyers, accountants, and business consultants, he says.    The Wedtech affair has been another headache for the SBA. The now defunct Bronx, N.Y., defense firm is at the center of an influence-peddling case involving Atty. Gen. Edwin Meese and other high administration officials suspected of helping the company win large, uncontested military hardware contracts.    Under the SBA's 8(a) program, companies owned by &quot;socially and economically disadvantaged individuals&quot; can sidestep normal bidding procedures and be named the sole supplier in government procurement contracts. Wedtech was an 8(a) firm.    &quot;A garden-variety local corruption case,&quot; save for the major names linked to the scandal, says Mr. Swain. He notes that some 3,000 companies routinely deal in 8(a) contracts. But the chastened SBA is supporting a reform bill that would require competitive bidding by minority firms on big-dollar contracts.    Mr. Swain gets generally good marks in his role as a combined small-business booster and gadfly. Under the SBA's peculiar organization, the advocacy counselor holds roughly equal rank with the administrator.    Speaking quietly in his 10th floor office in SBA headquarters in downtown Washington, Mr. Swain says the SBA remains an invalid to much of the public, even though the agency is no longer on a Reagan imposed life-support system. &quot;I still get a lot of questions like, 'Are you folks going to be around next year?'&quot; he says.    A few yards down the corridor, in an office filled with Reagan Administration artifacts, Mr. Abdnor also attempts to fan the small-business flame. It is a tough sell. His dream of seeing the SBA administrator as a cabinet position will go unfulfilled, he concedes. The next best thing would be membership in the President's inner circle of economic advisers.    &quot;Once in a while they invite me in&quot; to cabinet meetings, Mr. Abdnor says. &quot;I sit in the second row. I don't think I'm supposed to be speaking out.&quot;    ---   Mr. Carlson covers regional, state and local affairs from The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>