<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Tax Report:A Special Summary and ForecastOf Federal and State TaxDevelopments---By Scott R. Schmedel</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES CANDA FRESTNATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><TEXT>   A WORKING INTEREST in a gas well becomes a volatile issue for investors.    Harold W. Hendrickson of Garden City, Kan., had no experience in oil and gas. He bought a 21.875% working interest in one gas well and similar shares in two more, becoming liable with co-owners for operations. The group farmed out all operations to a management company that could be removed only by a 51% vote of the owners, who saw themselves as investors. But the IRS said a working interest constitutes a business. It billed Hendrickson for the Social Security tax on self-employment income.    He appealed to the Tax Court. Now Special Judge Dinan has drawn a line that may surprise some tax experts: Hendrickson was inexperienced and owned minority shares in only three wells, so he was unable to play an active role in management and operations or to influence operational decisions. Thus, he was a passive investor not engaged in business and not subject to the self-employment tax.    The holding rejects a long-standing IRS position and opens the way for many refund claims, says Leon Nad of Price Waterhouse, CPAs.    HE CONSTRUCTED A HOME, but misconstrued the interest-deduction rules.    A man we'll call Noah built a new home in 1986 and used his savings account as the sole security for the construction loan. In 1987, of course, deductions for personal interest costs are being phased out; only 65% is deductible this year. But mortgage interest on a first or second home remains fully deductible, with certain restrictions. So, Noah asked the IRS, can't I treat my construction-loan interest as &quot;qualified residence interest&quot; and deduct it all?    Sorry, the IRS replies in private ruling 8743063: Residence interest applies to debt secured by residence property. Noah's loan isn't secured that way; so it is personal interest, subject to the deduction phase-out. Noah could solve his problem by mortgaging his new home to pay off the construction loan, notes publisher Research Institute of America.    DID DISILLUSION bring dissolution to this experiment in cooperative living?    Years ago, several families wishing to share meals, chores, and home costs formed a general partnership to buy an estate with two houses. They divided the land into four parcels and built more homes. Yet &quot;divorce, retirement, and widowhood caused the social framework . . . to loosen,&quot; IRS private ruling 8741066 says. The group dissolved the partnership in 1986, sold three land parcels, and split up the cash and property. One member formed a new partnership with others to buy interests in the fourth parcel.    Ah, the tax ramifications! Among them: May partners defer tax by rollovers -- that is, by putting either profit from the first partnership into a private home or profit from a private home into the second partnership? And may partners over 55 claim the one-time exemption for up to $125,000 in profit on selling a home? Here, the IRS ruling concludes, owning an interest in a general partnership is the same as owning a home -- not a business or investment.    Thus, it says, members of both partnerships qualify for the tax breaks.    AN IRS NOTICE of tax deficiency became valid when his lawyer handed Gregory W. McKay a copy of it in 1977, even if the original wasn't sent to the Beverly Hills, Calif., man's last known address, the Tax Court says. It refused to bar the IRS's claims and dismissed McKay's 1985 petition as filed long after the 90-day deadline.    CANADA CONSIDERS requiring tax-service firms to keep clients' information confidential, a minister says. A court inquiry heard claims that an Edmonton-based concern, now bankrupt, used data taken from its tax-service unit in efforts to sell investments. That is illegal in the U.S.    HOMEWORK offers extra credit to parents who buy a condominium or other residence for a child away at college, notes Ernst andamp; Whinney, CPAs. Parents may treat the place as a second home and deduct mortgage interest as well as property taxes.    CALL MOBY DICK as a material witness in this disability case.    Besides earning $31,000 in 1987, a man we'll call Ahab will get $7,000 in Social Security disability benefits; half the benefits, or $3,500, must be added to his taxable income. To establish his right to the benefits, Ahab paid legal fees of $1,500 to a lawyer this year. Generally, those fees would be deductible as a cost of producing or collecting taxable income; but in Ahab's case, only half the income is taxable.    Discussing the matter in Revenue Ruling 87-102, the IRS notes that no deduction is allowed for an expense allocable to exempt income. Thus, it says, half of Ahab's legal expenses, or $750, is basically deductible; the other half isn't. Moreover, his ultimate deduction is complicated by the provision of the 1986 tax act that now limits miscellaneous personal deductions.    The $750 must be added to other miscellaneous itemized deductions; only that part of the total that exceeds 2% of Ahab's adjusted gross income is deductible on his return.    BRIEFS: The IRS plans a hearing Monday on proposed rules for inventory accounting that include its controversial rejection of the &quot;practical-capacity&quot; method. . . . Laurence J. Whalen and Robert P. Ruwe have been sworn in as Tax Court judges. . . . Negotiations for an income-tax treaty with Singapore are to begin there during the week of Dec. 14. </TEXT></DOC>