<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Party Poopers Would Uninvite Millions---By David L. Wolper</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN><TEXT>   After the finale of the Liberty Weekend opening ceremonies a year ago today, I walked into the press tent on Governors Island in New York Harbor for a short news conference.    The highlights of the ceremony had been the unveiling of the refurbished Statue of Liberty, addresses by President Reagan and French President Francois Mitterrand, the swearing-in of new citizens by then-Chief Justice Warren Burger, the awarding of the Medal of Liberty to 12 of America's most distinguished living immigrants, a Balanchine ballet danced by Mikhail Baryshnikov and a historic remembrance of the Statue of Liberty recited by Gregory Peck. But the first question I received from the press was: &quot;Where were the Elvis Presley look-alikes?&quot;    Where were they, indeed? Of course, not in the unveiling ceremonies. The Elvis Presley segment constituted 45 seconds of a 50-minute salute to the history of American music during the closing ceremonies following four days of activities. But it has become a symbol for all those who missed the true significance of last year's Liberty Weekend celebration.    The press asked us why we were &quot;trivializing&quot; the Statue with our ceremonies. Judging from the press coverage we received, the 45-second Elvis Presley number in the closing ceremonies was the beginning and end of Liberty Weekend. We did not trivialize the statue's centennial, but our critics did trivialize us.    That's too bad. If some journalists were down on the enjoyment and fun of Liberty Weekend, the American public wasn't. Especially the public in the metropolitan area where the events took place.    The people who attended the events loved them. The citizens of the New York metropolitan area are still talking about what a terrific feeling the weekend engendered in everyone. The state of New York was so happy that it is using a photo from Liberty Weekend in advertisements to attract business to the state. Those who watched the events on television -- more than 100 million Americans -- loved them. People in 51 foreign countries enjoyed the events via television. The French were so impressed by the celebration, they thanked the U.S. in an ad in a New York newspaper.    People came 800,000-strong to our free New York Philharmonic concert in Central Park. They came to our free Boston Pops Americana Music Concert in Liberty State Park in New Jersey. They came to the three sessions of the Liberty Conference, where some of the finest minds debated the future of liberty in the world. And millions enjoyed shoreside views of the International Naval Review; Operation Sail '86, the magnificent parade of tall ships; and the 45-minute fireworks show. No ersatz Elvises graced these events with their presence.    In organizing Liberty Weekend we set out to make America feel good about itself and to honor one of our most precious national symbols, the Statue of Liberty. We also set out to celebrate the Fourth of July weekend and to have a good time. One year later, I can say that we accomplished all of those goals.    Our program was specifically designed to bring Americans of all ages closer to the Statue and what it stands for and to bring them from all parts of the country.    The celebration deserved to be more than just a New York event. Fifty-one children from the 50 states and the District of Columbia were chosen to participate in the ribbon-cutting ceremony after writing about what the Statue meant to them. Very little was mentioned in the press about that. In the closing ceremonies our marching band was made up of 850 college students from the 50 states, and our Drill Team consisted of more than 1,000 high school girls from all 50 states. The unveiling ceremonies focused on the histories of the Statue and Ellis Island and the important contributions of millions of immigrants who have come to America.    So why did some in the press make the Elvis dance number the symbol of our four-day program? Those who focused only on the flashy production numbers missed the essential point of the celebration.    That well-known &quot;glitz-monger&quot; John Adams wrote in 1776 that the signing date of the Declaration of Independence &quot;ought to be solemnized with pomp and parade, with shows, games, sports, guns, bells, bonfires, and illuminations, from one end of this country to the other, from this time forward for evermore.&quot;    Surely there's nothing wrong with a little patriotism, a little flag-waving, a little dancing and a little singing, especially on the Fourth of July weekend. Isn't it better to bring our message across with a smile and a little fun so that it is well remembered than to demand that the nation swallow a lecture coated in castor oil in the name of &quot;dignity&quot;? Adams understood this.    Unfortunately, the criticism leveled at us has had sad after-effects. Organizers of other important national events don't want to risk press criticism that they are &quot;glamorizing&quot; their programs. Guided by fear of a critical press rather than by the potential for impact on the public, they have reduced celebrations that could have touched all Americans this year to largely local events with limited -- or no -- national television exposure.    The 50th anniversary of the Golden Gate Bridge in May should have been a national event, but the pressure of the San Francisco press not to make the celebrations too &quot;glitzy&quot; influenced the organizers. The San Francisco celebration received only a minute or two on the national news shows. The same thing has happened in Philadelphia, which is celebrating the 200th anniversary of the Constitution. The organizers there are having problems raising money and getting national attention for the events. Too bad. Maybe not enough glitz.    During Liberty Weekend we produced a celebration for the entire nation. For those in the New York metropolitan area, we provided not only the events but the food-service, health and sanitation facilities, security and other logistical requirements in concert with the local, state and federal authorities. We charged admission for only two events and used the money they brought in to produce nine other programs that were free to the public. For all Americans, we provided a forum to remember our history, rejoice in the Statue's centennial and renew our commitment to the principles of liberty and justice for all.    I'm proud to have been a part of the celebration and proud to be an American. I hope you'll join me on this Independence Day weekend in being proud enough to celebrate with the fireworks and fun it deserves. President Adams would have wanted it that way. Maybe Elvis too.    ---   Mr. Wolper was chairman and executive producer of Liberty Weekend. </TEXT></DOC>