<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880826-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   POLISH RIOT POLICE BROKE UP coal strikes systematically in Silesia.    Convoys of police drove from mine to mine in the southern region, using a combination of negotiations and intimidation to end the labor protests at all but three of the mines. One striker said six of the miners were beaten. Workers at the giant Nowa Huta steel mill outside Krakow also gave up a partial strike. Strikes demanding higher pay and recognition of the banned union Solidarity continued along the Baltic coast.    At the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk, Solidarity leader Lech Walesa and about 1,300 strikers held out. The port director warned that any strikers will be fired.    ---   SUSPECTED SPIES WERE ARRESTED in an apparent breach of NATO security.    An ex-Army sergeant with access to a top-secret military archive and two Hungarian-born brothers were arrested in West Germany and Sweden and charged with suspicion of being Warsaw Pact spies. Intelligence sources said first hints of such a ring came years ago from spies in the East Bloc who were later killed.    U.S. officials said the exposure of the ring may revive controversy over whether the security of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow was breached.    ---   Burma released 1,700 jailed protesters and a leading dissident, Aung Gyi, quickly organized a rally of about 200,000 people to demand immediate formation of an interim government to lead the country to democracy. Protesters appeared to reject President Maung Maung's call for a referendum on ending 26 years of one-party rule.    ---   Iran and Iraq began face-to-face meetings in Geneva aimed at hammering out a permanent truce in their eight-year-old war. The mediator, U.N. Secretary General Perez de Cuellar, said he was satisfied with the first meeting, and talks between delegations headed by each nation's foreign minister are to continue through the weekend.    ---   Pakistan's new military chief warned senior officers against any &quot;ill-planned steps&quot; and pledged support for general elections planned for November, state-run television said. Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg took command of the military within hours of the plane explosion that killed President Zia and many of Pakistan's top military commanders.    ---   Mexican opposition legislators accused the government of blocking inquiries into charges of voting fraud in the disputed July 6 elections, and stormed out of a meeting of the Chamber of Deputies. The chamber serves as the country's electoral college and has been engaged in checking ballots prior to a certification of the vote results.    ---   The U.S. proposed a compromise at talks in Brazzaville on a timetable for withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. Sources at the negotiations said the proposal involved withdrawal of Cuban troops over a year and a half, probably starting Nov. 1. The talks in the Congolese capital, which involve Cuba, South Africa and Angola, are continuing.    ---   Burundi's president acknowledged his soldiers killed civilians in ethnic fighting, and said the death toll could rise above 5,000. The leader, Maj. Pierre Buyoya, was quoted on state-run radio. The fighting involves the majority Hutu tribe and the minority Tutsi, who control the Central African nation's military and government.    ---   A top Soviet official is to travel to China tomorrow for talks on Cambodia, marking the most important bilateral talks between the two estranged Communist giants in nearly 30 years. Deputy Foreign Minister Rogachev's visit could hasten peace in Cambodia and might pave the way for a Moscow-Beijing summit.    ---   North and South Korean leaders are to resume talks today on a nonaggression pact and the sharing of the Olympic Games. The talks opened last week but had broken off when they reached a stalemate Monday. At issue are the agenda and size of future parliamentary talks and a North Korean demand for withdrawal of U.S. troops.    ---   Israeli helicopter gunships attacked densely populated districts and Palestinian bases inside a refugee camp outside Sidon, Lebanon. Police said 10 people, including one guerrilla, were injured in the attack. In Israel, masked Palestinians wielding axes killed a Palestinian farmer suspected of cooperating with Israeli authorities.    ---   The Pentagon said the Soviet jet fighter program has benefited from the diversion of French milling machinery in a case it said rivaled that involving Japan's Toshiba, which sold submarine-propeller machinery to Moscow. The French case involves Machines Francaises Lourdes, four of whose executives were arrested in April.    ---   A genetically engineered drug showed promise in treating victims of a Brazilian radiation accident, according to doctors who administered it. In a report to be published in the British medical journal The Lancet, the doctors said the drug appeared to boost the radiation-damaged immune systems of some patients.    ---   Died: Art Rooney Sr., 87, owner of football's Pittsburgh Steelers, in Pittsburgh. . . . G. Robert Truex Jr., 64, ex-Rainier Bancorp. chairman, Wednesday, in Seattle. </TEXT></DOC>