<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:The FDA Cardio-Renal Committee Replies</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) </IN><TEXT>   The evaluation and licensing of new drugs is a topic of legitimate concern to not only the medical profession but our entire populace. Thus it is appropriate when the media, such as The Wall Street Journal, take an interest in these matters. The Food and Drug Administration recognizes the public interest by holding open meetings of advisory committees that review material presented by pharmaceutical companies, listen to expert opinions, listen to public comment from the floor and then give advice to the FDA. The Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee met on May 29 to consider two drugs to dissolve blood clots causing heart attacks. The Journal published editorials prior to the meeting (&quot;The TPA Decision,&quot; May 28) and after the meeting (&quot;Human Sacrifice,&quot; June 2 and &quot;The Flat Earth Committee,&quot; July 13). The second editorial began with the sentence: &quot;Last Friday an advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration decided to sacrifice thousands of American lives on an altar of pedantry.&quot; How can such decisions occur in our time? This reply by members of the advisory panel presents another side to the story. In part the reply is technical, although we have tried to simplify it. We first discuss drug evaluation in general and then turn to the specific issues involved in the evaluation of the thrombolytic drugs streptokinase and TPA.    The history of medicine has numerous instances of well-meaning physicians giving drugs and treatments that were harmful rather than beneficial. For example, the drug thalidomide was widely marketed in many countries -- and in West Germany without a prescription -- in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The drug was considered a safe and effective sleeping pill and tranquilizer. Marketing was delayed in the U.S. despite considerable pressure from the manufacturer upon the FDA. The drug was subsequently shown to cause birth defects and thousands of babies world-wide were born with grotesque malformations, including seal-like appendages and lack of limbs. The FDA physician who did not approve the drug in the U.S. received an award from President Kennedy. One can hardly argue with the benefit of a careful evaluation in this case. We present this, not as a parallel to TPA, but to point out that there are two sides to the approval coin -- early approval of a good drug, with minimal supporting data, looks wise in retrospect; early approval, with minimal supporting data, of a poor drug appears extremely unwise in retrospect. Without adequate and well-controlled data one cannot distinguish between the two cases. Even with the best available data, drugs are sometimes found to have adverse effects that were not anticipated. Acceptance of unusually modest amounts of data, based on assumptions and expectations rather than actual observation, is very risky. As will be explained below, the committee concluded there were major gaps in the data available to evaluate TPA.    The second editorial states that &quot;Medical research has allowed statistics to become the supreme judge of its inventions.&quot; If this means that data are required, we agree; people evaluate new therapies with the hope that they are effective -- again, before licensing, proof of effectiveness and safety is needed. If the editorial meant that the TPA decision turned on some arcane mathematical issue, it is incorrect. Review of the transcript shows that statistical issues played no substantial role.    We now turn to the drug of discussion, TPA. Heart attacks are usually caused by a &quot;blood clot in an artery supplying the heart muscle with blood.&quot; The editorial quotes Dr. Eugene Braunwald, &quot;The real question is, do you accept the proposition that the proximate cause of a heart attack is a blood clot in the coronary artery?&quot; We accept the statement, but there is still a significant question: &quot;What can one then do to benefit the victim?&quot; It is not obvious that modifying the cause after the event occurs is in the patient's best interest, especially when the intervention has toxicity of its own. Blood clots cause pulmonary embolism; it is the unusual patient who requires dissolution of the clot by streptokinase. Several trials show the benefit does not outweigh the risk.    On May 29 the Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee reviewed two drugs that &quot;dissolve&quot; blood clots. The drug streptokinase had been tested in a randomized clinical trial in Italy involving 11,806 patients. The death rate in those treated with streptokinase was 18% lower than in individuals not given streptokinase; patients treated within six hours did even better. Review of 10 smaller studies, and early results of a large international study, also showed improved survival. The committee recommended approval. It is important to know that the 18% reduction in death rate is a reduction of a few percent of the patients studied. The second drug considered-recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) -- which also was clearly shown to dissolve the blood clots, was not approved. Why? At least five issues contributed, to a greater or lesser amount, to the vote not to recommend approval for TPA at this time. These issues were: the safety of the drug, the method of manufacturing and its effect upon the drug, the completeness and adequacy of the data presented, the dose to be used, and the mechanism of action by which streptokinase (and hopefully TPA) saves lives.    Safety was the first and most important issue concerning TPA. Two formulations of TPA were studied at various doses; the highest dose was 150 milligrams. At this dose there was an unacceptable incidence of cerebral hemorrhage (that is, bleeding in the brain), in many cases leading to both severe stroke and death. The incidence may be as high as 4% or as low as 1.5% to 2% (incomplete data at the meeting made it difficult to be sure of the exact figure), but in either case it is disturbingly high; this death rate due to side effects is of the same magnitude as the lives saved by streptokinase. This finding led the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute to stop the 150-milligram treatment in a clinical trial. It is important to realize that this finding was unexpected, as TPA was thought to be relatively unlikely to cause such bleeding. Because of bleeding, the dose of TPA recommended by Genentech was reduced to 100 milligrams. The safety profile at doses of 100 milligrams looks better, but there were questions of exactly how many patients had been treated and evaluated fully. Relatively few patients getting this dose had been reported in full. Without complete reports from the studies there could be smaller strokes not reported and uncertainty as to how patients were examined. The committee felt a substantially larger data base was needed to show safety.    The TPA used to evaluate the drug was manufactured by two processes. Early studies used the double-stranded (roller bottle) form of the drug; the sponsor then changed to a predominately single-stranded form (suspension culture method) for marketing and production reasons. The second drug differed from the first in how long the drug remained in the blood, in peak effect, in the effect on fibrinogen and in the dose needed to cause lysis of clots. Much of the data was from the early form; these data were not considered very helpful with respect to the safety of the recommended dose of the suspension method drug. This could perhaps be debated, but the intracranial bleeding makes the issue an important one. The excessive bleeding may well prove to be a simple matter of excessive dose, but this is not yet known unequivocally.    Data were incomplete in that many exposed patients' data had not been submitted yet and much of the data came from treatment with TPA made by the early method of manufacture. There was uncertainty about the data used to choose the 100-milligram dose, i.e., perhaps a lower dose is adequate. When there is a serious dose-related side effect it is crucial that the dose needed for effectiveness has been well-defined and has acceptable toxicity.    Let us turn to the mechanism of action, the means by which the beneficial effect occurs. There may be a number of mechanisms. The most compelling is clot lysis (dissolution). However, experts presented data that streptokinase changes the viscosity of the blood that could improve blood flow; the importance is uncertain. Streptokinase also lowers blood pressure, which may decrease tissue damage during a heart attack. While there is convincing evidence that TPA (at least by the first method of manufacture) dissolves clots faster than streptokinase (at least after a few hours from the onset of the heart attack), we do not have adequate knowledge to know what portion of the benefit of streptokinase comes from dissolving the clot. TPA, thus, may differ in its effect on the heart or on survival. The drugs could differ in other respects, such as how often after opening a vessel they allow reclosure, and, of course, the frequency of important adverse effects.    These issues delay possible approval. Fortunately, more data are being collected. It is our sincere hope that the drug lives up to its promise, but should the drug prove as valuable as hoped, that would not imply the decision was wrong. The decision must be evaluated as part of the overall process of drug approval.    The second editorial suggests that if the drug is not approved, Dr. Temple (director of the Bureau of Drugs, FDA), Dr. Young (FDA commissioner) and Dr. Bowen (secretary of health and human services) should administer &quot;randomized mortality trials of heart-attack victims receiving the TPA clot buster or nothing.&quot; This indignant rhetoric seems inappropriate on several counts. First, the advisory committee has no FDA members; our votes are independent and in the past, on occasion, we have voted against the FDA's position. It is particularly inappropriate to criticize Drs. Temple and Young for the action of an independent group. The decision (by a vote of eight against approval, one for and two abstaining) was made by an independent panel of experts in cardiovascular medicine and research from excellent institutions. These unbiased experts reviewed the data presented and arrived at this decision; the FDA deserves no credit or blame. Second, we recommend approval of streptokinase; we are convinced that the drug saves the lives of heart-attack victims (at least in the short term). To us it would be questionable to participate in a trial without some treatment in patients of the type shown to benefit from streptokinase. A better approach is to use streptokinase as an active control drug in a randomized trial. If it is as efficacious or better than streptokinase, we will rejoice. We have spent our adult lives in the care of patients and/or research to develop better methods of treatment. Both for our patients and our friends, our families and ourselves, we want proven beneficial drugs available.    In summary, with all good therapeutic modalities the benefits must surely outweigh the risks of treatment. In interpreting the data presented by Genentech in May 1987 the majority of the Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee members could not confidently identify significant benefits without concomitant significant risk. The review was clouded by issues of safety, manufacturing process, dose size and the mechanism of action. We are hopeful these issues will be addressed quickly, allowing more accurate reassessment of TPA's risk-benefit ratio with conclusive evidence that treatment can be recommended that allows us to uphold the physician's credo, &quot;primum non nocere&quot; (first do no harm).    ---   Lloyd D. Fisher, Ph.D., director, clinical statistics, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; director, Biostatistical Core, Diabetes Research Center; professor of biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle.    Elsa-Grace Giardina, M.D., associate professor of medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York.    Peter R. Kowey, M.D., director, Cardiac Arrhythmia Service; professor of medicine, Medical College of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.    Carl V. Leier, M.D., director, division of cardiology, Ohio State University Medical Center; the James V. Overstreet Professor of Medicine and Pharmacology, Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus.    David T. Lowenthal, M.D., Ph.D., past president, American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics; professor of geriatrics and adult development, professor of pharmacology, director of clinical pharmacology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York.    Franz H. Messerli, M.D., associate head, division of hypertension, Ochsner Medical Institutions, professor of medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, La.    Craig M. Pratt, M.D., associate professor of medicine, director of Coronary Care Unit, director of Clinical Cardiology Research, Methodist Hospital, the Baylor College of Medicine, Houston.    Jeremy Ruskin, M.D., director, Cardiac Arrhythmia Service, Massachusetts General Hospital; associate professor of medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass. </TEXT></DOC>