<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870805-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN IS SEEKING congressional support for a Central American initiative.    The White House plan would link a suspension of U.S. assistance for the Nicaraguan rebels to a cease-fire and certain political changes by the Sandinista government. Under the proposal, the administration wouldn't submit its request for additional Contra aid before Sept. 30 and cease-fire talks would begin. When terms are reached, the U.S. would suspend military aid to the Contras. Managua would stop receiving aid from the Soviet bloc and would suspend its emergency laws.    Guatemala said the country's army had foiled a guerrilla plot to seize a foreign embassy during this week's summit of Central American leaders.    ---   Iran launched three days of military maneuvers in the Persian Gulf. U.S. warships in the region were on &quot;heightened alert&quot; because of Tehran's recent threats against the U.S. Separately, Iran reportedly reached an agreement with the Soviet Union to open a railroad and an oil pipeline linking the neighboring countries.    Many Moslem leaders appear to have decided that Iran is to blame for last week's rioting in Mecca, in which more than 400 people, mostly Iranians, were killed. Saudi officials said Iran had plotted to take over the Grand Mosque, where more than two million Moslems yesterday ended their annual pilgrimage to the holy city.    ---   The FCC abolished the fairness doctrine, saying the 38-year-old policy violated the constitutional rights of broadcasters. Despite opposition to the move, the agency voted 4-0 to eliminate the doctrine, which requires broadcasters airing controversial material to give opponents free air time to respond.    ---   A Tamil rebel leader formally accepted an Indian-sponsored accord aimed at ending Sri Lanka's ethnic civil war, saying the main guerrilla group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, would surrender its arms. The leader, however, doubted the pact would achieve lasting peace, saying &quot;a separate state is the only solution.&quot;    ---   A Chilean jetliner crashed while landing at the northern city of Calama, killing at least two people and injuring 10 others, police said. The Lan Chile Boeing 737 had 33 people aboard, including two U.S. citizens.    ---   A Venezuelan appeals court upheld the acquittal of a Cuban exile in planning the 1976 bombing of a Cuban airplane that killed 73 people. Orlando Bosch, an opponent of Castro, has been imprisoned for 10 years despite two earlier acquittals. The three-judge panel in Caracas also upheld the convictions of two co-defendants in the case.    ---   The EPA released a survey showing that potentially dangerous levels of radon gas were found in 21% of 11,600 homes tested in 10 states. The results indicate that radon contamination may be a problem nationwide. Radon has been linked to as many as 20,000 lung cancer deaths annually.    ---   Officials in Thailand received assurances from Gen. John Vessey that visits by U.S. officials to Vietnam to search for missing servicemen didn't signal a normalization of U.S. relations with Hanoi. Thailand had expressed concern that renewed U.S.-Vietnamese ties might weaken pressure on Hanoi to end its occupation of Cambodia.    ---   The Senate Ethics panel said Alaska Sen. Murkowski isn't violating a conflict-of-interest rule by owning part of a refinery that relies on North Slope oil while sponsoring a bill to expand North Slope production. The committee, however, is still studying whether the Alaska Republican broke disclosure rules.    ---   Relief officials in Dhaka said that the death toll from two weeks of flooding rose to 238, and that nearly a million people were left homeless in Bangladesh and neighboring India. The floods were triggered by heavy monsoon rains, which also have destroyed at least 625,000 acres of rice fields.    ---   Police in the Philippines arrested two men, including a one-time Moslem separatist leader close to Marcos, in the assassination Sunday of President Aquino's local governments minister. Separately, an Aquino spokesman said criminal charges were being prepared against Marcos in an effort to recover his alleged &quot;ill-gotten wealth.&quot;    ---   Panama's military leader is being investigated by the U.S. for allegedly providing protection to drug traffickers and moneylaundering operations in exchange for kickbacks, the Los Angeles Times reported. The inquiry is being pursued despite a split in the White House over whether to press for Gen. Noriega's ouster, the newspaper said.    ---   Soviet police blocked more than 5,000 Crimean Tatars from holding a weekend rally in the Soviet Central Asian city of Uzbekistan, a dissident leader said. Police and soldiers in armored vehicles surrounded the demonstrators, who are demanding the restoration of their ancestral homeland.    ---   The U.S. and Sweden are studying the possibility that a ring of Polish-born businessmen smuggled sensitive electronic parts to their homeland through Sweden. The U.S. attorney's office in Los Angeles confirmed that two Polish-born residents of Sweden, carrying computer microprocessors, were arrested May 13. </TEXT></DOC>