<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861230-0063 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Nowhere to Hide</HL><DD> 12/30/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN FRESTTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   For the hottest product of 1987, some bright international entrepreneur ought to come up with a new union, The National Leaders Protective Association. No doubt his first three recruits could be Ronald Reagan, Mikhail Gorbachev and Deng Xiaoping. All three are spending the season wondering what hit them.    Mr. Reagan, supposedly the world's most powerful man, has troubles by now documented in tiresome detail. The New Republic has even conducted a contest to give them a name. The winning entry, Iranamok, certainly deserved the title -- whether it describes the Reagan administration or its critics.    Mr. Gorbachev, head of the world's only extant empire, lost a round to Andrei Sakharov. Mr. Sakharov won his fight to be released from internal exile in Gorky, and shortly started giving interviews to the Western media. The Soviet authorities even let him borrow a television studio. Of course, if their new openness were anything more than a cosmetic publicity play to foreign opinion, they could always let him broadcast his thoughts to the Russian people themselves.    Mr. Deng, who runs the world's most populous country, must be the most puzzled of all. He's buried Mao Tse-tung, reversed the cultural revolution, introduced private markets and incentives, and even announced plans for a Shanghai stock exchange. Suddenly, he's got students in the streets demanding that he shake the place up.    With Mr. Reagan being hounded for being soft on hostages, Mr. Deng is being hounded as a straight-laced communist. So the president requests an independent counsel and appoints a cabinet-level coordinator and appeals to congressional committees to release what they've learned. And China's supreme leader promises to have elections with more than one candidate. Secretary Gorbachev hints he has some more dissidents to release, and talks of holding a human-rights conference in Moscow.    At the National Leaders Protective Association, these poor fellows could gather in Monaco or someplace to compare notes. Maybe Ferdinand Marcos and Jean-Claude Duvalier could be granted emeritus status to share their experiences. P.W. Botha and Augusto Pinochet could be given observer status, to listen but not talk. Corazon Aquino, newly minted as Time's Woman of the Year, might not want to join up just yet, but give her time. Clearly running a country has become a thankless job.    A common thread runs through the woes of the NLPA, and it tells us no little about what really shapes the times in which we live. The leaders who presume to run countries are being rocked to and fro by a wired world. Communications have become so rapid and so pervasive the leaders can't keep up with events. Mr. Reagan can't keep his arms sales to Iran a secret, and can't control the flood of revelations and speculations. Mr. Gorbachev finds that penning Mr. Sakharov up in Gorky doesn't keep him out of the international spotlight, and also that he needs people like Mr. Sakharov to have any chance of running a modern society. Mr. Deng, similarly, needs educated youths, but can't keep them from learning that democracy means choices.    No doubt the NLPA would blame its woes on a nosy and irresponsible press, but that's not quite right. Some in the U.S. press didn't print what they knew about the Iran arms sales until the story started to leak out of Iran, and quite a few knew but didn't print that one of the hostages was a CIA station chief. But in today's world these stories were bound to come out sooner or later; the press has no more control than the leaders.    The moving force is communications technology. Even the Soviets can't control the telephone. Something published in an obscure newspaper in Lebanon is now instantly known around the world. If an opposition party is allowed in Taiwan, students in Shanghai will soon know. In most of the world, we can now watch as the space shuttle Challenger goes up in flames, or as Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager land in California.    There were fears that a wired world would benefit the demagogues like Hitler and lead to totalitarian societies like Orwell's &quot;1984.&quot; So far at least, the effect has been to keep alive the spark of freedom in authoritarian societies and make it harder, not easier, for leaders to manipulate their peoples. We've seen nothing yet; computer technology is still leaping ahead, database retrieval and satellite television broadcasts are in their infancies. Members of the NLPA will have nowhere to hide.    The biggest danger in global communications, we suppose, is a certain faddishness. Uncontrolled waves of enthusiasm or condemnation may sometimes give rise to unrealistic hopes in Shanghai or instability in Washington. This is something both the world's leaders and the world's people will have to learn to live with, as indeed they already are. Knowledge has its dangers, but ultimately is a liberating force. On the whole, the new communications age is an instrument for human freedom. </TEXT></DOC>