<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880523-0025 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   HUNGARY OUSTED veteran leader Kadar and named Grosz as his successor.    Kadar, also dropped from Budapest's ruling Politburo, was given the largely ceremonial post of president. The Hungarian Communist Party named Premier Grosz, 57, a hard-nosed politician who can be expected to proceed with economic changes, to succeed the 75-year-old Kadar, who had led Hungary since 1956. It had been accepted wisdom that fresh leadership was needed to deal with Hungary's $18 billion foreign debt, unprofitable industry and diminishing standard of living.    The action, announced after a three-day party forum, illustrates the Soviet Union's influence on economic and political changes in Hungary.    ---   GORBACHEV EXPRESSED optimism over reaching a pact on strategic arms.    The Soviet leader said he believed that a superpower agreement cutting long-range nuclear arsenals by as much as 50% could be completed by the time Reagan leaves office in January. In a wide-ranging interview with the Washington Post newspaper and Newsweek magazine, Gorbachev also proposed a joint U.S.-Soviet flight to Mars. And he declared that the entire Soviet leadership supported his plans to modernize the Soviet political and economic systems.    The Communist Party dismissed the leaders of the republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan. The moves Saturday followed ethnic turmoil in the regions.    ---   The U.S. has placed an offer &quot;on the table&quot; for Noriega to step down, National Security Adviser Powell said in a CBS-TV interview. Negotiations for the removal of the Panamanian military chief currently are &quot;on hold,&quot; Shultz said on ABC-TV. But the secretary of state made clear the U.S. might drop drug charges against Noriega.    ---   Authorities in Pelham, N.Y., said a man who killed a federal judge Saturday and then committed suicide was a retired New York City police officer. Officials said the judge, Richard Daronco, had ruled against the gunman's daughter in a sexual-harassment suit against a bank. He was the second U.S. judge to be killed this century.    ---   Pentagon advisers called for a revamping of Reagan's space-based anti-missile project and urged a cautious approach on deployment. Rather than a full-blown array of weapons, the panel suggested development of a succession of defensive systems. The Pentagon said the report didn't signal a change in policy.    ---   Assailants hurled hand grenades at a political rally in South Africa's Soweto township, killing at least two people and wounding about 30 others, police said. The attack came amid an upsurge of violence over the weekend. Five blacks were killed in clashes in Natal province and a white was burned to death near Johannesburg.    ---   Rival Moslem militiamen battled in the slums of southern Beirut, and Lebanese police said at least six people were killed and 14 others wounded. About 7,000 Syrian troops appeared poised to enter the area. Meanwhile, the pro-Iranian Hezbollah pledged to protect western hostages held in Beirut, a newspaper in Abu Dhabi reported.    ---   Violence erupted in the occupied West Bank as Israeli authorities reopened schools closed for the past four months in East Jerusalem. The Israeli army said a Palestinian woman was killed by troops during a demonstration in a West Bank refugee camp, and two Arab teenagers were wounded during clashes in the city of Nablus.    ---   Two committees in Sweden absolved past and present governments of complicity in a series of illicit weapons transactions uncovered over the past four years. The panels, one a parliamentary group and the other named by Premier Carlsson, blamed lax government enforcement of Sweden's arms-trade policies.    ---   Evangelist Jimmy Swaggart returned to the pulpit, telling followers in Baton Rouge, La., that the sex scandal that led to his three-month exile was behind him. Swaggart was defrocked April 8 by the Assemblies of God ministry after he refused to accept the Pentecostal denomination's order barring him from the pulpit for a year.    ---   Sikh extremists detonated a bomb at a railway station in Punjab, killing at least two Hindu migrants and injuring about 35 others, police said. On Saturday, Sikh radicals killed at least 15 people in the northern state, and New Delhi dispatched special anti-insurgency forces to the area.    ---   Riot police in South Korea clashed with thousands of youths in the southwestern city of Kwangju during rallies against the government and the U.S. The demonstrators were demanding an inquiry into the army's role in crushing a 1980 revolt against martial law imposed by then-President Chun.    ---   The last column of Soviet troops left the Afghan city of Jalalabad and arrived in Kabul, the Soviet news agency Tass reported. The withdrawal paves the way for attacks by anti-Communist guerrillas on the strategic northeastern city, which controls the corridor into the capital from Pakistan. </TEXT></DOC>