<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880425-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Space: The Russian Frontier </HL><AUTHOR> Jonathan Coopersmith </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT FREST </CO><IN> ARO </IN><TEXT>   The past six months have seen the announcement of a much-needed American civilian space policy. But they were also marked by major strides in the Soviet program, the successful return of the European Ariane rocket to commercial service, a significant expansion of Japanese plans, the Soviet commercial launch of an Indian earth-resources satellite, and a Chinese-Brazilian agreement to build such a satellite. The U.S. is back on the right road but faces a lot of traffic.    For the businessman, engineer or scientist who wants to work in space, Moscow is increasingly the place to be. This was quite clear at the Moscow space-futures forum (officially the International Forum on Cooperation in Space in the Name of Peace on Earth), held last October to commemorate the 30th anniversary of Sputnik. Nearly 500 foreigners, half of them American, attended.    The forum was the creation of Roald Sagdeev, director of the Institute for Space Research of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Mr. Sagdeev, an energetic, charming man, brought the core of the world's space-science community to Moscow on the basis of his reputation, free travel and housing, and assurances that the forum would not be a propaganda mill.    Mr. Sagdeev and the evolving constellation of Soviet space organizations emerged with enhanced credibility and closer ties with the West and developing countries. While the vast bulk of the Soviet space effort remains military and public relations still plays a major role, the civilian component is growing in size and openness, and is increasingly seeking and finding Western cooperation.    Underlying Soviet activities is a perspective on space that encompasses long-term exploitation and colonization as much as the exploration Americans stress. Soviet space programs benefit from direct military interest and the general concentration of resources on physics and chemistry. Institutional momentum keeps programs and organizations alive.    Over the past few years, the Soviets have chalked up very impressive accomplishments, including a permanently manned space station; the world's largest booster; improved reliability and endurance of unmanned spacecraft; and the development of a space shuttle, which will soon be tested. Complementing these accomplishments are wide-ranging plans to explore Mars, worthy of American visions 15 years ago. In the face of an economy backward in so many ways, the Soviets nevertheless are offering services and opportunities no other country today can match financially or technically.    The Soviets can offer delivery to orbit more quickly and less expensively than Western commercial vendors. The large investment in their space infrastructure has given them a stable of reliable rockets (the Proton has had nine failures in 105 launches) that, while technologically undistinguished, perform the bottom-line task of putting satellites in orbit.    The shortage of Western capacity makes Soviet launchers attractive. A series of launch disasters, including the Challenger explosion, severely curtailed Western access to space in 1986-87. The European Ariane launcher just returned to commercial service. The U.S. space program will not eliminate its backlog of payloads until the early 1990s.    Want to launch a satellite quickly and inexpensively? Glavkosmos, the recently established civilian space agency, will charge roughly $40 million for a payload that a Western company would charge $60 million for. It offers a range of boosters with safeguards to minimize the transfer of technology from the West. The U.S. government has prohibited American use of Soviet boosters, but two major satellite makers, General Electric and General Motors, are appealing the action.    The Soviet purpose in offering launch services is two-fold: To gain both international prestige and hard currency. The Soviets can undercut their Western competitors because Soviet operating costs are significantly lower than those of American and European commercial boosters, due to economies of scale (in 1987 the Soviets launched 95 boosters, compared with 15 by the rest of the world). Furthermore, the expense of launching a Proton rocket is in unconvertible rubles; the payment is in an international currency.    Glavkosmos also offers small self-contained canisters carried on the Mir space station. Formerly a NASA monopoly, these &quot;Getaway Specials&quot; offer a low-cost way to conduct research in space. Payload Systems Inc. recently became the first American customer.    Want a satellite picture so detailed it shows airplanes on the ground? Sojuzkarta sells photographs with a resolution of five meters, twice that of France's SPOT and six times better than Landsat's thematic mapper. The U.S. Geological Survey wants to use these pictures, but faces opposition from other parts of the government. Sojuzkarta rang up its first of many American sales at the October forum, and an American firm soon may become its Western marketing outlet.    Want to explore Mars, an asteroid, or Saturn? Mr. Sagdeev's Institute for Space Research and other research institutes are seeking foreign experiments for Soviet space probes. The Institute for Space Research coordinated the 1986 Halley's Comet missions of several countries. European scientists are working actively with their Soviet counterparts on Mars missions for the 1990s. U.S. scientists, utilizing their expertise from the 1976 Viking landers, are selecting possible landing sites for Soviet and, possibly, American rovers.    Scientists are revenue- (more accurately, research-) maximizing players. If the Soviet Union offers opportunities their home countries cannot match, the best and the brightest scientists world-wide will prefer to work with Soviet institutes. The long-term consequences for the American scientific and technical community would be devastating.    The U.S. has three options. It can ignore, compete with, or cooperate with the Soviet space program.    Competition has long been tacit American policy. Continuing this approach, the new space policy announced in January will put the U.S. back on solid competitive ground by emphasizing easier access to space and the development of basic technologies for working in space.    But while competition is a viable strategy, the U.S. will maximize its return with selective cooperation. Cooperation requires shared interests, knowledge of each other's activities, and political support. The U.S. government has a shaky record on the last. It unilaterally canceled a joint U.S.-European solar probe a few years ago, and now an unseemly brawl has broken out between the Defense Department and NASA over foreign participation in the space station. Nonetheless, intelligent cooperation with Europe, Asia and the Soviet Union offers definite scientific and economic benefits by avoiding redundancy and expanding prospects for research. The coordination of Japanese, European and Soviet missions to Halley's comet, aided by American tracking facilities, is an excellent example of what can be done.    The U.S. could focus on making International Space Year in 1992 more than a public-relations blitz. One worthy proposal for this 500th anniversary celebration of Columbus's discovery of America is the creation of an international satellite consortium for earth resources, Envirosat.    Earth-resources satellites observe and monitor our planet from space. They have proved economically valuable in making maps, estimating crop yields, predicting water runoff, charting urban growth, and discovering mineral deposits. With Third World scientists and engineers trained to use the consortium's data, Envirosat could have a global impact as great as that of weather satellites 25 years ago.    Envirosat also would revitalize NASA's pioneering Landsat program and help the U.S. regain technical parity with the earth-resources programs of France, the Soviet Union, Japan, India and, soon, China and Brazil. India's third remote sensing satellite was just launched. The next American satellite, Landsat 6, will not be launched until 1991. The Landsats in orbit will probably fail before then, leaving the U.S. -- the first country to launch a remote sensing satellite -- dependent on foreign satellites for data.    While unmanned satellites are commercially and scientifically valuable, they do not spark the public interest -- and support -- of costlier manned projects. NASA's intention to return to the moon before going to Mars is the right approach. While not as exciting as going directly to the red planet, manned lunar operations will establish the industrial foothold necessary to exploit space, not just explore it.    Given the growing space programs of other nations, the U.S. must decide not just what it wants from space, but what resources to commit over long periods of time. Does it want to compete with all the world or does it want to seek ways to cooperate? As long as America's policy makers remain indifferent, the world's space experts will continue to go to Moscow.    ---   Mr. Coopersmith, a historian of science and technology, is a visiting scholar at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University. </TEXT></DOC>