<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870710-0026 </DOCNO><HL> )HL    What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH TESTIFIED Casey sought to shield Reagan from Iran-Contra damage.    The Marine officer, in his third day of public hearings before congressional panels, said the late CIA director told him that he and Adm. Poindexter, North's National Security Council boss, would have to take &quot;the hit&quot; for the scandal to give the administration a &quot;credible&quot; defense. North also said he tried to conceal Casey's role from Justice Department attorneys, and continued to shred documents until the day he was fired, even, on one occasion, while the lawyers were in his office.    Prime Minister Shamir denied Israeli intelligence was involved in diverting funds to the Contras, and denied firing an aide North linked to the affair.    ---   An Iranian gunboat attacked a Persian Gulf oil tanker operated by a U.S. company, without inflicting casualties. The tanker Peconic, under charter to a Texaco unit, flies a Liberian flag. Meanwhile, Senate Democrats failed to halt a Republican filibuster of a measure calling for a delay in U.S. plans to flag and escort 11 Kuwaiti gulf ships.    ---   Meese said that he knew as early as 1985 that the personal investment adviser he was using had business ties to Wedtech Corp., but asserted that they never discussed the scandal-plagued military contractor. The attorney general told a Senate panel that he &quot;endeavored to make full disclosure&quot; of all his investments.    ---   Marcos will be jailed if he doesn't stop trying to overthrow President Aquino, a State Department official told a House panel. The U.S. confined the former Philippine leader to Hawaii after hearing of his alleged plot to overthrow and capture Aquino.    The panel also heard a tape in which Marcos said he had 1,000 tons of gold.    ---   South Korean students held a massive funeral march for a comrade who died of injuries received in a June demonstration. The march began peacefully, and riot police stayed away, but it ended in violence when about 100,000 students tried to march on President Chun's Seoul palace and police blocked them.    ---   Sikh terrorists killed eight moderate Sikhs in the northern India state of Punjab as strikes called to protest the separatist killings of 74 Hindu bus passengers this week shut down New Delhi and 21 other cities. No deaths were reported in the protests as Hindus attacked Sikh homes and businesses and police imposed a curfew.    ---   Bonn charged the brother of Mohammed Hamadi, accused of hijacking a TWA jetliner to Beirut in 1985, with the January kidnappings of two West Germans in Beirut. Bonn said Ali Hamadi kidnapped the two men in an attempt to block the extradition of his brother to the U.S., which sought to try him for murder and hijacking.    ---   Panama opposition leaders planned to go ahead with a massive protest today despite a presidential ban. Meanwhile, Col. Diaz Herrera, whose criminal accusations against military leader Gen. Noriega prompted recent protests, was to appear before the attorney general to lodge charges, but a spokesman said that was unlikely.    ---   Australians vote tomorrow in parliamentary elections. A victory for Prime Minister Hawke's Labor Party has been thrown into doubt as polls show its once-commanding lead all but gone. A victory by the conservative opposition parties would create a coalition government that promises huge government spending cuts and deregulation.    ---   Egyptian President Mubarak met with Israeli Foreign Minister Peres in Geneva, Switzerland. The two discussed a U.S. proposal for a Mideast settlement and scheduled a visit to Israel by Egypt's foreign minister in two weeks. Egypt wants an international conference with participation by the PLO, which Israel opposes.    ---   Talks opened in Senegal between about 60 white South Africans opposed to apartheid and leaders of the African National Congress, a banned black resistance group. The white group is the largest ever to meet with the ANC and is composed mostly of Afrikaners, who dominate South Africa's governing Nationalist Party.    ---   The White House accused Sen. Biden (D., Del.) of politicizing confirmation hearings of Supreme Court nominee Bork. Biden, chairman of the Senate Judiciary panel, had said he would lead opposition to the appointment when the panel begins hearings Sept. 15. Meanwhile, White House aide Baker urged the NAACP not to pre-judge Bork.    ---   U.S. officials fear another tragedy similar to the deaths of 18 illegal aliens found locked in a sweltering boxcar in Texas recently as smugglers attempt to cash in on new immigration laws. Nineteen Mexicans were rescued from another locked boxcar in Texas and 141 were found in two trucks in California this week. </TEXT></DOC>