<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870202-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Currency Protectionsim: Parity Lost---By Ronald I. McKinnon</HL><DD> 02/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPAN CANDA FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   When the dollar soared to 260 yen and 3.7 marks in late February 1985, the unsustainable loss in America's international competitiveness since 1981 had become so great as to be obvious to everybody. The Reagan administration finally abandoned its longstanding refusal to treat the dollar exchange rate as a legitimate target for public policy.    For the rest of 1985, central banks cooperated to nudge the dollar down directly in the foreign-exchange markets. More important, they adjusted their domestic money growth rates to support this objective. Growth of M1, the basic money supply, rose sharply in the U.S. to more than 10% per year, while West Germany and Japan followed relatively tight money policies with M1 growth less than 5%.    At 200 yen and 2.3 marks by the end of 1985, the dollar was more or less correctly aligned with the currencies of our Japanese and European trading partners in two closely related respects. First, there was approximate purchasing-power parity. At those exchange rates, one dollar could buy at the wholesale level a broad basket of manufactured goods and primary products in Japan and Europe similar to what it could buy at home.    Second, rates of price inflation (as measured by changes in their respective wholesale-price indexes in the three areas) were virtually the same at the end of 1985, and close to zero. Being properly aligned, the yen/dollar and mark/dollar exchange rates were not themselves imposing any significant upward or downward pressure on the average price level of tradable goods in any of the three major blocs.    Hence, late 1985 into early 1986 presented a wonderful opportunity for the finance ministers of the Group of Seven industrialized democracies to reinstitute a common monetary standard to secure the trading efficiency of the major industrial countries. At that point, a formally announced policy whereby the dollar would, henceforth, be kept within fixed narrow bands of, say, 190 to 210 yen and 2.2 to 2.4 marks would have been technically easy to implement. If the dollar tended to be weak and fall toward the lower intervention points, the U.S. Federal Reserve System would be obligated to tighten American monetary policy just as the Bank of Japan and Bundesbank would be obligated to loosen up. And vice versa should the dollar become unduly strong. Aggregate money growth would be geared to keeping constant the three blocs' common (wholesale) price level.    Once private speculators understood these new rules of the game, containing unambiguous information regarding the mutual intentions of the major central banks, then financial speculation would be stabilizing in containing exchange rates within their official bands -- as was largely true of the operation of the late 19th-century gold standard.    What then went wrong with this naive vision? Instead of being stabilized at its purchasing-power-parity level at the end of 1985, the dollar continued to fall throughout 1986 and then plunged early in 1987 toward 150 yen and 1.8 marks. Instead of feeding the foreign-exchange markets clear information regarding their mutual monetary intentions, governments criticized each other's alleged policy failures and then appeared to act at cross purposes. For example, this Jan. 13, after the Bundesbank and Bank of Japan had intervened heavily to support the dollar, unnamed high officials in the U.S. government suddenly suggested that the dollar should be allowed to fall further -- which it did.    The upshot in 1987 is a system in disarray. Particularly in agriculture, there is a growing demand for protectionism to insulate domestic markets and prices from these unpredictable fluctuations in the international economy. The most recent casualty of the monetary disorder is the normally robust Japanese economy: The gross overvaluation of the yen against most other currencies has precipitated a major deflation (on the order of 10% per year) in the internal Japanese wholesale price level and sharp downturn in the profitability of industrial investment.    What provoked the American government to push, and to keep pushing, the dollar down too far -- thus imposing undue deflationary pressure on Japan and continental Europe while risking the resurgence of inflationary expectations in the U.S.? The pursuit of what is now a false academic doctrine: that a once-and-for-all devaluation of a currency can by itself systematically reduce that country's trade deficit.    Granted, the current huge excess of imports over exports in the American economy is unsustainable, and must eventually be corrected one way or another. But this trade deficit of $150 billion to $200 billion a year merely reflects the saving-investment gap in the American economy created by the -- not coincidentally -- equally large U.S. fiscal deficit. And, the president's January 1987 budget proposal for fiscal 1988 yet again overstates likely revenues and understates likely expenditures, leaving the gap as big as or bigger than $150 billion to $200 billion. Nevertheless, getting rid of this chaos in the American public finances is the only satisfactory way by which the trade deficit can be reduced.    For the industrial economies of the 1980s, which are highly integrated in both trade and financial flows, why do exchange-rate changes have no predictable effect on net trade balances -- although paradoxically they have major effects on what is loosely called &quot;international competitiveness&quot;? After all, this huge depreciation of the dollar from 1985 to 1987 makes American goods less expensive in foreign currencies and hence more attractive to foreigners, while foreign goods become more expensive in dollar terms and relatively less attractive to Americans. These direct price effects would, by themselves, suggest that the American trade deficit should fall sharply -- as most economists, such as Martin Feldstein (Journal article Nov. 25), still believe.    Because of the high degree of economic integration in the 1980s, however, a substantial currency misalignment also sets up strong countervailing pressures on aggregate domestic expenditures within each trading partner's economy that could well offset these direct price effects. The outstanding current example is Japan: that country whose currency has been pushed furthest out of alignment. The sharp appreciation of the yen has reduced the domestic yen prices of Japanese industrial goods across the board, and caused a collapse in business profits and a fall in Japanese industrial investment and in other private expenditures. Thus, although Japanese exports have declined somewhat because they are more expensive to foreigners, imports have been declining even faster! Unexpectedly, the Japanese trade surplus has been getting larger as a result of exchange appreciation.    Clearly, if the international system is to hold together, the U.S. government must give up its false, although widely held, view that dollar devaluation will improve its net trade balance in an economically satisfactory manner. This belief is distorting the exchange-rate regime.    To be sure, the trade deficit is an important subject worthy of intense negotiation -- but only in the context of assigning fiscal policies to resolve it. And in a world where real interest rates are still too high, there is little doubt that the U.S. should sharply reduce its fiscal deficit rather than try to persuade other governments to expand their expenditures and cut tax revenues.    Once the net trade balance is off the negotiating table as far as exchange rates and monetary policies are concerned, then the G-7 can move to realign exchange rates at purchasing-power parity and to halt the deflation process in Japan and, to a lesser extent, in West Germany. In early 1987, the Bank of Japan could be encouraged to undertake a major internal monetary expansion with the joint effect of nudging the yen down substantially in the foreign exchanges and stopping the internal deflation. So could the Bundesbank be more expansionary to nudge the mark down against the dollar.    But to facilitate this exchange-rate realignment and prevent excessive monetary expansion in the system as a whole, the money supply of the weak currency country -- the U.S. -- should not expand in concert with that of the other two blocs. Once new purchasing-power-parity exchange rates -- say, 180 yen or 2.1 marks to the dollar -- were reached, then these differing monetary stances could be relaxed to maintain this new monetary standard into the indefinite future.    ---   Mr. McKinnon is the Eberle professor of economics at Stanford. </TEXT></DOC>