<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0126 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> SAN JOSE, Costa Rica  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As the Iran-Contra arms-transfer scandal unfolds, there is a growing sense among Washington's Central American allies that President Reagan's war on Nicaragua is a lost cause.    The region has long been ambivalent about the policy of covertly destabilizing the Sandinista government. Military and civilian leaders seemed to have confidence in Mr. Reagan, but they feared that the American public and Congress wouldn't back up Central American nations should the Contra war &quot;regionalize.&quot; Now, what is locally called &quot;Irangate&quot; appears from here to have paralyzed the White House and doomed future U.S. financing for the Contras.    &quot;Until a week ago, I saw a strong, consistent Reagan policy,&quot; says Luis Alberto Cordero, a close adviser to the president of Costa Rica. &quot;Today, I'm not sure what to expect.&quot;    Unless the uneasiness among U.S. allies in the region dissipates -- which won't happen except in the unlikely event that Congress continues aid to the Contras -- they can be expected to gradually drop their support for the Nicaraguan rebels. Already, El Salvador's president, Jose Napoleon Duarte, has been embarrassed by disclosures that apparently illegal Contra arms-supply flights originated from Salvadoran territory. Such flights seem to have been halted, at least for the time being. Honduran army and civilian officials are currently debating whether to continue giving the Contras sanctuary on Honduran territory should U.S. aid to the rebels be cut off because of &quot;Irangate.&quot; And Washington's crisis has emboldened Costa Rica's president, Oscar Arias, who met with President Reagan at the White House yesterday, to criticize the Contras' leadership and military capacity.    &quot;The governments of Central America must reconsider their relations with the U.S. government and their policies toward Nicaragua,&quot; says Manuel Gamero, an influential Honduran newspaper editor. Mr. Gamero thinks the crisis in Washington hammers the final nail in the Contras' coffin. &quot;It's too risky,&quot; he says, &quot;to deal with a government that doesn't show all its cards. Irangate will ultimately touch Honduras and hurt our international position.&quot;    Such sentiments are poison to the Contra cause. If the Contras are ever to overthrow the Sandinistas, they will need the full political and military support of Nicaragua's neighbors. The Contras need cross-border bases along their northern and southern fronts -- in Honduras and Costa Rica -- secure from Sandinista air and artillery attacks. Guerrillas operating within Nicaragua require air and land supply lines that cut through Costa Rica and Honduras.    Central American leaders don't have faith in the Contras, but they don't trust the Sandinistas, either. Few seriously believe the Sandinistas will invade a neighbor, but officials are concerned that Nicaragua can cause trouble by training radical union and peasant leaders as well as guerrillas. Fortunately for the neighbors, leftist groups have been declining throughout the isthmus since 1983.    The Contras made a pitch for regional support last week by holding a legislative assembly in Costa Rica that planned for a provisional democratic government should they win power in Nicaragua. The Contras opened their assembly with the Costa Rican national anthem and discussed ways eventually to disband the Nicaraguan army the way Costa Rica did with its own army 40 years ago.    But Costa Rica was an ambivalent host. San Jose denied a visa to the Contras' leader, Adolfo Calero, and didn't send an observer. (Neither did any government except the U.S. Aiding the Contras, after all, has been President Reagan's favorite foreign-policy project. A few representatives from the region's right-wing opposition parties did attend.) Hoped-for press coverage of the event was dominated by the news that profits from secret arms sales to Iran had gone to the Contras.    Across town, as the assembly broke up and revelations flowed from Washington, President Arias said in an interview that the Contras &quot;don't have a chance militarily.&quot; He said the Nicaraguan people couldn't be expected to support a military force led by Enrique Bermudez, a former colonel in Anastasio Somoza's hated national guard.    &quot;If the Central Americans don't accept us and help us, we're served up and eaten,&quot; says Contra leader Arturo Cruz. Mr. Cruz believes that Nicaragua's neighbors will come to the Contras' aid when they see &quot;military results and U.S. support.&quot; He says the Sandinistas' final hour could come when Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica first &quot;tell the world they don't want the Sandinistas in power anymore&quot; and then form a regional task force for a &quot;Grenada-style liberation&quot; with U.S. financial and logistical support.    That scenario would require Central America's leaders to turn sharply from their current positions.    Honduras, the Contras' best ally in the region, wavers in its support. For several months last year, Tegucigalpa halted U.S. aid shipments to the Contras. Honduras has been more helpful lately, but rising protests among coffee planters and opposition politicians against the Contras complicate the government's stand. Popular concern is growing that Contra positions in Honduras are damaging the border region's economy, swelling the refugee population and inviting incursions by the Sandinista army.    The current crisis in Washington only underscores these arguments for army officers who want to reassert Honduras's control over its own territory. Some fear that the Contras, once beaten by the Sandinistas, will attempt to take a chunk of Honduras for themselves. A top Honduran government official, who spoke on the condition that he not be quoted by name, says Tegucigalpa &quot;has very little confidence now in the Reagan administration. Our relationship is obviously affected by the Iran scandal.&quot; He adds: &quot;The Contras were underdogs before. Now there's no way they can win.&quot;    Jaime Rosenthal, a vice president of Honduras, says that the crisis in Washington has put his government in &quot;a wait-and-see situation.&quot; Asked whether President Reagan's troubles meant the Contras can't win, he says, &quot;The Contras couldn't win with the $100 million in aid {Congress granted them this year}, they couldn't even move out of Honduras.&quot;    &quot;We are very much concerned about a lack of U.S. policy,&quot; Mr. Rosenthal continues. &quot;Public opinion {in Honduras} is against the Contras,&quot; he says. &quot;The government will not be able to resist that for too long.&quot;    He himself is critical of the Contras. &quot;They are living a very good life {off the aid}. Calero lives better than I do, and I'm vice president.&quot;    Pressures were growing in Honduras to expel the estimated 7,000 Contras operating there even before the scandal in Washington. Nicolas Cruz Torres, a leading opposition legislator, has introduced a bill in the national congress calling for the removal of the Contras. The debate on his bill is expected to be heated when the congress reconvenes in January after a three-month recess.    Nationalist sentiment is growing in the army, in part because Sandinista army units have held upland positions about three miles inside the Honduran border for most of 1986 to halt Contra incursions. A local Honduran brigade commander was so incensed by that situation that in October he ordered the Contras to attack the positions and expel the Nicaraguan forces. If they didn't, he threatened to halt the transport of Contra supplies along local roads.    The Contras failed to dislodge the Sandinistas and suffered heavy casualties in trying, but U.S. aid kept flowing anyway. That incident was just one of a string of Contra military defeats over the past four years.    The rebels badly need to revive a southern front in Nicaragua along the Costa Rican border and to spark an Indian rebellion on the Caribbean coast of Nicaragua in order to spread thin the Sandinista army; on both scores they are moving in reverse. In Managua, where a third of Nicaragua's population lives, there is no sign of active support for the Contras; the Sandinista security apparatus has been too tough to crack. Contra leaders claim they can turn the tide with surface-to-air missiles to counter the Sandinistas' Soviet-supplied helicopter gunships that slice Contra attack columns to pieces. But now the final heavy-weaponry installment of the $100 million U.S. Contra aid package, which is scheduled for shipment in February, is in jeopardy and may be withheld by Congress.    Normally conservative coffee growers recently met with Honduran President Jose Azcona Hoyo demanding that he make the Contras leave. Production of Honduras's second leading export (after bananas) has been declining as Contra territory -- known here as &quot;new Nicaragua&quot; -- has expanded along the border.    The U.S. has attempted to assuage concerns in the Honduran armed forces by approving the sale of advanced war jets to the country's air force. But Washington has so far refused to agree to Honduran appeals that the U.S. take the Contras as refugees once the war against the Sandinistas is over.    Ranking officials of the ruling Salvadoran Christian Democratic Party are telling President Duarte that he should make amends with the Sandinistas as a way to alleviate regional tensions. They argue that the Salvadoran guerrillas have lost so much strength over the past three years that they can't be revived -- with or without Sandinista aid. Moreover, Contra leaders privately grumble, President Duarte won't aggressively criticize the Sandinistas in public because he thinks such provocations would harm his support among liberals in the U.S. Congress.    Atilio Vieytez, the Christian Democratic Party leader in El Salvador's National Legislative Assembly, says: &quot;The Contras are finished. That's evident.&quot; Mr. Vieytez worries that the damage caused to the Reagan administration and the Contras is &quot;dangerous for El Salvador because the Contras have been a vital pressure point to diminish Nicaraguan aid to El Salvador's guerrillas.&quot; He predicts that the Contras will exist only as a small force with aid found from other international sources.    Guatemalan President Vinicio Cerezo, backed by his army, is pursuing a policy of &quot;active neutrality.&quot; He opposes U.S. aid to the Contras and supports regional negotiations. &quot;Our position,&quot; said the president last month, &quot;is the Contras don't have an effective military force. They are only effective as a destabilizing guerrilla force like the Salvadoran guerrillas.&quot; He added that a continuation of the Contra war &quot;is no good for us. It diminishes confidence for investment.&quot;    Since Costa Rica's President Arias took office in May, he has reversed his predecessor's policy of secretly helping the Contras. The government has recently shut down a secret Contra airstrip, closed Contra medical clinics, prohibited Contra military leaders from entering the country and reinforced the border guard to keep the Contras from reestablishing camps on the Costa Rican side of the Nicaraguan border. The Contras complain that the cutoff of their Costa Rican supply lines has paralyzed operations on the now-moribund southern front.    President Arias says the U.S.-backed war in Nicaragua is hurting investment and tourism, causing capital flight and filling his country with Nicaraguans who tax the government's social services.    &quot;What has the Reagan administration achieved?&quot; he asks rhetorically. &quot;The Sandinistas are using the Contras as an excuse to become more totalitarian every day.&quot;    Says President Arias: &quot;Why don't you quote me on this? The Communist Party in Costa Rica is smaller today than four years ago. Why is that? Because the people in Costa Rica have seen what has happened in Nicaragua. The best propaganda against communism in Costa Rica is to put {Costa Ricans} on a bus and send them to Managua.&quot;    &quot;The war in Nicaragua is incompatible with higher rates of economic growth in Costa Rica,&quot; the president continues. &quot;We need tranquillity, peace and confidence.&quot;    ---   The Contras may well be hapless victims of the Iran arms snafu. Contra leaders unequivocally deny that they knew details of a plan reportedly engineered by Lt. Col. Oliver North, the National Security Council aide fired last week, to siphon up to $30 million in profit generated from arms sales to Iran to the Contras. According to the Contras, they are in debt despite more than $120 million in official U.S. aid they have received since 1982. Rebel leaders say they will fight on without U.S. assistance, as they did in late 1984 and 1985 when Congress cut off aid. At that time, Congress was incensed that the Central Intelligence Agency had mined Nicaraguan ports. With the help of Lt. Col. North, the Contras managed to stay alive with financial aid from a network of Americans, acting as private citizens. But now Lt. Col. North is gone, and the White House, engulfed in scandal, is likely to be more circumspect. </TEXT></DOC>