<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881013-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ALGERIA LIFTED a state of emergency and announced a political referendum.    President Chadli Bendjedid said a Nov. 3 referendum would be held on a constitutional change requiring the president to appoint a prime minister with increased power. He also announced measures that would end the ruling party's grip on power. The announcement came after Bendjedid lifted emergency rules and a curfew that were imposed six days ago in response to anti-government riots. Despite the moves, there were reports of renewed violence.    Unofficial reports said as many as 500 people were killed in the week of unrest. About 3,000 demonstrators remained in police detention.    ---   The Supreme Court heard arguments over a 1976 civil-rights decision that gave citizens the right to sue for damages for non-governmental discrimination. Justices O'Connor and Kennedy voiced concerns that the ruling encroaches on a 1964 federal law barring employment bias. A decision isn't expected until spring.    ---   Bush and Dukakis studied and practiced for their second and final campaign debate tonight. The nationally broadcast encounter, to be held at UCLA, is considered crucial to the presidential candidates with less than four weeks to go before the Nov. 8 election.    ---   The U.S. said military tests of civilians seeking to enlist found that chances a blood test will falsely indicate a person is infected with the AIDS virus are extremely low. The findings could play a role in the controversy over whether AIDS screening should be used to obtain marriage licenses, insurance and employment.    ---   Congress approved legislation to create a one-time procedure that could lead to the closing or consolidation of unneeded military bases in the U.S. beginning in 1990. The Pentagon said the measure, which was sent to Reagan, could save billions of taxpayers' dollars.    ---   The EPA will permit the use of some new pesticides that can cause cancer. The agency contended they will pose less of a threat than some pesticides currently used. The policy, which is effective immediately, revises the criteria the EPA must consider when registering pesticides for use.    ---   Panama's Noriega used a secret account at a Bank of Credit andamp; Commerce International Holdings S.A. unit to funnel money to Panamian politicians, according to a senior bank official. The account received mostly cash deposits and was the source of funds for the military chief's overseas trips.    ---   Reagan will consider calling Congress back to Washington for a special session this year if he judges that the future of Nicaragua's Contra rebels is imperiled, the White House said. Sources said the president would seek the quick release of $16.5 million in stockpiled military aid to the rebels.    ---   Czechoslovakia's president named a new 20-member government. Ladislav Adamec, head of the Czech republic, was sworn in as premier. The leadership changes, begun Tuesday by the Communist Party's Central Committee, are expected to slow the pace of political and economic restructuring.    ---   Yugoslavia's Communist Party chief said ethnic rallies that ignited nationwide unrest are &quot;the most brutal threat to socialism&quot; in the country. The tension between minority Serbs and ethnic Albanians in the southern Kosovo province has led to widespread economic protests, labor strikes and political maneuverings in recent months.    ---   Moscow and Beijing are preparing their first major joint venture, a $400 million pulp mill, signaling continued easing of long-strained Sino-Soviet relations. The official China Economic News Service said investment in the mill in northeastern China will be split equally between China and the Soviet Union.    ---   Lech Walesa met in Gdansk with U.S. envoy Whitehead and said he would insist in negotiations with Polish authorities that Solidarity be made legal again. The union founder expressed optimism about the government-opposition talks, which are tentatively scheduled to begin next week.    ---   Energy Department officials said safety problems that halted production of U.S. nuclear weapons material expose a &quot;bad trend&quot; and a &quot;sense of complacency&quot; in the operations of nuclear plants. And U.S. defense aides said the nation's strategic deterrent could be weakened by the continued closure of the Savannah River plant.    ---   The Philippine government indicated that it may delay filing criminal charges against deposed leader Marcos so U.S. authorities can proceed with their own prosecution of the former president. In California, FBI agents seized $6 million of paintings during a recent search of the estate of Marcos's son-in-law, an official in Manila said.    ---   China has expressed a willingness to grant sanctuary to Pol Pot, leader of the Khmer Rouge guerrilla group, in an effort to pave the way for a settlement of the war in Cambodia, diplomats at the U.N. said. Beijing has insisted, however, that Vietnam withdraw its troops from Cambodia as the first step toward any peace accord.    ---   Israeli soldiers destroyed four Palestinian houses with explosives and sealed five others in reprisal for the murder of Arabs who collaborated with Israel. Palestinians hurled a grenade at a troop bus.    ---   Iran and Iraq exchanged the remains of soldiers killed in the Gulf War, the first such exchange since a truce took effect seven weeks ago, a senior U.N. official said. But a state-run newspaper in Baghdad said there wasn't any progress in U.N.-mediated talks toward a permanent armistice in the gulf.    ---   The Los Angeles Dodgers captured baseball's National League pennant, beating the New York Mets four games to three in the best-of-seven series. The Dodgers will face the Oakland Athletics in Saturday's opening of the World Series in Los Angeles. </TEXT></DOC>