<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880329-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAEL CLOSED the entire West Bank and Gaza Strip for three days.    Under the order, considered Israel's broadest clampdown on the 1.5 million Palestinians living in the occupied areas, Arabs in the Gaza will be banned from leaving their homes, while those in the West Bank will be confined to their villages. Jewish settlers living in the territories will be permitted to move freely. The army announced that it was barring journalists from the territories for the first time in four months of often-violent unrest, in which 119 Arabs and one Israeli soldier have been killed.    The U.S. criticized the closure of the lands by Israel, which said the order was imposed in expectation of major Palestinian demonstrations.    ---   Riot police clashed with anti-Noriega demonstrators in Panama City. As a general strike continued, thousands of opponents of the military leader marched through the capital demanding his ouster. Police used force to disperse the crowd, and later burst into a hotel, seizing opposition leaders and briefly detaining eight U.S. journalists.    Noriega has agreed to send an emissary to a meeting with Central American leaders in Costa Rica this week, in a possible bid for exile, U.S. officials said. The meeting was called by Costa Rican President Arias and would include a representative of Spain, which offered Noriega asylum.    ---   West German authorities are holding six suspected Soviet spies arrested last week and are investigating 18 others in what may be the biggest intelligence sweep ever by the Bonn government. Western diplomats doubted the incident, which involved direct spying in West Germany, would inflame East-West ties.    ---   Gephardt quit the Democratic presidential race. The Missouri congressman, whose campaign faltered after he won the Feb. 8 Iowa caucuses, said he would seek re-election to the House. Meanwhile, Jackson and Dukakis campaigned in Connecticut for today's primary. Bush turned his attention to next week's GOP contest in Wisconsin.    ---   The Senate Armed Services panel voted 18-2 to recommend that the Senate ratify a U.S.-Soviet treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles. The committee, however, said a serious question remained about whether negotiators intended to ban futuristic weapons, or only nuclear-armed ballistic and cruise missiles.    ---   Congressional leaders failed to reach accord on a package of &quot;nonlethal&quot; aid to the Contras. It was unclear whether any pact could be reached before Congress adjourns for a weeklong recess Thursday. Separately, U.S. troops began leaving Honduras, where they were rushed almost two weeks ago as a show of force against Managua.    Sandinista and Contra negotiators held talks in Nicaragua aimed at working out details of a 60-day cease-fire signed last week. The delegations are to determine areas where the rebels will gather during the truce that is to begin Friday. The talks are to continue today and could address when the Contras must surrender their arms.    ---   Independent counsel Walsh has reached an agreement with Israel for cooperation in his investigation into the Iran-Contra affair. Under the accord, reached after yearlong negotiations, Israel has given Walsh historical and financial chronologies covering its role in the shipment of U.S. arms to Iran in 1985 and 1986, an Israeli official said.    ---   Thousands of Armenians defied a Kremlin threat of a crackdown and stayed away from factories and schools in the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan. The Armenians want control of the area. Witnesses said all but essential services were halted in the city of Stepanakert, and disturbances were reported elsewhere.    ---   South African soldiers raided a house on the outskirts of Botswana's capital, killing four people and firebombing the residence during an hour-long gunbattle. Pretoria described the victims as &quot;terrorists&quot; of the African National Congress. Both the U.S. and the secretary-general of the U.N. condemned the assault in Gaborone.    ---   Afghan rebel leaders said they are forming a government and plan to rule Afghanistan from a mountain headquarters whatever the outcome of current Pakistani-Afghan peace negotiations in Geneva. The guerrillas said their proposed government would be ready to move into Afghanistan from Pakistan within three months.    ---   Union leaders in Portugal said about two million workers staged a strike in a bid to block proposed legislation aimed at making it easier to dismiss employees. The one-day general strike brought public transportation to an almost total halt, and disrupted work on docks and in most heavy industries.    ---   A Haitian opposition leader was arrested and charged with possession of explosives-related devices, and two Americans were placed under house detention in connection with a blast last week at a bridge in Portau-Prince. The government said the Americans &quot;have a certain responsibility in the affair,&quot; but didn't elaborate.    ---   Iran claimed its forces repulsed a counterattack by Iraq and anti-Khomeini rebels in Kurdistan. Tehran also said its gunboats attacked two supertankers in the Persian Gulf, setting the vessels ablaze.    ---   Gunmen in the Philippines killed seven people and wounded a suburban mayor in what was considered one of the worst attacks blamed on communist rebels since they moved their insurgency to Manila last year. The brother of a leftist leader was killed in a separate attack. </TEXT></DOC>