<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Fateful Decision:In the Netherlands,The Very Ill HaveOption of Euthanasia---Some Doctors Agree to ActAfter Repeated EntreatiesBy Patients in Great Pain---Death With Dignity, or Evil?---By Alan L. OttenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> AMSTERDAM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The 94-year-old woman in the village nursing home had an emotional farewell visit with her son and daughter-in-law. Then her doctor gave her one injection to put her to sleep, another to make sure she was unconscious, and finally curare to bring on respiratory arrest.    For many months she had been bedridden, unable to feed herself and in severe pain from a hip fracture she refused to have repaired. With increasing urgency she had pleaded with her doctor to end her life. He and a colleague interviewed her several times to make sure she truly wanted to die; convinced that she did, and that there was nothing they could do to make things easier for her, they finally granted her wish.    This is active, voluntary euthanasia as practiced in the Netherlands. Officially illegal but nonetheless countenanced under strict conditions, it accounts for anywhere from 1,000 to perhaps 7,000 deaths a year. The Netherlands is pioneering in an area that in the coming decade is likely to be a focus of medical, legal, ethical -- and intensely emotional -- debate in many industrialized countries.    &quot;When I set up practice in 1949, we didn't have this,&quot; says Jan van Es, editor of the journal of the Royal Dutch Medical Association. &quot;What we are seeing now,&quot; he believes, &quot;is the result of processes and technology that keep people alive too long, people who are suffering, people you cannot help in any real way.&quot;    Dutch opinion polls show that sizable majorities endorse a right to active euthanasia. Doctors and pharmacists have access to manuals suggesting the most effective drugs and dosages, and the Dutch Society for Voluntary Euthanasia has 26,000 dues-paying members.    &quot;We in the Netherlands believe you have the freedom to live by your own convictions, and that includes the freedom to die by your own convictions,&quot; says Jeane Tromp Meesters, coordinator of the society's Members Aid Service.    Yet euthanasia remains highly controversial here. Some groups charge that it is employed to rid society of the frail, the retarded, the handicapped and other &quot;useless&quot; members of society. In a country that vividly remembers World War II, some hear disturbing echoes of Nazi efforts to exterminate &quot;inferior&quot; peoples.    Thus, the Netherlands may be the laboratory to determine whether active euthanasia can be employed with circumspection to provide &quot;death with dignity&quot; for people in extreme suffering or whether once a foot is placed on this slippery slope, a descent into wholesale slaughter becomes almost inevitable.    In the U.S. and most other developed countries, the practice isn't a prominent issue. Debate and action still center on &quot;passive&quot; euthanasia: avoiding resuscitation of a terminally ill patient who has a heart attack, for example, or withholding food from the irretrievably comatose or from the severely disabled who request it.    Active euthanasia, in which a doctor administers fatal pills or injections or prescribes lethal pills for a patient to take himself, is still shunned as far too controversial. &quot;Passive euthanasia gives us more than enough to deal with right now -- areas most people are still trying to work out,&quot; says Fenella Rouse of America's Society for the Right to Die, which some years ago changed its name from the Euthanasia Society of America.    In Los Angeles, however, the Hemlock Society propagandizes for active voluntary euthanasia for the terminally ill and has published a how-to guide of sorts. A small group of Californians called Americans Against Human Suffering is trying to collect the 450,000 signatures needed to put on next year's state ballot a proposal to legalize physician-assisted euthanasia for terminally ill patients who want it.    Here in the Netherlands, active euthanasia is still classed in the criminal code as a form of murder punishable by up to 12 years in prison. But so long as doctors meet medical and ethical criteria developed in a series of judicial decisions since 1973, they are seldom prosecuted. The few convicted have received only token fines or short suspended jail sentences.    The court criteria, closely mirrored in guidelines later issued by the medical association and a government-appointed commission of prominent citizens, have several stipulations. The request must come from the patient, not a relative or friend; the patient must be fully conscious and rational; and he must ask repeatedly over time. He may or may not be terminally ill, but must have physical and mental suffering judged to be unbearable, with no prospect of improvement. Only a doctor can administer active euthanasia, and only after consulting another physician.    &quot;Contact over many months or even years is very important,&quot; says Jurrit Bergsma, a psychologist teaching at the Utrecht Medical School. &quot;If you see a doctor today for the first time and ask for euthanasia, he won't do it. But if you started talking about it five years ago as a possibility some day, it is really a contract you have made.&quot;    However, with nearly 200 local prosecutors enjoying broad discretion, many doctors object to the uncertainty. &quot;We would like a law or regulation so that doctors doing euthanasia would know what is happening,&quot; says Willemien Vroom-Kastelein, a lawyer with the medical association. &quot;Now you're never sure.&quot;    The doctors who killed the elderly woman in the nursing home, for instance, were prosecuted, and their case dragged through the courts for four years before they were finally acquitted.    In another case, a 40-year-old man with advanced stomach cancer had failed in a suicide attempt; in increasing agony, and with the support of his wife, he pleaded with his doctor to end his suffering. After months of discussion with his colleagues and the patient, the doctor agreed, giving an intravenous solution to make him unconscious and then injecting a drug to paralyze the muscles and end breathing. But when the doctor candidly listed &quot;unnatural death&quot; on the death certificate, he had to undergo four separate police interrogations and dangled for 13 months before being told he wouldn't be prosecuted.    &quot;There is still too much trouble possible for the doctor who is honest and open, and so they lie about the cause of death,&quot; says Eugene Sutorius, legal adviser to the euthanasia society. Most doctors simply put down heart failure, cancer or some such. Ministry of Justice figures show only 65 cases reported to the authorities between 1982 and 1985, of which nine resulted in prosecution.    Moreover, the Dutch don't count as active euthanasia any cases where a doctor withholds a respirator or other life-saving help at the patient's request, nor instances in which the doctor halts or declines to start treatment he thinks medically pointless. In fact, says Henk Rigter, executive director of the Health Council, &quot;If a doctor continued to treat a patient aggressively when he knew it was no use, we would think that very strange.&quot;    Efforts to get clarifying legislation on euthanasia through the Dutch Parliament have thus far failed; the issue splits the two parties in the governing coalition. The Christian Democrats prefer keeping euthanasia a crime, with very limited exceptions; the smaller Liberal Party would like to move toward legalization. The government still hopes to have a proposal ready for debate this fall but is having a hard time working one out.    The subject may finally prove too difficult for legislation. &quot;Some doctors and lawyers,&quot; says J.K.M. Gevers, a lawyer who teaches at the University of Amsterdam Medical School, &quot;are beginning to think that perhaps the more you talk about it and try to regulate it, the more problems you make, and the best thing is to leave it to medical practice and the regular criminal justice system.&quot;    Mrs. Tromp Meesters of the euthanasia society estimates that &quot;a family doctor might be met with a euthanasia request once every two or three years, unless he has a lot of elderly patients, and then maybe two or three a year.&quot;    Doctors often turn the patient down as not meeting the medical criteria, or suggest waiting a bit to see how the disease develops. They can't be compelled to administer euthanasia, and many won't do so under any circumstances.    Since its founding in 1973, the euthanasia society has offered a model &quot;living will&quot; people can sign stating that, should they ever become irretrievably comatose or otherwise incompetent to make medical decisions, they want to be spared life-prolonging measures and/or put to death.    Thirty-five trained volunteers respond to the 650 to 700 people who seek help from the society each year. Anna Wolse, a retired interior decorator, handles two or three cases a week. &quot;My task is to mediate between people and their doctors,&quot; she says.    One recent client was a 70-year-old man with severe emphysema and lung cancer who feared suffocating but didn't know how to ask his doctor to spare him this horror. After a lengthy interview, Mrs. Wolse urged him simply to explain to the doctor that he wished to be treated so long as his breathing wasn't too labored, but wanted euthanasia before coming close to suffocation. After several discussions, the doctor eventually decided the breathing had become too difficult.    &quot;He died with dignity,&quot; Mrs. Wolse says.    Sometimes, though, she cannot be that helpful. The husband of a woman who had become demented sought euthanasia for her. &quot;If we could ask her,&quot; he said, &quot;she would tell us she wants to die.&quot; But Mrs. Wolse had to explain that only a patient's request can be honored.    &quot;Unless the request comes from the patient or from a living will that isn't too long out of date, we can do nothing,&quot; Mrs. Tromp Meesters says. &quot;For the patient in a coma without a living will, or with Alzheimer's or mentally retarded, euthanasia is not possible. We have to do it that way to guard against misuse.&quot;    Some Dutch medical people expect the AIDS epidemic to bring a small upsurge in active euthanasia; Holland, with its permissive approach to drugs and homosexuality, has a large number of AIDS cases. Speculation has arisen, too, that Americans and other nationals with AIDS will pour into Holland seeking euthanasia. Dutch experts doubt it.    &quot;That is a kind of fairy tale,&quot; says Mr. Bergsma, the Utrecht psychologist. &quot;For every physician, one of the most important conditions {for euthanasia} is long contact with the patient. It is practically impossible for anyone to come from overseas and get a Netherlands doctor to kill him.&quot;    Why should this small country be the one where active euthanasia is so much more common than elsewhere? Some cite a Dutch dislike of wasteful spending. Others note an absence of widespread religious opposition; though the Catholic hierarchy opposes euthanasia, many Dutch Catholics are independent-minded and, like Dutch Protestants, tend to take a liberal view. But the most frequent answer to the question is that euthanasia isn't really more common here -- the issue is just more openly talked about.    &quot;Colleagues from France, Germany and elsewhere say they have just as much,&quot; says Els Borst-Eilers, vice president of the Health Council. &quot;But things here in the Netherlands are very intensely discussed -- it is our disposition to do that.&quot;    Some Netherlanders contend their country is already sliding down the slope to &quot;social Darwinism,&quot; an almost casual elimination of those thought no longer useful or productive. A group of physicians strongly opposed to abortion and euthanasia has broken off from the Royal Dutch Medical Association to form the Dutch Physicians League, loudly warning against &quot;euthanast -- doctors&quot; alleged to dispose of people almost on whim.    &quot;The purpose of medicine is to cure, not to kill,&quot; says K.F. Gunning, a former president of the league.    Adds Richard Fenigsen, a Polish-born doctor now practicing here: &quot;No one has granted doctors the authority to exterminate the weak.&quot;    But most in the health-care field reject these charges. &quot;I don't believe a word of it,&quot; says Dr. Borst-Eilers. &quot;The few doctors I know who have done euthanasia tell me they were miserable for months afterwards. Our doctors are not going to go around killing too easily.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>