<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880825-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Where President Bush Could Find All Those Jobs </HL><AUTHOR> Martin Anderson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   George Bush's camp reportedly is backing away from his acceptance-speech goal of 30 million new jobs in the U.S. if he served two full terms as president. Indeed, the podium in the New Orleans Superdome hadn't even been dismantled before a number of well-known economists sniffed and said the nominee's idea was impossible.    Such smug assurance comes only from being a certified Ph.D. in economics. It doesn't seem to matter if you'd been the economic adviser to a president under whom the economy failed, or are affiliated with a consulting firm that can't come close to an accurate economic forecast. With a snappy line about how Mr. Bush would need to reinstitute child labor, annex other countries or tolerate 20% inflation, you could get your lick in.    Well, fun is fun. And politics ain't beanbag. But this borders on intellectual malpractice. It is possible to create 30 million new jobs from 1988 to 1996. It is not likely, but it is possible.    It is generally accepted that the most likely growth in our labor force over the next eight years is somewhere around 14 million. The key phrase here is &quot;most likely.&quot; Estimates of the labor force eight years hence, like estimates of economic growth eight years hence, are problematic. To arrive at these estimates we must make some educated guesses about some of the key conditions -- and there is a fairly wide range of guesses that are acceptable professionally.    People who specialize in this somewhat arcane part of economics, labor economists, are fully aware of the possible range of their projections. But just like economic forecasters who are fully aware of the possible range of their projections, they choose for very practical reasons to stick with their &quot;most likely&quot; estimates.    Goals or &quot;missions&quot; like the one Vice President Bush put forth are not based on what probably will happen if we keep on doing what we are doing and change nothing. A goal is a vision of what might be, of what we are capable of. Its test is not whether it is likely, but whether it is possible.    Thirty million new jobs in eight years is possible. Here's how. Start off with the base estimate of a labor-force increase of 14 million by 1996. The major educated guess buried in that estimate is something called the &quot;labor-force participation rate,&quot; or basically what percentage of the population that can work wants to work. By 1996 it is currently estimated that some 70 million people, 16 years of age and over, will not be in the labor force. The current guess is that by then about 65% of the potential labor force will want to work. But it could be higher. Back in the 1970s the labor experts underestimated the participation rate in the 1980s by five or six percentage points.    No one knows for sure what will happen to the labor force by 1996. If, once again, we are five or six percentage points low, or even seven or eight, the increase in the labor force would be substantially greater than we now think -- 10 million to 12 million, or perhaps even as high as 14 million to 16 million, more.    There are some powerful forces pushing us in that direction -- low personal tax rates that make it more attractive to look for work and to keep working; the changing nature of work, including the creation of high-paying jobs that don't require unusual physical strength and make it possible for more older people to work; expanded education and job-training, and child-care provisions that could allow more parents to work.    Labor-force participation rates of 70%-plus in the late 1990s would be higher than any we, or any other Western country, have yet achieved. For example, last year Sweden's rate was 67.4%. But 70% or more is possible, especially so if we keep on creating all those jobs that pay $20,000 and more a year and keep tax rates low. Remember, anyone who works an hour or more for pay during the week -- even at home -- is part of the labor force.    Then there is the question of the overall population estimates themselves, from which the labor-force figure is derived. Estimating what the population is going to be a decade from now is not an exact science. In fact, the estimates made in 1975 of the 1985 population turned out to be wrong by 3% -- on the low side. There are a number of reasons for this.    We tend to overestimate the death rate in the future. We tend to underestimate population gains from immigration. Those 2.5 million illegal aliens we just legalized will be bringing in a lot of relatives. And, if our economy continues to boom, the U.S. will be more attractive to foreigners in the future -- Simpson-Rodino notwithstanding. Also, our people-counting procedures, while very good, are not perfect. We miss heads. Thus, for a number of reasons, it is possible that our population-growth estimate for 1996 could be off by the same degree, and we would have four million more in the labor force than we now expect.    Finally, there are the unemployed. Even if the jobless rate should drop to 5% by 1996, there would still be almost seven million Americans looking for work.    When you add it all up, it is possible that we may have to create more than 30 million new jobs to satisfy the U.S. job market in 1996. It probably won't be that high, but it could be -- and 30 million-plus new jobs is certainly a bright, shining goal to try for. It represents the upper limits of what our economy may be capable of.    Unrealistic? Perhaps. But remember Ronald Reagan's unrealistic goal of nuclear-arms reduction, his dream of a world free from all nuclear weapons? Remember the goal of the war on poverty, the elimination of a class of needy? We may never achieve these goals, but they are honorable ones. We shouldn't settle for less.    It may turn out that we need only 25 million new jobs, or 20 million, or 15 million -- but whatever it is that we as a nation are capable of producing we should strive for. Our goal should be decent, well-paying jobs for all Americans who want them -- regardless of how many that may turn out to be.    ---   Mr. Anderson, a Hoover Institution fellow, has written &quot;Revolution&quot; (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich), a first-hand account of the Reagan campaigns and presidency. </TEXT></DOC>