<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871001-0046 </DOCNO><HL> Baker Suggests a Role for GoldIn Setting World Economic Policy---Commodity Index ProposedTo Help Curb InflationAnd Stabilize Currencies---By Walter S. Mossberg and Alan MurrayStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN EUROP CANDACOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Gold may be edging its way back onto the world monetary stage.    Ever since the gold standard was abandoned in the early 1970s, currency rates have fluctuated with little regard to the price of the precious metal. But yesterday, in a surprise announcement before the annual meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, Treasury Secretary James Baker suggested that the major industrial nations should base their joint economic policy planning in part on &quot;the relationship among our currencies and a basket of commodities, including gold.&quot;    This is a far cry from a move back to a standard that directly ties the value of the dollar to gold. Instead, Mr. Baker proposed only that gold be included in a new &quot;commodity price indicator.&quot; This index would be added to the existing list of more traditional indicators already used by the finance ministers of the seven big industrial democracies to set broad economic policy and exchange-rate ranges.    But the Baker proposal, if adopted by other major nations, would be another major step toward closer management of world economic and monetary policies. It would also be a significant move away from the unilateral policies and free-floating exchange rates the Reagan administration once championed.    The proposal is part of Mr. Baker's efforts to help the U.S. decrease its trade deficit without triggering world-wide recession or inflation. Until now, the industrialized nations have focused their efforts principally on stabilizing exchange rates. But Mr. Baker's proposal would provide a new guidepost that helps ensure nations don't follow monetary policies that encourage world-wide inflation or discourage world-wide growth. Over time, it could also reduce sharp fluctuations in exchange rates.    The Treasury secretary said his proposed commodity index &quot;could be helpful as an early-warning signal of potential price trends.&quot;    The Baker proposal would introduce a strong price-sensitive measure into the secret economic planning process the big countries use to coordinate their economic policies and stabilize exchange rates. It appears to be an effort to defend the joint process, which Mr. Baker has championed, against skeptical officials in West Germany and Japan. They're less committed to the indicator planning process and more fearful of inflation than officials in the U.S.    In foreign exchange trading, the dollar held on to the gains it made Tuesday, when it reached a six-week high against many other major currencies. Although currency dealers were skeptical of some of the ideas emerging from the annual meetings, particularly Mr. Baker's suggestion, traders were impressed by a recurring theme of increased official management of exchange rates.    Precious-metal prices, pressured by a somewhat stronger U.S. dollar, plunged on producer selling and a dearth of investment demand with some selling apparently spurred by Mr. Baker's statement. On the Commodity Exchange in New York, the October gold contract fell $5.30 an ounce to $452.70 in brisk trading.    Mr. Baker refused to elaborate on the proposal, which caught even some major officials of other countries off guard. &quot;The statement speaks for itself,&quot; he told reporters. Japan's powerful vice minister of finance, Toyoo Gyothen, appeared surprised by the proposal when informed about it by reporters and said: &quot;I think we need to study it. We should know exactly what is implied in that.&quot; Karl Otto Poehl, West Germany's central bank governor, instructed a spokesman to say he needed to study the Baker statement before commenting on it.    But Mr. Baker's speech was bolstered by a separate address by British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson. He called for formalizing the current ad hoc system of setting secret exchange-rate ranges through a process of consultations begun in February and suggested tying currency values and economic policies to industrial-world growth and inflation, with special attention to world commodity prices.    Speaking shortly before Mr. Baker, the British official said: &quot;I believe that we can and should use the experience we have gained to build a more permanent regime of managed floating. I do not see the past two years simply as a temporary phase. Our objectives should be clear: to maintain the maximum stability of key exchange rates, and to manage any changes that may be necessary in an orderly way.&quot;    Although advocates of a gold standard were quick to praise Mr. Baker's proposal, it doesn't represent a move back to the gold-based system that existed before 1973. For most of the 25 years following World War II, the price of gold was fixed at $35 an ounce, and governments had to adjust their economic policies to maintain a fixed parity with gold. However, the so-called Bretton Woods system broke down under the weight of the inflation and huge international capital flows of the 1970s, when President Nixon broke the link with gold. Many analysts believe that a formal gold standard is too rigid to work in today's economy.    Under the Baker proposal, gold would only be one in a &quot;basket&quot; of commodities whose prices would be monitored, and commodity prices would be only one of several indicators that the finance officials would look at in setting policies.    &quot;One has to differentiate between a commodity standard and the use of commodity prices as an indicator,&quot; said Federal Reserve Board Governor Robert Heller, who advocates commodity prices as a guide to policy. &quot;As an indicator, it is just one variable, one additional input into the decision-making process.&quot;    Nevertheless, some administration officials, including President Reagan, believe that sharp changes in the price of gold are an important inflation indicator. Mr. Baker's mention of gold also provides a boost to those who have long advocated a return to the gold standard. Republican Rep. Jack Kemp of New York, a gold advocate, called Mr. Baker's speech &quot;a large step in the right direction.&quot; And supplyside pundit Jude Wanniski noted that Mr. Baker is &quot;the first secretary of the treasury to use that four-letter word since George Shultz said it in 1973 in throwing it out.&quot;    Mr. Shultz, the secretary of state, was Treasury secretary in 1973 when the U.S. and other major nations were forced to abandon the post-war international monetary system based on gold. Since then, exchange rates have fluctuated widely.    Mr. Baker's proposal demonstrates how far the administration has moved from its position during Ronald Reagan's first term, when Treasury Secretary Donald Regan argued that exchange rates should be allowed to float freely, and monetary policy should be aimed simply at controlling the supply of money.    Those policies allowed the dollar to soar in the early 1980s, creating huge U.S. trade deficits, and they caused international commodity prices to plummet, creating serious problems for Third World economies that depend on the sale of commodities for their livelihood. In general, leaders of major industrial nations would like to curb the wild exchange rate volatility that has characterized the world's monetary system over the past 15 years without returning to the rigid rule of a gold standard.    In his speech, Mr. Lawson said a return to low inflation, after the high U.S. inflation in the 1970s, has made it possible to move toward greater exchange rate management.    A Treasury official said Mr. Lawson and Mr. Baker didn't coordinate their addresses and that &quot;the British speech was a surprise to the Treasury Department.&quot; But Mr. Baker said he had discussed the commodity-basket idea with a few of his fellow world economic officials, as well as with Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan, who supported the plan.    In recent weeks, U.S. hopes of stronger growth abroad have been threatened by interest-rate increases in Tokyo and Bonn that grew out of inflation fears. Mr. Baker's commodity-basket proposal would build inflation-consciousness into the coordination process and exchange-rate planning, thus making it harder for monetary officials to justify acting on their own against inflation by raising rates.    &quot;It would be unfortunate indeed,&quot; Mr. Baker told the meeting, &quot;if our efforts to foster exchange-rate stability among currencies led to stable currency relationships -- but in a context of inflationary economic policies that reduced the real value of all of our currencies.&quot;    A Treasury official said: &quot;This is something Jim Baker has been thinking about for some time. He thought this was the right time to do it.&quot;    Mr. Lawson, Britain's chief financial official, told reporters that the Louvre Accord, a February agreement to stabilize the dollar at about its current level, &quot;has survived triumphantly and must be regarded as a success,&quot; and added, &quot;I believe it is here to stay.&quot; But he said the success of the exchange-rate management system depends on low inflation, and advocated creating aggregate indicators for the seven major nations to show average inflation, overall growth and world commodity prices.    More explicitly than any top official in the past, Mr. Lawson described the system established early this year as based on &quot;bands&quot; of exchange rates &quot;agreed in private&quot; and supported when necessary by &quot;coordinated intervention, sometimes on a substantial scale.&quot; He said that under a formal version of the system, exchange rate &quot;bands&quot; should be altered when necessary by establishing a new &quot;midpoint&quot; that overlaps the old range.    In addition to Britain, France is likely to favor moves toward a more formal exchange-rate management system. French Finance Minister Edouard Balladur told reporters Monday that the floating exchange-rate system had been &quot;disastrous&quot; and was &quot;behind all the evils we have seen in the West.&quot; He said the Louvre accord had &quot;represented a systematic change in the international monetary system.&quot; After the speech, a French finance official said, &quot;We're very interested in the evolution of commodity prices.&quot;    The Treasury secretary's proposal is the latest sign of the rising interest among policy makers in commodity prices as a guide to monetary policy.    Many of the current members of the Federal Reserve Board believe commodity prices provide a very important leading indicator of inflation. Fed Governor Wayne Angell has worked with the Fed staff in developing an experimental commodity price measure that is reviewed by many central bank policy makers before setting monetary policy. And it was rising commodity prices, in part, that encouraged the Fed to boost interest rates earlier this year.    Fed Governor Heller has also kept a close eye on commodity prices, and has advocated the development of international commodity price indexes such as those mentioned by Secretary Baker to help central bankers decide when a country's monetary policy is too tight or too loose.    &quot;When you are talking commodity prices, you are at the very beginning of the whole chain of production,&quot; Mr. Heller said. &quot;It gives you an earlier indicator of price changes.&quot;    But even Mr. Heller and Mr. Angell don't support proposals that would tie monetary policy directly to gold prices or other commodity prices. Under such a plan, monetary policy would be loosened directly whenever such prices fall, or tightened whenever they rise.    &quot;I think rational decision making is superior to any rigid rule that you may want to adopt,&quot; said Mr. Heller. &quot;The world changes, and as the world changes, policy must change.&quot;    Although Mr. Greenspan supported Mr. Baker's proposal, the Fed chairman is known to believe that commodity prices are less reliable an indicator of inflation than they were 20 or 30 years ago. That's because commodity prices largely reflect price activity among commodity-using industries, but are less of a guide to the growing service and high-technology industries.    Robert Hormats of Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. said the Baker proposal &quot;opens a whole new vista in the debate&quot; over monetary policy. Mr. Hormats, a former assistant secretary of state for economic affairs, said, &quot;I think Baker is saying he wants to relate currencies to something real -- commodities -- and he's giving gold a little more visibility.&quot; He added, &quot;It does give gold the status of first among equals, but it's by no means a gold standard.&quot;    But Robert Mundell, a Columbia University professor who has long advocated linking the dollar to gold again, said, &quot;As far as I'm concerned, it's a step toward a new system that I've been advocating for a long time -- stabilization of exchange rates and the use of commodities, especially gold, as a criterion&quot; for adjusting exchange rates.    Geoffrey Bell, a financial consultant and former senior British official, was skeptical about the Baker idea, saying: &quot;We don't need another index. Is it going to persuade President Reagan to raise taxes, or the Germans to stimulate their economy?&quot;    ---   Effort to Help Manage Exchange Rates    September 1985 -- Plaza Agreement: The U.S., Britain, France, Japan and West Germany launch a coordinated program to drive the dollar down in relation to other currencies.    May 1986 -- Tokyo Summit: Leaders of countries in the Plaza Agreement, plus Canada and Italy (the Group of Seven), pledge to increase the coordination of their economic policies and to guage their economic performance against a set of indicators. The moves are designed to help reduce exchange-rate volatility.    February 1987 -- Louvre Accord: The U.S. and its major economic allies declare that the dollar, which has fallen about 40% from its 1985 peak, had declined enough. They agree to steps to stabilize the dollar within a range but don't announce the range.    April 1987 -- Group of Seven Meeting: Finance ministers reaffirm the Louvre Accord to stabilize exchange rates and pledge to adjust economic policies to reduce trade imbalances.    June 1987 -- Venice Summit: Heads of Seven nations endorse the Louvre Accord and approve specific plans for policy coordination based on economic indicators.    September 1987 -- World Bank-IMF Meeting: Treasury Secretary Baker proposes a &quot;commodity price indicator&quot; -- a basket of commodities including gold -- to help gauge inflation. The proposal is designed to help major nations achieve noninflationary economic growth, which will help keep the value of the dollar stable. </TEXT></DOC>