<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880912-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Image Fight: MCA Inc. Is Battling Accounts Linking It To Organized Crime --- Never Charged With Offense, The Entertainment Group Is Haunted by Past Deals --- Checks From Sal the Swindler </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Akst and John R. Emshwiller (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MCA </CO><IN> FLX </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   MCA Inc. isn't known for gangster films, but given the strange doings at the entertainment giant lately, maybe it is a genre worth pursuing.    Consider this plot:   A Chicago ophthalmologist gets into the band-booking business during the Roaring '20s and prospers. His company later moves to Hollywood and becomes a true power. Its chairman -- the doctor's hand-picked successor -- hobnobs with the president and the pope. The board members are business and political heavyweights.    Then strange things start happening. A prosecutor alleges a mobster has influenced the company's movie unit. Another reputed mobster is said to have the run of the company's records division. And the video unit spends time negotiating a $3 million movie deal with a man now under federal investigation in a Hollywood labor-racketeering inquiry. When a veteran federal prosecutor begins investigating, the company attacks his conduct, and he is taken off the case.    The plot is a true-life tale of MCA itself, and the ending has yet to be played out. But the revelations have already raised eyebrows in Hollywood, where MCA is considered part of the bedrock of the entertainment industry. MCA had $2.6 billion in revenue last year, owns Universal Studios and is a television, music and real-estate giant. The company hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing, but recent publicity about its tangle of business dealings threatens, at the very least, to sully its reputation.    Currently, for example, a federal grand jury in Los Angeles is investigating MCA Home Entertainment Group's president, Eugene F. Giaquinto. The jury is said to be looking into MCA home video's dealings with a Clifton, N.J., company called North Star Graphics Inc., whose owner was convicted of tax evasion and whom authorities have called an &quot;associate&quot; of a mobster. Also, the grand jury recently questioned alleged mobster Salvatore J. Pisello about his ties to the company.    MCA says all of its business operations are above-board. Company officials are livid that questions about alleged links to organized crime are even being raised. The real story, they say, is how an overzealous prosecutor aided by irresponsible media can impugn the reputation of an honest company and its executives.    Still, MCA officials concede that, while they are innocent, they aren't blameless. &quot;We were guilty of stupidity,&quot; says Sidney J. Sheinberg, MCA president, who declined to elaborate. Mr. Sheinberg and other MCA executives referred all questions to the company's lawyers.    Mr. Sheinberg was talking about MCA Records' decision to advance $180,000 to Mr. Pisello, a man whose business career earned him the nickname &quot;Sal the Swindler.&quot; Mr. Pisello once threatened to kill a federal informant, hardly ever paid taxes, and spent most of his life in nefarious dealings, according to a sentencing memo and other documents filed in Los Angeles federal court where he has twice been convicted of tax evasion. Mr. Pisello, who is free pending appeal of his second conviction, denies any wrongdoing or ties to the mob.    MCA didn't just hand over the money to Mr. Pisello. MCA got security from him: $180,000 in undated checks that MCA concedes it knew would bounce if they were ever cashed. An MCA Records executive kept them in his desk.    Some people wonder how MCA could have been so careless or improvident. After all, the company's executives are renowned in the entertainment industry for their shrewdness.    &quot;I've seen people terminated from the company for a lot less&quot; than accepting undated checks, says Al Bergamo, a former MCA Records distribution president. &quot;I am absolutely amazed that some head hasn't rolled.&quot; Mr. Bergamo himself knows something about unceremonious departures. He left MCA in 1983 over what he characterizes as an organizational dispute with Irving Azoff, chairman of MCA's Music Entertainment Group.    Marvin Rudnick, a prosecutor with the Justice Department's Organized Crime Strike Force in Los Angeles, was another who wondered what motivated MCA to do business with Mr. Pisello. Mr. Rudnick took an interest in MCA affairs in 1985 after discovering, during his first prosecution of Mr. Pisello on tax-fraud charges, that MCA knew the defendant.    Mr. Pisello is a strapping 65-year-old Brooklyn native with a raspy voice and a sightless right eye. He is a member of the Gambino organized crime family, a federal agent said in one of Mr. Pisello's tax cases, and he had no experience in the record business before hooking up with MCA Records.    That was in 1983. Mr. Pisello first showed up at MCA as a negotiator for Sugar Hill Records, a small Englewood, N.J., company. One of Sugar Hill's owners testified during Mr. Pisello's second tax case that his firm couldn't interest MCA in a deal to distribute its records until Mr. Pisello intervened, and that Mr. Pisello bragged he could &quot;deliver&quot; an MCA contract. Mr. Pisello and MCA deny this.    In any event, Mr. Pisello soon had regular access to top MCA Records officials, says former MCA Records executive Samuel J. Passamano Sr. &quot;He would just flit from office to office, and if he needed a phone, he would pick up yours,&quot; the executive recalls. Mr. Passamano, who is suing MCA for wrongful termination, says some of his duties eventually were given to Mr. Pisello.    Mr. Bergamo says Mr. Pisello also tried to get MCA to cover a supposed $1 million lien against Sugar Hill held by record retailer Morris Levy, whom the FBI has called an associate of mobsters. Mr. Bergamo says that there was no reason for MCA to pay that amount, and that Mr. Pisello tried to bribe him so MCA would do it anyway. Mr. Pisello denies such a conversation took place.    Mr. Bergamo says he was outraged and went straight to his boss, Myron Roth, who seemed unperturbed. But the two men have different recollections. Through an MCA attorney, Mr. Roth, now senior vice president of MCA's music entertainment group, denies that the conversation occurred.    MCA never sent Mr. Levy the $1 million, but soon after, in the summer of 1984, MCA sold one of his companies $1.4 million of out-of-date records and tapes in a deal arranged by Mr. Pisello. An MCA internal audit says the so-called cut-outs were to be paid for in 60 days. However, final payment wasn't received until January, 1986 -- well after federal investigators began asking about Mr. Pisello.    Those records and tapes were later a source of woe to Mr. Levy, who owns the Strawberry Records chain in New England. Mr. Levy got into a dispute over the cut-outs with a record wholesaler, and was convicted last May of conspiring to extort payments from him. An FBI affidavit in that case, in federal court in Camden, N.J., called Mr. Levy &quot;a lucrative source of cash and property for leaders of the Genovese&quot; crime family. Mr. Levy, through his lawyer, has denied any connection to organized crime.    Meanwhile, MCA kept making deals with Mr. Pisello. In early 1984, it advanced him $100,000 to market break-dancing mats, and lost $95,000 in the process, according to the MCA audit. In June 1984, MCA gave him $30,000 to look into setting up a Latin music label; that was a complete bust. And the following January, MCA gave Mr. Pisello $50,000 as an &quot;advance against future proceeds&quot; that never materialized. These were the payments secured by the $180,000 in uncashable checks, which were kept in a drawer by Daniel McGill, finance vice president of MCA Records.    In early 1985, MCA's relations with Mr. Pisello began unraveling under scrutiny from authorities and reporters. John Gervasoni, a distributor who bought MCA records through Mr. Pisello, claims he got a call from Zach Horowitz, MCA Records senior vice president for business and legal affairs.    Mr. Gervasoni testified during proceedings against Mr. Pisello in Los Angeles on tax-evasion charges that Mr. Horowitz told him he should &quot;keep my mouth shut. . . . MCA Corporation was doing an audit . . . and the government was up there asking questions. . . . He was very, very firm about me not telling a soul about&quot; buying MCA records. Mr. Horowitz, through an MCA lawyer, denies such a conversation took place.    Mr. Rudnick, the voluble 40-year-old career prosecutor who twice convicted Mr. Pisello of tax evasion, was pulled off the MCA case late last year after MCA complained to his superiors that he was making &quot;untrue&quot; and &quot;irresponsible&quot; public statements about the company. MCA retained as outside counsel William Hundley, the Justice Department's former organized-crime chief, who says he discussed the case at lunch with top agency officials in Washington, D.C. Ultimately, Mr. Rudnick's boss, John Newcomer, who heads the Los Angeles organized-crime unit, wrote MCA saying that neither the company nor any of its officials were targets for indictment in the Pisello inquiry.    MCA says Mr. Rudnick has himself to blame for his problems. The company, outraged, points to a comment Mr. Rudnick made in court about the possibility of Mr. Pisello's being &quot;hounded&quot; by the Mafia or by MCA, presumably to keep him from talking to the government.    MCA also is suspicious of the fact that Mr. Rudnick's wife is a business reporter for the Los Angeles Times. A colleague on the newspaper reported often on MCA's dealings with alleged mobsters -- prompting complaints from MCA to the reporter's superiors.    Mr. Rudnick denies leaking information to the Times and says he acted properly throughout the investigation. He believes the Justice Department bowed to pressure from MCA. He says he had hoped to use Mr. Pisello's second conviction for tax fraud as leverage against him to learn more about his relations with the entertainment giant.    &quot;But I never got a chance,&quot; says Mr. Rudnick, who is now considering leaving the department. Justice Department officials won't comment.    MCA's role in Mr. Rudnick's removal has also raised questions. MCA Chairman Lew R. Wasserman, one of the most influential men in Hollywood, is President Reagan's former talent agent and in 1986 gave more than $500,000 to an organization planning a Reagan library and museum. In 1952, while Mr. Reagan was president of the Screen Actors Guild, the Guild waived a key rule for MCA, allowing it to be both a talent agency and a production company.    MCA adamantly denies that it or Mr. Wasserman used influence against Mr. Rudnick.    Dan E. Moldea, whose book &quot;Dark Victory&quot; is a muckraking history of MCA, contends that questionable dealings are nothing new for the company. He says MCA's deceased founder Jules Stein, the ophthalmologist, frequently associated with racketeers and was a bootlegger. &quot;Stink bombs&quot; would sometimes go off in clubs that refused exclusive arrangements with MCA, Mr. Moldea says. MCA says the allegations are false.    Although overlooked at first, another alleged link between MCA and a mobster has gained attention recently. It came up in New York federal court following the 1982 conviction of Edward Sciandra for tax evasion. Mr. Sciandra, of Bellmore, N.Y., has been identified by the Pennsylvania Crime Commission as a leader of that state's Buffalino crime family.    Then-assistant U.S. Attorney Carolyn Henneman said in a sentencing memo in U.S. District Court in N.Y. that &quot;because of his organized-crime connections&quot; Mr. Sciandra was able to direct &quot;hundreds of thousands of dollars&quot; of MCA's Universal division film-processing and film-editing work to one company in return for &quot;10% in cash under the table.&quot;    No one was ever charged in connection with the allegation. Ms. Henneman won't explain further, except to call it &quot;a very-well-thought-out and carefully phrased statement.&quot; Mr. Sciandra couldn't be located for comment. MCA calls the allegation &quot;absolutely false.&quot;    MCA's relationship with North Star Graphics, the New Jersey concern that is MCA's exclusive supplier of videocassette boxes, is also getting attention.    North Star's owner, Michael Del Gaizo, pleaded guilty to tax evasion in 1984 in New York and served one month in prison. In court papers filed in Mr. Sciandra's tax-evasion case, prosecutors called him a &quot;close friend and associate&quot; of Mr. Sciandra and a participant in a phony invoicing scheme that Mr. Sciandra designed to help businessmen hide taxable income. Mr. Del Gaizo, through his lawyer, denies both allegations.    MCA, which was doing business with North Star at the time of Mr. Del Gaizo's plea, apparently wasn't concerned about his legal problems. Mr. Giaquinto, the MCA Home Entertainment president, even wrote to the court in 1984 praising Mr. Del Gaizo's &quot;credibility,&quot; &quot;dedication&quot; and &quot;leadership.&quot;    Ronald Olson, a lawyer for MCA, says North Star has always been &quot;price and service competitive&quot; and that the current contract between the two firms requires that North Star match any lower bids MCA gets. He says past audits haven't turned up any irregularities, but, because of recent publicity, MCA is doing a &quot;more intensive&quot; investigation.    The federal grand jury in Los Angeles that is looking into possible labor racketeering in the movie industry apparently also is interested in the connection between North Star and MCA. Mr. Giaquinto is under investigation for his dealings with the vendor, says Mr. Hundley, the MCA outside counsel. Last September a federal agent even tried to plant a listening device in the building housing MCA's home video unit, but was discovered by MCA security guards.    The grand jury also is investigating erstwhile producer Martin Bacow, with whom MCA's video unit was negotiating to pay $3 million for the video rights to an unmade movie about the late gangster Meyer Lansky. The investigation is for possible involvement in labor racketeering, which Mr. Bacow denies.    Mr. Bacow hasn't produced a movie in 24 years, but MCA drew up a contract for him. The deal was finally killed by MCA management, Mr. Olson says.    Mr. Bacow is better known in Hollywood as a labor go-between, and says his mediation has settled Teamster disputes on the sets of &quot;Miami Vice&quot; and &quot;Magnum, P.I.,&quot; two MCA television shows. MCA acknowledges that federal investigators have asked for payroll records for Teamster drivers on &quot;Miami Vice.&quot;    Although he admits having known mobsters, Mr. Bacow insists that he isn't tainted by them, that he never gets paid for his labor help and that he hasn't done anything wrong.    Mr. Pisello was recently called before the grand jury in Los Angeles and was asked about his dealings with MCA. In an interview, Mr. Pisello says he never did anything wrong.    MCA hasn't heard the last from the alleged mobster. Last week, Mr. Pisello sued the company in a Burbank, Calif., state court. The suit claims MCA defrauded him out of hundreds of thousands of dollars in various business transactions and seeks over $50 million in damages.    Mr. Olson, the MCA lawyer, says the allegations are without merit. &quot;We are confident they will be rejected in court,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>