<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880722-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Playing Offense: Dukakis's Game Plan Is to Go After Bush In Every Single State --- Ideology Takes a Back Seat To Character in a Race Likely to Get Personal --- Electoral College Arithmetic </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers and David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis wants to play offense, charging head-down and straight at the character of George Bush and the heart of the Republican Party.    The Democrats' candidate for president will run a &quot;domestic-content&quot; campaign, playing down foreign policy and focusing on the economy. He leaves the national convention today for Texas and California -- home states to Mr. Bush and President Reagan -- in the first steps of what his advisers insist will be a 50-state strategy to wrest a Democratic majority in November from the GOP advantage in the Electoral College.    This will be a hard-bitten, often personal fight. The intention is to blur ideology, contrasting the Massachusetts governor's ethnic past and his record as an executive with Mr. Bush's elite upbringing and his recent service in the shadow of President Reagan. Each line the Dukakis campaign etches into its portrait of the candidate is supposed to produce a contrast with Mr. Bush.    &quot;This election isn't about ideology,&quot; Mr. Dukakis said in his acceptance speech last night. &quot;It's about competence. . . . It's not about meaningless labels. It's about American values.&quot;    &quot;First and foremost, it's a choice between two persons,&quot; says Thomas Kiley, a senior Dukakis political adviser.    The campaign will also be a balancing act for Mr. Dukakis with a third man, his defeated Democratic rival Jesse Jackson. The civil-rights leader dominated much of this week's convention here, and a challenge for Mr. Dukakis is to harness the energy Mr. Jackson generates while avoiding the controversy he also engenders.    While Mr. Jackson speaks of &quot;dreams,&quot; Mr. Dukakis's favorite word is &quot;real.&quot; Against Mr. Bush, he will boast of having a real record of real decisions affecting real people.    But Mr. Dukakis also has real liabilities. Polls show that the public has more confidence in Mr. Bush on foreign policy. He will continue to speak out on international matters in selected forums, but a sudden crisis for the U.S. abroad could highlight his lack of experience. His running mate, Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, brings to the ticket his background on the Senate Intelligence Committee, but his career, too, has focused largely on domestic affairs.    Mr. Dukakis is better positioned to reclaim economic issues from the GOP, but today only four states can be said to be in a recession, compared with 31 when the Democrats won control of the Senate in 1986. With unemployment at 5.3%, he will have to play on voters' fears about the future. &quot;It is tomorrow's breakfast that people are worried about this year,&quot; says Democratic pollster Paul Maslin.    Gerald Rafshoon, Jimmy Carter's former media strategist, for one, thinks that Mr. Dukakis's favorite economic pledge -- good jobs at good wages -- &quot;is not going to cut it over the long haul.&quot;    With its stress on the issue of character, the Dukakis campaign is vulnerable to a swing in public opinion toward Mr. Bush. Though national polls currently show the vice president with high negative ratings, Democrats worry that behind skilled media strategist Roger Ailes, Mr. Bush could yet emerge as a warmer and more appealing figure than Gov. Dukakis.    In money and enthusiasm, Democrats leave the convention far ahead of where they were four years ago, but they still must coax Americans to break with the voting pattern of recent elections. Major Electoral College battlegrounds include California and Illinois, which the Democrats have lost in five consecutive elections; Michigan, which they have lost four times in a row; and Texas, Ohio and Tennessee, which have gone Republican in four of the past five elections.    To get to a majority -- 270 electoral votes -- the Democrats probably need California. And even if Mr. Bentsen delivers Texas for the ticket, Mr. Dukakis must do well in the industrial Midwest and prevail in skirmishes for the Border States and the Pacific Northwest.    The Dukakis strategy is to minimize the importance of individual states by taking the offensive everywhere -- and distracting the Republicans enough to prevent them from delivering a knockout punch by concentrating their resources in just a few critical states. &quot;The key is to keep as many states in play for as long as possible,&quot; says Charles Baker, the campaign's national field director. &quot;If this election is going to work, we are going to have to change the arithmetic.&quot;    That will be hardest to do in the South. The selection of Sen. Bentsen makes the campaign competitive in Texas, but the presence of Jesse Jackson is two-edged. He will help to energize and register black voters, but Republicans intend to label him &quot;the second vice president&quot; in an effort to mobilize white conservatives across the Cotton Belt. Georgia recently elected a liberal senator, but Democrats say their best chances remain in states such as Tennessee, Kentucky and Arkansas, where there are relatively fewer blacks and the population is less racially polarized.    Republicans doubt that the strategy will succeed. &quot;It sounds like they're trying to whistle 'Dixie,' but they'll never get the tune,&quot; says Mr. Bush's campaign manager, Lee Atwater.    The lack of a base in the South is what forces Mr. Dukakis to look to the Pacific Coast. Recent polls show him to be competitive in California, which he carried easily in last month's primary. And his managerial style and environmental record seem to suit Oregon and Washington.    In California, Mr. Dukakis will take a leaf from Sen. Alan Cranston, who emphasized organization in his narrow 1986 victory. The Dukakis campaign hopes to mobilize the 2,000 precinct captains it recruited in the spring. But no organization can substitute for a media campaign in a state of 27 million people, and Mr. Dukakis is lining up Madison Avenue talent in order to beef up his advertising team to go against Mr. Ailes, an experienced hand in the state. Among the more prominent personalities is adman Edward McCabe, who sold Volvos as the car for &quot;people who think&quot; and sold poultry magnate Frank Perdue (&quot;It takes a tough man to make a tender chicken&quot;).    A victory in Texas would mean Mr. Dukakis wouldn't have to win most of the Midwestern industrial states. But his strategists believe that no other region will provide a better test of his economic message. He is planning to stump the Midwest next week, appealing to blue-collar voters who went for Mr. Reagan in 1980 and 1984 -- and who were reluctant to embrace Mr. Dukakis in the primaries this year.    In these states and in farm states suffering economic distress -- and now drought -- the Dukakis strategists plan aggressive field operations, television spots and an effort to identify and then convert swing voters. &quot;George Bush has a serious Midwestern problem -- both on the farm issue and in the industrial states,&quot; says Mr. Baker, the field director. &quot;We're going to remind them how bad things were, and we're going to talk about how we can assure that the future is better.&quot;    One potential asset here is Mr. Jackson. He has ties in the region through his activism on behalf of farmers and labor, and he builds on a tradition of rural protest. &quot;Jesse Jackson allows you to grieve the suffering in America while holding your head high,&quot; says former Nebraska Gov. Robert Kerrey, a Democratic candidate this year for the Senate. &quot;The Democrats sound whiny when they speak from their heads,&quot; he says. &quot;Jackson speaks from the heart.&quot;    In Mr. Dukakis's own Northeast, New York and Pennsylvania are major battlegrounds in which his strategists believe he can do well. They expect to run strongly in New England, plucking Vermont and competing well in devoutly Republican New Hampshire and Maine. Poised on either side of the New York media market are Connecticut and New Jersey, which between them represent a prize equal in electoral votes to Illinois.    Dukakis people are gambling -- critics say foolishly -- on building similar combinations among states that are usually beyond even the peripheral vision of Democrats. Mr. Dukakis, for example, tomorrow will find himself in North Dakota, one of the 23 states that have gone Republican in the past five presidential elections.    Earlier this month, he made a campaign stop in Arizona, the only state that has voted GOP in every presidential election in 40 years. &quot;There are places you can't win, but you can't admit it under this strategy,&quot; says former Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt, who at first was skeptical about a Dukakis visit. Mr. Babbitt says, &quot;The psychology of this campaign requires a full-court press.&quot;    The ultimate logic of the &quot;50-state strategy&quot; lies with Michael Dukakis. The candidate draws strength from his vision of himself as a national candidate capable of bridging the class and regional differences he says have been exacerbated in the Reagan years. That was one reason he chose Sen. Bentsen, a man steeped in the Anglo and Hispanic cultures of the Southwest.    In his speech last night, Mr. Dukakis, speaking in Spanish, paid tribute to the late Hispanic activist Willie Velasquez, and cited his own life as a metaphor for the unifying American Dream: &quot;My friends, if anyone tells you that the American Dream belongs to the privileged few and not to all of us, you tell them that the Reagan era is over and a new era is about to begin.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis frequently cites as his model John F. Kennedy, yet the parallel may be misleading. Mr. Kennedy made a strong appeal to the generation of voters who came of age during World War II. But Mr. Dukakis, a product of the 1950s, has a more diverse electorate to appeal to.    The governor's most unifying theme may well be in his message of economic growth and opportunity. He conveys the image of a manager with shirt sleeves rolled up who is ready to go to work to help America compete. But campaign strategists want to expand on his pragmatism by emphasizing the candidate's moral commitment to equal opportunity for all.    The effort to humanize Mr. Dukakis's image -- through frequent mentions of his immigrant parents, for instance -- is an important element of his aggressive strategy. It could also be an important part of his defense against the attacks awaited from the GOP.    &quot;I expect the Republicans will be very negative about Dukakis,&quot; says Susan Estrich, the governor's campaign manager. &quot;They've run out of positive things to say about Bush. We're ready for it. There are a great many vulnerabilities in George Bush.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>