<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880113-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   JAPAN'S TAKESHITA ARRIVED in Washington for talks with Reagan today.    The prime minister's first meeting with the president since taking office in November is expected to focus on Tokyo's trade practices at home and abroad, as well as military and world currency issues. He also is expected to visit Congress before leaving Friday for Ottawa and talks with Canadian Prime Minister Mulroney. Separately, Takeshita gave the Reagan administration a new proposal for increasing U.S. construction companies' access to the huge Japanese public-works market.    Reagan signed an order that helps clear the way for a proposal to market Alaskan natural gas to Japan and other Far East countries, sources said.    ---   ISRAELI TROOPS KILLED a protester and barred a U.N. envoy from a camp.    The military command said troops opened fire on a crowd of knife-wielding Arabs in the southern Gaza Strip, killing a member of the Islamic Jihad, a fundamentalist group. Soldiers also blocked a U.N. official, sent to investigate conditions among Palestinians in the occupied territories, from entering a refugee camp. Foreign Minister Peres called in the Israeli parliament for a political end to the violence.    Security sources said the deportation to Lebanon of four Palestinians was imminent. The four were among a group of nine protesters ordered expelled.    ---   A verification panel is seeking an extension of a Friday deadline for cease-fires and reforms called for in the five-nation Central America peace plan, sources close to the panel said. The request for an unspecified extension is part of a report that will be considered by presidents of the five nations when they meet Friday in Costa Rica.    Managua charged a jailed Illinois man with violating public order and security and accused him of having ties to U.S.-backed Contras. James Denby, whose small plane was shot down over Nicaragua Dec. 6, faces up to 30 years in prison if convicted.    ---   A U.S. safety agency said 1987 was the worst year since 1974 for accidents by scheduled airlines flying large aircraft. The National Transportation Safety Board said there were 31 accidents by the airlines last year, including four crashes that claimed 231 lives. Fatalities involving commuter airlines were the highest since 1979.    ---   Iraqi warplanes fired two missiles into a Cypriot-flagged ship carrying Iranian gasoline in the Persian Gulf, killing two crewmen and setting it afire, shipping sources said. Separately, administration officials said Iran may have received a new shipment of Chinese-made Silkworm missiles on a cargo ship from North Korea.    ---   Gorbachev defended his reform program against critics at a meeting of the Communist Party Central Committee, but said proponents of &quot;ultra-perestroika,&quot; such as ousted Moscow party leader Yeltsin, had proved incapable of leadership. The Soviet leader also said a June party conference will weigh electoral and judicial reforms.    ---   Sweden and the Soviet Union reached agreement in a 19-year-old border dispute over an 8,400-square-mile region of the Baltic Sea. Under the accord, which is to be signed today in Stockholm by Swedish Premier Carlsson and Soviet Premier Ryzhkov, Sweden will have rights to the easternmost 75% of the region.    ---   The Army is likely to cancel plans for its new $50 billion LHX helicopter program because of budget cuts, Pentagon officials said. The helicopter, which was to have replaced Vietnam-era Huey and Cobra aircraft, was considered a cornerstone of the Army's modernization. A final decision is expected today.    ---   The Centers for Disease Control said there were 20,620 new cases of AIDS reported in 1987, a rate of about 400 a week and an increase of almost 59% from the 13,008 new cases reported in 1986. By Jan. 4, the last date for which figures are available, the total number of U.S. AIDS cases had reached 50,265, the federal agency said.    ---   The House Intelligence panel released an assessment by unidentified U.S. intelligence officials concluding that the Soviet Union probably didn't know it was firing at a civilian airliner when it shot down a Korean Air Lines jet in 1983. The view contradicts administration claims that Moscow knew it was attacking a non-military target.    ---   China's Foreign Ministry reiterated a demand by leader Deng Xiaoping that Soviet-backed Vietnam withdraw its troops from Cambodia as a precondition for any summit with Soviet leaders. The statement appears to indirectly reject a proposal by Gorbachev for a Moscow-Beijing summit.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled, 8-0, that judges aren't absolutely immune from lawsuits charging them with sex discrimination or other misconduct when they act in administrative rather than judicial roles. The ruling came in a case involving a male Illinois state court judge who fired a female probation officer.    ---   Soviet troops rebuilt four bases and 15 security posts destroyed by Afghan rebels last month south of Kandahar, rebel sources said. Separately, a top Soviet Foreign Ministry official told diplomats from Denmark, Greece and West Germany that their governments can &quot;contribute constructively&quot; to efforts to end the Afghan conflict.    ---   A passenger attempted to hijack a Canadian airliner with 263 aboard, but the plane landed in Edmonton, Alberta, and passengers disembarked without injury, a Transport Ministry spokesman said. Police said a note was found in a washroom saying explosives were on board the DC-10, which was on a flight from Amsterdam.    ---   A Soviet arms negotiator said the U.S. must agree to limits on its space-based missile defense project before Moscow will sign a treaty halving superpower arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles. Alexei Obukhov, arriving in Geneva for treaty talks tomorrow, said the U.S. must comply with the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.    ---   Medical researchers in Texas said they have used a laser to cleanse donated blood of the AIDS virus and other infectious agents without harming the blood. The Baylor University team, financed in part with Strategic Defense Initiative funds, said the experimental technique could be used to cleanse as many as four pints an hour.    ---   Suriname's National Assembly elected former Agriculture Minister Ramsewak Shankar as president, paving the way for an end to seven years of military rule. Shankar is to succeed military leader Desi Bouterse, who seized power in a 1980 coup in the former Dutch colony in northeast South America, in a Jan. 25 inauguration ceremony.    ---   Died: John J. Williams, 83, four-term former Republican senator from Delaware, Monday, in Lewes, Del. </TEXT></DOC>