<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0072 </DOCNO><HL> Monetary History, not Dogma---By Milton Friedman</HL><DD> 02/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Journalists who write about economic prospects and policies have a distressing tendency to proceed as if all of economic history is divided into two parts: from the creation to 1983, and from 1983 to 1986. Witness a recent article with the screaming headline &quot;Economic Policy: The Old Tools Won't Work,&quot; and a text noting that &quot;As recently as . . . 1983, the old elixirs worked as they had in the past. . . . But in 1986, things were different&quot; (Dun's Business Month, January 1987).    In particular, the current widespread euphoria about inflation rests in considerable measure on the belief that somehow the age-old link between monetary growth and inflation has been broken, so that the Fed can now concentrate on stimulating the economy without worrying about a possible resurgence of inflation. A longer time perspective is a helpful antidote to the widespread myopia. It suggests that if things are different in 1986, then they have been different for at least a century.    The solid line in chart A is the quantity of money per unit of output, year by year, for the century from 1886 to 1985. (See accompanying illustration -- WSJ Feb. 12, 1987.) &quot;The other line is the implicit price deflator for national income. In order to make the two series comparable, both have been expressed as percentages of their average value over the century as a whole (1886-1985 equals 100 for both lines). The monetary aggregate used is the only one for which reasonably satisfactory data are available before World War I. It is comparable to, but somewhat narrower than, the aggregate that the Fed now designates as M2 and is the one that Anna Schwartz and I have relied on in our studies of U.S. and U.K. monetary history. Output is measured by national income in constant prices.    From 1886 to 1985, the quantity of money multiplied 340-fold and output 20-fold, so money per unit of output multiplied 17-fold. Price in turn multiplied 13-fold. In the perspective of a century, the only sizable departures from close parallelism between money per unit of output and prices are for World War I, the Great Contraction, and World War II. During World War I, prices rose more rapidly than money, the usual relation during a period of rising inflation. During World War II, this relation was reversed with money rising faster than prices, thanks to extensive price control, rationing, and the widespread expectation that prices would collapse after World War II as they had after the Civil War and World War I.    During the contraction from 1929 to 1933, both output and prices fell more rapidly than the quantity of money so that money per unit of output actually rose for the first two years of the contraction, but then fell along with an even sharper fall in prices -- the mirror image during deflation of the experience during the World War I inflation.    For a closer look at the more recent period, chart B plots the same data for the past quarter of a century, except that both series are expressed as percentages of their average value during the past 25 years instead of the past century. On this expanded scale, the only departures that stand out are associated with the accelerating inflation from the early 1970s to 1980, and the sharp disinflation since. During the early stages of the acceleration of inflation, money rose more rapidly than prices until the public came to recognize what was going on, after which the reverse occurred, as during World War I. Once disinflation set in, there was a reaction, and prices rose less rapidly than money.    In discussing current economic prospects, all of us tend to focus on quarter-to-quarter or year-to-year changes rather than the underlying aggregates. To give some perspective on these, chart C plots the year-to-year percentage changes in money per unit of output and in the deflator for the past century.    Over the whole of the past century, money has consistently been more variable than prices -- the market tends to smooth out the short-term perturbations in money. What is equally striking is that both money and prices were far more variable under the pre-World War II gold standard than they have been since. This reduction in variability may in part be a statistical illusion, reflecting the greater accuracy of recent data. However, the difference is too marked to be wholly explainable simply in terms of better data.    Though money was more stable over short periods after World War II, it was less stable over longer periods. There is no parallel prior to the 1960s of the near-quadrupling of the quantity of money per unit of output from 1965 to 1985 recorded in charts A and B. Similarly, there is no earlier parallel in chart C to the 23 years of consistently positive growth in money per unit of output that followed 1962.    The greater year-to-year stability of prices after World War II than before is a response to the greater stability in monetary growth. Similarly, the larger long-term movement in prices is a reflection of the larger long-term movement in money.    During the past century, major changes have occurred in financial institutions, the role of government, the structure of the economy, the distribution of the population among occupations, the flows of international trade, and so on. Yet these charts demonstrate that no appreciable change has occurred in the relation between the quantity of money and the level of prices. The belief that there has been such a change derives from a myth about past relations and the persistent search for some magic fine-tuning tool that can be used to guide the economy precisely along a pre-selected path from quarter to quarter.    The charts make clear that the quantity of money is not and never has been such a magic tool. On the contrary, the attempt to use it as such has added to the economy's instability rather than reduced it. This historical evidence, not some a priori dogma, is the reason why I, in common with many other economists, have long opposed fine-tuning, and have, instead, favored steady monetary growth at a rate that in the long run would be consistent with stable prices.    ---   Mr. Friedman, a Nobel winner in economics, is a senior research fellow at the Hoover Institution. </TEXT></DOC>