<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880210-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Two Big Questions Loom as Democrats Head East; How Well Will Dukakis Do, Who Will Be Second? </HL><AUTHOR> Dennis Farney and David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   As the Democrats head east to the important New Hampshire primary, there are two big questions: How impressively will Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis carry his neighboring state, and who will finish second?    With a respectable third-place finish in Iowa Monday, Gov. Dukakis is the heavy favorite to capture next week's primary in New Hampshire. But the size of his victory and the way he shapes his campaign message will be crucial measures of his subsequent potential in the Southern primaries and the Midwest.    Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt, who won the Iowa caucuses, may emerge as Gov. Dukakis's strongest rival as a result of his victory in Iowa. But the attention he has won is double-edged in that it brings tougher scrutiny for alleged inconsistencies. Mr. Gephardt gambled on a win in Iowa to help his financially strapped campaign, but his victory was overshadowed by the Republican contest.    And Mr. Gephardt will be strongly challenged for second place by Sen. Paul Simon, who finished second in Iowa. But the Illinois Democrat faces credibility problems on fiscal issues.    The Iowa caucuses probably marked the end for two other Democrats, former Colorado Sen. Gary Hart, who ran a dismal seventh, and former Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt, who did more respectably but can't seem to break into the first tier of candidates.    Thus, it's likely Gov. Dukakis and either Rep. Gephardt or Sen. Simon will leave New Hampshire next week as credible rivals to the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore in the South. Sen. Gore would benefit if two liberals, Messrs. Dukakis and Simon, are left standing. It matters less to Mr. Jackson, who won more than 10% of the vote in the predominately white state of Iowa, much better than he fared four years ago. He could do equally well in New Hampshire and is poised to score heavily throughout the South.    Richard Gephardt, a man with a choirboy's face and populist rhetoric, is a multiple contradiction in terms. His Iowa victory will now expose those contradictions to scrutiny and attack. But his earnest, reassuring personality is a shield that may be tough to pierce. He's a consummate Washington insider -- who won Iowa by flailing the Establishment. He combines the porch swing-and-picket fence look of bedrock Midwestern stability with a quicksilver ability to remold himself as situations require.    &quot;Circumstances change. Facts change. The issues change,&quot; he explained last week as his big campaign sedan glided through the icy streets of downtown Dubuque, Iowa. And Dick Gephardt himself has changed many times.    In Iowa, the 47-year-old congressman, best known until now as a quiet and effective congressional coalition-builder, perfected a new voice and a potent theme. He talked of lost jobs, lost dreams and the callousness of corporate America. He told workers they and their nation could regain control of the future. Amplified by beautifully executed television ads, the message worked.    But there are other Dick Gephardts buried in the votes and changing positions of more than a decade in Congress. And those Dick Gephardts will now be exhumed in the frenzy of the post-Iowa campaign.    He assails the Reagan deficit, but voted for the 1981 tax cut that helped create it. He champions the lot of hard-pressed farmers, but voted for the Jimmy Carter grain embargo that hurt them. He promises to protect Social Security from budget-cutters just waiting to &quot;hack&quot; at it, but himself supported an unsuccessful 1985 move to freeze retirement benefits.    He once supported the MX missile, but now opposes it; once supported an anti-abortion constitutional amendment, but abandoned it as he moved toward his presidential bid. Now he attacks &quot;the vested interests.&quot; But he once criticized Ralph Nader for saying that lawyers were making too much money, and is one of the few Democratic candidates to take political-action committee contributions from those &quot;vested interests.&quot;    But his opponents will find their target a formidable campaigner. Wendell Bailey, Missouri's GOP state treasurer, doesn't admire Rep. Gephardt, whom he derides as &quot;Mr. Magnanimous,&quot; but he has a profound respect for his political skills. &quot;I thought I was eating him alive,&quot; recalled a rueful Mr. Bailey of a long-ago debate. &quot;Then he hit that God, mother, country thing. I left with my tail tucked down.&quot;    Precisely because critics will be looking for new flip-flops as Rep. Gephardt moves beyond Iowa, campaign aides say, he'll continue to talk tough on trade, a kind of shorthand way of communicating his stand-up-for-America campaign theme.    Paul Simon's strong finish in Iowa illustrates that his campaigning as a candidate of unquestioned virtue and old-fashioned Democratic principles still has strong appeal among some Democrats, and there's a constituency for this message in New Hampshire too.    But even if that puts him in good shape for next week's primary, there is a widespread belief that he will have trouble with the more conservative Southerners who vote in the Super Tuesday primaries March 8. He may be saddled with two of the Democrats' biggest albatrosses, an image of being both a big spender and soft on defense. &quot;A Paul Simon candidacy leads with both Achilles' heels,&quot; charged Mark Siegel, a Democratic political analyst.    Substantively, Sen. Simon's principal task in the days ahead will be persuading voters that he can reconcile the seeming contradiction in his promises for expensive social programs and a balanced budget. He proposes to increase education spending, institute a jobs program at a first-year cost of $2.5 billion and begin a long-term health care program, all of which he says would be enacted on a &quot;pay-as-you-go&quot; basis.    The Illinois Democrat does propose a $20 billion cut in defense spending by fiscal 1992 but says only as a &quot;last resort&quot; would he increase revenue through such levies as a tax on wealthy Americans or an oil-import fee. He is either vague on any other budgetary savings or uses assumptions many experts consider dubious.    By reducing the trade deficit, Sen. Simon says unemployment would be cut 1 1/2 percentage points and the budget deficit would be narrowed by $45 billion. Interest rates would be cut 1 1/2 to two percentage points through &quot;coordinating&quot; with the Federal Reserve Board, slicing another $30 billion to $40 billion off the deficit.    But most experts, including leading Democratic economists, assert that if reducing unemployment and lowering interest rates were so easy, they would have been reduced long ago, and thus they don't think Sen. Simon's proposed new programs really can pay for themselves.    Michael Dukakis won by surviving in the Iowa caucuses. A skilled political organization helped to keep him within range of his Midwest rivals this week. But he has yet to put some punch behind his cocky sureness. The burden falls more directly on him to clarify the message that will carry his campaign not only through New Hampshire but Super Tuesday.    &quot;Time works against him,&quot; said Democratic consultant David Garth, and the risk for the governor is that his very strengths may encourage him to ignore his weaknesses. &quot;He's not touching the soul of the Democratic Party in any way,&quot; said Thomas Mann of the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank.    As if to underscore the point, while the Gephardt campaign ended with a television ad dubbed &quot;Soul,&quot; Gov. Dukakis was airing one labeled &quot;Skills.&quot; New Hampshire's healthy economy makes the state more receptive to his message, but those who know the governor well say his real identity as a candidate won't be defined until he takes the gloves off and challenges his rivals.    &quot;He should not cede the economic issue to Gephardt,&quot; said one Democratic strategist. &quot;All he has to do is draw Gephardt as the past and himself as the future.&quot; Within the Dukakis camp, advisers point with pride -- and longing -- to a one-on-one debate last August between the Missouri congressman and Mr. Dukakis. But in the months since, he has shown little of the same initiative.    He seems haunted at times by the hardball tactics that led to the resignation of his former campaign manager and close adviser John Sasso and shrinks from any suggestion that he be more aggressive. He insists -- critics would say with an intellectual arrogance -- that the distinctions so clear to him will be clear in time to voters and casts himself as a man who saves his fire for the GOP. &quot;If somebody punches me, I have to counterpunch, &quot; he says. &quot;But I have to win in a way that will make this party united.&quot;    In the final days in Iowa, he seemed almost serene, playing a trumpet duet of &quot;Happy Days Are Here Again&quot; with actor Richard Gere. Mr. Gere told voters he could relate to Mr. Dukakis and his wife, Kitty, at the &quot;heart level.&quot; Now the campaign just has to find more like him.    ---   Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>