<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870707-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Congress Is Hoist by Its Boland Petard---By L. Gordon Crovitz</HL><DD> 07/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Rep. Bill Alexander (D., Ark.) set a modern printing-cost record when he had the legislative history of the Boland amendments published in the Congressional Record on June 15. He said the $197,382 cost was justified because the report would show that any intention to exclude the president or his National Security Council from coverage by the amendments was &quot;conspicuously absent.&quot;    Rep. Alexander should ask for a refund. The collection, &quot;The Boland Amendment: Intent of Congress&quot; (U.S. Government Printing Office, 403 pages, $1.25), is ammunition for critics who are skeptical that the Boland amendments were clear policy statements or valid legal constraints on the executive branch. Like the amendments themselves, the debates included no express intent to limit the president or his NSC staff from aiding the Contras. Nor were any civil or criminal penalties envisioned for any &quot;violations.&quot;    Congressmen on the Iran-Contra committee will have a chance today to ask Lt. Col. Oliver North how the NSC staff viewed the Boland amendments. For their part, many congressmen were confused about what the Boland amendments meant. Indeed, at one point in the debates, Rep. Edward Boland (D., Mass.) himself seemed to suggest the NSC wasn't covered.    The most restrictive Boland amendment was the third of the five versions, which was attached to the Defense Appropriation and Intelligence Authorization Acts and in force from Oct. 3, 1984, to Sept. 30, 1985. This included the prohibition on Contra funding by the CIA or Pentagon or any other government agency &quot;involved in intelligence activities.&quot;    The debate is mute on any suggestion that President Reagan or the NSC were included in the prohibition. Rep. Boland issued a statement after the amendment was adopted to clarify its breadth. &quot;This prohibition applies to all funds available in fiscal year 1985 regardless of any accounting procedure at any agency,&quot; he said. &quot;It clearly prohibits any expenditure, including those from accounts for salaries and in all support costs. The prohibition is so strictly written that it also prohibits transfers of equipment at no cost.&quot;    The key question is which agencies were covered. The Library of Congress, which collected the Boland debates, said the prohibition was not absolute: &quot;Unlike some other appropriations statutes, there is no express bar to the use of funds for activities for which Congress had denied assistance.&quot; Missing was the usual catchall phrase that no funds otherwise authorized could be used for a prohibited purpose -- here, the Contras.    The text of the amendment strongly indicates that the president and NSC were not covered. The authorization act that included the third Boland amendment listed the 10 &quot;intelligence and intelligence-related&quot; agencies that would be covered by the law. These were the CIA; Defense Department; Defense Intelligence Agency; National Security Agency (no relation to the NSC); Departments of the Army, Navy and Air Force; State Department; Treasury Department; Energy Department; Federal Bureau of Investigation; and Drug Enforcement Administration. This group is similar to the intelligence agencies listed by President Reagan in Executive Order 12333. The NSC is absent from both lists.    Perhaps the strongest evidence that the Boland amendments didn't apply to President Reagan or the NSC came from Rep. Boland himself in the debate on the Michel amendment to the fourth of the five Boland amendments, which provided $27 million in humanitarian aid from August 1985 to March 1986. Consider this colloquy, where Rep. Boland referred only to the CIA and Pentagon as intelligence agencies:    Rep. Boland: &quot;{The Boland amendment} means that none of the funds which are appropriated by the Michel amendment may be provided through any intelligence agency. Now some of you might ask if this is necessary, since the Michel amendment says that the money it would appropriate can't go through CIA or DoD. The president, under the Michel amendment, can determine the agency which will dispense this aid, but he will be precluded from using an intelligence agency.&quot;    Rep. Thomas Foley (D., Wash.): &quot;Is it also correct that the Boland amendment to the Michel amendment would not in any way restrict the authority of other agencies of the U.S., other than intelligence agencies, from distributing any humanitarian assistance if authorized by the Michel amendment?&quot;    Rep. Boland: &quot;Yes.&quot;    What makes Rep. Boland's comments especially interesting is that just as the House was debating which agency should administer the humanitarian aid, the Senate Appropriations Committee was writing a report that expressly specified a role for the NSC. The report said that the amendment allows President Reagan to determine how the aid would be administered, but &quot;requires the National Security Council to monitor implementation of the proposal.&quot; Far from the NSC being prohibited from playing any role in the Contra aid program, the agency would be required to oversee its administration. Legislators apparently believed this was consistent with the Boland amendment. President Reagan eventually chose a unit in the State Department to oversee the humanitarian aid.    The legislative debate is also interesting for the dog that didn't bark -- the arguments that weren't made. If Congress meant to legislate a legal constraint on presidential authority in foreign policy, this would have raised separation-of-powers issues. Yet the only discussion on this during debate on any of the Boland amendments was by Sen. Barry Goldwater (R., Ariz.), who opposed congressional efforts to micro-manage foreign policy.    &quot;The decision in these matters in my opinion and according to the Constitution rests with the president,&quot; Sen. Goldwater said in the October 1984 debate on the third Boland amendment. Whatever the amendments says, &quot;ultimately it is the commander in chief who is going to have to make up our minds or we are going to have to amend the Constitution.&quot;    The debate also includes rejection of competing amendments that would have flatly prohibited any Contra aid. The Boland amendments were compromises, accepted to avoid the risk of presidential veto or a constitutional showdown.    The Library of Congress report describing the legislative debate on the first Boland amendment, which covered 1982-83, says &quot;it was clearly understood at the time of enactment that the compromise would not cut off all direct or indirect assistance to the Contras.&quot; Rep. Boland's amendment passed the House unanimously. It prohibited the Defense Department and Central Intelligence Agency from military aid &quot;for the purpose of overthrowing the government of Nicaragua.&quot;    This was less restrictive than the proposal of Rep. Tom Harkin (D., Iowa) that would have barred funds to assist any group or individual &quot;in carrying out military activities in or against Nicaragua.&quot; Rep. Boland worried about a possible veto of the broader bill. He said that the Boland amendment &quot;is agreeable to the executive branch. They do not like it, but it is agreeable to them. I believe {the Harkin amendment} is not necessary. I further believe that it sets a bad precedent.&quot;    Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.) offered a version of Rep. Harkin's amendment. &quot;There are any number of ways of circumventing&quot; the Boland amendment, he said. &quot;It is going to provide a green light for the continued activity that we have seen reported over and over again, in the last several weeks and months, suggesting that we are already deeply involved in a broader conflict in Central America. My amendment is more open-ended, more of a declaration of policy.&quot;    Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.) called the Dodd proposal &quot;an extreme injunction to impose on the activities of the United States, directly or indirectly. I do not think we have ever had an injunction like this.    &quot;The senator from Connecticut, I presume, is going to say {about the Boland amendment}, 'Well, that is big enough to drive a truck through.' The question really before us is, is this body going to insert a complete prohibition of activities. . . . Are we going to tie the hands of the president? After all, it is the president who is at the top of the heap in this.&quot;    The Boland amendment for 1983-84 included $24 million for the Pentagon and CIA to support the Contras. The most remarkable feature of the debate was how strongly congressmen disagreed about the meaning of the Boland prohibitions they had passed just the year before.    Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.) thought all covert aid was prohibited. &quot;Covert action against Nicaragua is against our laws,&quot; he said. &quot;The first law in question is the Boland amendment, passed last year.&quot;    The ranking Republican on the Intelligence Committee, Rep. Kenneth Robinson of Virginia, disagreed. He said, &quot;The House voted down a legislative amendment which would have denied funds for the purpose of carrying out covert activity. The House, however, adopted the Boland amendment by a vote of 411 to 0. In so doing, the House approved the concept that a covert paramilitary operation in Nicaragua was acceptable.&quot;    Rep. Robinson became exasperated with some members' revisionism of the first Boland amendment. &quot;I took some of those 411 votes with me. I argued some of my colleagues into going along at that time because I thought I understood it, and I still think I understand it, and I do not believe that the Boland amendment has been violated. . . . I want to say that as one who stood here defending the Boland amendment, arguing my colleagues on the Republican side to vote for it, that I made a mistake in so doing. It is probably the biggest mistake I have made since I have been in Congress.&quot;    The fourth Boland amendment, which covered 1985-86, included $27 million for humanitarian aid to the Contras. Much of the debate was about the meaning of &quot;humanitarian.&quot; Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams recently testified to the Iran-Contra panel that he, too, had difficulty with the concept; he had decided that on balance, wristwatches met the standard. One colloquy shows the confusion among congressmen:    Sen. Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.): &quot;Obviously there is a gray area here of items that are nonhumanitarian but also nonlethal. I wonder would the following items be included within the scope of humanitarian assistance. Military-type uniforms?&quot;    Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.): &quot;We had considerable discussion on this. I think we have defined it as food, medicine, clothing. I would say if you gave a multiple-choice question and said, would the CIA be permitted to provide military-type uniforms or would they be required to give them three-piece suits or tuxedos . . . or bathing suits or Bermuda shorts, I would say military-type uniforms are permitted.&quot;    The fifth version of the Boland amendment provided a classified amount of aid for the Contras for the period of December 1985 to October 1986. In June 1986, Congress voted $100 million in aid for the Contras.    So, Congress left some play in the joints throughout the Boland amendment period. The legislative record shows that everyone knew the executive branch was left free to do what it could to support the Contras until Congress resumed funding. In return, Congress avoided an all-out constitutional battle with the executive over separation of powers.    This record of a changing and ambiguous set of amendments should force the Iran-Contra panel and special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh to ask themselves this question: Are the Boland amendments sturdy enough hooks on which to hang any of the accused? The answer is no. The weight of the evidence from Congress's own record is that the Boland amendments did not limit President Reagan or his NSC staff from aiding the Contras.    ---   Mr. Crovitz is assistant editor of the Journal's editorial page. </TEXT></DOC>