<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): The Problem --- A Step Backward? Science Agency Chief Sees Americans Losing Skills to Make Basic Products </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN FREST EUROP </CO><IN> MON ELE EDP ARO CHM AUT </IN><TEXT>   NATIONAL SCIENCE Foundation director Erich Bloch is one of Washington's most outspoken bureaucrats. His language is blunt. His opinions are strong, especially on the subject of American competitiveness.    Mr. Bloch, born and educated in Switzerland, joined International Business Machines Corp. in 1952 as an electrical engineer. He became an IBM vice president in 1981. In 1984, he was appointed head of the science foundation, where he administers a budget of more than $1.7 billion annually, covering more than 12,000 grants in the natural and social sciences.    Following are excerpts from a recent conversation.    WSJ: You have sometimes compared the Japanese challenge to the one posed by Sputnik in the 1950s. Yet Sputnik created a real sense of urgency in America. There's little sense of urgency about Japan. Why?    Mr. Bloch: The Sputnik thing was, first of all, a highly visible item. You could look up into the sky and see it. You could hear it beep. Secondly, it affected in a clear way the military security of the U. S.    What we have today isn't highly visible. Yes, the Japanese are selling more cars, and the Koreans are selling more semiconductors. But the man in the street doesn't see that. Or when he sees it, it's to his benefit, because he can buy a Hyundai cheaper than he can buy a Ford. So you don't get a feeling that there's a catastrophe here at all.    Also, I don't think our industries realized what was happening until very late in the game. Finally, the Japanese aren't the Russians. That puts the security issue in a different light.    WSJ: Is it fair to say that Japan is our military ally and our economic adversary?    Mr. Bloch: Yes, but you see, that isn't understood. A lot of people have said, and I've said, we're fighting a war today. It isn't a war on the battlefield, but that doesn't make it any less deadly.    WSJ: What is deadly about this war?    Mr. Bloch: The deadly aspect is that we are losing whole sectors of industry and therefore the competence to do something. To give an example, the whole video and television area. If you wanted to start an industry to design television sets, you wouldn't have the knowledge base in place anymore. You'd have to build it from scratch.    WSJ: So we lose this &quot;skill base.&quot; So what?    Mr. Bloch: The whole trade deficit stems from this. The attitude of a lot of economists just shows how far removed they are from reality. They say that the value of the dollar going down will rectify the trade deficit.    Well, that's interesting. That should happen -- if you had something to sell overseas. But you have nothing to sell anymore. You can't compete in televisions. You can't compete in radios. You can't compete in cameras, microwave ovens, machine tools.    WSJ: You're saying America can't compete. What is our problem?    Mr. Bloch: The problem that we have as a country is that we aren't as fast on our feet in getting something from basic research into a product in the marketplace. The Japanese are beating us at the game. The second problem is, we don't have the staying power. The VCR took 20 years to develop. Well, who stayed in it? The Japanese, not RCA. That's one of hundreds of examples. And that's my concern.    WSJ: Meantime, American Randamp;D spending seems to be stagnating.    Mr. Bloch: Over the last two or three years, it isn't that the civilian Randamp;D budget has gone down, but that it has leveled off. There was tremendous growth between 1975 and 1985. I don't know if it means the start of a downturn. But all of these mergers mean that we are dismantling part of the research enterprise, and that's a concern.    At the same time, {while the federal Randamp;D budget is growing}, 70% of it goes to defense. Ten years ago, the split was more 50-50, defense and non-defense Randamp;D. So we see a tremendous swing to military Randamp;D at a time when there is more transfer of civilian basic research into the military than the other way around.    Computers were funded by the military until about 1960. The whole semiconductor industry was funded by the military because of ICBM and programs of that sort. Where is a program today that has that kind of fallout? I don't see it. In some of the materials areas, it's still true, like composite materials. But the whole area of biotechnology is coming out of the civilian sector. The same is true for advances in computers and semiconductors.    WSJ: The Japanese are starting to push into basic research.    Mr. Bloch: Japan is moving into basic research in a significant way, and they didn't do that, to any great extent, five or 10 years ago. They have started now and they are going to be an increasing competitor in basic research.    WSJ: What will that mean for business competition?    Mr. Bloch: The Japanese were always much better than we were at translating things into products. But with basic research right in the country, they will gain a time advantage. And, basic research isn't only done for the result it produces, even though that is highly important. It is being done to educate people. If you have a leg up in that, you'll have people who can take the results of basic research and translate it into products.    WSJ: You've said in the past that Asian competition isn't the only foreign competition we face. What about Europe?    Mr. Bloch: I think we're underestimating Europe and what Europe is doing in basic research, in technology -- and in cooperative efforts. I think 1992 (the economic integration of European Community countries) will be a major change in what Europe can accomplish. I think attitudes are changing. Some of these cooperative programs couldn't have gotten off the ground 10 years ago. Today they seem to be showing results.    WSJ: Do you see any sectors of American business facing up to their problems in competing?    Mr. Bloch: The semiconductor industry is one where, over the last five or six years -- and seriously over the last two or three -- people have understood the problem. The computer industry also understands the problem pretty well.    I haven't seen the same understanding coming from the chemical industry, for instance. That industry is under attack, not in total but in many sectors. The auto industry has always been a mystery to me . . . It doesn't seem to be facing up to the issue and has lost a tremendous amount of its economic power.    So it's a mixed story. I think the interest that we have seen over the past few months in the trade bill represents a feeling that something is wrong. </TEXT></DOC>