<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880511-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Bush the Insider Talks of Changing the System; Dukakis the Outsider Says He Can Work With It </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   George Bush has an issue he wants debated in the presidential campaign: the presidency itself.    &quot;I am worried about the erosion of presidential power,&quot; the vice president declares. He sees Congress eating away at a president's ability to act decisively on issues foreign and domestic, so he calls for changes: reducing the number of congressional committees overseeing intelligence matters, challenging the War Powers Act and instituting a line-item veto.    Michael Dukakis, Mr. Bush's likely Democratic opponent, doesn't see things that way. He maintains that he has worked effectively with lawmakers in his two and a half terms as Massachusetts governor and doubts that the president needs added powers to restrain Congress. Mr. Dukakis &quot;has a very strong view that the executive branch doesn't have a monopoly on wisdom, nor is the president the only person who's elected to serve the public interest,&quot; says Christopher Edley Jr., Mr. Dukakis's issues director.    Thus, a campaign debate is emerging over presidential power. It is full of irony. Mr. Bush, the insider with long Washington experience, calls for changes in the system in which he has prospered. Mr. Dukakis, the outsider without Washington experience, basically claims he could work effectively within the system.    The issue also is ironic because it is raised by Mr. Bush, who is more often criticized for not being assertive enough than accused of trying to accumulate power. Moreover, Democrats historically have been more inclined to push for a strong presidency, while Republicans have worried more about maintaining the checks and balances that prevent any branch of government from becoming too strong.    But the topic of presidential power fits nicely within a broader Bush theme -- the vice president's contention that many of the nation's troubles can be blamed on the misdeeds of the Democratic-controlled Congress -- so it is sure to be heard more. And politics aside, some students of the presidency think Mr. Bush may have a point. &quot;It's always a problem, and I think it's fair to say in the last decade or so . . . Congress has asserted that power more and more and more,&quot; says Lloyd Cutler, who was White House counsel under President Carter and who has written about presidential authority.    Other presidential scholars doubt, however, that there has been systematic erosion of presidential power; even Mr. Cutler says Congress has asserted its power more as a &quot;matter of principle&quot; than by interfering with specific presidential actions. And skeptics wonder whether the issue can be raised effectively by Mr. Bush, whose boss, President Reagan, was widely credited just a few years ago with restoring the authority and effectiveness of the presidency.    &quot;I don't think there is a widespread sense that the system itself, because of recognizable ways it has restrained the presidency, has restrained Reagan,&quot; says Fred Greenstein, a professor of politics at Princeton University who has just edited a book on presidential leadership.    Mr. Bush maintains, though, that it is precisely his experience in government that makes him see the need for bolstering the power of the executive branch. &quot;I think it began when he was director of the CIA (in 1976) and had to deal with so many committees and subcommittees,&quot; says Peter Teeley, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. &quot;I think it's certainly philosophical rather than political.&quot;    The change Mr. Bush calls for most often is introduction of the line-item veto. He contends that the congressional budget process is out of control, with lawmakers jamming wasteful spending projects into big catchall spending bills that the president must either sign into law or veto in their entirety, thereby closing down the whole government.    So Mr. Bush argues that a line-item veto, which would allow a president to strike individual spending projects without killing a whole bill, would be a powerful tool in whittling down the deficit. &quot;If the Congress can't do it, give the president the line-item veto and let him have a shot at controlling the spending side of the equation,&quot; Mr. Bush said in a recent speech to Indiana Republicans. He also favors a balanced-budget amendment and two-year rather than annual defense budgets, measures that would further reduce congressional latitude on spending decisions.    Mr. Bush is equally interested in bolstering presidential power on foreign affairs. He wants to scrap the separate House and Senate intelligence committees and substitute one joint committee on intelligence. That would reduce the number of lawmakers told about covert actions and, Mr. Bush says, cut the chances of leaks.    The vice president also would like to see the War Powers Act &quot;challenged,&quot; says Mr. Teeley, his spokesman. This act, which requires the president to notify Congress when he sends troops to an area where hostilities seem &quot;imminent&quot; and obtain lawmakers' approval to keep them there beyond 60 days, has been a regular source of friction between the Reagan administration and Congress.    Gov. Dukakis appears to disagree with much of Mr. Bush's analysis, but faces some tricky problems answering the vice president. Mr. Dukakis wants to portray himself as more willing and able to work with Congress, but he also wants to seem as interested as Mr. Bush in being a strong and forceful president.    Thus, Mr. Dukakis generally favors the line-item veto, too. But he also says that his 10 years as governor of Massachusetts, where he has a line-item veto at his disposal, have shown him that it isn't a very useful tool for cutting the budget and isn't any substitute for negotiating compromises with lawmakers.    And Mr. Dukakis &quot;doesn't share the current administration's antipathy towards the War Powers Act or involving Congress in foreign policy,&quot; says Mr. Edley, the Dukakis issues director.    Gov. Dukakis often boasts of his track record of working with legislators in Massachusetts as proof that he could work with Congress. But he also may encounter problems making that point; while Mr. Dukakis's record in working with the state legislature has markedly improved, some legislators from both parties remain sharply critical of his early dealings with lawmakers.    For Mr. Bush, the issue of presidential power is generally a winner with conservatives, who think Democrats in Congress have undermined the Reagan agenda. But conservatives also are leery about pushing too many changes that could return to haunt Republicans later. They wonder, &quot;Hey, where would we be if Jesse Jackson were in the White House?&quot; says Edwin Feulner, president of the conservative Heritage Foundation. </TEXT></DOC>