<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870903-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:One Way to Help the Case for Bank Deregulation---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 09/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Banks' lobbyists are running around Washington trying to convince legislators that banks need and deserve further deregulation, including the right to get into the securities business. Securities firms' lobbyists, of course, are trying to convince lawmakers that banks have no business in the securities business.    Bankers have been encouraged by the fact that the new Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, is somewhat friendlier toward deregulation than his predecessor, Paul Volcker. But the lawmakers seem determined to move slowly. Some of them, in fact, suggest that banks need more, not less, regulation.    Banks and savings and loan associations actually haven't been helping the case for deregulation. Ninety-six banks failed in the first half of this year, a post-Depression record, and the total for 1987 may reach 200. Many Sandamp;Ls are in sorry shape, too, but the Federal Savings andamp; Loan Insurance Corp. has lacked the resources to shut down all the shaky institutions.    Most of the failed banks were small and wouldn't have been major competitors of Merrill Lynch even if they had been given broader powers. It might very well be good for the country if Citibank, Morgan Guaranty and other large, solvent banks took hands in the securities game. But the atmosphere of trouble among financial institutions is giving legislators pause.    What to do? Well, Edward J. Kane, an Ohio State University economist, in a National Bureau of Economic Research paper (Working Paper No. 2317) says a start could be made by reforming deposit insurance. Everyone knows the sorry state of the FSLIC, which recently was authorized to sell $10.8 billion of bonds to shore up its finances. But Prof. Kane stresses that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. has its troubles, too.    &quot;Unrecognized and deferred losses at insured deposit institutions currently impair the capacity of the nation's principal deposit insurers (the FDIC and FSLIC) either to discipline failing institutions or take over insolvent ones,&quot; he writes. &quot;These agencies' accrued but unreported losses far exceed their explicit financial resources. Moreover, their backlog of unresolved problem cases far exceeds the workload that their existing staffs can handle.&quot;    The baling wire that's holding this mess together so far is the public's seemingly unshakable faith that politicians and bureaucrats can't afford to let the FDIC and FSLIC renege on promises that they and their predecessors have allowed the agencies to assume.    Up to now the politicians have shown no interest in legislation that would solve the problems. The banking bill that Congress passed just before its summer recess is all too typical.    The bill would let the FSLIC raise a probably inadequate $10.8 billion. But the Home Loan Bank Board, which oversees the FSLIC, would have to go easier on troubled thrifts in &quot;economically pressed areas.&quot; The trouble is lack of discipline, so the Bank Board and the FSLIC must exercise less discipline.    Prof. Kane's recommendations are sweeping. Many of them won't appeal to banks, Sandamp;Ls or many politicians. But something of this sort eventually will be necessary.    Deposit insurance allows high-flying deposit institutions to attract massive amounts of funds that they then plow into risky investments. The deposit institutions pay premiums to the federal insurer, but the premiums aren't related to the risks they -- and the federal agency -- assume. If an institution goes under, the federal agency makes good on its guarantee. Since the premiums are insufficient, much of the money has to come from taxpayers.    Perhaps Prof. Kane's most important recommendation is to convert everyone to market-value accounting. Federal agencies now allow deposit institutions to cook their books by listing assets at acquisition cost, no matter how unrealistic some numbers may be. The agencies keep their books in much the same way. If everyone went to market-value accounting, the taxpayers would at least know how deep a hole was being dug for them.    Prof. Kane also argues that the capital banks and Sandamp;Ls are required to hold should be related to the riskiness of their portfolios. If a bank proposes to do nothing but hold government bonds, it should be required to hold less capital than the bank that plans primarily to finance skateboard factories.    Risk rating for capital requirements has been proposed by federal regulatory agencies and has received a good deal of support from the industry. The risks that we're talking about, of course, should be assessed in market-value terms.    Prof. Kane sees no reason why the FDIC and FSLIC shouldn't then develop risk-related premiums for the deposit insurance they provide.    However that idea is received, Prof. Kane's proposal on stockholder liability is sure to run into a lot of opposition. Stockholders already take a bath when their banks go under, but Prof. Kane says this isn't properly handled. The trouble often goes on for so long that the stock is completely under water before anything is done. Stockholders are wiped out, but there is nothing left for creditors.    Prof. Kane would provide that all mutual thrifts become stockholder-owned by a specified deadline. You can't draw on stockholders if there aren't any. Many thrifts already are switching to stockholder ownership, so this shouldn't be too much of a problem.    What would be a problem is that Prof. Kane wants a significant increase in stockholder liability. And this, he says, should be reinforced by requiring stockholders to post bonds that they could meet the higher liability. Bank stock would be less attractive in the market, but Prof. Kane figures that's a price of reform.    None of this obviates the need for giving more resources to the federal insurers, more money and more people. The system will be easier to police when it is reformed, but it will still have to be policed.    So there will be higher costs in the short term. In the long term, however, the system should be more self-regulating. Higher premiums and capital requirements should make institutions more careful about assuming risks. Higher stockholder liability would make stockholders police their banks.    Prof. Kane's plan is a large pill to swallow. But the problem is political, not economic. Politicians seem to be willing to go on papering over problems indefinitely. Whether meaningful reform is possible in the near future is doubtful.    Even sound banks and thrifts seem little interested in major reform, although it might open the way to new deregulation. As Prof. Kane says, &quot;As long as healthy institutions hold so myopic a view, political support for meaningful reform in accounting requirements or insolvency criteria may have to await a crisis.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>