<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871022-0145 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Business Bookshelf:The Rise and Fall of Dennis Levine---By Robert B. Reich</HL><DD> 10/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The noise on Wall Street these days is the dull thud of aspirations hitting rock bottom. Junk bonds may be a thing of the past. Unfriendly takeovers may be consigned to the history books. Congress and state legislatures will be trying to clean up some of the mess, and may end up creating even more. In the meantime, those of us who never speculated very much in the market to begin with can breathe a sigh of relief and pick up a good book.    This one is the story of a spunky kid who grew up in a close-knit, working-class Jewish home in Queens, N.Y., was the first in his family to go to college, married his college sweetheart, got fired up in business school, gained a reputation as a brilliant merger and acquisition strategist at Smith Barney andamp; Co., bought a fancy apartment on Park Avenue, was considered &quot;star quality&quot; by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and was then convicted of making $11.6 million on insider trading and carted off to prison.    Douglas Frantz gives us a fast-paced, fascinating account of the rise and fall of Dennis Levine. &quot;Levine andamp; Co.: Wall Street's Insider Trading Scandal&quot; (Holt, 370 pages, $19.95) is part biography, part detective story, part psychological thriller. Above all, it's a morality tale about life on the fast track in the sometimes-lucrative world of American finance.    Morality tales get their punch from the lessons they reveal, but it's not clear exactly what we're to make of this one. Mr. Frantz hints at some possibilities: (1) A little greed and ambition is fine, but too much will cause one to overstep and plunge headlong into an abyss of immorality; (2) Wall Street was once a dignified place where social connections and pedigree constrained behavior, but the unwritten code of gentility has been abandoned by a new breed of rapacious kids who'll let nothing get in their way; (3) The postwar baby boomers, now come of age, are selfish, narcissistic and dangerous to society; (4) Thank God for the Securities and Exchange Commission and its dedicated staff; (5) America is going to hell.    Perhaps it's some of each. The confusion of themes isn't Mr. Frantz's fault. After all, the U.S. is still trying to sort out the lessons to be learned from the larger morality tale of which the Levine story is merely a chapter -- the continuing saga of corruption on Wall Street. At this moment ethics courses are being furiously organized at business schools, Congress is readying legislation to discourage hostile takeovers, new laws on insider trading are in the works. But, especially now, there's no agreement about what needs fixing.    What's reasonably clear, as Mr. Frantz reminds us, is that something important happened to American capitalism in the 1970s. In 1974, International Nickel Co. undertook a hostile takeover bid for Electric Storage Battery Co. Until then, investment bankers had viewed such aggression as unseemly, if not unethical. One year later, when the SEC decreed that commissions paid in stock transactions were no longer to be based on fixed rates, revenues on Wall Street plunged $600 million. The Street had to forage for new sources of earnings. Suddenly unfriendly takeovers gained new luster.    The supply of investment bankers, as it were, seemed to create its own demand. There were 12 takeovers of $1 billion or more in the remainder of the '70s; between 1981 and 1984, when Levine hit his stride, there were 45. Each was so large and complex as to require armies of financiers, all of whom received most generous compensation for their services. The demand, in turn, generated a larger supply of deal makers. Until the early '70s, only about 12% of each Harvard Business School graduating class ventured into the field; by the early '80s fully a third flocked to investment banking.    The feeding frenzy continued, at least until recently: More than a third of all the new office space that became available in Manhattan last year was gobbled up by investment bankers, arbitragers, lawyers, accountants and other paper professionals engaged in rearranging industrial assets.    If there is money to be made in moving money, there is even more to be made in accurately predicting where money will move and then moving some there before the rest of the money catches up. Hence, as Mr. Frantz reveals, the importance of rumors, gossip, tips and educated hunches about who is about to acquire whom. Great wealth may be had from cultivating a network of investment bankers, lawyers and arbitragers ready to share such early breaking news. Vast riches can result from schmoozing on the telephone, over lunch, at the club, over drinks, or, as in Levine's case, during discreet walks. When competition is intense and timing is everything, the line between legitimate sharing of gossip and illegal sharing of inside information can blur.    And the game is easy to play. Dennis did it with style and gusto. Companies of whatever size can be put into play by raiders with enough audacity. Options to purchase their shares can generate huge returns on relatively small investments, once the market starts moving in their direction. &quot;There's a lot of money to be made by trading on inside information,&quot; says Dennis to one of his recruits. &quot;Everybody does it. It's all over the Street. The arbitragers live off of it. Investment banking guys do it and lawyers do it and corporate types do it.&quot;    Some economists even suggest that there's nothing wrong with trading on inside information, because it makes the market more efficient. Assets get shifted more quickly to their highest and best use. Legalize insider trading, they say. Unleash Dennis, and everything he represents.    Those who try to rationalize the scandals on Wall Street don't understand what all this looks like to the average investor from Des Moines. The antics of Levine and his cronies convince the rest of the U.S. that the game is rigged. And it's not just the law breakers that send this message. Even with Levine andamp; Company in jail, the game still looks rigged, because there's no other way for most Americans to understand how so many investment bankers who seem to produce so little can make so much money in so short a time.    Many Americans are now regarding Wall Street's recent plunge as well-deserved retribution for the excesses of the sort Levine so poignantly represents. The lessons that the average American draws from this book -- and the larger morality tale of which it's a part -- are sure to reshape Wall Street in years to come.    ---   Mr. Reich teaches political economy at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government. </TEXT></DOC>