<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870317-0057 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Heating Oil Quotes Lead Market HigherAmid Signs of OPEC Output Restraint---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   U.S. oil prices, led by surging heating oil quotes, advanced on spot and futures markets for the fourth time in the past five days.    Continuing indications that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is holding down production led to some of the day's gains, traders said. These included a report from the Middle East Economic Survey, a respected industry publication, that OPEC production for March was running about 11%, or 1.8 million barrels a day, below the cartel's output ceiling of 15.8 million barrels a day.    Moreover, the OPEC News Agency reported that Saudi Arabia currently is producing about three million barrels of crude oil a day, 27% below its quota of more than four million barrels.    The production level &quot;reflects Saudi Arabia's commitment to the (OPEC) December agreement,&quot; the news agency quoted Saudi oil minister Hisham Nazer as saying. The oil cartel agreed at that time to cut its output by 7% and to set fixed prices of about $18 a barrel.    &quot;It's apparent that OPEC has reached consensus to stick to the production agreement, and that if they're going to lose sales because of fixed prices, so be it,&quot; said Nauman Barakat, energy futures analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., New York.    Yesterday's strong buying interest in fuel oil stemmed partly from tightness in supplies in New York harbor, said James Ritterbusch, the Chicago-based vice president, energy futures, at PaineWebber Inc.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil futures prices for April delivery rose 28 cents, to $18.64 a barrel. April heating oil contracts soared 1.24 cents a gallon, to 51.65 cents; unleaded gasoline futures prices also rose.    Spot, or noncontract, prices also posted gains. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark U.S. crude, rose 30 cents, to $18.65 a barrel. And the March price of North Sea Brent, a major European blend, rose 15 cents, to $18 in late trading.    Some traders were reluctant to participate, however, until tonight's weekly inventory statistics are released by the American Petroleum Institute. Last week, significant drops in inventories and refinery utilization sparked a price rally.    &quot;If there are further (inventory and refiner-use) declines, this market could explode to the upside,&quot; said one trader in New York.    In other futures markets yesterday:    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Most futures prices rose as traders, beginning in Tokyo, then continuing in London and New York, sold dollars to try and discover the price level at which foreign central banks would intervene in support of the dollar, analysts said. Dennis Gartman, president of Gartman Financial Services Inc. in Portsmouth, Va., said he didn't think the central banks of the largest industial countries would intervene in support of the dollar until West German mark futures &quot;get about 30 higher.&quot; Mark futures yesterday closed .0052 higher at .5489.    STOCK INDEXES: Most futures prices ended lower as traders continued a sell-off that began Friday afternoon. Weakness in the bond futures market and the dollar also added to the stock-index futures' decline, traders said. &quot;The market's likely to move lower over the next few days, but that's a good buying opportunity,&quot; said John Gustafson, an analyst with Discount Corp. of New York Futures, in Chicago. &quot;There were some sell programs as futures sold at a discount to stocks, but not much setting up for the March expiration&quot; Friday when stock-index futures, options and individual stock options expire, said Gerald Walsh, an analyst with PrudentialBache Securities Inc. Some analysts have predicted that if stock-index futures traded at a large enough discount to the underlying stocks in the index this week, traders would buy the index futures and sell stocks. On Friday at expiration they would buy the stocks back and let their contracts expire at the same price as the stocks.    COCOA: Futures prices rose on the growing expectation that producing and consuming countries would agree on buffer stock details, enabling the new International Cocoa Agreement to take effect, analysts said. Formal talks on the buffer stock will begin tomorrow in London, but consuming nations met yesterday to discuss their position. Both sides were said to be approaching the negotiations with more flexible attitudes, the analysts added. The International Cocoa Organization, which administers the agreement, has about $240 million at its disposal to buy cocoa. The remaining buffer stock questions include whether the manager of the stock should buy from both members and non-member producing nations and whether a premium should be paid for quality cocoa beans. Dealers are buying cocoa because current prices are below the minimum support range, said Giles Evans, analyst for GNI Ltd., commercial brokers. Some believe that the recent crash in coffee prices &quot;will concentrate (the cocoa conferees') minds,&quot; improving chances for an agreement, he said. The coffee collapse followed recent International Coffee Organization talks in London, where negotiators failed to agree on conditions for reinstating export quotas to replace those suspended early last year.    SUGAR: Futures prices declined, with nearby contract prices particularly soft in response to Pakistan's failure to bid for supplies. Pakistan had been expected to offer to buy as much as 100,000 metric tons of sugar during the weekend. &quot;The concern now is that Pakistan may not need the sugar,&quot; one analyst said. Once the price of the May contract broke below eight cents a pound, aggressive stop-loss selling depressed prices sharply, he added. India yesterday was seeking to buy as much as 30,000 tons of sugar and the price and quantity of the offerings it receives could be a factor in the market, analysts said. While India has received large offerings on previous tenders, the prices have been high, an analyst said. &quot;If that pattern is repeated,&quot; he said, &quot;it could be a supporting influence even if India is offered a large quantity.&quot;    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: A cattle-on-feed report released by the Agriculture Department after yesterday's close is expected to have little effect on today's market. The report, which showed a 15% increase from the year before in the number of young cattle placed on feedlots in seven major beef producing states in February, was factored into the market last week on the basis of analysts' estimates, analysts said. The report also showed a 3% decline from a year earlier in the number of animals on feed as of March 1. Sales for slaughter during February were even with the year before. Cattle future prices were unchanged to slightly higher yesterday as the market awaited release of the report and higher prices for boxed beef, analysts said. </TEXT></DOC>