<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0130 </DOCNO><HL> After Stumble, French Quick-Photo WhizPlans Fast Comeback With New Products---By E.S. BrowningStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHOTOGRAPHY (PIX)OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Serge Crasnianski became one of France's richest men between 1963 and 1985. Then he stumbled. Now the former wunderkind says he's coming back.    Mr. Crasnianski made his name by inventing and marketing a machine that develops and prints photos in one hour. He made a fortune selling his Minilab to small-business men for use in neighborhood shops. He hit his high point about the time his privately owned company, Kis France S.A., decided to sponsor an entry in the most recent America's Cup challenge with a boat named French Kiss. The low point came after an abortive invasion of the U.S. photo-finishing business, which left him with stacks of lawsuits from angry customers, some of whom allege they went bankrupt because of Kis's poor product support and broken promises. Sales plummeted, and in the 15 months through June, Mr. Crasnianski had to spend 400 million French francs ($65.3 million) -- about half of Kis's reserves -- to keep the company afloat. He has cut his French staff almost in half, to 700 people, in the past year. Today, Kis France is for sale.    He says he expects to have a loss this year for the first time ever, though he won't say how much, adding that the books went into the black last month. And this month, a California court handed him a victory by rejecting a petition for a lawsuit against Kis to be declared a class action. The plaintiffs -- a group of American small businessmen who had bought Kis developing machines -- still can file individual suits. But the decision eliminates, at least for now, the danger that a single lawsuit could force Mr. Crasnianski to pay millions of dollars in damages to a broad group.    Unrepentant and unworried, Mr. Crasnianski says he is charging back into the U.S. and Europe. He says he plans to bring out as many as five new products in the next few months in fields as diverse as blood analysis, photocopying and food processing. Outside experts and competitors say they are waiting to see, but Monsieur Serge, as he is known to employees at his headquarters in Grenoble, France, hasn't any doubts.    &quot;Some of the products will have to sell,&quot; he declares in an interview during a brief stop in Paris. &quot;Some already are selling. Don't you worry -- at the end of 1988 I will still be here.&quot;    Can he resume the explosive growth that multiplied Kis sales to 2.19 billion francs ($359 million) in 1984 from 148 million francs in 1980?    &quot;We can grow even faster,&quot; says the 45-year-old entrepreneur.    It will be an uphill battle for Mr. Crasnianski, who controls almost all Kis's capital himself. His color photocopying machine, for example, has had successes in both France and the U.S., but the market remains small for such machines and, as with the Minilab, Kis appears to have distribution problems.    One handicap: Kis is tiny compared with some of its competitors. Even its 1984 sales high-water mark is dwarfed by the multibillion-dollar annual sales of such competitors as Xerox Corp. and Canon Inc., which make photocopiers, and Du Pont Co., which makes blood analyzers. (Kis sales fell to 1.5 billion francs last year.) Mr. Crasnianski's annual research budget, which has tripled in two years, this year still is just 100 million francs.    Mr. Crasnianski dismisses such worries. Research, he says, has less to do with size than with organization and ideas. His views on research tell something about his business style in general.    &quot;Let me tell you a story that will help you understand,&quot; he says. &quot;I had a team of 110 people working for three years to develop a new, better Minilab. Their research alone cost me 100 million francs. But they came up with a monster that cost a fortune to run. Last February, I threw the plans in the wastebasket, fired half the team, and reorganized the rest into small groups. The small groups developed a good, new, fully automatic machine.    &quot;A big company would just have continued with the same bad team,&quot; he explains. &quot;They waste huge amounts. That's why we aren't at a disadvantage with them.&quot;    Mr. Crasnianski founded his company 24 years ago while a 21-year-old student in Grenoble. (Kis comes from the phrase, in English, &quot;key independent system,&quot; he says.)    The son of a Russian emigre, Mr. Crasnianski began by importing American-made instant key-copying machines. Then he developed his own key copier and later moved into instant shoe-repair machines, instant business-card-printing machines and, finally, one-hour photo-developing machines. His newest idea is a machine that he says can make 14 different medical tests from one drop of blood, including a test for AIDS -- all in 10 minutes.    The fascination with speed fits Mr. Crasnianski's character. He prides himself on developing ideas quickly and rapidly bringing them to market. But it was speed that got him in trouble, say French government officials, competitors and outside analysts. Eager to expand, he decided to market the Minilab in the U.S. soon after it was developed. Many buyers were small-store owners with little experience in the photo business. Soon, customers were complaining of poor service, machines that didn't work, salesmen who had overstated the machines' capabilities and broken promises about marketing assistance.    &quot;They hooked up my machine in December 1985, and in January 1986 I told them to come pick it up because the prints wouldn't come out the front the way they were supposed to,&quot; says Jim Zeiler, who runs an auto-parts and convenience store in Grantsburg, Wis. &quot;They fixed it, but the fixes were temporary.&quot;    Mr. Zeiler has organized a group of Kis customers who are negotiating a settlement with Kis and threatening a new effort to file a class-action suit. Meanwhile, he says, the local bank that financed his machine is dunning him for $78,000. &quot;I face the prospect of going bankrupt after being self-employed for 12 years,&quot; he says.    Mr. Crasnianski says his machines were fine. He has won some lawsuits and settled some out of court, and says the disgruntled are a small minority.    Nonetheless, Kis was hurt. France's Societe Generale and other banks that had arranged the leases for Kis buyers were left holding the bag when some stopped payments. Societe Generale said this year it was cutting its ties with Kis.    Despite the expected loss for 1987, Mr. Crasnianski says 1988 will mark the start of his resurgence. Kis recently announced a $10 million color photocopier sale to a U.S. concern, which Kis wouldn't identify. And Mr. Crasnianski says he has high hopes for his blood analyzer, which he expects to market early next year. The product still requires U.S. certification.    &quot;If the machine gets clearance (for sale) in the U.S., it would be a competitor&quot; of a product made by Du Pont, says Roger Morris, a spokesman for Du Pont's Medical Products department. Doctors would use the devices to analyze blood in their offices. Du Pont estimates a $500 million annual world market for such machines, mostly in the U.S. The jury is still out on whether Kis can compete. </TEXT></DOC>