<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870717-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Moscow Enigma:Soviet Plan to Let InForeign Firms ProvesFrustrating in Practice---Turf Battles and BureaucracyThwart Joint Ventures;A Newspaper's Retraction---Explaining Leases to Russians---By Peter GumbelStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Mikhail Gorbachev's effort to revitalize the Soviet economy includes a tantalizing offer to U.S., Japanese and European capitalists: Bring us your money and your technology, and you can set up profit-making joint ventures in the Soviet Union.    To smooth the way for these ventures, Mr. Gorbachev has broken a stifling monopoly over imports and exports held by the powerful Ministry of Foreign Trade. For the first time, 21 other ministries and 72 state enterprises can arrange their own business affairs with the noncommunist world.    The new policy has attracted hundreds of foreign companies with high hopes of cracking a market of 280 million potential customers. But many of the concerns have found that -- so far at least -- actually doing business in the Soviet Union is a frustrating and unproductive process. At times, the ponderous Soviet bureaucracy seems to be trying to ignore Mr. Gorbachev's sweeping economic reforms. In some cases, ministries' turf-protective measures have blocked business proposals. And many Soviet trade and industrial officials don't understand basic Western business practices and concepts.    Above all, Westerners are discovering that their basic aim -- to make and sell products inside the Soviet Union -- is completely at odds with Moscow's basic aim of absorbing foreign investment and know-how to make export products that can earn urgently needed hard currency.    &quot;Many {Russian officials} don't know what's going on, and hardly anyone dares to make a decision,&quot; complains Herbert C. Lewinsky, the president of the Austrian industrial conglomerate Voest Alpine AG, one-third of whose exports go to Communist-bloc countries. &quot;It's incredible what's happening in the Soviet Union, but the problems are enormous.&quot;    Donald M. Kendall, who set up PepsiCo Inc.'s Soviet operations in the early 1970s, describes Mr. Gorbachev's reforms as &quot;real and very positive.&quot; But he adds that &quot;there's no question the bureaucracy is going to be difficult and slow the process up.&quot;    One of the companies that have had problems is West German publisher Burda Verlag. In March the Soviets marked the introduction of the Russian-language version of a Burda magazine for women with a glittering Moscow gala. The guest list read like a &quot;Who's Who&quot; of Moscow society, and the whole affair was broadcast live, in prime time, on Soviet television.    But the party soon ended. After months of talks, the German publisher hasn't made any headway on plans for a joint venture with the Soviets to print the magazine in Moscow rather than in Germany. Despite their eagerness to gain access to Western printing technology, says Burda's general manager, Manfred Made, the Soviets can't answer crucial business questions about the planned project, such as how it is supposed to be financed or make profits.    Mr. Gorbachev's reforms have come so quickly and have broken so much new ground, the German executive says, that Moscow bureaucrats &quot;just haven't had time to change the way they think.&quot;    Shaking up rigid structures anywhere can cause adjustment problems. Similar conflicts have arisen in China and Eastern Europe, where attempts have been made to graft free-market practices and foreign investment onto centrally planned, state-run economies. But in China's case, at least, the Communist bureaucracy hasn't been as hard-nosed about change as Moscow's seems to be.    Soviet officials play down talk of difficulties. &quot;We are not in a hurry. We are not in a hurry,&quot; Ivan Ivanov, the deputy chairman of the Soviet State Commission for Foreign Economic Relations, told a visiting group of Westerners in Moscow last month. &quot;We are not exactly sure, with the legislation in force only four months, what we want out of this.&quot;    But Mr. Gorbachev is growing impatient. At a meeting last month of the Communist Party's policy-setting central committee, he lashed out at &quot;those who for the sake of their selfish advantages are impeding social transformations and standing in the way of the drive for renewal.&quot; And Western analysts note that if the piecemeal reforms that Mr. Gorbachev implemented early aren't successful, his more grandiose plans for a total restructuring of the Soviet economy won't have a chance.    Details of the new joint-venture laws were published in Pravda in January, and talks have been held with about 200 Western companies, including such U.S. concerns as Occidental Petroleum Corp., Monsanto Co. and Combustion Engineering Inc. Several companies have signed preliminary agreements, but no ventures are yet operating.    The ventures represent a sharp departure from previous Soviet practice because they require that the Western partner take a minority stake in the final project. In the past, private ownership of any business, let alone ownership by a foreign capitalist, was anathema to the Soviets.    There are good reasons for Mr. Gorbachev to make changes. Soviet trade with the rest of the world is out of sync with the size of the country's population, its plentiful natural resources and its political importance. The volume of its business with the West is more like that of a Third World nation than a superpower: Europe and Japan export just 1% of their total economic output to Moscow and its East European allies, while the U.S. exports a minuscule 0.1% to the Soviet bloc. Some European companies, particularly exporters of capital goods such as Voest-Alpine, have had some success with the U.S.S.R. in the past, but even they complain that business is spotty.    &quot;The vast untapped potential of the Soviet market is its greatest myth,&quot; says Philip Hanson, a British expert on the Soviet economy.    One big problem now is conflicting signals. Take the case of Britain's Rank Xerox PLC, which has sold photocopying equipment to the Soviet Union for almost 20 years. In May 1986, shortly after Moscow first floated the idea of joint ventures, the company proposed a venture in which the Soviets would assemble copiers from Rank Xerox parts and pay for them with exports of high-quality copying paper. Under the proposal, the Soviets would eventually make some of the parts themselves.    But as negotiations continued, Rank officials were stunned to find a thinly veiled attack on the company in a Soviet newspaper article that was also critical of the whole notion of joint ventures. The March 15 article in Moscow News, signed by Yuri Dryomov, the head of the Ministry of Foreign Trade's joint ventures department, charged that &quot;a company well known to Soviet end users of copier equipment&quot; had made a one-sided proposal that would benefit only the foreign firm. The story also claimed that the British company wanted to fob off outdated technology.    &quot;We were obviously upset by the article,&quot; says Ralph Land, the general manager of Rank Xerox's Eastern export operations. &quot;We thought, 'Is there anything sinister?'&quot; The company took the unusual step of writing an angry letter to Moscow News that refuted Mr. Dryomov's claims and concluded: &quot;If the article . . . is the official opinion of our Soviet partner, we see no point in discussing further cooperation.&quot;    In the past, such a letter probably would have led to severance of the company's Soviet operations, says Marshall I. Goldman, the associate director of Harvard University's Russian Research Center. Instead, Moscow News ran a follow-up story on April 19 entitled &quot;Two Opinions.&quot; It quoted at length from the British letter, chided Mr. Dryomov and quoted the views of Grant Sutherland, Rank Xerox's Moscow representative, on the Soviet economic reforms. The newspaper even noted, &quot;We have been using Xeroxes for years and have ordered more of the same for the future.&quot;    Mr. Land says Rank Xerox also received separate apologies from two ministries. &quot;It really is a remarkable story. It's most interesting that they retracted,&quot; he concludes. &quot;They don't want to spoil the climate.&quot;    Mr. Goldman of Harvard is more critical. Despite the apparently happy outcome, he maintains, the incident demonstrates that there is considerable entrenched opposition to the reforms. &quot;When the man in charge of the fire station turns out to be an arsonist, then you've got trouble,&quot; he says, referring to Mr. Dryomov's position as the head of the joint-ventures department.    Finding Soviet officials who know what they are talking about can also be a problem. Mr. Gorbachev has carried out a widespread purge of Soviet bureaucrats; some Western experts estimate that as many as 40% of the officials in a number of ministries have been replaced. Many of the newcomers are more enthusiastic and forward-looking than their predecessors, businessmen say, but they often lack basic business know-how.    Mr. Lewinsky of Austria's Voest-Alpine recalls that during a conversation in Moscow earlier this year about joint ventures, senior Soviet officials suddenly looked disturbed. &quot;They had started talking leasing with us, but they didn't know what it was,&quot; he recalls. The next day, he sat down with a group of about 90 Soviet bureaucrats to explain the concept.    More serious is a lack of coordination, or even a blatant rivalry, among various ministries. Even after the Soviet apologies, Rank Xerox's proposed venture couldn't be realized in its original form because of difficulties in linking the ministry that was supposed to produce the paper for export and the one that was going to import and assemble the copying machines. Mr. Land says that both sides are working to find alternatives.    Likewise, Voest-Alpine is still waiting for approval to expand a steel plant that it erected near Minsk in the early 1980s. Helmut Schmolzer, Voest's senior vice president for marketing, says that the Soviets want to enlarge the plant, which makes thin wire rods used in tires. But, he says, the $200 million project is being held up, partly because of disagreements among Soviet officials over who should be in charge.    A leading Western chemical company has even started a major row among three different ministries with its joint-venture proposal. According to a senior executive at the firm, the plan entails the joint manufacture of a herbicide that the Soviets now import. The proposal is in trouble because the Ministry of Agriculture won't agree to buy the herbicide from the Fertilizer Ministry, which would produce it, and the Chemical Industry Ministry is reluctant to commit the raw materials needed to make the product.    Some companies have had better luck. Italy's state-owned conglomerate Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale, or IRI, recently signed an agreement to build a $120 million steel plant in Yugoslavia in a joint project with the Soviets. Giovanni Bisignani, the head of IRI's international division, says that the accord was arranged in just four months, extremely fast by Soviet standards. He maintains that he detects a new-found Soviet flexibility. But, he concedes, &quot;it does depend on whom you deal with.&quot;    Another Italian industrial company, Fata S.p.A., hopes to reach final agreement soon on a joint venture to make commercial refrigerator units in Volzhsk on the Volga. Peter D. Giacobbi, a U.S. businessman representing Fata, says that the Soviets haven't been too tough in the negotiations, which he hopes will be concluded in a matter of weeks. &quot;They really want this,&quot; he says. &quot;They want a few showcases to show joint ventures can work.&quot;    But many other Westerners say that they are hampered by an underlying conflict between their aims and those of the Soviets. The Soviets appear to view the ventures mainly as a source of Western money, technology and management skills and as an opportunity to earn valuable hard currency. To achieve the latter end, they are insisting on the need to export the ventures' products. But most Western companies are interested in the ventures as a way to increase sales to Soviet industry and consumers. If they were looking to set up a low-cost manufacturing operation for their equipment, they say, they would go to South Korea or Taiwan.    &quot;We'll certainly not print things in the Soviet Union that will be exported to Western Europe,&quot; says Mr. Made of Burda, the West German publisher. &quot;We won't compete with ourselves.&quot;    Compromise may be possible in some cases if the rewards are sufficiently enticing. For six months, Monsanto Co. has been negotiating a Soviet venture to jointly produce a herbicide. While it isn't interested in exporting the finished product, some of the intermediate chemicals may be able to be sold outside the Soviet Union, suggests Michael A. Petrilli, Monsanto's manager of international development.    Nonetheless, &quot;the Soviets are going to have to show some flexibility,&quot; Mr. Petrilli adds. &quot;If they take a hard line over hard currency, they won't have many joint ventures.&quot;    ---   Mark D'Anastasio contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>