<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870804-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Public HearingsOn Iran AffairEnd in Rhetoric---Lawmakers Condemn PolicyBut Avoid Placing BlameFor Its Failure on Reagan---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   House and Senate committees on the Iran-Contra affair ended three months of public hearings with a flourish of rhetoric and bipartisan warnings that any future foreign policy that so seeks to circumvent Congress is doomed to the same failure.    Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), vice chairman of the Senate committee, said the secret operation bred a dangerous &quot;abuse of power&quot; by individuals in the executive branch. Even among President Reagan's most ardent defenders, there was implicit criticism of the White House's failure to take a more open approach.    &quot;No foreign policy can be effective for long without the wholehearted support of the Congress and the American people,&quot; said Rep. Richard Cheney (R., Wyo.), Sen. Rudman's counterpart on the House panel. &quot;Covert action has its place in the kind of world we live in,&quot; Mr. Cheney said, &quot;but it is no substitute for the kind of effective political leadership that brings around a recalcitrant Congress and persuades the American people.&quot;    Republican support is crucial to the writing of the joint committees' report this fall. Sen. Rudman's remarks reflected a strategy of personally defending Mr. Reagan while condemning the actions around him, and Senate committee Chairman Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) painted a grim portrait of the scandal while scarcely mentioning the president. Among the panel leaders, only House committee Chairman Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.) brought the controversy back to the Oval Office.    &quot;The buck does not stop anywhere else,&quot; Mr. Hamilton said. &quot;The president's decisions must be clear and crisp. Otherwise, as we have seen in these hearings, confusion follows, and those who work for him cannot carry out his policies successfully.&quot;    The committees will question three Central Intelligence Agency officers in closed-door sessions beginning today. As a practical matter, however, yesterday's brief ceremonies marked the end of the public phase of the hearings that began in early May. In 41 days of testimony, 29 witnesses were questioned under oath, and with the president's acquiescence, cabinet secretaries and former National Security Council officers described their most confidential discussions with Mr. Reagan regarding the affair.    The record remains filled with contradictory statements, and the inquiry will continue as staff attorneys interview important figures and re-evaluate -- after a pause -- the direction of the investigation. A written report isn't likely before late September. In the meantime, attention is expected to shift to the parallel criminal inquiry into the affair conducted by independent counsel Lawrence Walsh.    Separately, new CIA Director William Webster has brought in his own independent counsel, according to sources familiar with the situation. Disciplinary action may be ordered in the wake of disclosures from the hearings and the internal inquiry, the sources said.    Among witnesses of interest to the committees is Michael Ledeen, a former NSC consultant who has significant ties to Israeli officials involved in the early stages of the Iran initiative. Mr. Ledeen has said he discouraged the sale of weapons to Iran, but he worked closely with Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, the former NSC aide who emerged as the central figure in the Iran initiative and the diversion of profits to Nicaraguan insurgents.    Defense Department documents released yesterday portray the NSC as shopping with &quot;$25 million available&quot; for TOW anti-tank missiles for Tehran as early as the fall of 1985. Col. North's messages in the same period indicate he was pursuing a transaction involving 3,300 TOWs and 50 Hawk anti-aircraft missiles.    Separately, Israel sold Hawk missiles to Iran in November 1985, and Col. North then became involved in facilitating transportation of the weapons through the CIA. Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord served as an intermediary in the operation, and an estimated $1 million was deposited by an Israeli middleman in an account under the general's control days before the shipment.    The bulk of this money was subsequently diverted to the covert airlift that Gen. Secord was building to aid the Contras. Investigators are pursuing evidence that Col. North was already moving to take advantage of the large profits available by selling U.S. weapons through Gen. Secord directly to the Iranians.    An early December message from Col. North read: &quot;all dollars are under our control.&quot; And in a message on Dec. 9, more than a month before President Reagan signed a finding that authorized direct U.S. arms sales to Tehran, the colonel raised the option of using Gen. Secord.    All of the CIA officers to testify this week had been questioned before Col. North's public testimony last month, when the former NSC aide claimed the late CIA Director William Casey actively supported the diversion scheme.    Clair George, head of the agency's operation branch, and Duane Clarridge, former head of the European division of operations, were close enough to Mr. Casey to shed light on this testimony. Col. North indicated both men had knowledge of his covert efforts to assist the Contras.    The Pentagon documents released yesterday came as Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger ended two days of testimony focusing on the Iran initiative and giving little detail on his department's role in connection with the Contras. CIA notes of a breakfast meeting with Mr. Weinberger in March 1985 indicate that he may have been aware of contributions from abroad to the Contras at that time. The secretary, however, generally cast himself as removed from any operative role on behalf of the insurgents.    While strongly supporting U.S. military aid to the guerrillas, he appeared unaware of Col. North's testimony that Army officers in Central America had assisted the colonel in helping the Contras. Moreover, Mr. Weinberger appeared irritated when pressed to give some benchmarks to measure the Contras' goals and progress.    He was most comfortable discussing the Iran initiative, and was scathing in rebutting criticism by the Tower Commission that he hadn't argued sufficiently against the arms sales. In similar tones, Mr. Weinberger criticized the intelligence provided to Mr. Reagan that portrayed Iran -- not Iraq -- as the weaker foe in their protracted war.    &quot;I don't attempt to explain it,&quot; he said. &quot;But when people have an agenda and they're arguing for particular points, they may be willing to utilize minority intelligence views.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>