<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880125-0008 </DOCNO><HL> As the INF Treaty Hearings Begin... --- Some Advice on Consent </HL><AUTHOR> Richard E. Messick </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Today's hearing before the Foreign Relations Committee begins the Senate process of deciding whether to advise and consent to the ratification of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty with the Soviet Union. Even before the hearings were scheduled, however, senators had begun devising ways to &quot;improve&quot; the treaty.    Some might wonder what these senators are up to. Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev have reached an agreement on nuclear forces in Europe. A treaty reflecting this accord was signed at the White House on Dec. 8. Isn't it too late for changes? After all, a deal is a deal.    Not when it comes to senators and treaties. Thanks to George Washington, the Senate is free to rewrite the INF agreement as it sees fit. If it should choose to do so, the Soviet Union and the president can take the rewrite or leave it. The one thing they can't do is stick to their original bargain.    The framers of the Constitution never intended it to be this way. Their idea was that the Senate would advise the president during the actual negotiation of the treaty. If the president took the advice, the Senate was obliged to consent to the ratification of the resulting agreement.    Washington tried this approach. Early in his first term he met with the Senate to discuss a planned treaty with the Creek Indian tribe. But he quickly grew exasperated with the Senate's penchant for postponing decisions. He came back a second day, only to see the matter referred to a committee. John Quincy Adams reports that Washington stormed out of the Senate's chambers vowing he would be damned if he would ever return.    He never did. Instead, he began submitting to the Senate treaties that had already been negotiated on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. The Senate got even. It approved Washington's treaties by the two-thirds vote called for in the Constitution, but only on the condition that Washington and the other party accept whatever changes a majority of senators deemed appropriate.    It wasn't long before the new republic ran into trouble with this novel approach to treaty making. Shortly after Thomas Jefferson became president, he instructed Rufus King to negotiate a pact with England fixing the Canadian border. King, the U.S. minister to England, came up with an agreement surprisingly favorable to the U.S., but the Senate insisted on &quot;improving&quot; it by dropping an entire article from the treaty. Jefferson returned the amended treaty to England, but the British rejected it out of hand.    As the republic grew more powerful, the Senate found it could force its changes down the throats of weaker nations. The Gadsen Purchase Treaty of 1853, for example, provided that Mexico would sell the U.S. what is now the southern portions of Arizona and New Mexico. When the treaty reached the Senate, boundaries were redrawn and the purchase price was cut by a third. Having just been defeated in war by the U.S., the Mexicans were in no position to argue.    It was Sen. Henry Cabot Lodge who discovered that even minor Senate surgery, if performed on a treaty enough times, can be lethal. The Senate adopted a string of reservations, written by Lodge, to the Versailles Treaty. Each one made only a small change in the terms of the agreement, but the sum of their impact was more than President Wilson could accept. The Versailles Treaty never failed on a straight up-or-down vote. It was, in today's Capitol Hill vernacular, &quot;pecked to death by ducks.&quot; Clever as Lodge's strategy may have been, the death of the treaty also killed any opportunity for the U.S. to be a constructive force in European affairs after World War I.    Fortunately for U.S.-Soviet relations, the votes aren't there for amendments to the INF Treaty, of the duck variety or otherwise. More likely is that Senate advice and consent will be used to tie the president's hands when it comes to interpreting the agreement. The impetus for this move is the Reagan administration's position that the 1972 ABM Treaty permits development and testing of the strategic defense initiative. Many senators believe &quot;advice and consent&quot; means the Senate should have had a say in this question. They want to be sure Senate prerogatives are preserved when INF is interpreted.    Several options are being discussed. The problem with all of them is that the Senate cannot control how the Soviets will interpret INF. Under international law only the U.S. has to follow Senate directions on issues of interpretation. Should the Senate offer this type of &quot;advice&quot; on the INF Treaty, the president would be robbed of any flexibility to interpret the agreement in light of changing circumstances, while the Soviets would remain free to do as they please.    Agreements broken, ultimatums issued, presidential flexibility limited. With &quot;advice&quot; like this no wonder presidents, secretaries of state and ministers of foreign governments cringe when a treaty is submitted to the Senate. The way the president and the Senate interpret the advice-and-consent clause regularly leads to disaster for U.S. foreign relations. A more compelling case for returning to what the framers originally intended is hard to imagine.    Of course, presidents and senators would have to develop some new habits. Presidents would have to learn to formally consult the Senate during treaty negotiations. The Senate, in turn, would have to learn to refrain from amending treaties. This will be tough. Presidents hate to consult and senators can't resist amending. But there have been times in the past when the two have put aside their old habits; the results have more than repaid the effort.    There is no better example then the payoff that came from the Truman administration's consultations with the Senate on the question of postwar relations with Western Europe. Undersecretary of State Robert Lovett approached Sen. Arthur Vandenberg for Senate advice about a possible treaty of alliance between the U.S. and the other Western nations. The two worked to build a consensus on an agreement acceptable to the Senate. Then they turned it into a resolution that Vandenberg steered through the Senate by an overwhelming vote.    The North Atlantic Treaty followed, faithfully mirroring the Vandenberg resolution. The Senate approved it without amendment. The cornerstone of postwar American foreign policy had been laid smoothly. By putting the advice where it belongs, before the negotiations, Vandenberg and Lovett avoided the divisiveness characteristic of so many Senate treaty debates.    Admittedly, this approach to Senate advice and consent represents the high-water mark in presidential/senatorial cooperation on treaty making. But given present circumstances -- vigorous new leadership in the Soviet Union and an unruly alliance in Western Europe -- is it too much to ask of the president and the Senate that they rise to the Vandenberg standard?    The Reagan administration is moving ahead on a strategic arms treaty with the Soviet Union. A conventional arms agreement also is possible. These raise major questions for U.S. policy. How will a strategic arms treaty be verified? Will the president sign a pact on strategic arms without a deal on conventional forces?    The president should not wait until these treaties are sent to the Senate before seeking its formal advice on these questions. If he and the Senate differ sharply on the answers, the treaties probably will die in the Senate, and the setback to U.S.Soviet relations will be severe. Better to know how the Senate will respond going into negotiations with the Soviets than to hold the presidential breath and hope for the best later. For its part, the Senate should not hesitate to offer advice. And once it gives this advice, it should consent to any treaty that reflects it, without amendment or undue delay.    Washington may have set an unfortunate precedent for &quot;advice and consent&quot; with his early actions, but his counsel on treaties is sound nevertheless. &quot;It is doubtless important that all treaties and compacts formed by the U.S. should be made with caution and executed with fidelity,&quot; he said. Nothing would more promote the caution and fidelity so necessary to a smoothly functioning foreign policy than to jettison the current advice-and-consent procedure in favor of one calculated to promote harmony between the two branches.    ---   Mr. Messick was chief counsel for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 1985-86, and currently works for a Washington law firm.    (See related story: &quot;SDI as Insurance&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 25, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>