<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871009-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Wire:A Special Weekly Report FromThe Wall Street Journal'sCapital Bureau---Compiled by Rich Jaroslovsky</HL><DD> 10/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST CANDATELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   BORK'S DEFEAT could signal a new round of administration infighting.    Conservatives move swiftly to head off any move by Chief of Staff Baker to pick a moderate court nominee. That would give Reagan foes &quot;the ability to say they had broken his back,&quot; says a Justice Department official. Some conservatives hope the flap will lead to Baker's departure. Reagan's mood may strengthen the hard-liners; aides say he is angry and determined to punish his foes.    White House aides grow weary of sniping from the right. They argue that conservative groups failed to mobilize on behalf of Bork, leaving the White House to carry too much of the load. Some charge that conservative activists are more interested in raising money than winning on issues.    Right-to-lifers write Meese that they'll go to the wall against oft-mentioned candidate Judge Patrick Higginbotham because of his decision voiding Louisiana abortion restrictions.    DEMOCRATS FRET about the problems of their current candidate crop.    Some party leaders continue to hope that one of the heavyweight non-candidates will jump into the race. But with New Hampshire's filing deadline just nine weeks off, there seems little chance that Cuomo, Bradley or Nunn will run. Moynihan's plea for favorite-son candidacies to ensure an open convention finds few converts.    Dukakis controls damage to his Iowa effort from the Biden tape flap, naming Susan Estrich, a Harvard law professor, to head his national campaign. Gephardt woos key Biden supporters, lavishing praise on him in public appearances. Jackson wows white audiences in Iowa and Democratic National Committee members in Washington, but he and Babbitt both face money woes. Gore's move to the right draws increasing interest.    STALEMATE LOOMS in the Senate over invoking the War Powers Act.    Weicker's introduction of a resolution yesterday would give Congress the chance to call troops home from the Persian Gulf after a given period. He and fellow Republican Hatfield press for a straight invocation of the law, but Democrats push a modified version that doesn't raise sticky constitutional questions; they are &quot;afraid of being doves,&quot; says a GOP aide.    Democrats acknowledge that there aren't enough votes to end an inevitable filibuster by GOP leaders but say that the debate will send a signal of congressional uneasiness. Some Republicans float the notion of a commission of lawmakers that would advise the president about strategy in the gulf.    But the administration resists significant compromise on the issue, saying it would violate the separation of powers.    CLEAR PICTURE: The movie and TV industries, which continually clash over issues like TV syndication profits and network-produced shows, find something they can agree on. Movie lobbyist Jack Valenti and NBC President Robert Wright are among the co-sponsors of a testimonial for Senate communications Chairman Inouye.    OLD ROSTENKOWSKI AIDES never die. They just join the Washington office of Dewey Ballantine, the big New York law firm. David Brockway, staff chief of the Joint Committee on Taxation, is the latest. Former top Ways and Means aide John Salmon joined the firm in 1985; successor Joseph Dowley signed on early this year.    BROADCASTERS ABANDON for this year their push for legal changes that would allow them to avoid some expensive TV license-renewal challenges. The National Association of Broadcasters says lawmakers wanted too much in return, including reinstating the fairness doctrine.    VOLCKER VOLUNTEERS a prediction. Sitting in a New York audience of economists, the former Fed chief was approached by a reporter with a question about Japanese interest rates. &quot;I have no comment on Japanese interest rates, but I'll give you an extended comment on U.S. interest rates,&quot; he said. The room grew silent. &quot;They will fluctuate,&quot; he said with a laugh.    FREER TRADE with Canada faces questions as the new treaty faces scrutiny.    Interest groups and lawmakers question key provisions. The merchant marine industry already launches its opposition, fearing lost repair and other business. The U.S. uranium and meat industries could face greater competition. Wine makers, initially jubilant about liberalized marketing of U.S. labels, could turn sour if the provincial officials who control wine sales refuse to go along.    Michigan Rep. Levin will demand clarification of auto provisions; he still sees loopholes allowing Canada to lure Asian parts plants at U.S. expense. Senate Majority Leader Byrd warns the White House he will focus on whether the pact sets a bad precedent by allowing challenges to U.S. rulings and even new laws before arbitration.    Key chairmen Bentsen and Rostenkowski take a wait-and-see stance. Democrats may try to trade their OK for a White House deal on the trade bill.    MINOR MEMOS: Rep. Cooper tells Fed Chairman Greenspan: &quot;I don't know whether you took lessons in Delphic utterances, but I think you've passed the boards.&quot; . . . Sen. Gramm says he and OMB director Miller spent their freshman year of college drinking beer and discussing &quot;the leisure of the theory class.&quot; . . . Just in case the Dukakis-Biden furor went unnoticed, the Massachusetts GOP sends political reporters copies of a Boston tabloid with the screaming headline, &quot;Duke's Darkest Hour.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>