<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871224-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Presidential Paralysis and the Constitution---By Peter Smithers</HL><DD> 12/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Beyond the borders of the U.S., many have watched in horror and disbelief as Washington has remained paralyzed in the face of a world financial crisis. The paralysis results from the inadequacy of the U.S. Constitution's decision-making machinery under modern conditions.    A constitution should enable an electorate to choose leaders who are competent to conduct government and to provide those leaders with mechanisms to make rapid decisions and translate them into action. And it should provide for a cadre of men and women who are experienced in the full range of central-government problems. From them the chief executives should be chosen. The U.S. Constitution is manifestly defective in all three respects.    A parliamentary constitution, though far from perfect and probably not appropriate for the U.S., provides these essentials. It provides a ladder of promotion the would-be prime minister must climb and from which he certainly will fall before he reaches the pinnacle if he is unequal to his aspirations. If he survives the ordeal, in the years of his ascent he will have acquired all of the skills necessary for the discharge of his responsibilities. He need not &quot;learn in office.&quot;    The first rung of the ladder is to be elected to Parliament. The severe restrictions on a candidate's election expenditure (in my former constituency of Winchester the maximum permitted is about $12,500) place the emphasis on competence rather than fund-raising ability. The next rung probably is to be selected by a senior minister as his parliamentary private secretary, an unpaid, semi-official post that provides an excellent opportunity to learn the art of political administration.    When there is a vacancy in a junior ministerial position the choice usually falls on a parliamentary private secretary of proved competence. As a junior minister, he will be personally responsible for government within a limited sphere. An unpromising performance will mean that he falls from the ladder of promotion. So it goes through the ministerial hierarchy. The weaker brethren fall. Those of proved ability survive and learn until they arrive at membership in the cabinet.    In the parliamentary cabinet, unlike the nearest American equivalent, every minister not only administers his own department but also shares responsibility with his colleagues for every government decision. The &quot;prime&quot; minister is just that, the first among equals. He must carry his cabinet colleagues with him in all that he does, and they in turn will counsel and support him. If a minister disagrees with his colleagues on an important issue and cannot win his point in cabinet, he may feel obliged to resign.    If the prime minister's chair falls vacant, it is but a step from one of the other chairs to occupy it. The incoming prime minister has already seen it all and knows it all. Thus there is always available a reserve of fully experienced men and women to fill the offices of state.    The U.S. Constitution does not provide any such mechanisms. For his cabinet, a president summons a miscellany of former senators, professors, business and financial wizards and personal friends, with or without experience in some branch of politics. Cabinet members are not fully experienced across the board of government and are not collectively responsible as a body for national policy -- nor are they in line for promotion to the presidency. Nor is there a clear means by which the aspirant to the presidency can gain the experience necessary. The president, having arrived in the White House by a process of selection mainly dependent upon fund raising and self-advertisement, must to a great extent learn on the job. His responsibilities are his alone and the Constitution has not ensured the existence of a body of experienced colleagues to counsel and support him.    Winston Churchill, a great admirer of the U.S. Constitution, was famous for his minutes that read, &quot;Action this day.&quot; Under a parliamentary constitution, &quot;Action this day&quot; is possible on any matter. The cabinet meets, a decision is arrived at after debate, and the governmental machine acts at once. The prime minister commands a majority in Parliament and in normal circumstances can be sure that the cabinet decision will be ratified if ratification is necessary. In the event that Parliament refuses to go along, he will put the matter to the British people and they will decide. The existence of this ultimate sanction ensures that the electorate has the last say in any matter of the greatest importance in which the government is at odds with the legislature.    By contrast, the decision-making mechanism in the U.S. is, in the literal sense of the word, incoherent. The president is elected with a program he considers himself obligated to carry through. Congress is elected separately and its composition will not necessarily correspond with the president's wishes. To aggravate this conflict further, midway through the president's term, part of Congress is renewed, also with a mandate that it considers itself obligated to execute. The president has no power to dissolve Congress so the electors may decide between him and them. The result, inevitably, is a conflict of wills and a dangerous paralysis of government.    In less complex, less urgent times, when the stakes were not global, the system, as Churchill observed, worked well. Today, the president and members of Congress are given a task that is virtually impossible for either of them to perform satisfactorily.    The effect of this paralysis of government on U.S. interests and the outside world is devastating. It is no comfort to be assured by Americans that it is quite normal for government to be unable to take decisive action on controversial matters during the last one-third of a presidential term. The world economy does not take these niceties into account.    It is surprising that Americans are willing to pay the price -- which they are now doing in the stock-market crash and the collapse of the dollar -- for this inability of the political machinery to take unpleasant decisions at the proper time. It is not surprising that their trading partners are unable by themselves to put the world's financial system in order when the world's richest country, custodian of the reserve currency, is willing to devalue that currency as an alternative to balancing its own budget.    I first came to the U.S. on Nov. 23, 1940, as a junior member of the British Embassy staff. Since then I have seldom been out of touch with American affairs. The U.S. today, compared with the nation of 1940, is immeasurably more closely integrated as a society, more efficient as an economy, more outward-looking, more productive and constructive in every field of human endeavor. Four decades have seen a brilliant national development -- except in the art of government. Recent years have seen repeated failures to translate these virtues and the immense potential of the U.S. into a coherent policy either within or outside the national frontiers. It is puzzling and astonishing that the American people do not ask themselves the reason for this failure.    Throughout most of the civilized world Americans are regarded with admiration, sometimes with envy and often with affection. That the U.S. government enjoys neither the confidence of its friends nor the respect of its opponents is due to the faltering performance of the institutions of government. In foreign policy those institutions are uncertain and vacillating. Will the policy of the president or that of the Congress prevail? Or will we get a lame compromise between incompatibles? The management of the economy, on which the fate of all of us is largely dependent, is seen to be governed by pork-barrel politics. Nothing matters if the economy can be kept going until after the next presidential election. Neither of the rival institutions of government is willing to accept responsibility for the disagreeable measures that both know should have been taken long ago.    It is the unworkable mechanism of decision in the U.S. Constitution that inevitably produces these melancholy results. It fails to provide either the cadre of qualified men, or the mechanism of presidential selection, or the decision-making machinery that would enable the greatness of the American people to be translated into effective management of their -- and of our -- affairs.    On the day I arrived in the U.S. in 1940, the New York skyline rose out of the sea as the Boeing Clipper carrying Ambassador Lord Lothian and Lt. Smithers approached the seaplane base at La Guardia. I felt, as others have before and since, that the country I was about to enter was the most romantic in the world. I think so still. It was something of a surprise when at the entry formalities I was presented with a document to sign that, strange to recall, asked me to declare that I did not intend to overthrow the Constitution of the United States. At the time I thought this somewhat irrelevant to real life.    Forty-seven years later, things look different. It would be difficult but certainly not impossible to amend the Constitution so as to provide the important missing elements I have described. Perhaps it would have been better if instead of spending a year in a self-congratulatory bicentennial celebration of a manifestly obsolete document, Americans had devoted the same time, effort and expense to researching how to bring the wisdom of the Founding Fathers into line with the current needs of mankind within and outside the national frontiers.    ---   Sir Peter was a member of the British Parliament, minister in the Macmillan and Douglas-Home governments and secretary-general of the Council of Europe. </TEXT></DOC>