<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880420-0117 </DOCNO><HL> How Uncle Sam Got in the Family's Way </HL><AUTHOR> Allan Carlson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><TEXT>   Families with children are losing economic ground relative to the rest of the population, the Congressional Budget Office says in a recent report. While real per-capita income within most families has risen since 1969, the study shows that the increase has been uneven, with gains concentrated among the elderly. Moreover, the modest gain among households with children derives primarily from fewer offspring and more wage earners per home.    The report echoes the work of the University of Maryland's Frank Levy, who describes a young middle class under severe financial strain in the 1980s. Setting aside the yuppies as an unrepresentative segment of the population, Mr. Levy stresses the overall stagnation in real earnings experienced by young men in the 1973-85 period, which stood in vivid contrast to the world of their fathers. The unmarried, he says, responded by avoiding the altar, while married couples abandoned savings, postponed childbearing, reduced family size, and sent wives into the labor force in unprecedented numbers to defend household living standards.    Reflecting these developments, both the political left and right have rediscovered the &quot;family wage.&quot; Their calls represent a return to an old debate on the fate of family life and sex roles in a competitive labor market, a debate that began in the late 18th century when factories first drew large numbers of men, women and children away from their homes.    Adam Smith and, later, David Ricardo believed that family life would prosper in the new order, as sentiments of &quot;common humanity&quot; combined with positive market forces (e.g., the value of youth as potential income producers and a source of old-age security) to preserve social stability. The invisible hand, they implied, would deliver a natural family wage.    But most people were unwilling to leave the question to economic forces. The liberal solution came from John Stuart Mill. In &quot;Principles of Political Economy&quot; (1871), he championed a family wage built on purposeful wage inequalities. He concluded that married women should be at home, caring for children. To secure this, the wages of single women &quot;must be equal to their support, but need not be more than equal.&quot; Yet &quot;the man's wages must be at least sufficient to support a wife, and a number of children adequate to keep up the population.&quot;    The turn-of-the-century minimum-wage movement in Australia pursued Mill's vision of social justice. Wage boards set minimum rates &quot;necessary to allow the average man to live his life according to Australian standards,&quot; keyed to a family of five. Women received a rate only 54% of that paid men, since they &quot;are not usually legally responsible for maintenance of a family,&quot; and children usually got less.    But the Australian system was plagued by distortions. The minimum rates paid the one million adult male workers in 1910 theoretically supported three million children; in truth, the nation had only 900,000 residents under age 17. Some estimates suggested that 20% of female workers provided primary support to children. In addition, the lower female minimum predictably drove up demand for female labor. Results were partially contained by rigid &quot;men's&quot; and &quot;women's&quot; job categories. For certain industries, though, the number of employed women and children rose an astounding 400% between 1896 and 1911.    Despite this chasm between intentions and effects, the concept of a minimum family wage spread rapidly. In Britain, Fabian Socialist Sidney Webb blasted the use of &quot;married women's labor&quot; as &quot;parasitic.&quot; Pope Leo XIII's 1893 encyclical &quot;Rerum Novarum&quot; introduced a rigorous theology of the &quot;just wage&quot; into the debate, including indirect support for the family standard.    To his credit, the pope warned of the dangers of excessive state intervention. American interpreters were less cautious. In &quot;The Living Wage&quot; (1906), the Rev. John Ryan declared that every man had a &quot;fundamental right&quot; to a family wage. A Jesuit writer added that this made it &quot;absolutely necessary . . . that female labor {be} kept from the labor market,&quot; a goal that required &quot;a far-reaching reconstruction of the entire economic system.&quot;    The same drive for the family wage animated both the Progressives and the New Dealers in their search for domestic justice. Policy consequences followed. Between 1912 and 1923, 11 states enacted statutes setting minimum-wage rates exclusively for women and children, a policy that with other work rules was designed to limit their entry into the labor force. In 1918, Woodrow Wilson's National War Labor Board declared &quot;the right of all {male} workers . . . to a living wage.&quot;    The U.S. Supreme Court did strike down the state statutes governing female and child labor in 1923. But they returned, in different guise, during the New Deal. National Industrial Recovery Act codes, for example, frequently set higher wage scales for men than for women. The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, while avoiding a fixed sex differential for constitutional reasons, informally sustained this form of coercive traditionalism by empowering the federal government to set minimum wages keyed in principle to one breadwinning paycheck.    At the same time, though, the natural family economic bonds that co-existed with a market economy were being cut. The Fair Labor Standards Act, for example, also gave the Labor Department power to regulate or ban work by youth. Old-age pensions under Social Security worked, over time, to sever the natural ties of dependency between generations of a single family.    As long as commitment to the state-constructed family wage held, the family economy still enjoyed some protection. Unfortunately, the definition of social justice on which it was based proved vulnerable to changes in intellectual fashion. As late as the 1930s, &quot;justice&quot; demanded purposeful discrimination in wages and jobs according to sex and a firm commitment to the mother-at-home. By the 1970s, the measure of social justice had been reversed: strict equality in wages and job opportunities, and a firm commitment to the woman working outside the home. Indeed, payment of a &quot;family wage&quot; to male heads-of-household became illegal.    The family unit, accordingly, has inherited the worst of both visions: The federal government has dismantled broad aspects of the natural family economy and, at the same time, has turned against the family-wage ideal that offered a kind of balance. The federal tax burden also shifted sharply against families between 1960 and 1984, as inflation eroded the real value of the personal exemption and the payroll tax soared. For the first time in U.S. history, governmental manipulation of labor markets and income both have a decided anti-child, anti-family bias.    Results are growing apparent. Mr. Levy shows that young men passing from age 25 to 35 in the 1950s and 1960s could anticipate a doubling in their real incomes. Yet those who were age 25 in 1973 saw their average real earnings rise only 16% over the next 10 years, a sum largely consumed by taxes. Even with the Reagan recovery of the mid-1980s the Congressional Budget Office describes families sustaining living standards only by working more total hours and forgoing children: in a sense, consuming their human capital. Not coincidentally, the U.S. birthrate remains well below the &quot;replacement&quot; level.    It is clear that the liberal family-wage approach has failed, the victim of its internal contradictions and an altered vision of justice. So what should be done? It is tempting to conclude that the whole exercise was misguided, and that we ought to rebuild, as best we can, the natural wage posited by Adam Smith, fostering the economic and emotional bonds linking grandparents, parents and children.    Practical policy steps toward that goal would include tax relief targeted by number and age of children. We might:   --Raise the personal income-tax exemption again, but confine this increase to dependent children, which sharply limits its revenue effects.    --Transform the existing Child Care Tax Credit, which primarily aids the relatively well-off using day care, into a revenue-neutral credit targeted on middle- and low-income families (a bill with this purpose has been introduced in the House by Louisiana Republican Clyde Holloway).    --For the working poor, expand the ceiling on the Earned Income Tax Credit (which, in effect, rebates part of the payroll tax) and raise its value according to family size.    These measures would allow all families with children to retain more of what they earn. Moreover, these proposals are sex-neutral, and deliver family support without resort to social engineering of either a traditional or radical nature.    As a step toward repairing the economic bonds between generations, plans to privatize Social Security also deserve &quot;pro-family&quot; support. So might the long-dormant proposal by the Reagan administration to modify Child Labor Regulation No. 3, giving somewhat greater flexibility to the parent-guided work of teen-agers.    These steps would repair some of the damage to family autonomy caused by government, and marginally improve family living standards, at a modest cost to the Treasury, and without disrupting labor markets or increasing the size of the state. Given the importance of young families to the nation, the price seems reasonable.    ---   Mr. Carlson is president of the Illinois-based Rockford Institute. </TEXT></DOC>