<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Data May LinkTop ArbitragerTo Illicit Trades---Mulheren Might Have HadIllegal Tie to Boesky, SayPeople Close to Inquiry---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Government investigators have pieced together a series of invoices suggesting an illegal stock trading arrangement between John A. Mulheren and Ivan F. Boesky, until recently two of Wall Street's most powerful arbitragers, according to people familiar with the investigation.    Mr. Boesky has pleaded guilty to a felony for his role in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal and is known to be cooperating with the government.    While Mr. Mulheren hasn't entered into any formal agreements with the government, he is &quot;responding to inquiries consistent with his best interests,&quot; said one person close to him. Mr. Mulheren also is understood to be cooperating with the government's investigation. The government investigation could lead to civil and criminal charges against Mr. Mulheren.    The invoices obtained by the government cover the period from about the beginning of 1986 until October, shortly after Mr. Boesky agreed to plead guilty and cooperate with the government, according to the people familiar with the investigation.    According to these people, the trading arrangement worked this way: Mr. Boesky sent regular invoices for trades that Mr. Boesky's Seemala Corp. executed on behalf of Mr. Mulheren's firm, Jamie Securities Co. But, each time, Mr. Mulheren's firm overpaid Mr. Boesky's by substantial multiples of the amounts actually billed. Total overpayments from Jamie to Seemala in the period were more than $400,000.    The overpayments appear to have been part of a parking arrangement to conceal Mr. Boesky's ownership of stocks nominally owned by Mr. Mulheren, according to the people familiar with the investigation. They said that only two or three stocks appear to be involved. One person close to Mr. Mulheren said &quot;he was doing a favor for a colleague&quot; -- Mr. Boesky.    Parking arrangements may enable firms to violate federal and stock exchange net capital requirements without detection, or may enable corporate raiders and their allies to accumulate stock without complying with Securities and Exchange Commission disclosure requirements. The payments may have been a way for Mr. Boesky to settle accounts with Mr. Mulheren, with the payments representing Mr. Boesky's profits on stock parked with Mr. Mulheren.    Fred M. Stone, executive vice president and general counsel for Jamie, and also a spokesman for Mr. Mulheren, said Jamie and Mr. Mulheren &quot;adhere to the highest ethical standards&quot; and have complied &quot;with all applicable laws and regulations.&quot; He declined to comment on the government's investigation or on any invoices or payments to Mr. Boesky.    Harvey Pitt, Mr. Boesky's lawyer, declined comment.    The use of invoices to settle accounts in stock parking arrangements have figured in other aspects of the insider-trading scandal. As previously reported, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. sent Mr. Boesky a $5.3 million invoice that could be part of a parking arrangement between Mr. Boesky and Michael Milken, the head of Drexel's junk bond operations. Drexel has said the invoice was for legitimate investment banking services, and the firm and Mr. Milken have denied any wrongdoing.    According to people familiar with Mr. Mulheren's business activities, Mr. Mulheren's investment strategy has changed substantially in recent months. They said Mr. Mulheren has abandoned the aggressive speculation in actual and possible takeover targets that earned him his reputation on Wall Street, and instead is taking longer-term investment positions. Mr. Stone, the spokesmen for Mr. Mulheren, confirmed the change in strategy but declined to elaborate.    One of Mr. Mulheren's limited partners, a subsidiary of London-based S. andamp; W. Berisford PLC, has recently given notice that it will withdraw all of its capital from Caronan Partners, a limited partnership that owns Jamie, at the end of the year.    Howard Zuckerman, a spokesman for Sandamp;W Berisford, said he's aware of the government investigation of Mr. Mulheren but said, &quot;I can't say it did and I can't say it didn't&quot; have any effect on the financial services company's decision to withdraw its capital. &quot;I hope his problems are small,&quot; Mr. Zuckerman said of Mr. Mulheren.    Whatever the outcome of the investigation, Mr. Mulheren's change in investment strategy is another sign that the era on Wall Street when traders and arbitragers were king is waning. &quot;He's simply not a factor in the market anymore,&quot; said a rival. &quot;His trading desk seems dead. Before, it was routinely doing 50,000, 70,000-share blocks, and we were hanging on every move he made.&quot;    Mr. Mulheren was known as an aggressive, brilliant and sometimes abrasive trader. Less than two years ago, his heavy trading in the stock of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. convinced many that the giant securities firm was in play as a takeover target. His clout was such that some believed Mr. Mulheren might actually take over Merrill Lynch, where he once worked as a trader.    Mr. Mulheren was also instrumental in Hanson Trust PLC's successful 1986 takeover of SCM Corp., selling a key block of SCM stock to Hanson at a crucial juncture in the battle.    Mr. Mulheren's change in strategy has led to increased profits for his firm. Jamie Securities is having &quot;the most profitable year in our history,&quot; said Mr. Stone. Partners who invested with Mr. Mulheren, including corporate raiders T. Boone Pickens Jr. and the Belzberg family of Canada, can't withdraw their money until the end of 1987, and then only if they give notice, according to the terms of the partnership agreement.    Mr. Stone said he is confident that the firm's capital would be equal to or greater in 1988 than it was at the beginning of 1987, and that most investors would remain with the firm.    Mr. Pickens said he isn't aware of any investigation of Mr. Mulheren and said, &quot;I don't have any plans to pull out&quot; of Mr. Mulheren's partnership. Another investor, Barry Wish, said that he is aware of the investigation but added that &quot;I'm extremely pleased&quot; with Mr. Mulheren's performance.    Members of the Belzberg family couldn't be reached.    Mr. Mulheren and Mr. Boesky were close friends for many years, say colleagues of the two men. When Mr. Boesky's firm faced a liquidity crisis in the wake of a disastrous investment in the 1982 Cities Service Co. takeover battle, it was Mr. Mulheren, then working at Spear, Leeds andamp; Kellogg, a New York securities firm, who arranged a complex options agreement that bailed out Mr. Boesky. Mr. Mulheren acted as a trustee for Mr. Boesky's children, until he resigned after the disclosures about Mr. Boesky's illegal activities. </TEXT></DOC>