<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0054 </DOCNO><HL> Warm Welcome:Spain's New OpennessTo Foreign InvestmentIs a Boon to Consumers---Firms Are Being PurchasedAnd Products Introduced;But Costs Start to Climb---Will They Eat Their Cereal?---By John Marcom Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> MADRID, Spain  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Lean Cuisine is coming to Spain, and Perrier isn't far behind.    Countless other products familiar to consumers in the U.S. and the rest of Europe suddenly are popping up for the first time on the shelves of Spanish supermarkets. They are among the fruits of Spain's transformation from a quirky, protected and government-dominated economy into a wide-open battleground for the world's biggest corporations.    Kellogg Co. and Nestle S.A. want to persuade more Spaniards, who typically eat breakfast at a cafe later in the morning, to have a bowl of cereal before leaving home. Fiat S.p.A., Jaguar PLC and other auto makers are aggressively promoting their stylish imports and new, more competitive prices. Citicorp, Chase Manhattan Corp. and other big foreign bank holding companies have wooed customers away from Spanish banks by introducing new, relatively high-interest money-market accounts. Citibank branches -- there are 81 in Spain -- seem almost as plentiful in Madrid as they do in Manhattan.    The shift to this more open economy got a huge push last year when Spain joined the European Community, opening its borders to freer trade with the rest of the world. &quot;EC entry meant a revolutionary increase in the level of competition in foreign markets and, undoubtedly for the first time in history, in domestic markets,&quot; says Carlos Solchaga, the economy and finance minister.    As has not been true elsewhere in Europe, foreign expansion here gets an unequivocally warm welcome. British politicians in recent years blocked U.S. companies' attempts to help rescue Britain's state-owned auto maker; the Spanish gladly handed control of their troubled car company, SEAT group, to Volkswagen AG of West Germany last year. American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., rebuffed recently by the French, is building its first European plant in the hills north of Madrid in a joint venture with Spain's phone company that has been amply supported by Spanish government money. The two partners recently announced plans for a second factory.    In Spain, &quot;there's a fresh attitude about things,&quot; says George W. Foyo, the managing director of ATandamp;T Microelectronica, which is building the first plant. Some 80% of the unit is owned by ATandamp;T.    Carlo De Benedetti, the Italian financier, praises Spain's &quot;new entrepreneurial, international way of thinking.&quot;    When Generalissimo Francisco Franco died in 1975, he left behind a country of 38.4 million people, a nation oddly out of step - not quite modern, not quite backward. Spain concentrated first on instituting a democracy.    But Franco left behind an economic mess, too: state-owned companies and sanctioned monopolies that protected workers and deprived consumers of choice. Fresh coffee could be imported only through official agencies. Cigarettes were a government monopoly. Regulations kept gas stations a certain, minimum distance apart, and they were run by a monopoly Spain is just now starting to disband.    Spain's living standards remain far below the rest of Europe's. Spaniards drive fewer and smaller cars on inferior roads; you still can't drive from Madrid to any other major city by expressway. Appalling hospital conditions prompted a five-month strike this year by public-sector doctors. The government says it needs to spend $17 billion to streamline the poky and overmanned railway system.    So Spain wants to grab as much foreign investment, management and technology as it can.    Long-established foreign companies find doing business in Spain easier today, and entry into the European Community has sparked a wave of interest from many other companies. Spain combines some of the advantages of a rich country -- its democratic system made more secure by EC membership -- with the growth potential of a poor country. Foreign investment in Spain in the first quarter of this year was $3.75 billion, triple the year-earlier level.    Obviously, the government isn't acting merely so Spaniards can buy Lean Cuisine and Perrier; economists expect investments eventually to build more efficient industries. Critics of the government's policy call it a sellout.    &quot;Perhaps in the future most Spaniards will be very well-fed, with very nice suits -- but all of them will be executives without real decision power,&quot; says Ramon Tamames, an economist and a member of the Spanish house of representatives who belongs to a small left-wing party.    Even within parts of the government, doubts sometimes arise, as was the case earlier this year before the government allowed Montedison S.p.A., the Italian chemical giant, to take over Antibioticos S.A., Spain's largest drug company. But government officials say they want to remove more barriers as soon as practicable. &quot;It's better to have foreign capital than no capital at all,&quot; says Manuel Conthe, the finance ministry official who oversees foreign investments.    The rush of money, so far, coincides with better economic health. Employment, after sliding since the mid-1970s, at long last is rising. Spain last year created 250,000 jobs but, because more people entered the work force, the 20% unemployment rate hasn't budged. The economy last year grew 3%, the strongest showing in at least a decade, and this year Spain is expected to do even better.    &quot;An important part of the country has learned to walk again, even to run,&quot; says Mr. De Benedetti. The financier is setting up a holding company here, adding Spanish companies to his growing European portfolio of businesses, which include office-equipment, computer-service and auto-parts concerns.    Other foreign companies already have snapped up Spanish companies making everything from soap to sausage. Last year, for instance, Gillette Co. acquired a locally known maker of natural cosmetics; Unilever Group took over a big meatpacker, and Pillsbury Co. bought a canner.    By backing locally known brands with more manufacturing and marketing expertise, acquirers hope to muscle in on a still-fragmented market. Spanish companies, lacking scale, capital and know-how, are often willing sellers. &quot;There are a lot of Spanish companies that have been managed with the principles of the past; they haven't developed an efficient management culture,&quot; says Manuel Balmaseda, the general manager here of Hay Group, a consulting unit of Saatchi andamp; Saatchi Co. of Britain. &quot;It becomes very, very appealing for a foreign company to buy them.&quot;    Even experienced investors like the new climate. Nestle, for instance, has done business in Spain since 1881, coping with the Civil War and then a fascist dictatorship that regulated supply of critical ingredients. The Swiss giant remembers when it took more than a year to get approval to bring more capital into Spain. Today, approvals usually take a month, and just a one-page application form.    In 1983, the government ended a ban on the sale of packaged ground coffee. The restrictions were originally intended to conserve foreign exchange and to maintain the purity of the coffee sold. But, by the 1980s, all that was being protected was the business of local coffee-roasting companies. Nestle has since bought three coffee companies.    Nestle believes that Spanish consumers, like other Europeans before them, will become more Americanized. &quot;What's interesting,&quot; says Francisco Castaner, the head of Nestle's Spanish unit, &quot;is how powerful is the image of the American style of life.&quot; Accordingly, the company decided to challenge Kellogg's hold on the tiny market for breakfast cereal -- even though consumption probably won't reach U.S. levels for decades. (In 1984, the average Spaniard consumed just three ounces of breakfast cereal, while Americans ate nine pounds, according to one estimate.) Kellogg just announced plans for a big expansion of its Spanish plant, voicing its confidence in the potential market.    Similarly, the market for frozen Lean Cuisine dinners -- a U.S.-developed product Nestle sells in other European countries -- and other frozen foods is limited at the moment. Fewer than 30% of Spanish households have proper freezers, much less microwave ovens; few of the mom-and-pop stores where many Spaniards still shop have big freezer cases. But &quot;all the habits are changing,&quot; says Mr. Castaner.    Aspirations are high. The importers of Perrier water, who already sell Lindt chocolates from Switzerland, hope to appeal to spreading status consciousness. Another sign of the times: Peugeot S.A., the French car maker, is selling a special Lacoste edition of its compact 205 model with a crocodile logo on the side of the car.    Along with consumer goods, the Spanish are importing more capital equipment, aiding a needed modernization of manufacturing. Among the most prominent projects is the $200 million ATandamp;T plant; it is expected to begin making advanced computer chips for its partner, Cia.Telefonica Nacional de Espana, and for other European customers later this year. Despite such visible high-tech projects, most Spaniards say the country's future lies in medium-technology goods. In autos, for instance, investments by Ford Motor Co., General Motors Corp. and, more recently, Volkswagen have made Spain a center of small-car production.    Aside from food-processing, where sunny Spain has a natural edge, Spain offers few clear advantages in manufacturing compared with the rest of Europe. Costs are fast catching up with the rest of Europe; one survey says Madrid real estate soared 40% in the last year. Labor laws are rigid; it is difficult to move people from plant to plant and all but impossible to lay them off.    The government is trying to reduce last year's 8% inflation rate. But unions are challenging the government's wage policies, sometimes winning inflationary increases. Madrid airport and subway stations were filthy in April when cleaners were on strike. A slowdown by ground workers at Iberia, the state airline, caused flights to be canceled and annoyed customers waiting for service at ticket counters. And on two recent weekends, unions closed down the nation's bingo parlors.    The labor troubles and interest rates -- the government briefly pushed interbank rates above 20% in May -- gave investors on Madrid's stock exchange the jitters a few weeks ago. But the ebullience accompanying Spain's entry into the European Community persists. Vice premier Alfonso Guerra says that Spain hasn't had it so good for four centuries.    The national high may well last until 1992, when Spain plans to celebrate the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America with a World's Fair in Seville, the Summer Olympics in Barcelona and the end of the transition period to full EC membership. And foreign investors help sustain the optimism. </TEXT></DOC>