<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870217-0115 </DOCNO><HL> America's Delicate Balance in the Aegean---By Robert D. Kaplan</HL><DD> 02/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FREST </IN><DATELINE> ATHENS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   An American diplomat once assured me that &quot;though the Greeks always kick and scream, come Armageddon they'll be on the side of the angels.&quot; Given the neutralist philosophy of Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, it is tempting to dismiss the remark as just the wishful thinking of a State Department philhellene. But a canny vision lies behind it.    The Greeks invented theater, and Greek politicians often behave like actors on a stage. As in ancient days, the actors wear masks. In Mr. Papandreou's case, willfulness has been a mask for vulnerability -- the vulnerability of a European nation that in psychological terms is really part of the Third World.    Occupied by the Turks, dominated by the British and ruled by Bavarian and Danish monarchs, the Greeks already had quite a few chips on their shoulders by the time America, after World War II, replaced Britain here as the dominant outside power. Greece's industrial revolution was only partial and didn't take place until the 1960s. The postwar economic boom was an artificial one, created by the generosity of American taxpayers. Mr. Papandreou's populism reflects the frustration of a people who still do not see themselves as masters of their own fate. By the standards of the post-colonial, developing world, his rhetoric was never that unusual.    But as Greece modernizes, Mr. Papandreou's appeal is losing its force. In last fall's municipal elections, three of Greece's four largest cities, including Athens, elected conservative mayors by wide majorities. A statistical extrapolation reveals that the prime minister's party, the Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK), has lost a quarter of its voting strength in urban areas since the 1985 general election. Rising crime, an inflation rate of more than 20%, and a veritable wage freeze have led to an atomization of Greek society. The emerging mood is one of economic self-interest. Voters are now more concerned about their bank overdrafts than about wounded national pride.    By making a bad economy worse, Mr. Papandreou created the conditions for his own slide in the polls, which might become steeper. This year, the principal due on Greece's foreign debt is slated to rise almost 50% from 1986, and in 1988 it will go up an additional 25%. This means more austerity, more disenchantment and more dependence on the good will of the U.S. and Western Europe. Not surprisingly, Mr. Papandreou has cooled his rhetoric. In January, he publicly committed Greece to continued membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and to negotiating a new agreement for the American bases here. And in the first week of February, he dropped three top left-wingers from his cabinet, giving the government a more moderate look.    Greek populism in the 1980s, like Quebec populism in the 1970s, is collapsing under the burden of economic reality. For the U.S., both will turn out to be foreign-policy problems that solve themselves. If Mr. Papandreou, as is likely, pays an official visit to Washington in late 1987 or 1988, it will not indicate a failure of will on President Reagan's part, but an American victory born of restraint.    At worst, perhaps, one of the four major American bases in Greece will close and its functions will be absorbed by the other three. Despite the clamor of the Greek left, Greece apparently is not in a position to remove all of the bases and lose the U.S. aid that goes with them. The U.S. has been wise not to provoke Mr. Papandreou into doing what he probably never intended to do in the first place. Nor has it so far succumbed to the temptation of going overboard in its support for rival Turkey, since, unfortunately, Turkey is not able to fill Greece's role in the Western alliance.    Just as the Greeks, historically insecure, have an ability to irritate, the Turks, exuding the confidence that comes from 600 years of Ottoman imperial rule, have an ability to ingratiate. Consequently, the U.S. position in Greece often appears a little worse than it really is, while in Turkey it often appears a little better than it really is.    Turkey's diplomatic tact with the U.S. has obscured its complex historical attitude toward the Soviet Union. It is often forgotten that Lenin assisted Kemal Ataturk's revolution with money and weapons. Ever since, Turkey has been especially mindful of the proximity and importance of the Soviet Union. Ankara's enmity toward Moscow has never interfered with its caution. Were Greece to close the American bases, Turkey would be hard pressed to open its doors to them. Relocating these bases in Turkey would force Ankara to redefine its fragile relationship with Moscow. And the Turks know that the Americans' ability to help them is less than the Soviets' ability to hurt them.    The Soviets have applied the carrot and stick in Turkey with virtual impunity. In the 1970s, they were using the Bulgarians to smuggle large amounts of weapons to Turkish extremist groups, while at the same time giving Ankara a considerable amount of economic aid. The 366-mile Soviet-Turkish border is the weakest link in the NATO defense chain. With Turkey outnumbered by several divisions and fighting with Korean War-vintage arms, it is difficult to comprehend how the country could defend its frontier in northeast Anatolia in the event of a Soviet strike. Though building up Turkey's military capability must be a priority for the West, it is unrealistic to expect Ankara's perception of its own geographic vulnerability to change much.    In peace, Turkey is a useful and dedicated ally, not only because of its hostility toward the Soviet Union, but also because of its expanding trade influence in the Islamic world, particularly in Iran and Iraq. A visitor to Tehran or Baghdad would find Turkish consumer products such as stoves and refrigerators as much in evidence as Japanese electronic goods are in any Western city.    But, come Armageddon, just the thought of a Soviet thrust into Anatolia might very well persuade the Turkish generals to declare themselves neutral. The Greeks would be forced to confront Warsaw Pact troops trying to realize what for decades has been both a primary Soviet strategic objective and a Bulgarian national obsession: an outlet on the warm waters of the Aegean.    One obviously could come up with many scenarios. My point is simply that the commitment of Turkey to NATO, like that of Greece, can never be taken for granted no matter what the Turks -- or for that matter, the Greeks -- say. And were Greece to be decoupled from NATO, rather than fill the gap, Turkey would be isolated and thus more liable to be compromised by the Soviet Union. Turkey's critical value to the West following a Greek withdrawal from the alliance would make Ankara as demanding and tempestuous as Athens is now. The U.S. should continue its evenhanded approach if it wants to secure the loyalty of both countries in the event of the unthinkable.    Moreover, despite a historical antipathy as bitter as that between the Arabs and the Jews, the Greek-Turkish conflict has remained a largely uneventful sideshow in the eastern Mediterranean, partly because of Washington's equal and considerable influence in both countries. Instead of tinkering with success, American foreign-policy analysts should hold it up as model on which to build a strategy for calming the Middle East.    Those who want the U.S. to veer sharply toward Turkey should note that Mr. Papandreou's overtures have failed to sway the Russians toward Greece. When in November 1983, Turkish Cyprus made a unilateral declaration of independence, the Eastern Bloc was days behind the West in condemning it. And given Moscow's record of scrupulous fence-sitting in Greek-Turkish affairs, it is difficult to believe that even if Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev visits Athens in the spring, he will not compensate the Turks in some other way. Great powers like Russia that have been active in the region longer than the U.S. have learned never to rely too much on any one country.    A tilt toward Turkey may very well be warranted, but the U.S. -- and conservatives in particular -- should not be tempted to venture too far. Mr. Papandreou is deep in economic mush, and an excessive show of support now for Turkey would only provide him with a fresh opportunity to rally his forces. The socialist storm appears to be receding in Athens, and President Reagan should continue to ride it out.    ---   Mr. Kaplan is an Athens-based journalist. </TEXT></DOC>