<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870619-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   VIOLENT PROTESTS ERUPTED in Seoul and other South Korean cities.    Thousands of students, parents and workers clashed with police in Seoul, Pusan and elsewhere during marches called to demand the ouster of President Chun and the institution of direct presidential elections. The protests have raged daily since June 10. The government reportedly was considering &quot;drastic measures&quot; to quell the violence, but the ruling party's presidential candidate indicated he was willing to meet with dissident leader Kim Young Sam.    Opposition leader Kim Dae Jung, in an ABC-TV interview, compared the situation in South Korea to the Philippines before the fall of Ferdinand Marcos.    ---   GUNMEN ABDUCTED an American journalist in a suburb of Beirut.    Police in the Lebanese capital said the former correspondent for ABC-TV, Charles Glass, was grabbed by about 14 kidnappers near mainly Moslem West Beirut. Responsibility wasn't claimed. Glass, 36, the first foreigner kidnapped in the region since Syria moved in troops last February to quell militia battles, became the ninth American held captive in Lebanon. The U.S. condemned the incident, in which the son of Lebanon's defense minister also was abducted.    West German TV said the kidnapping may have occurred to prevent Glass from testifying against a suspect in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner.    ---   Reagan administration officials said the U.S. would deal &quot;seriously&quot; with the planting of mines in the Persian Gulf, adding that U.S. intelligence indicates Iran may have placed mines in or near Kuwaiti waters. Separately, the White House said it regards the risk of attacks on U.S. military personnel in the gulf as &quot;low to moderate.&quot;    Pentagon sources said the skipper of the Stark would be relieved of his command before the ship sails for the U.S. from Bahrain. Separately, United Press International reported that the board of inquiry into May's Iraqi air attack on the frigate had recommended the skipper be court-martialed.    ---   Congressional investigators released Iran-Contra testimony by retired Air Force Lt. Col. Gadd, who said Secord sought to improve &quot;the image&quot; of the airlift supplying Nicaraguan rebels in an attempt to sell certain of the operation's assets to the CIA. The statements contradicted testimony by Secord.    ---   Researchers said an experiment in heart patients who have had bypass surgery showed that lowering blood cholesterol levels slows or even reverses the clogging of coronary arteries.    ---   The American Jewish Congress said it would boycott a fall meeting in the U.S. of Jewish leaders and Pope John Paul II to protest the pope's planned audience next week with Waldheim. The group said the meeting with Austria's president, accused of involvement in Nazi crimes, would desecrate the memory of Holocaust victims.    ---   The Warsaw Pact has shown signs of joining the West's war against terrorism, including an exchange of data on anti-terrorist techniques, and Syria recently curbed activities of the Palestinian terrorist Abu Nidal, U.S. officials said. The East bloc's moves prompted the U.S. not to publish a report on Abu Nidal.    ---   The Pentagon said Marine Staff Sgt. Robert Stufflebeam, a former U.S. Embassy guard in Moscow, has been ordered to stand trial on charges of improper fraternization with Soviet women. Another guard, Sgt. Clayton Lonetree, has been charged with espionage. Charges have been dropped against a third, Cpl. Arnold Bracy.    ---   An opposition coalition in India appeared headed for a landslide victory in a state-assembly election in Haryana. As the vote count from Wednesday's election continued, the alliance had won 37 seats and was leading in the race for 39 others. Prime Minister Gandhi's Congress (I) Party has ruled Haryana since 1979.    ---   A federal grand jury has begun looking into allegations that Los Angeles-based Northrop Corp. improperly accounted for parts and labor under Air Force contracts for guidance system equipment for the MX missile.    ---   Three Argentine federal courts ruled constitutional a new law that grants immunity to most officers accused of human-rights abuses during the 1976-83 military rule. The measure was passed by Congress this month at the behest of President Alfonsin.    ---   Norway's prime minister told Reagan that Oslo had dealt inadequately with the illegal sale of sensitive technology to the Soviet Union and pledged stricter curbs. In Tokyo, officials said Toshiba had admitted to more illegal exports to Moscow of data used to make quieter submarine propellers.    ---   Vietnam named an ailing former Viet Cong guerrilla leader as prime minister in what appeared to be a transitional appointment. Hanoi also named a new president. In Singapore, Secretary of State Shultz met with representatives of noncommunist Southeast Asian nations and urged Vietnam to withdraw its troops from Cambodia.    ---   Bahamian politicians ended campaigning for today's general elections. The campaign has been dominated by the issue of drug smuggling and corruption. Prime Minister Pindling is expected to face his toughest challenge in two decades of power.    ---   U.S. and Canadian astronomers said they have found the strongest evidence yet of possible planets outside the solar system, discovering signs that celestial bodies are orbiting as many as seven stars. The objects are believed to be gaseous, Jupiter-like bodies, the joint research team said.    ---   Federal officials said reputed Philadelphia mob boss Nicodemo Scarfo and 27 others have been indicted for participating in an international drug operation. Scarfo, who was convicted last month in an extortion attempt, currently is facing murder charges.    ---   Israel has granted visas to allow a Soviet delegation to visit the Jewish state. A date for the visit hasn't been set. Officials in Jerusalem also said that a group of Israelis would travel to Moscow next month. The visits are considered a sign of improvement in ties between the two nations, which were severed after the 1967 Arab-Israeli war. </TEXT></DOC>