<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881014-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Loss of Control: First Boston's Slide Into Swiss Hands Is Laid To Poor Management --- Turf Wars and Huge Gambles In Trading Are Blamed; Too Little Soul-Searching --- Big Losses Sparked Turmoil </HL><AUTHOR> Steve Swartz and Matthew Winkler (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FBC </CO><IN> BNK SCR TNM PRO BIO </IN><TEXT>   Just two years ago, everyone on Wall Street seemed to want to work at First Boston Inc. In 1986, one of every 10 members of the Yale College graduating class applied for a job at what appeared to be the pinnacle of the glamorous, lucrative field of investment banking.    First Boston's triumphs during the 1980s, especially its dominance of the Eurobond market and its huge success in the burgeoning field of mergers and acquisitions, had stunned competitors.    Behind those successes and thanks to a raging bull market, First Boston had become a leading trader of mortgage-backed securities. It was close to becoming the country's leading securities underwriter. And it was betting its own capital on risky bond trades -- and winning big.    Wall Street hailed First Boston's gruff chief executive, Peter T. Buchanan, a former stock trader who in eight years had transformed a once-sleepy firm. Planning to retire in 1989 to his fishing cottage in upstate New York, he needed just three more good years and &quot;Pete would have marched out of here a hero,&quot; says a member of the firm's management committee.    But last Sunday, a very different, humbler First Boston agreed to a $1.1 billion merger with its European affiliate, Credit Suisse First Boston, in effect ceding control over the combined companies to the big Swiss bank, Credit Suisse. When Mr. Buchanan retires next year at age 55, he will be replaced not by his hand-picked successor but by Credit Suisse's choice, 52-year-old John Hennessy. Of Mr. Buchanan's three closest aides, only one was offered a role in the new firm.    Like many Wall Street firms, First Boston was battered in the late 1980s by forces outside its control: a devastating bond-market slump, a plunge in the mortgage market and, of course, last October's stock-market crash. But First Boston's biggest problem was its own management.    Having changed so much in the mid-1980s, the firm needed a different type of leadership, according to several inside and outside observers. In recent months, Mr. Buchanan and his management team couldn't hold together a firm whose very success made it vulnerable to vaunting egos, turf wars and overreaching gambles for ever bigger profits.    &quot;The business has changed, and their time has passed,&quot; is the assessment by Samuel Hayes, a Harvard Business School professor. Says one of Mr. Buchanan's senior officials, &quot;Pete's style didn't change, and that caused him problems.&quot;    Surprisingly, Mr. Buchanan himself made the change in leadership possible. Ever the calm, pragmatic trader filling the executive floor with cigar smoke, Mr. Buchanan himself pushed hardest for the merger. And he himself had to keep the reluctant, ever-cautious Swiss from backing away from a deal that gives them effective control over the U.S. securities firm. Mr. Buchanan's supporters argue that if the new firm succeeds, it will be much stronger than First Boston ever was and will restore Mr. Buchanan's luster.    Says Mr. Buchanan himself, &quot;When I leave, this firm is going to be in terrific shape, and as far as I'm concerned, that's how you judge what I've done.&quot;    Adds Mr. Hennessy: &quot;We made an assessment we'd better change our structure. We didn't feel we had to do something because we were wounded or hurting or dying or desperate. We thought anything we are going to do would be done out of offensive, not defensive, reasons.&quot;    Mr. Buchanan, the Princeton-educated son of a former Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. research analyst, had worked as a First Boston trader for his entire career when he was tapped in 1978 as the firm's president. Sober, stern and reassuring, he was the perfect complement to First Boston's bowtie-sporting chairman, George Shinn.    Somewhat detached but clearly a visionary, Mr. Shinn had come in from Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. three years before. It was Mr. Shinn who hatched the idea of First Boston's alliance with Credit Suisse. He was also the prime backer of a rumpled securities lawyer, Bruce Wasserstein, and a lanky former accountant, Joseph Perella, who were trying to launch a mergers-and-acquisitions practice.    But it was Mr. Buchanan who made the operation work. &quot;I think Pete took the bank to tremendous heights,&quot; says Richard Cyert, a First Boston director and the president of Carnegie-Mellon University.    In the early 1980s, Mr. Shinn wanted to step aside, and Mr. Buchanan had to find another management partner. Since Mr. Buchanan's background was in trading, it was understood that, for balance, he would pick an investment banker.    But the shining star of the investment-banking operation was Mr. Hennessy, a man who could hardly be more different from Mr. Buchanan. After graduating from Harvard, Mr. Hennessy worked in South America for Citibank, as a consultant at Arthur D. Little Inc. and as assistant secretary of the Treasury for international affairs in the Nixon administration.    While Mr. Buchanan enjoys fishing and Sunday football games, Mr. Hennessy is an avid political fund-raiser (his current efforts are on behalf of Vice President George Bush) and a world traveler who plays tennis with opera star Luciano Pavarotti. While Mr. Buchanan looks every inch the businessman, Mr. Hennessy's movie-star looks are &quot;right out of central casting,&quot; a First Boston official comments. And while Mr. Buchanan is a man of few words and so humorless that even friends speak of the &quot;Pete Buchanan book of jokes -- the one with no pages,&quot; Mr. Hennessy is described as a &quot;cheerleader&quot; who loves to banter with employees and clients.    Passing over Mr. Hennessy, Mr. Buchanan chose as his right-hand man a longtime First Boston executive, Alvin Shoemaker, a tall, unfailingly pleasant municipal-finance specialist who had just completed a brief stint away from the firm as the head of Blyth Eastman Dillon Inc. After that securities firm was taken over by PaineWebber Inc., Mr. Shoemaker returned to First Boston and became its chairman in 1983, when Mr. Buchanan was promoted to chief executive. Mr. Hennessy was sent to London to run the then-stumbling affiliate, Credit Suisse First Boston.    The next three years were smashing successes for First Boston and its European affiliate. But by 1986, big problems began to surface. That spring and summer, one of the firm's fastest-growing operations, the risky mortgage-backed securities business, was socked with a combined loss of more than $100 million when interest rates swung sharply. The loss was the harbinger of several in fixed-income trading.    In addition, profit margins in stock and bond trading were narrowing. And underwriting competition had sliced fees so thin that, to some staffers, First Boston's goal of becoming the leading U.S. underwriter seemed a money-losing proposition.    Still, First Boston did little, if any, soul-searching. Mr. Buchanan had built the firm by giving managers leeway to grow, and he wasn't about to change.    But the biggest problem was the constant warfare between old-line employees and a new, brash breed of entrepreneurs who were becoming increasingly responsible for the firm's success at home and abroad. Mr. Buchanan didn't understand that the squabbling could damage the organization, people close to him say.    The merger wizard, Mr. Wasserstein, often complained about what he saw as the disorganized leadership of the investment-banking group by Anthony Grassi. Mr. Wasserstein's merger people and Mr. Grassi's investment bankers frequently argued in front of clients.    Mr. Wasserstein won this battle, and he and Mr. Perella took over Mr. Grassi's job; Mr. Grassi was shunted into a secondary role. Once in charge of all of investment banking, however, Mr. Wasserstein became just as dissatisfied with his new boss, the genial, unassertive chairman, Mr. Shoemaker.    Says Mr. Grassi, now the chairman of the management committee: &quot;He pushed me out of a job. He wanted to destroy Shoemaker. Bruce chafed under reporting to Shoemaker and did everything he could to undermine his authority. He saw me as a threat because I was parallel to him and he was unwilling to work with me or for me.&quot;    Turmoil also hit the trading desks, where the volatile but talented new head of stock trading, former Morgan Stanley official Luis Mendez, was squabbling with his boss, Francis Jenkins.    Mr. Jenkins, a bond specialist and easygoing Southerner, had been Mr. Mendez's superior years earlier at a smaller firm, F.S. Smithers andamp; Co., and Mr. Mendez had left after a feud. The fighting continued at First Boston. To all who would listen, Mr. Jenkins would say he had fired Mr. Mendez at Smithers, while Mr. Mendez would say he had quit. At First Boston, the two men's subordinates joined the feud, and the bond and stock traders were at war.    Despite the tension, First Boston senior executives rarely had a substantive discussion about their business, officials say. The 18-member management committee was &quot;nothing but a luncheon club,&quot; according to a former member. Some members now say they were afraid to talk about anything important for fear that internal rivals would relay it to the press.    Others say Mr. Buchanan, shy despite his gruff exterior and uncomfortable with heated exchanges, would quash any that threatened to surface. Even Mr. Buchanan concedes that the management committee contained &quot;a bunch of individuals out for their own priorities,&quot; a situation he says has changed now that &quot;you've got a real team there.&quot;    The strange quiet that reigned over management-committee meetings was disturbed in July 1987, when Mr. Wasserstein, just back from a vacation and celebrating his 10th anniversary with the firm, questioned its entire strategic focus in an unexpected monologue.    He was furious that the bond-trading operation, under Mr. Jenkins, had recently lost another $100 million when some loosely supervised traders bet wrong on Treasury-bond options. Mr. Wasserstein pressed for a major reallocation of resources from low-profit businesses into high-profit ones -- such as his investment banking, which was providing half the firm's earnings. Further raising the tension, Mr. Wasserstein singled out Mr. Jenkins's rival, Mr. Mendez, for praise.    The speech angered Mr. Buchanan, who cut it off with a curt statement that First Boston would remain committed to all its business units. He and other traditionalists made light of the uproar and called it &quot;The Great Muppet Caper.&quot;    But it was difficult for Mr. Buchanan and his two merger stars to understand each other. Both younger men lived in fancy Manhattan apartments and spent weekends at sumptuous homes in ultra-chic East Hampton, N.Y. They were sold on the limitless potential of their own abilities. As Mr. Perella said in mid-1987, &quot;We're going to be getting into things nobody ever imagined.&quot; For someone such as Mr. Buchanan, who has lived in the same New Jersey home for more than 20 years, such talk just didn't make sense.    Still, both sides agreed to smooth over their differences and await the results of a strategic review of the firm, to be completed in January 1988.    Meanwhile, trouble was brewing in London. Mr. Hennessy's Credit Suisse First Boston had achieved record earnings largely by underwriting international bond offerings. But by 1986, Japanese and other competitors had entered the market, narrowing profit margins for all. CSFB went searching for new products.    That strategy brought CSFB head-on with the increasingly global orientation of First Boston, which also wanted to do global underwriting and mergers. Many squabbles broke out. First Boston and CSFB bankers called on the same clients. They argued over who would handle foreign-currency trading and interest-rate swaps.    Moreover, CSFB had its own array of talented prima donnas. Hans-Joerg Rudloff, the German-born CSFB deputy chairman, completed deals by day and talked about them into the wee hours of the morning with a group of loyal followers at Annabel's nightclub in London. Michael von Clemm, then CSFB's chairman, insisted on being addressed as &quot;Doctor&quot; because of his Ph.D. in anthropology; he once led a group of clients on a climb up Tanzania's Mount Kilimanjaro.    Mr. Hennessy, with his international flair, managed to retain the loyalty of this egocentric group and maintain correct but cool relations with New York. But Mr. Hennessy's troops blamed their difficulties on what they perceived to be the uncooperative spirit of Mr. Buchanan and his aides. A CSFB official told a reporter in 1986: &quot;Buchanan doesn't understand anything about global markets. That's the mind-set {in New York}. They don't understand how valuable CSFB is to their franchise.&quot;    Mr. Buchanan told board members in 1986 that he considered a divorce of the two companies likely. But that was risky because CSFB's 40% stake in First Boston might fall into truly hostile hands. And a divorce would weaken both companies.    So, surprisingly, by mid-1987 the two sides began seeing a merger as the only answer. But each had its own idea about who should take over whom. &quot;We just assumed we would take over CSFB,&quot; says a former First Boston management-committee member. CSFB was smaller.    But the merger talks avoided the question of First Boston's basic business thrust. That question was answered in January 1988, when the strategic review declared that no major changes were needed. The consequences were thunderous.    Messrs. Wasserstein and Perella were beside themselves. In early February, they walked into Mr. Buchanan's office and resigned. That shook the firm to its foundation; to many corporate clients, Messrs. Wasserstein and Perella were First Boston. The pair took more than a dozen staffers with them and also set off an avalanche of other high-level defections.    To many at First Boston, a merger with CSFB now was more important than ever. Mr. Buchanan pushed for it tenaciously, even though it required tough personal decisions. &quot;I did what I thought was right for the firm,&quot; Mr. Buchanan says. &quot;That's what the job's for. It's not for your personal priorities. I fully endorsed Hennessy. If I hadn't supported Hennessy for the job, he wouldn't be getting it.&quot;    Effective control would go to the persistent but still-nervous Swiss, who as late as last week threatened to drop the deal because they feared the admittedly remote possibility that an outside firm could take over the merged company.    There would be no role for one of Mr. Buchanan's closest aides, Mr. Jenkins, who quit last month. And Mr. Shoemaker would have to go as well. People close to the situation say that Mr. Shoemaker never emerged as a tough manager or a visionary leader and that he was badly bruised by battles with Mr. Wasserstein.    Says Mr. Shoemaker: &quot;I'm tired. I'm tired of trying to manage a guy like Bruce Wasserstein. It takes a lot out of you. These are very difficult people.&quot;    The merger, announced last Sunday, was praised by some analysts and competitors. In going private, the combined company will try to create a partnership culture that, by giving employees the right to pocket a much bigger share of the firm's earnings, may encourage more cooperation among rival factions.    As for Mr. Buchanan, the day after the deal was formally signed, he and his wife headed off to do some fishing.    ---   Craig Forman in London contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>