<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880422-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Cost vs. Care --- Benefits Update: Corporate Medical Benefits Are Changing Rapidly; Here's What's Hot at the Moment </HL><AUTHOR> Clare Ansberry </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> PHA INS </IN><TEXT>      Preventive Programs   Companies expand employee &quot;wellness&quot; programs to improve worker life styles and detect illness early. Most widely offered are tests to screen for such conditions as high blood pressure and cancer, and smoking-cessation programs.    Fitness remains an employee favorite, but companies prefer subsidizing club memberships over providing elaborate gyms.    Nutrition takes a back seat. &quot;People still don't consider being overweight a health problem,&quot; says Karen Glanz, a Temple University health educator. But concerns about cholesterol boost diet-related issues. John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance hosts high-fiber, low-salt and low-fat cooking classes; Johnson andamp; Johnson installs scales in restrooms. Weight Watchers International conducts classes at several companies, but male executives prefer weight-loss contests.    Preventive health-care programs are &quot;an important source of cost containment in the long run,&quot; says Lance Tane, a Wyatt Co. consultant. But some firms question the value of wellness efforts, contending that workers job hop so often that employers who invest in long-term health won't reap the benefits. That, says Deborah Chollet, senior research associate at the Employee Benefit Research Institute, &quot;is the ultimate in cynicism.&quot;    Retiree Health   As costs rise, companies are making new efforts to keep retirees and older workers fit. At Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber, &quot;retreads&quot; (as they're tagged) attend the corporate fitness center for such activities as brisk walking and folk-dancing groups. Steelcase has aerobics classes and an aquatics fitness class for retirees. Kimberly-Clark invites retirees to its cardiac rehabilitation program for group warm-ups and individualized programs using fitness machines and the company track and pool. Rohm andamp; Haas provides complete physical exams and blood work to screen for illness at its Knoxville, Tenn., plant.    Some employers focus their wellness efforts on older employees because retirees often move to places where it is difficult to monitor their health or influence their behavior. Older workers at Levi Strauss plants in San Francisco are given diabetes and colo-rectal screenings in addition to regular blood-pressure tests. Tenneco developed a four-hour course for older workers focusing on such subjects as arthritis, osteoporosis and proper nutrition.    Long-Term Care   Employee worries about future nursing-home bills prompt a handful of companies to offer insurance for long-term care. Medicare doesn't pay most nursing-home costs, and Medicaid pays only once an individual's savings are virtually gone.    Last year only Eastman Kodak provided any company-paid benefit: a $6,000 subsidy for nursing-home care. But seven more employers, including American Express and Procter andamp; Gamble, have initiated employee-funded long-term care programs. The Washington Business Group on Health says that the companies' group programs cost about 30% less than individual policies in part because the employers pay some administrative costs. Early concerns that younger employees might not be interested in such a plan seem unfounded; 20% of Pandamp;G employees 40-to-59 years old enlisted.    While few companies offer long-term care as such, many have increased benefits for home health care and hospices. Others provide support groups for employees who are primary care-givers of frail parents or spouses with Alzheimer's disease.    Other Efforts   Unions and health: Organized labor adopts its own health-care programs. The Chicago Teachers Union started a teacher-support network and a stress hot line. The United Auto Workers offers blood-pressure screening at four plants. The United Storeworkers Union operates work-site clinics to teach retail clerks how to detect the first signs of breast cancer, while the International Ladies Garment Workers Union offers classes on correct ways of lifting and sitting.    ---   Small businesses adopt low-cost ways to promote wellness. At First Interstate Bank in Santa Fe, N.M., fresh fruit is available Wednesday mornings for employees. Result: doughnut consumption dips 75%. A food-packing plant in Glencoe, Minn., reserves the high-school pool for employee use one hour each work night from October through May. Sky Brothers Inc. in Altoona, Pa., helps with smoking-cessation classes. Healthy workers are especially important at smaller concerns since one employee often handles several different jobs.    ---   Do-it-yourself: Some companies are finding that home intravenous therapy sharply reduces hospital costs. Thanks to improved infusion and catheter devices and new drugs, more patients needing intravenous antibiotics and prescription drugs are taking their I.V.'s home. The home I.V. is especially suited when prolonged treatment is required, such as for growth-stunted children requiring frequent hormone injections. Annual revenues for the home I.V. market are expected to exceed $2 billion by 1990.    ---   AIDS: The deadly illness still isn't a major expense issue for most companies, maintains Willis Goldbeck, president of the Washington Business Group on Health. Smaller companies, though, can literally be wiped out by one AIDS case, especially as new drugs prolong victims' lives without offering any real improvement. Some companies battle AIDS with increased drug-abuse programs. A growing concern: AIDS-infected mothers and children.    ---   Early retirees' health-care costs are underestimated by one-third of employers offering early-retirement incentives, one survey finds. Companies are also supporting more retirees. In 1960, the typical U.S. company had one retiree for each 10 to 15 active employees, but now that ratio is one retiree for every three workers. In some older industrial concerns with little turnover, the ratio is 1-to-1, says the Washington Business Group on Health. </TEXT></DOC>