<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880315-0034 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHAMIR ARRIVED in Washington, saying he had new ideas for Mideast peace.    The Israeli prime minister, at the start of a four-day official visit, indicated that he wouldn't respond directly to a U.S. plan for talks with the Arabs. Shultz, who meets with Shamir today, is expected to use friendly persuasion, rather than blunt pressure, to try to induce Israel to accept the U.S. plan, which is aimed at ending unrest in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Moreover, the secretary of state has dropped the previous U.S. insistence that Israel and the Arabs either accept or reject the American peace plan this week.    Israel imposed a nightly curfew on the Gaza Strip to try to contain unrest. In the West Bank, at least 11 Arabs were wounded by Israeli gunfire.    ---   Panamanian riot police clashed with public employees in the streets of Panama City as strikes and demonstrations were staged to protest the Noriega regime's failure to meet its payroll obligations. There weren't any reports of injuries or arrests. The government has said it doesn't have the funds to meet this week's $33 million payroll.    The Pentagon sent about 100 Marine and Air Force security personnel to Panama. It described the move as a &quot;prudent measure&quot; to help safeguard Americans in the country. Meanwhile, the U.S. hinted that it may be reassessing its position on seeking extradition of Noriega on drug charges if the Panamanian military leader flees to Spain.    ---   Gorbachev toured Belgrade at the start of a tour of Yugoslavia, which has tested some of the economic changes the Soviet official supports. Gorbachev, the first Kremlin leader to visit Yugoslavia since Tito's death in 1980, acknowledged Soviet ethnic problems, but said protesters hadn't challenged the government's authority.    ---   Cuomo indicated he probably won't back a Democratic presidential candidate until after the final June primaries. The New York governor also dismissed suggestions that he had been leaning toward Dukakis, and denied rumors that he is withholding an endorsement in the hope that the party would turn to him.    Bush was expected to win today's GOP primary in Illinois, with polls giving the vice president a wide lead over rival Dole. Among the Democrats, surveys showed that Jackson and Simon were about even. Dukakis was expected to place third.    ---   The U.S. became the first major producer and consumer of ozone-depleting chemicals to ratify a treaty limiting their production. The move came on an 83-0 vote in the Senate. Thirty-one countries have signed the treaty, reached in Montreal last September, to curb the global use of chlorofluorocarbons.    ---   The Senate approved a provision that would reserve 4,800 conditional visas each year for immigrants who invest at least $1 million in a business in the U.S. that creates jobs for 10 or more American citizens or legal residents. Critics said the measure, cleared 51-33, would put U.S. citizenships up for sale.    ---   Rep. Peter Rodino yielded to pressure from some minority constituents and said he won't seek a 21st term in Congress. The 78-year-old New Jersey Democrat, who headed the House's impeachment hearings of Nixon, said he would retire in January.    ---   South Africa's foreign minister said a peace plan proposed by Angola didn't include a timetable for the withdrawal of about 40,000 Cuban troops in that country. Roelof Botha, saying such a schedule was crucial, made his remarks after meeting in Geneva with Assistant Secretary of State Crocker.    ---   Pressure mounted on Pakistan to sign an accord aimed at securing the withdrawal of about 115,000 Soviet troops from neighboring Afghanistan, but Islamabad appeared to be sticking to its demand for a new government in Kabul to oversee the pullout. Moscow indicated it would begin the withdrawal May 15 if a pact were signed by today.    ---   The PLO's envoy to the U.N. declared that he would defy Friday's U.S. order to close the organization's mission by next Monday. Zehdi Labib Terzi, citing the PLO's accreditation to the U.N., said U.S. authorities would have to use force to close the mission. Meese ordered the closure Friday under a 1987 anti-terrorism law.    ---   Reagan contended that his space-based antimissile system has progressed more rapidly than previously anticipated, and he criticized Congress for being &quot;irresponsible&quot; by cutting spending for the program. The president's comments came as part of an administration drive aimed at assuring the five-year-old program's survival.    ---   Iraqi missiles struck Tehran, and Baghdad's jets launched raids on six Iranian towns. An official said the attacks were in retaliation for Iran's violation Sunday of an unofficial truce against civilian targets. Iran shelled Baghdad and threatened to turn the Iraqi capital into an &quot;inferno.&quot;    ---   Biaggi's defense attorney said that former Wedtech officials had tried to bribe high-ranking White House officials, including Meese, in an attempt to remain out of jail. The remarks were made at the start of the New York congressman's corruption trial. Meese's attorney denied any involvement by the attorney general.    ---   Italy's President Cossiga began three days of political consultations aimed at finding a successor to Prime Minister Goria, who stepped down last week after eight months in office. Cossiga faces some difficulties since the Socialists, the second largest party in Rome's five-party government, have threatened to quit the coalition.    ---   Colombia's ruling party lost municipal elections in Bogota and Medellin, the South American country's two biggest cities, to the opposition Conservatives. Despite the setback in Sunday's balloting, the Liberals remain Colombia's main political party. </TEXT></DOC>