<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870115-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE CIA PLAYED a larger role than disclosed in arming Nicaraguan rebels.    Data gathered by federal and congressional investigators suggests that the CIA's role in recruiting, training and arming the Contras was greater than the White House or CIA has acknowledged. Sources said that the FBI early last year urged a federal grand jury to probe allegations that CIA agents were involved in hiring mercenaries and shipping weapons to the rebels in violation of federal laws, but that the U.S. attorney's office in Miami resisted such suggestions.    The independent counsel and the Senate select panel want to determine what part the CIA played in aiding the Contras and how aggressively the Justice Department pursued its inquiries.    ---   China expelled from the Communist Party a well-known Shanghai writer for his &quot;bourgeois liberal&quot; views. The announcement by the Xinhua News Agency coincided with speculation that party leader Hu Yaobang also would be ousted. He reportedly is in political trouble for his handling of recent pro-democracy student demonstrations.    ---   Moscow called for a one-on-one meeting between the heads of the U.S. and Soviet arms-control delegations, which begin a round of talks today in Geneva. The two sides had planned to begin with a meeting of full teams. Meanwhile, the U.S. defended its decision to retain its chief negotiator despite a Soviet call for a higher-level official.    ---   Iran said it recaptured strategic positions from Iraqi troops in a new offensive northeast of Baghdad, but Iraq said it repulsed the assault. Iran also said it hit the Iraqi capital with a missile for the second consecutive day, while Baghdad said its planes bombed Iranian cities.    Iraq's oil minister defended Saudi Arabia against charges that it is selling refined products to Iran to hedge its bets on the outcome of the gulf war. Some Arabs view such sales as a sign of appeasement toward Tehran's Islamic regime.    ---   Federal rail officials said the engineer and the brakeman of a Conrail locomotive involved in a collision with an Amtrak train both tested positive for marijuana. It was unclear whether the presence of the drug might have contributed to the Jan. 4 crash near Baltimore, in which 16 people were killed.    ---   Authorities in San Juan have charged a second employee of the Dupont Plaza hotel with arson in the New Year's Eve fire in which 96 people died. The hotel busboy, a Teamsters union member, was charged with providing the fuel and helping a maintenance worker who is charged with setting the blaze. More arrests are expected.    ---   Jaruzelski met with Italian labor officials, who urged the Polish leader to lift a ban on the Solidarity trade union. Jaruzelski called such a move unrealistic. Before leaving Rome for Warsaw, he also said progress had been made in improving ties with the Catholic Church, and confirmed that he had invited the pope to visit Poland in June.    ---   Philippine President Aquino announced plans for local elections to be held Aug. 24, the first such balloting since 1980. Separately, Moslem rebels blew up bridges and downed power lines in four southern provinces. The attacks were staged in advance of a weekend visit to the region by Aquino. Troops were ordered into the area.    ---   Anglican envoy Terry Waite reported &quot;good progress&quot; in efforts to free Americans and others held hostage in Lebanon, despite the Shiite Amal militia's rejection of his request for aid. In Beirut, Arab League mediators arrived to help end 10 weeks of fighting between Shiite Moslem militiamen and Palestinian guerrillas.    ---   The State Department has launched a damage-assessment investigation following the arrest in Vienna last month of a Marine guard at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. The Marine, charged with espionage, is suspected of letting Soviet spies into embassies in the Soviet Union and Austria.    ---   NASA engineers are proceeding with tentative plans to equip the space shuttle Discovery with an escape system for the astronauts, according to an official at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. A test firing of Discovery's rockets probably will be needed, and engineers believe such tests will delay the launch, set for Feb. 18, 1988.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett was told by Democratic and GOP members of two Senate panels that Congress will reject his plan to cut education spending by nearly 30%. Plans to slash college student-aid programs by 45% and to eliminate federal vocational-education funding were particularly hard hit by senators.    ---   The U.S. is launching an effort to persuade nonaligned nations to join in controlling the shipment of strategic goods to the Soviet bloc. A Commerce Department official said the administration will propose steps next month to attain allied cooperation in an effort to include the independent countries.    ---   South Africa said it was studying the impact that its censorship measures would have on a planned whites-only general election this year. Critics have said the restrictions would result in a &quot;gagged election.&quot; In Johannesburg, two large newspaper groups filed court applications challenging Pretoria's latest emergency press curbs.    ---   Shultz urged President Doe of Liberia to adopt new policies to reverse the West African country's economic decline. The secretary of state met with Doe during the last stop of a six-nation visit to Africa.    ---   Afghan rebel leaders said they were drafting a unified proposal for a political solution to Afghanistan's civil war as an alternative to a rejected truce call from the Kabul government. Despite the guerrilla rejection, Afghan leader Najibullah again called for a cease-fire and said his troops were preparing to begin the truce today.    ---   U.S. envoy Murphy ended a weeklong tour of the Mideast, indicating that he had made little progress in peace efforts. He said, however, that U.S. efforts to bridge differences in the region would continue. </TEXT></DOC>