<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880608-0021 </DOCNO><HL> Seoul Brother: Northrop Signed On Secret Lobbyist to Try To Sell F-20 to Korea --- Its Man, a Nightclub Owner With Important Friends, Stood to Earn $55 Million --- Several Inquiries Under Way --- This article was prepared by Wall Street Journal staff reporters Eileen White Read in Los Angeles And Joseph P. Manguno in Seoul </HL><SO> </SO><CO> NOC FREST </CO><IN> ARO REL </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Park Chong Kyu, a former South Korean presidential aide and national assemblyman, was a well-known Mr. Fixit with many powerful friends.    Businessmen from around the globe cut deals and met ladies of the evening at his Seoul night spot, the Safari Club. He was right-hand man to one Korean president. And the next president, Chun Doo Hwan, chose him to serve as second-in-command of the prestigious Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee.    The late Mr. Park also had a secret. He was a Northrop Corp. lobbyist who stood to earn as much as a stunning $55 million for helping sell Northrop's F-20 fighter planes to his friends in the Korean government.    Desperate to recoup more than $1 billion invested in developing the fighter, Northrop quietly hired Mr. Park five years ago in a highly unusual arrangement that has only recently come to light. Mr. Park died two years later at age 55, without selling a single plane. But Northrop's dealings with him, including $7.75 million in questionable payments it made to firms he controlled, have touched off a series of inquiries that could lead to broader investigations of foreign transactions in the U.S. and Korea:   --In Washington, the House Energy and Commerce Committee is looking into a $6.25 million Northrop deposit in a Hong Kong bank in 1984 that may have violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Northrop says the money was supposed to help build a Korean hotel; Park associates claim it was spent in an effort to promote the F-20.    --In Los Angeles, the executive committee of Northrop's board, without public notice, has conducted a two-year investigation of the company's Korean dealings. Three executives who were involved in the Park affair, including Northrop's chief financial officer, have taken early retirement in recent weeks.    --In Seoul, the Korean prosecutor's office has been looking into the Northrop matter as part of a wider investigation into alleged abuses by the Chun administration. The larger probe already has resulted in the arrests of a brother of the former president and a former mayor of Seoul on charges unrelated to Northrop. A special committee of the national assembly will soon begin its own investigation.    Northrop's Korean dealings come to light at a time when the company's veteran chairman, Thomas V. Jones, already is under intense pressure from Pentagon officials to shape up performance and reduce costs on numerous troubled projects, including the company's $46 billion Stealth bomber project. There have been some calls from procurement officials for the resignation of Mr. Jones, who at age 67 has ruled Northrop for 28 years.    Mr. Jones declined to be interviewed for this article. A Northrop spokesman stated that the company didn't make any improper payments. The spokesman declined to answer certain questions, citing litigation in Korea.    Western diplomats and other observers say the Northrop situation could be a test case of how far the government of South Korea's newly elected President Roh Tae Woo will go in investigating questionable matters that touch his old friend and political patron, former President Chun.    The Northrop probe &quot;is a political hot potato&quot; in Seoul, says Daryl Plunk, a Washington consultant who has frequent business dealings in Korea. &quot;My reading is, the president does not want to see his old friend dragged into a public forum.&quot;    The Northrop-Park affair is beginning to echo the giant foreign payoff scandals of the mid-1970s, when dozens of U.S. companies, including Northrop, admitted making improper foreign payments and the actions of officials and power brokers in a score of countries were called into question. It was an era when Northrop maintained a hunting lodge and corporate yacht to entertain visiting military officials and Mr. Jones pleaded guilty to a felony count for creating a secret political slush fund.    Mr. Jones was called before congressional committees to answer allegations of illegal foreign payoffs. A 1977 investigation by the company's board identified $2 million in such payments, including a $450,000 bribe to two Saudi Arabian generals made through arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi. There were millions more in questionable payments, many of them in countries that bought Northrop's F-5 airplane, precursor to the F-20.    The Securities and Exchange Commission sued Northrop for failing to disclose its political slush fund and failing to keep track of about $30 million in payments to consultants. Without admitting or denying guilt, Northrop signed a consent decree promising not to violate securities law.    Interviews with former associates of Mr. Park and with American businessmen in Korea suggest why both parties to the lobbying arrangement might have chosen to keep their pairing a secret.    Mr. Park's Olympics post was a high-profile honorary title that he wanted to protect from scandal, his former associates say. He spoke English well, knew most of his nation's powerful men and hoped to use his Olympics contacts to make even more powerful connections around the world, they say. The period of his dealings with Northrop was especially sensitive, because he had just been named to represent Korea on the International Olympic Committee.    But the gregarious former army colonel, known to Americans as C.K. Park, had another side. As chief of bodyguards under President Park Chung Hee, who was assassinated in 1979, he was remembered for a fondness for guns that earned him the nickname Pistol Park. Associates say he was also a bully who gave the home-affairs minister a black eye for allowing student dissent to get out of control and who once kicked an Air Force chief of staff in the knees for failing to please the president.    In 1973 Mr. Park sheltered Chun Doo Hwan in Mr. Park's home when the military was looking for those involved in an alleged coup attempt. After Mr. Chun became president, former associates say, he returned the favor. During a government &quot;purification&quot; campaign in 1980, officials investigating influence peddling placed Mr. Park under house arrest and demanded that he turn over more than $2 million of allegedly ill-gotten real-estate holdings amassed in his hometown. Although most other officials detained at the time were treated harshly, Mr. Park was released after the president interceded.    At the same time, Mr. Park's Safari Club, situated in the district where wealthy foreigners live, became a hangout that offered drinks, gambling and playgirls. It was also a place where international arms traders met government and business leaders. And it was a vehicle for Mr. Park, who associates say was a friend of the globe-trotting Mr. Khashoggi, to promote himself as a budding arms merchant.    On occasion, Mr. Park himself livened up the atmosphere by drawing his pistols and shooting out the mirrors behind the bar. &quot;I was invited to the Safari Club, but it wasn't the kind of place I wanted my company to be known in,&quot; says a U.S. aerospace executive who regularly visits Seoul. People who worked in the American Embassy at the time say they would have been surprised if any U.S. company admitted publicly that it hired Mr. Park as a marketing representative.    Northrop officials say they were introduced to Mr. Park in 1983 by a Korean-American consultant who lives in Honolulu, James K. Shin. Mr. Shin couldn't be reached for comment.    At the time Northrop hired Mr. Park, its salesmanship around the world was looking a bit tired. It had one customer for four of the F-20s, planes it was building on speculation without any of the usual U.S. government backing. Deals to sell the fighters in Egypt, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Taiwan were in trouble -- in some cases because the Reagan administration allowed the countries access to the more powerful General Dynamics Corp. F-16. Korea already had ordered F-16s, but officials were willing to take a look at the F-20 for future orders.    Congressional investigators have so far uncovered two Park-Northrop transactions, although Mr. Park's former associates claim there are others. In one, the company signed a lobbying contract with Mr. Park's brother-in-law, Lee Min Ha, who operated a bus company that Mr. Park controlled and wasn't involved in the arms trade. Northrop's official partner in a second transaction, the hotel venture, wasn't Mr. Park, either; it was a group of shareholders that included Mr. Park's wife and other relatives and associates.    At Northrop, red flags were raised when the lobbying contract was drafted. A former Northrop attorney, who attended a meeting of the company's aircraft-division executives before the document was signed, says he expressed alarm at the contract's free-wheeling language that promised as much as $55 million in sales commissions.    &quot;I told them they shouldn't sign the deal, and I had everybody mad at me,&quot; says the attorney. &quot;But you can't tell me you couldn't get a reputable person to do that work for considerably less. Once you're promising someone a sum that he can't possibly justify in terms of legitimate costs and a profit, there's a presumption he's going to make illegal payments.&quot;    The Northrop spokesman explains that Mr. Park was going to get that much money only if he sold 200 planes, and it would have represented only 2% of the value.    The spokesman says Northrop's other project with Mr. Park, the hotel venture, was intended to demonstrate the company's willingness to invest in Korea if the government would buy its planes. But Northrop officials neglected to include a single reference to the hotel project in two separate letters to Korean military officials, in which they described in detail nearly $10 million of investments they might consider making to clinch a sale.    The contract for the 50-50 hotel venture doesn't give Northrop officials any right to participate in management of the project and includes no oversight of the venture's finances, such as requiring both sides to sign disbursement checks, a typical protection used by American companies with their foreign consultants.    What's more, the hotel venture was approved by Northrop's board five days after the contract was signed in Korea. &quot;The directors were given a done deal to approve,&quot; says the former Northrop attorney. This lawyer, who says he helped draft the document, also asserts that some key wording was changed after it left his desk, saying: &quot;I wrote the agreement in such a way that we controlled all the money.&quot;    In making the hotel-venture payment to its partners, Northrop apparently disregarded advice from one of its Korean representatives. Shortly after directors gave their approval, Northrop got a cable from the representative alerting it that government records showed that the property on which the hotel was to be built -- which Northrop's partners had claimed was worth the equivalent of $6.25 million -- had an appraised value of less than $200,000. The representative also advised the company not to follow its partners' wishes to pay them by check outside Korea, because the Korean Ministry of Finance objected. Despite the warning, Northrop's chief financial officer, William G. McGagh, approved a check for $6.25 million to be deposited in a bank in Hong Kong.    Mr. McGagh didn't return telephone calls to his home in Los Angeles nor to his temporary office at Northrop headquarters. When his retirement from the company and its board was announced in April, a prepared statement gave no reason for his leaving early, at age 59. An individual close to the Northrop directors' investigation said another corporate officer with a role in the Korean affair, Executive Vice President Welko E. Gasich, would be leaving the company soon. Mr. Gasich couldn't be reached.    James Dorsey, a Honolulu-based Northrop marketing executive who had a role in the Park projects until he retired a few weeks ago, also couldn't be reached. Donald Foulds, a former Northrop international subcontracting official who approved the hotel venture, also took early retirement in April at age 63. In a brief telephone interview, Mr. Foulds said he understood that the hotel venture was related not to the F-20 but to sales of the F-5, which Korea has been buying for many years. &quot;I was given this thing as a project that had been checked out by somebody. I didn't do it.&quot;    Apparently, no one else did either, because Northrop's partners never produced blueprints, government approvals or plans for a hotel, a Northrop spokesman says. Individuals close to the investigation in Korea say the property presented to Northrop directors as the site of a future deluxe, seven-story hotel actually was the site of the notorious Safari Club, which Mr. Park had no intention of tearing down.    &quot;The whole thing just smells to high heaven,&quot; says John Bennett, a former U.S. government economics counselor in Korea who now represents Korean companies in Washington. &quot;But when you're selling military hardware, what do you do? Payments were an ancient and honorable tradition in the aircraft industry, and they were desperate to sell that plane.&quot;    Mr. Park apparently launched an enthusiastic lobbying effort for the F-20. In a letter written on his International Olympic Committee stationery, addressed to Northrop Chairman Jones, Mr. Park wrote that he had &quot;the continued assurance of President Chun Doo Hwan that the F-20 program is a 'go.'&quot; Mr. Park added, in an unexplained phrase, that he had &quot;guaranteed support where it counts most.&quot;    Several of Mr. Park's former associates have asserted, in interviews and in letters to Northrop officials obtained by this newspaper, that Mr. Park's services included at least two personal meetings with Northrop Chairman Jones, once during the 1984 Olympic games in Los Angeles and the following year at the Okura Hotel in Tokyo. The associates also say that Mr. Park arranged a private meeting between Mr. Jones and then-President Chun in Honolulu in May 1985.    The Korean prosecutor's office is looking into the Northrop deal, including allegations from several individuals that President Chun solicited an $8 million payment from Mr. Jones in the Honolulu meeting. The circumstances weren't clear, nor could it be determined what Mr. Chun allegedly said the payment was for. Mr. Chun couldn't immediately be reached for comment.    What else Mr. Park may have done on Northrop's behalf is for the moment a mystery. Investigators in Washington say they haven't found evidence so far that he made payments to Korean officials, which would be illegal under the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Representatives of the Korean prosecutor's office won't say whether their inquiries have led to government officials. In 1985, Mr. Park succumbed to liver cancer.    Northop's sales efforts were meeting sales setbacks during this time. An F-20 crashed during a demonstration in Korea in 1984. The following year, the same fate befell another F-20 on the way to the Paris Air Show, where Korean military officials -- who believed the earlier crash was the result of pilot error -- intended to give the plane another chance. Northrop ultimately mothballed the F-20 project, after writing off its $1.15 billion investment. Now, government investigators on both sides of the Pacific are trying to find out where some of that money went.    Kang Oh Hyun, a former aide to the late Mr. Park, asserted in a letter to Northrop's Mr. Foulds that the $6.25 million was never intended to build a hotel. The funds, he wrote, were spent as planned for &quot;Korean promotion of Northrop.&quot; Mr. Lee, the late lobbyist's brother-in-law, sent Northrop an itemized bill detailing claims for more than $16 million.    Mr. Lee was taken into government custody recently by the Korean prosecutor's office and hasn't been released. His bill claims that he and others paid for studies of the Korean hotel project and promotional activities for the F-20 as far afield as Singapore, Indonesia, Thailand and Panama. The billed items include chauffeur-driven automobiles for four lobbyists and $5 million in &quot;kimilbee.&quot; The word refers to non-itemized expenses for entertainment and gratuities, allowable under Korean tax law.    In the summer of 1986, Northrop officials paid $1.5 million to settle these claims. But a year later, Northrop asked the Korean Commercial Arbitration Association to hear a request to have the $6.25 million hotel-venture money returned. The claim is pending. Northrop says it also filed suit in a Seoul district court alleging that Mr. Park and his brother-in-law withdrew the hotel-venture money from the Hong Kong bank just a few weeks after Northrop made the deposit in 1984. About $3 million found its way to a Park bank account in Singapore, Northrop says.    Individuals familiar with the investigation conducted on behalf of Northrop's board said outside directors insisted that the company try to recover the money. &quot;Otherwise, it would look like they intended it as a lobbying fund all along,&quot; says one person familiar with the internal probe.    Mr. Kang and Mr. Park's widow, Lee Chong Won, and two of her sons are among those named in the suit. Mr. Kang couldn't be reached, and Mrs. Park didn't return a message left with guards at the gatehouse of her Seoul estate. But a friend of the family contacted a reporter to say that Mrs. Park &quot;doesn't want to get into a protracted fight with Northrop over this thing. If she has to sell some of her property to settle it, she's ready to do that.&quot;    The disclosures about Northrop's Korean connection have prompted the House Energy and Commerce Committee to reopen its inconclusive 1985 investigation into the activities of Yoon Eung Yul, a retired Korean general whose consulting firm collected at least $6.5 million in fees from General Dynamics and four subcontracting firms. Gen. Yoon worked on behalf of the team's F-16 at the same time that the late Mr. Park was promoting the competing Northrop plane.    Aides to the committee's chairman, Rep. John Dingell of Michigan, say he is also considering a new investigation of U.S. defense companies' foreign payments. After all, says one staff member, it has been 10 years since Congress last took a thorough look at the issue. </TEXT></DOC>