<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Sports (A Special Report): Doing It --- Excessive Accessories </HL><AUTHOR> Beatrice E. Garcia </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> BLY WELL SHRP </CO><IN> PHA EDP ELE </IN><TEXT>   TECHNOLOGY IS DRIVING the fitness craze of the '80s into the next decade. Experts in the world of sports and medicine are looking to sophisticated exercise gear to boost motivation and keep millions of Americans huffing and puffing to tone muscle, trim fat and burn up calories. Manufacturers expect that fancy innovations will keep their cash registers ringing.    &quot;Equipment really does excite people,&quot; says Dr. Michael Wolf, president of a New York-based consulting firm, International Fitness Exchange.    No one knows that better than George Pakradoonian, owner of the Urban Hiker, a shop on Manhattan's Upper West Side that is geared to outfitting walkers with the best and the latest. He sends these trendy striders out to the streets in high-tech textiles: padded socks designed especially for walking; long underwear made of polypropylene, which helps take moisture away from the skin; and stylish sweats and Gortex jackets and pants. He'll add gloves, sunglasses, a hot-cold canteen that doubles as a mini-backpack, a collapsible walking stick, a pedometer at your waist and a digital pulse monitor with sensors that attach to your chest. And don't forget the shoes: 80 different models to choose from, including super-cushiony models and ankle-high, waterproof leather boots. Simply walking around could cost $800 -- before New York's 8.25% sales tax.    For serious athletes, advances in technology are making fitness equipment safer and more reliable. Yet high tech is also providing a mind-boggling array of information and choices for regular consumers. And it often comes with a price tag that can flatten almost any wallet.    Says Dr. Peter Francis, associate professor of physical education at San Diego State University: &quot;A muscle doesn't know the difference between an expensive hydraulic valve and a rubber band.&quot; But the urge is always strong to buy a better tennis game or a sleeker body. Here's a collection of some state-of-the-art sports gear. Some could propel even a die-hard couch potato into action, and other items could barely elicit a groan.    Personal trainers are no longer the exclusive domain of movie stars and the ultra-rich.    Pierre, Chester, Harry, Ty, Schroeder and Curly will encourage, cajole or scold you into working those quads and pecs. But these &quot;coaches&quot; aren't muscle-bound hunks or even humans. They are part of a new computerized weight-training system, developed by Powercise International Corp., a unit of Houston-based Living Well Inc. The complete system is now in 14 health clubs around the country.    Each sleek, black-and-white machine has its own computerized voice and personality. Using a magnetic field instead of clanging weights for resistance, each &quot;coach&quot; works out two major muscles. Curly offers help with bicep curls and tricep extensions. The coaches tailor individual workouts, test strength, count repetitions and calories burned, and communicate with each other on the progress of each user. Powercise workouts can be developed to trim or tone flabby muscle or build bulk.    &quot;It's like having C3-P0 as your personal trainer,&quot; says Rick Dyer, an electrical engineer who developed the system, priced at $50,000, along with Dr. Richard Keelor, a fitness expert.    Powercise isn't alone in the effort to replace traditional weights with electricity and colored lights.    This spring, Life Fitness Inc., an Irvine, Calif.-based unit of Bally Manufacturing Corp., plans to introduce the first four units in a new computerized strength-training system. The complete Lifecircuit set of 12 units, targeted to health clubs, hospitals and sports teams, will sell for about $70,000. A home system is planned, all in a single unit, for probably under $3,000, says a company spokesman.    Stationary cycling is a proven way to burn calories and work out the old ticker, but its fun quotient is extremely low.    Manufacturers are combining computers, software and video to motivate and challenge riders bound by four walls. Many of the updated machines monitor time, distance, speed, resistance level, pedal revolutions and calories burned during a workout.    Lifecycle, also made by Bally's Life Fitness subsidiary and selling for $1,438, simulates hill and valley terrain for interval training (a combination of easy and hard workouts). For the athlete of meager means, Life Fitness offers a 36-month installment plan, at $39.95 each, to pay for the bike. Precor Inc., based in Bothell, Wash., has a new stationary bike with computer graphics to simulate the approaching landscape as well as vary the intensity of a workout. The Precor bike, on the market next month, will sell for about $2,000.    Other manufacturers start with a standard 12-speed road bike and let microchips provide the excitement. CompuTrainer, created by Seattle-based Racer-Mate Inc., is a bike stand, with a microprocessor and an electronic load simulator to create the effect of hills, head and tail winds, and the rider's own inertia. The stand and the &quot;brain box,&quot; which is mounted on the handlebars, go for $599.    The real fun comes from Racer-Mate's &quot;Challenge,&quot; a software cartridge with video game-like graphics that put the rider in the center of a road race, pitting him or her against a computerized challenger. Besides monitoring time and distance, the displays shows whether the opponent is ahead or behind the rider. The drawback is that the software runs only on a Commodore 64 or 128 computer.    Video-Velodrome, a computer program offered by the Performance Bicycle Shop in Chapel Hill, N.C., allows the homebound cyclist test his mettle against another racer or an entire team on a simulated indoor track. At about $40, the Video-Velodrome is affordable high-tech training, if the required Apple IIe or IBM XT personal computer and monitor are handy.    Getting some exercise while knocking off a tedious household chore is an appealing idea, but it just doesn't sell.    Sunkyong International Inc., a South Korean company, thought that busy American consumers would jump for the Exercycle Mower. It's a tricycle with a round blade that cuts grass as the pedals are turned. With a top price of $399, this cycle is certainly affordable. Yet sales have been disappointing: Only 50 exercycle mowers were sold in the past two years. Mowing the lawn this way &quot;takes a long time. Americans like to get this task over with real quickly,&quot; says a spokesman for Sunkyong.    High tech can also offer high comfort.    Dolomite, Nordica, Lange USA Inc., and Raichle are among several brands offering heated ski boots to help solve that perennial midwinter woe: cold feet. The heating element is usually part of the boot liner, and a battery pack is concealed in the heel. Prices range from $250 to $380, about $50 more than the unheated models. (However, one boot fitter warns that if the problem of cold feet is caused by poor circulation, then a better-fitting boot, not a heated one, is the ticket.)    The Sharper Image, a San Francisco-based high-tech novelty store, is offering ski goggles with a battery-operated built-in turbo fan, designed to keep lens and eyeglasses fog-free on downhill and cross-country trails. The price tag is $99.    Graphite bats could become a familiar sight in the batting cages of the major leagues during spring training this year.    Some members of the Toronto Blue Jays have ordered the new bats, developed and manufactured by Worth Co. of Tullahoma, Tenn., for practice sessions. The graphite-composite bat duplicates all of a wood bat's performance features, right down to the traditional cracking sound wood makes when striking a baseball, claims Jess Heald, Worth's president. Except it doesn't break like a wood bat.    It's a good thing the graphite bats are far more durable than wood, since Worth will be selling them for $100 each. Conventional bats cost $18. But wood bats are still the only ones allowed in major league games.    ---   Ms. Garcia is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>