<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880419-0156 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Manufacturing's New Window of Opportunity </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> ROK </CO><IN> EDP IND </IN><TEXT>   Two years ago, visitors to Allen-Bradley in Milwaukee were mostly engineers asking questions about A-B's manufacturing technology. Then came factory managers. Today, J. Tracy O'Rourke, A-B's president and chief executive officer, is entertaining fellow CEOs.    What this signifies to Mr. O'Rourke is a new stage in the modernization of American manufacturing. The U.S. auto industry pioneered the use of new, computerized, flexible automation. Now, top executives of other companies are on the move.    Statistics reflect the trend. An 8.9% rise in plant and equipment outlays by manufacturing industry this year from 1987 is predicted by the Commerce Department. Claremont Economics Institute notes that output per worker in all manufacturing industry rose 30% from the end of 1982 to November last year.    Allen-Bradley has become the Lourdes of advanced manufacturing. It long ago branched out from electrical switch-gear to an incredibly broad array of automation controls and communications products. Rockwell International Corp. bought privately owned A-B in February 1985. Its plant and headquarters building near downtown Milwaukee attracts visitors because A-B uses high-tech equipment, partly of its own design, to make products.    Just outside Mr. O'Rourke's office is a manufacturing cell that converts plastic resins, copper and steel into contactors that start and stop electric motors. The floors are polished hardwood. There is almost no dirt or noise, and only a few people about. Factory manager John Rothwell monitors the machines, which he refers to as &quot;this guy&quot; or &quot;that guy,&quot; from a control room packed with computers and CRT screens. In three years the cell has had very little down time except for routine maintenance, Mr. Rothwell says.    If Mr. Rothwell's shop is a shrine to the new automation, the 53-year-old Mr. O'Rourke is one of the leading prophets. With reference to the much-maligned efficiency of American manufacturing, he says, &quot;I've been out on the stump for seven or eight years trying to tell people we were sick, we were troubled, but we're not dead, and everybody saying we're dead is crazy. We just needed to speed up some of the things we were doing.&quot;    Clearly the speedup is occurring. To Mr. O'Rourke, one tip-off is the modernization efforts of such tradition-bound industries as food processing. &quot;You're looking at bakeries that are going to be like oil refineries, they will have so few people,&quot; he says. &quot;They will dump the flour in at night and out will come these things -- bread, cookies or whatever -- in the morning.&quot;    One reason all this is happening is that companies have become richer in the 1980s, thanks to low inflation, rising consumer demand and, to a degree, better cash flow allowed by the recent softening of the dollar. With so many corporate raiders lurking about, leaving cash in the till is not a great idea. On the positive side, corporate managers have reawakened to the importance of efficient manufacturing and to the modern manufacturing technology coming out of engineering labs. Further, labor shortages have developed in some parts of the country, such as New England, fueling the need for efficiency. This is one of the seldom-acknowledged results of improved productivity: It creates more, not fewer, jobs.    Mr. O'Rourke likes to refer to the new automation as &quot;Computer Enabled Enterprise&quot; (CEE) -- as opposed to the more-familiar &quot;Computer Integrated Manufacturing&quot; (CIM) -- because it requires a total change in the way enterprises are managed. The old &quot;hard&quot; automation made use of expensive transfer lines to make single components, such as automobile engine blocks. With CEE, the emphasis is on flexibility. Orders are placed by computer from within the factory itself or a salesperson in the field. The machines, operating on computer instructions, make the product or part, sometimes shifting from one part to the other without interruption of the production cycle. Mr. O'Rourke's bakery of the future will put orders from retailers into the computer, which will instruct the mixers and ovens on what is wanted, and the assortment of cookies, doughnuts, rye bread or whatever for each order will come off the line to be boxed and shipped on the morning truck.    One result is a sharp reduction -- indeed near-elimination -- of costly inventory. Moreover, says Mr. O'Rourke, &quot;the quality goes up inherently or you don't make anything. If the quality of the process is not very, very high and maintained that way and if the quality of the ingredients is not very, very high, the whole thing just shuts down.&quot; That thought scares managers, and in Mr. O'Rourke's view it should. &quot;If you go after this with a lack of understanding you can get yourself into a lot of trouble.&quot;    But a look at A-B itself shows the possibilities. The company now makes over 300,000 different items, ranging in price from a few pennies to a half-million dollars. Its sales this year, says Mr. O'Rourke, will be $1.2 billion to $1.3 billion, compared with $450 million in 1980. Yet its world-wide employment is only 12,000 people, compared with 15,200 in 1980, and its manufacturing employment now is down to about 2,500 from 8,000 a decade ago.    It has held its engineering staff steady at about 1,000 people. &quot;With computer-aided engineering and computer-aided design, engineers today are hundreds of times more productive than they were even 10 or 20 years ago,&quot; says the A-B president. &quot;The advances are utterly magnificent. We are producing new products faster than ever. Not long ago, an electronic solid-state product would take us four years to develop if it was complex. Now even the complex ones take less than two years. Simple ones we can do in less than a year. We're probably going to be able to design, test and be ready to go to market with a product faster than our sales force can handle it. That's going to be the next challenge.&quot;    There are other challenges. Standardization of computer language is one that now occupies industry world-wide. The machines need better lasers, bar-code readers and the like to give faster and more accurate control. The range of what must be sensed -- size, shape, color, consistency -- by automatic machines is enormous, as are the conditions under which the sensing must occur -- heat and vibration, for example. A-B engineers and engineers at other companies are working on hundreds of these devices so essential to the automatic factory.    The toughest problem is computer software. Because manufacturing processes, unlike office processes, are so variable, the software to control them must be custom-designed. Mr. O'Rourke says that one approach might be to develop standard programs that would cover, say, 80% of the process, leaving only 20% to be custom designed.    Finally, companies will need to change their thinking. If you use old-fashioned assumptions about, say, inventory costs and parts rejects in making return-on-investment calculations, CEE often will appear to be uneconomic. The whole point is to have no inventory or rejects. That, as much as anything, explains why Mr. O'Rourke has so many high-level visitors. </TEXT></DOC>