<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870428-0112 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):A Crisis Summit</HL><DD> 04/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   This week's meeting between President Reagan and Japan's Prime Minister Nakasone could scarcely be more aptly timed, coming as it does just as their two nations are stumbling into economic crisis. Unhappily, there is scant reason to believe the two crippled leaders will even broach what ought to be the number-one item on their agenda.    With the dollar slipping below 138 yen, financial markets are threatening to collapse in both New York and Tokyo. In the U.S., long-term interest rates have soared a full point in the past few weeks, and the stock markets have peaked out and started to decline, on some days rapidly. In Tokyo on Monday, the Nikkei average recorded its biggest one-day drop ever, wiping out 3.5% of the value of Japanese stocks.    What the world urgently needs is a Japanese-American bargain on monetary policy. Mr. Reagan needs to offer a tighter policy and Mr. Nakasone an easier one. The dollar is already undervalued and the yen overvalued on the basis of their ability to buy the same basket of goods. Signs of inflation are blossoming like cherry trees in the U.S., while the Japanese wholesale-price level declined 6.8% in the year ending in March. The distorted exchange rate is by now a clear and present danger to both economies, as well as to innocent bystanders throughout the world.    The world's central banks recognize the danger, and have been actively &quot;intervening&quot; to &quot;support&quot; the dollar, but have routinely been sterilizing their own transactions. They mop up dollars by issuing yen, then create dollars by buying bonds in New York and mop up yen by selling bonds in Tokyo. Then they stand by amazed as the dollar continues its fall.    The whole problem is that there are too many dollars and too few yen -- relative of course to the world's demand for them. The answer is to provide fewer dollars and more yen. Adjusting money supplies is the only way to stabilize an exchange rate. Which is to say, there is no way to separate exchange-rate policy and domestic monetary policy. The exchange rate is a thermometer for measuring when monetary policies are out of coordination; the cure lies in correcting the underlying disease.    The mystery is why each nation doesn't simply do the right thing on its own. With prices generally starting to rise and with gold soaring to touch $475 in Zurich yesterday, the U.S. needs to nip the bud of inflation. This will help, not hurt, the financial markets; gold backed off to $443 in New York and stocks recovered from a 40-point drop after the White House said a further fall in the dollar would be &quot;counterproductive.&quot; Japan finds itself in the grip of an unaccustomed recession with falling prices, and clearly needs to ease. Why don't the U.S. and Japan do it?    Because they are afraid of each other. The Americans see Japanese growth faltering, and feel a responsibility to pump up world demand. The Japanese see dollar prices starting to rise, and fear importing U.S. inflation. We still have to learn to manage a world of interdependence. One way is to defend exchange rates with unsterilized interventions, which would extinguish dollars and create yen. It would be a tremendous advance for the world if Messrs. Reagan and Nakasone, and their respective central bankers, pledged not to sterilize.    All indications suggest, though, that the Reagan-Nakasone summit will not be about monetary policies. They will discuss trade issues, which are certainly important but rather remote from the immediate problem. All of the world's exports and imports come to about $2 trillion a year. But foreign exchange market trading amounts to about $1 trillion a week. It is in the financial markets that the battle of the dollar will have to be fought.    Nor is it easy to see strong leadership in either nation. Mr. Reagan has been weakened by the Iran flap. His economic advisers include half of the six people in the world who still believe floating exchange rates have solved international economics. The Federal Reserve Board seems divided and uncertain.    Mr. Nakasone has just suffered a major political defeat, being forced to withdraw the sales-tax plan he strongly supported. Two weeks ago his party suffered one of its worst setbacks ever in local elections, but after he withdrew the tax proposal it rebounded smartly in Sunday's voting. The broadest lesson may be that the Japanese voters are growing tired of not enjoying the fruits of their nation's economic success, a lesson with implications not only for tax policy but for free trade. Japanese consumers would enjoy paying the world price for grapefruit.    Whatever the handicaps they face, though, it is good that the president and the prime minister are meeting this week. They are still the leaders of their countries, and their summit is a recognition of interdependence. They will talk about rising protectionism, opening markets and the growing acrimony between their publics. Perhaps in some moment alone they will recognize that these irritations stem mostly from one source, exchange-rate instability, and that the solution to this underlying problem is to get monetary policies into some semblance of coordination. </TEXT></DOC>