<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870313-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. PRESENTED verification procedures at arms-control talks in Geneva.    U.S. negotiators submitted to the Soviets a monitoring plan to guard against violations of a proposed treaty to eliminate medium-range nuclear missiles from Europe. Among the provisions is the stationing of Russians at American missile factories and U.S. inspectors at Soviet plants. Meanwhile, the Kremlin detonated an underground nuclear device, the second since Moscow ended a 19-month moratorium on such tests Feb. 26. Tass said the explosion, at a site in Kazakhstan, was conducted &quot;with a view to upgrading military technology.&quot;    The White House clashed with congressional Democrats over Reagan's proposed reinterpretation of the 1972 ABM treaty to allow development of a space-based antimissile system.    ---   A U.S. JUDGE DISMISSED North's lawsuits over the independent counsel.    In a 21-page opinion, a federal judge in Washington dismissed the pair of suits filed by the fired NSC aide, saying arguments over the constitutionality of the special prosecutor law &quot;shouldn't be considered&quot; until the criminal investigation into the Iran-Contra affair by independent counsel Lawrence Walsh &quot;has run its course.&quot; Separately, a three-judge federal appeals panel temporarily blocked another independent counsel from asking a grand jury to indict former White House aide Michael Deaver on perjury charges.    The appeals court indicated it will rule Tuesday whether to continue the stay or permit Whitney North Seymour to seek indictments against Deaver.    ---   Sweden ordered an end to all trade with South Africa and faulted the U.N. for refusing to impose mandatory international sanctions to prompt the Pretoria government to end apartheid. The ban by Stockholm would take effect July 1 and imposes an Oct. 1 deadline for Swedish firms to end all trade of goods with South Africa.    Police in Johannesburg fired tear gas to disperse a group of about 50 blacks participating in a nationwide protest against detention of thousands of people without trial under South Africa's nine-month-old state of emergency. Candlelight vigils and rallies were held as part of the protest.    ---   Reagan met at the White House with President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya to discuss U.S. aid levels and allegations of human-rights violations in the east African nation. The Kenyan leader also called on the U.S. to make &quot;a deeper commitment&quot; toward ending South African apartheid.    ---   The White House said Reagan was disappointed by Wednesday's vote by the House to embargo aid to Nicaraguan rebels, but remained committed to the insurgents. The statement came as the Senate voted 97-1 to support a new peace plan by four Central American nations. The proposal calls for an end to military aid for the Contras.    ---   Vietnam signaled its willingness to end the eight-year-old war in Cambodia, announcing plans to open talks on the issue with China and Western-aligned Southeast Asian nations, Radio Hanoi reported. The plans were unveiled during a visit to Hanoi by Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, who endorsed the peace initiative.    ---   Canada said it would allow trials of suspected Nazi war criminals living in that country. A judicial commission, in a report to the government, had urged that Ottawa take action against 20 war-crime suspects.    ---   A NASA advisory group said the space agency should buy a fleet of unmanned rockets to handle the bulk of U.S. space cargo, reserving the shuttle for missions needing a manned presence. The panel urged NASA to seek a supplemental appropriation to begin buying unmanned rockets.    ---   Baldrige defended the proposed sale of low-level computers to the Iranian press agency and to a Tehran power firm, asserting that the equipment wouldn't be used for &quot;military purposes.&quot; Another Commerce Department official said the computers could be obtained by Iran from foreign manufacturers.    ---   Honduras said four crew members, including an American pilot, were killed when Tegucigalpa's air force shot down a U.S.-registered DC-3 during what the military believes was a drug flight Monday. In Miami, U.S. authorities said the pilot of the downed cargo craft had a record of drug-related arrests in Florida and the Bahamas.    ---   Pro-Iranian extremists threatened to kill a French captive in Lebanon unless Paris clarifies its policies on French captives in the Mideast and military aid to Iraq. Mitterrand expressed support Tuesday for continued French military aid to Baghdad and said Syria's troops in West Beirut would secure the release of French hostages.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir said two government-appointed investigators would have a free hand in probing the case involving American spy Jonathan Pollard, but must work in secrecy. Meanwhile, a parliamentary panel studying the spy operation against the U.S. questioned Defense Minister Rabin. Details weren't disclosed.    ---   An Ecuadoran official said as many as 2,000 people may have been killed in a series of earthquakes last week that caused flooding and mudslides. The estimate was sharply higher than the confirmed death toll by the International Red Cross, which said Wednesday that about 300 people were killed and at least 4,000 others are missing.    ---   Police in Spain clashed with demonstrators in the northern town of Reinosa as fighting erupted during protests over threatened job losses under the Socialist government's austerity program. At least 57 people were injured in the violence.    ---   Died: Woody Hayes, 74, former coach of Ohio State University's football team, in Columbus, Ohio, of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>