<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880912-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Sweden Feeling Disoriented in the Gorbachev Era </HL><AUTHOR> Amity Shlaes </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><DATELINE> STOCKHOLM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A Swedish navy officer arrives for a Sunday press briefing equipped with a video cassette player. The film his heavy briefcase yields is a Soviet adventure movie called &quot;Counter Move.&quot; It's about war games in which frogmen glide out of torpedo tunnels and, to a disco beat, are propelled shorewards on underwater vehicles. The officer slows the film for a closer look when the swimmers reach a rocky coast. He stops the movie for a replay when an agent utters some crucial words: &quot;We need a submarine.&quot;    Sweden feels spooked these days. The accession of Mikhail Gorbachev and his Westward overtures might be expected to calm a small nation known for its detentist policies. Instead reports of Soviet submarines off the coast, spies arriving disguised as diplomats, and an under-prepared military are preoccupying Swedes. A measure of the current insecurity will be made in this Sunday's election, when a traditionally stable electorate is expected to vote unpredictably or give support to an isolationist Green party.    The fears of intruders bobbing up in this election reflect deeper problems Swedes are having with their tradition of neutrality. For years the Swedes' thinking has run like this: Sweden will stick to its century-old policy of non-alignment; NATO and its forces will take care of West European defense; Sweden can therefore afford to shift its resources to finance an increasingly expensive social welfare system. As compensation, Swedes took pride in their international role as mediator -- for example, through the anti-American meddling during the Vietnam War of Prime Minister Olof Palme. Two years ago, though, an anonymous gunman took away much of this confidence when he shot Mr. Palme dead on a Stockholm street. Then the INF treaty between the superpowers removed a layer of protection afforded by NATO.    &quot;In a way, we're in a trap,&quot; says Gunnar Hokmark, a conservative member of Swedish parliament. &quot;We want to be neutral. But the Soviets are more aggressive because they see we are weak. So that hurts our neutrality.&quot;    Election-time debate over the death of Mr. Palme echoes the Swedes' disorientation. When the leader died, national attention focused on finding the killer. Two years later, the assassin hasn't been found and concern has shifted to a fight over how to conduct the hunt. The justice minister resigned following charges that she acted unconstitutionally in allowing an extra-governmental investigation; a summer's worth of televised hearings gave Sweden a taste of what Watergate was like. Although Mr. Palme's own party, the ruling Social Democrats, look likely to retain strong representation, some say national distress over the investigation scandal will hurt the group in the election.    The rapprochement of the Soviet Union and the United States is causing further tensions. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, the supreme commander of Sweden's armed forces, General Bengt Gustafsson, worried aloud about the post-INF situation. &quot;The risk for war in Europe is low today. But if it comes it will mean that Scandinavia -- including Sweden -- is of greater importance for military strategy than 10 or 15 years ago.&quot; Back in the 1950s, Sweden was an important military presence -- numerically, its planes made it the fourth biggest air power in the world. Today, Sweden is working hard on developing a new plane, the JAS-39 Griffin. But it plans to fly only some 350 of the Griffins, about half of the nation's 1950s airpower.    The main fear for Swedes comes from the north. While they used to worry about a conventional war in Europe, they now see danger in the Soviet naval buildup in places like the northern Kola Peninsula base of Murmansk. Decades of left-leaning governments -- including, in the late 1970s, one with some relatively conservative elements -- has meant a decrease in the share of spending going to defense. General Gustafsson operates on a defense budget that is 2.8% of GNP, half of the rate in the 1950s. He plans a report on defense allocations at the end of this month, but allowed in his interview that the budget means he may have to cut the number of army brigades in Sweden by at least 30%.    The submarine situation provides a model for Swedish defense frustrations. It's now seven years since a Soviet sub ran aground inside Swedish waters and provided internationally convincing evidence of Soviet intrusion. The last report of a possible visitor in the western Stig Fiord came August 27. By most accounts the Swedish navy does a professional job of looking for intruders, using its twelve non-nuclear subs. At dinner parties, citizens complain the government -- and even the military -- are avoiding capturing an intruding sub for fear of the international scandal. Yet the voters support a government that allocates around four billion Swedish kronor ($624.5 million), or less than half of what goes to the army or the air force, to its navy. It can be said that to some extent the Swedes have resigned themselves to the fact that Soviets like to play in their waters. On Sunday, Swedes aren't likely to provide themselves with relief from such tension. Over the decades the nation's political constellation has made a shift to the left -- the conservatives, for example, changed their name to the more conciliatory &quot;Moderate Party,&quot; in 1969. The current five-year defense budget is the product of the Social Democratic leadership, which got the legislation with the support of the Liberals and the Communists. Opinion polls indicate Ingvar Carlsson, who became prime minister after Mr. Palme's death, is likely to be returned to power. Although Mr. Carlsson has made much effort to continue the Palme tradition of international mediation -- one of his first official visits was to Moscow -- his party seems confused about what to do next. In a pamphlet listing the platforms of the campaigning parties designed for the foreign press, for example, the Social Democratic pages omit reference for defense. Even those farthest to the right on the political spectrum, the Conservatives, back only a meager 2% increase in defense spending -- about enough to keep pace with the growth of the economy.    Then there is the nation's environmentalist grouping, the Greens. After a summer filled with natural disasters that included a version of canine distemper killing off some 75% of North Europe's seals, the Greens may get into parliament for the first time. It's conceivable they could even replace the Communists, and to some extent the middle-of-the-road People's Party, as the parliament's swing party. Sweden's Greens advocate an extreme form of isolationism. The party wants, for example, to impose a series of tariffs on goods leaving and entering Sweden that would mean an effective economic closing of the borders. This would spell economic suicide for Sweden, which is not a member of the European Community and is already feeling pressure from EC's plan to build an internal market by 1992.    This is the context in which the Swedish navy is winding down its vain two-week pursuit of the Stig Fiorden submarine. Until the next probe, the military will be busy studying signs of Soviet plans -- including adventure movies like &quot;Counter Move.&quot; Another bears a title of equal concern to the Swedes: &quot;In the Zone of Special Interest.&quot;    ---   Miss Shlaes is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe.    (Revised WSJ Sept. 13, 1988.) </TEXT></DOC>