<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870827-0103 </DOCNO><HL> The Woman at the Bus Stop---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> ASUNCION, Paraguay  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It seems like a typical suburban scene: two blond boys playing soccer in the yard, a dog chasing the ball, the smell of grilled meat and mowed grass, mother and father at the gate of an immaculate white house.    But the tranquillity is illusory. Argentine authorities say that the boys, Gonzalo and Matias Miara, are really Gustavo and Martin Rossetti, born 10 years ago in an Argentine prison to one of the thousands of victims of Argentina's brutal military dictatorship.    The officials believe that the twins' real mother, Liliana Rossetti, is dead, but they want the boys returned to the man they say is the children's true father, a lawyer who lives in Buenos Aires. They also want the &quot;parents&quot; in front of this leafy Asuncion home extradited to Argentina for blood tests and a possible trial for kidnapping and falsification of documents.    &quot;They want to destroy me,&quot; says Samuel Miara, a former Argentine police officer. &quot;Why should I prove these boys are mine?&quot;    The boys' tangled tale, a source of rising tension between Argentina and Paraguay, dates back to the Argentine military's &quot;dirty war&quot; against leftist subversion, in which about 9,000 people disappeared between 1976 and 1980. Their story isn't unique. Eduardo Rabossi, Argentina's undersecretary for human rights, can cite at least 114 similar cases, and the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo human rights group is seeking about 200 children born before or during the repression. The problem was dramatized in &quot;The Official Story,&quot; which won an Academy Award for best foreign film in 1985. A recent amnesty law excludes crimes involving infants, so the issue will be around for many years.    Most of the cases are impenetrable because the military destroyed records during its 1976-82 rule. But in the Rossetti-Miara saga, evidence has emerged that suggests that, even in South America, people don't always disappear without a trace. The case also illustrates the unhealed wounds that split Argentine society, threatening the fledgling democracy.    Adalberto Rossetti and Liliana Ross were childhood sweethearts. They came from humble families and met at the ages of 15 and 13 in the small town of Chacabuco, about 200 miles from Buenos Aires. She was outgoing and played guitar; he was more serious. Both were good students. In 1971, Adalberto left for La Plata to study law. He was joined in 1974 by Liliana, who entered medical school.    Two years later, in November 1976, they returned home to be married. The military had seized power in a coup in April, and the climate in La Plata was oppressive. The two were active in the students' left-wing Peronist movement, but Mr. Rossetti says that they weren't afraid because they had no links with terrorists. Besides, the atmosphere at home was festive. Liliana was already pregnant. One of the last photographs of her shows her on her wedding day, wearing a white dress and holding two yellow roses.    &quot;She was a lovely, musical girl. Nobody suspected anything could happen,&quot; says Mr. Rossetti's father, Nolfredo.    Within a month, though, something did. On Dec. 12, as Mrs. Rossetti emerged from the medical school, she was grabbed and bundled into a car. Later in the day, when she didn't show up to meet her husband on his return from an out-of-town trip, he went -- as a precaution -- to a friend's house for the night. Early the next morning, the friend went to the Rossettis' home and found that it had been ransacked by police. Mr. Rossetti went into hiding, first in Buenos Aires and then in Brazil and France. As for Mrs. Rossetti, she vanished -- or almost.    When they heard that she had disappeared, Mrs. Rossetti's mother, Lucia Ross, and her mother-in-law, Elda Rossetti, began a dogged campaign to find her. They wrote letters to government officials. They traveled the 250 miles to La Plata several times. They hung around outside the local barracks. Eventually, a military official suggested that, if Liliana was pregnant, they might look for her at the women's prison of Los Olmos, about 10 miles from town. By then, it was April 1977.    La Plata is a flat, sprawling town with tree-lined streets. The graffiti on the walls of its university illustrate the continuing divisions spawned by the &quot;dirty war&quot;: &quot;Justice and punishment for all the guilty is the only end to this,&quot; reads one on the orthodontics school.    It was near here that the two women looked for a bus to Los Olmos. &quot;A bus came,&quot; says Mrs. Rossetti, &quot;and we weren't sure whether to get on. So we asked a woman at the bus stop if it went to Los Olmos. She said no, and then she asked what we wanted at Los Olmos. I said I was looking for my pregnant daughter-in-law.&quot;    The woman turned out to be the prison midwife, Hilda Delgadillo. She said that a woman in the jail had just given birth to twins. According to Mrs. Rossetti, the midwife said that she had asked the young mother if there were any twins in her family and the woman had replied that her aunts were twins. Mrs. Ross's younger sisters are indeed twins. Moreover, the midwife disclosed that one of the boys had been named Martin -- the name that Mr. Rossetti and his wife had picked for a boy.    The birth of twin boys in Los Olmos on April 22 was later confirmed by a doctor at the birth, Nestor Siri, by the prison chaplain, Father Jose Hapo, and in a note to Mrs. Rossetti from the private secretary to the archbishop of La Plata. But the investigation has been hampered because, among these witnesses, only Dr. Siri survived the military regime. The two churchmen died of natural causes, and Mrs. Delgadillo, the midwife, was seized by the military in August 1977 and apparently killed. The doctor says that he can't identify the woman whose children he delivered.    Nor it seems can anybody else. In the crumbling La Plata court building, magistrate Braulio Fonseca thumbs through a pile of yellowing papers accumulated before the proceedings were transferred last year to a Buenos Aires judge, Miguel Pons. &quot;We know that twins were born,&quot; he says, &quot;but we can't absolutely say to whom. Everything indicates Liliana Rossetti was in Los Olmos, but we can't say with absolute certainty she was.&quot;    Before vanishing, Mrs. Delgadillo met again with Mrs. Rossetti, who tracked her down after failing to get permission to visit the prison. The midwife related the following: The second boy was named Gustavo, the twins' mother was removed from the prison and &quot;almost certainly shot,&quot; and the twins were taken away in a car on the night of May 16.    May 16 is the date on the contested birth certificates, numbered 5070447 and 5070448 respectively, of &quot;Gonzalo Javier Miara&quot; and &quot;Matias Angel Miara,&quot; who were allegedly born that day in the Jose M. Penna hospital in Buenos Aires to Samuel Miara and his wife, Beatriz.    According to Judge Pons's confidential extradition request to Paraguayan authorities, a copy of which was obtained by this newspaper, Adolfo Maccarone, the head of the hospital's technical department, has testified that no such births took place in the hospital between May 6 and May 19, 1977. Moreover, there is no trace in hospital records of Mrs. Miara. Finally, according to Judge Pons's letter, Raquel Blanca Datavio, a hospital nurse, says that she was forced to sign blank birth certificates in 1977.    Mr. Miara says &quot;it's a lie&quot; that the birth certificates are false. A small, swarthy man of 43, he smokes continuously as he talks outside his Paraguayan home. He insists that he is the object of political persecution. &quot;Soon,&quot; he comments acidly, &quot;all Argentine policemen active between 1976 and 1982 will have to prove they're fathers.&quot; He and his wife show a reporter pictures in which she is emerging from a swimming pool, clearly about six months pregnant.    Judge Pons insists that Mrs. Miara lost the child. He says there is evidence that an infant, N. Miara, was buried on Feb. 24, 1977, in a cemetery in the resort of Mar del Plata, about 600 miles from Buenos Aires.    The Miaras deny losing a child. As they tell their story, they were married 20 years ago but waited 10 years to have children because they &quot;wanted {the children} to have the best.&quot; Mr. Miara worked hard to make his way in the police force, but when the &quot;dirty war&quot; began in 1976 he was no more than an &quot;ufficialito&quot; -- minor official. He says that he never went to La Plata and never heard of Liliana Rossetti.    Mrs. Miara says that the children are being given a Roman Catholic upbringing and that she and her husband have &quot;sacrificed everything for the boys' well-being.&quot; In the middle of the living room hangs a photograph of Mr. Miara kissing Pope John Paul II's hand. He was in charge of security in the motorcade during the pope's visit to Argentina in 1982.    Mr. Miara says that the entire case is an attempt to get political revenge. &quot;Somebody in the organization of human rights hates us so much, they created this,&quot; says Mr. Miara. &quot;I have the whole Argentine government -- and they're leftists -- against me. I'm portrayed as worse than Hitler.&quot;    That may be an exaggeration, but Argentine authorities do believe that Mr. Miara was more active in the repression -- he describes it as &quot;a war to the death to save the country&quot; -- than he makes out. In the official government report on the &quot;dirty war,&quot; Mr. Miara is twice identified as a torturer in death camps.    Whatever his role, Mr. Miara was living unobtrusively in a Buenos Aires suburb until 1980. That is when Mrs. Rossetti and Mrs. Ross received a tip through the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo -- a group formed in 1977 by women in similar situations -- that twin boys living with Mr. Miara weren't his.    Posing as women looking for an English teacher, the two made their way to the Miaras' house. At that moment, the three-year-old twins appeared with their mother. &quot;We admired them and asked their names,&quot; recalls Mrs. Rossetti. The boys said Gonzalo and Matias. &quot;Then we said they looked like twins, and they said they were.&quot; The women, who have not seen the boys since, note that Gonzalo, like Gustavo, begins with a &quot;G&quot; and has seven letters; Matias, like Martin, begins with an &quot;M&quot; and has six.    &quot;I was overwhelmed,&quot; says Mrs. Rossetti, clenching her fists. &quot;Their noses were exactly like Liliana's.&quot;    But while the military regime lasted, it was impossible for the two women to begin a legal case against Mr. Miara. Besides, Adalberto Rossetti, Liliana's husband, was still in exile in Paris, where, after remarrying in Brazil, he had started a new family.    When democracy returned in late 1983, Mr. Rossetti came home and quickly opened legal proceedings in La Plata. Progress was &quot;agonizingly slow,&quot; he says. But by mid-1985, the La Plata tribunal had enough evidence to order blood tests on Mr. and Mrs. Miara.    The Miaras, however, failed to appear for the tests. Then, early last year, they disappeared.    The new disappearance was a heavy blow to the Rossetti and Ross families, who had spent nearly 10 years trying to track their grandchildren. But early this year, another tip to the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo pointed to the Miaras' presence here in Asuncion.    Judge Pons decided that there was enough evidence to demand the Miaras' extradition and the surrender of the children to an Argentine minors' court, pending blood tests. In April, he traveled to Asuncion. And on April 7, a Paraguayan judge, Edgar Stanley, signed an order extraditing the Miaras and consigning the boys to Judge Pons.    Accompanied by an official from the Argentine consulate, Judges Pons and Stanley arrived at the Miaras' home in the late afternoon. Finding only a maid at home, the judges proceeded to seize the Miaras' documents and pack the children's clothes. Meanwhile, an Argentine police plane was flying to Asuncion to pick up the Miaras and the children.    As Judge Pons recalls the scene, when Mrs. Miara arrived home with the boys and found the two judicial officials, she began screaming over and over that they were &quot;blood of my blood&quot; and could be removed only &quot;over my dead body.&quot; She insisted on calling her husband.    Suddenly, a Paraguayan police chief -- apparently alerted by Mr. Miara -- arrived, berated Judge Stanley for signing the extradition order, and demanded that both judges leave immediately. The Argentine plane was not allowed to enter Paraguay.    From then on, Judge Pons's efforts met evasive responses. The Miara extradition case was transferred to another Paraguayan judge, and the question of what would happen with the children went to a juvenile court. Judge Pons returned to Argentina, convinced that the arrival of the police chief in the Miaras' home signaled that &quot;the case has become politicized.&quot;    This now appears to be everybody's view. Enrique Sosa, a Paraguayan lawyer engaged by the Argentine consulate, contends that there is a reaction by the military dictatorship of General Alfredo Stroessner against what it views as pressure from leftist-backed human rights groups. This, he says, is slowing proceedings to a crawl.    Mr. Miara's lawyer, Jose Gorostiaga, also believes that the twins' case is now a political affair. Why else, he asks, would Judge Pons have come to Asuncion and attempted what he calls &quot;a commando operation.&quot; The lawyer is convinced that he will win his case because the Treaty of Montevideo, which governs such matters, prohibits extradition for political crimes.    Mr. Gorostiaga's optimism appears to be justified. Chief public prosecutor Clotildo Jimenez Benitez, who is supposed to present the case against Mr. Miara, doesn't hide his distaste for it. In his office, which is adorned with photographs of Gen. Stroessner, he says that it is &quot;madness of the Argentines to try to punish those responsible for the dirty war. It's a political campaign and they want to persecute {Mr. Miara} as a police chief.&quot;    Argentine officials say that relations with the Paraguayans over the affair are tense -- the Argentine ambassador was recalled for consultations on the issue this week -- and they predict little progress. Thus the case seems certain to go on festering.    Some wonder whether it is psychologically advisable for the children to be returned to Argentina. Mr. Rossetti concedes that the transition would be difficult. But he says that this would quickly pass and that &quot;the love of Mr. Miara can only be perverse and so injurious.&quot; Judge Andre Jose d'Alessio of the Argentine appeals court adds that &quot;our experience of children returned to their families is positive.&quot; So far, 19 children who disappeared have been returned.    For now, the Miara family is under house arrest pending a Paraguayan judicial ruling. Mr. Miara says that he would submit to a paternity test, but not in Argentina &quot;because they'd twist it.&quot; Meanwhile, he says, he can't even go to the small sporting-goods store he owns. To illustrate their plight, the Miaras ask the boys to fetch two fishing rods they got for their 10th birthdays but haven't been able to use. Asked the date of the boys' birthday, Mrs. Miara hesitates for a moment before replying, &quot;in May.&quot;    Back in Buenos Aires, Mr. Rossetti waits with his new wife Maria Lujan -- a friend of Liliana's -- and their three small children. He says that their lives are dominated by &quot;an unbearable uncertainty.&quot;    So too is the life of his 63-year-old father. Sitting in his small house, he says that he has &quot;learned to do a lot of things alone&quot; since his wife took up the struggle to find the twins a decade ago.    As for the twins, they stand at attention with their fishing rods, beneath the nervous gaze of Mr. Miara. All they will say is that their greatest wish is to meet Argentine soccer star Diego Maradona. </TEXT></DOC>