<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870716-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   POINDEXTER SAID he didn't tell Reagan of the diversion of Iran-Contra funds.    In testimony before the congressional panels investigating the affair, the former national security adviser said he had approved the diversion of arms-sales profits to the Nicaraguan rebels and sought to protect the president by withholding the information. Ending months of silence on his role in the affair, Poindexter also said he later destroyed a secret 1985 presidential directive that described the Iran initiative as an arms-for-hostages swap. He said, however, that he believed the transfer of arms proceeds &quot;absolutely&quot; would have met with Reagan's approval.    Reagan expressed relief at Poindexter's testimony, but said he didn't recall signing the memo contradicting denials that the arms sales to Iran were aimed primarily at freeing captives.    ---   Iran threatened to attack and seize any Persian Gulf ports made available to U.S. warships, which are expected to begin escorting Kuwaiti tankers under American flags next week. Meanwhile, Pentagon sources said an 18-member U.S. Navy diving team is set to begin searching for underwater mines placed in the gulf by Iran.    Iraqi jets attacked Iranian gunboat and helicopter bases in the gulf for the third consecutive day. The raids on the offshore platforms came as Senate opponents dropped efforts to halt the U.S. escort operation.    ---   The FAA said it will investigate Delta Air Lines in the wake of a series of incidents involving errors by Delta pilots. The study is expected to focus on Delta's long-range navigation procedures, crew coordination for routine and abnormal procedures, and pilot training.    ---   A South African labor leader urged blacks to &quot;seize power&quot; from the country's white-minority government. The comments by the head of the Congress of South African Trade Unions, which make him liable to possible arrest, came at the opening of the federation's national conference in Johannesburg.    ---   A federal appeals court ordered the U.S. judge in Deaver's perjury case to open jury selection proceedings to the public. The court, acting on an appeal by news organizations, said it was &quot;clearly invalid&quot; to conduct the closed-door proceedings in an effort to protect the privacy of jurors at the Washington trial of the former Reagan official.    ---   Pakistan's President Zia blamed Afghan agents for car-bomb blasts Tuesday that killed at least 75 people in Karachi. As salvage crews cleared the wreckage, protests erupted, with demonstrators criticizing local officials for failing to provide security.    The U.S. demanded an explanation from Pakistan about an alleged plan to illegally ship materials from the U.S. that could be used to develop a nuclear bomb. A Pakistani resident of Canada was arrested in Philadelphia last week in the alleged plot.    ---   Two car bombs exploded in northern and eastern Lebanon, killing at least 13 people and wounding about 35 others. Responsibility wasn't claimed for the blasts, which were viewed as a challenge to Syria's effort to maintain order in Lebanon.    ---   Army doctors said that a study based on the first six months of AIDS screening of military recruits found that 1.5 out of every 1,000 tested are infected with the AIDS virus. The study also found that blacks were more likely than whites to carry the virus, and that equal numbers of men and women were infected in some areas of the U.S.    ---   Two Cuban diplomats were ordered to leave the U.S. within 10 days. A State Department spokesman said the move was in response to an &quot;intolerable&quot; campaign by the media in Havana, which has accused U.S. diplomats of espionage activities.    ---   A Moscow newspaper reported that six Soviet officials on trial for the April 1986 Chernobyl nuclear incident have been accused of allowing a poorly planned test that led to the explosion of a reactor. The dispatch, which cited evidence presented at the trial near Kiev, was the first official report since the proceedings began last week.    ---   An earthen dam collapsed in the French Alpine village of Grand Bornand, killing at least 22 people and leaving 28 others missing. At least 10 people were seriously injured as mud and water from a rain-swollen river swept into the village campground.    ---   A Haitian opposition alliance staged a general strike in Port-au-Prince to demand the resignation of the nation's military-led junta. The action by a coalition of 57 organizations caused the closing of businesses and a lack of public transportation. It was the seventh such strike this month.    ---   India's Prime Minister Gandhi expelled three prominent critics from the ruling Congress (I) Party &quot;to tighten discipline in the party,&quot; according to an official in New Delhi. The action followed the resignation Tuesday of a senior cabinet member, a move viewed as deepening a crisis of confidence over Gandhi's leadership.    ---   Italy's prime minister-designate began consultations with political parties and said the country could have a new government by early next month. Giovanni Goria, however, was presented with certain conditions from the Socialists, who are demanding a program of political and economic changes before joining a new coalition.    ---   An official in Jerusalem said he expected an Israeli diplomatic delegation to be allowed to visit the Soviet Union following this week's visit to Israel by an eight-member Soviet consular group. Moscow has rejected any reciprocity. Separately, Israel confirmed that it had confiscated the passports of some Palestinian-American tourists.    ---   Died: Leslie H. Arps, 80, senior partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Slom, in New Milford, Conn., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>