<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870909-0098 </DOCNO><HL> How Big a Budget Deficit, and So What?---By Robert Eisner</HL><DD> 09/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   As the 1987 fiscal year approaches its Sept. 30 close, major official guardians of the numbers are in agreement on one thing. The federal budget deficit is coming in some $15 billion to $19 billion below winter forecasts, according to the Congressional Budget Office and the administration's Office of Management and Budget. The CBO now projects this year's deficit at $157 billion and the OMB has it at $158.4 billion. But there the agreement stops.    The congressional estimate puts the 1988 &quot;baseline&quot; deficit, assuming no policy changes, back up at $183 billion, while the corresponding administration deficit for 1988 is down nearly to $161 billion. And the divergences grow thereafter, with the CBO figures from 1989 to 1992 descending from $192 billion to $151 billion, while the OMB foresees a fall from almost $166 billion to under $105 billion. Thus, the discrepancy reaches $46 billion in 1992, the year after the original Gramm-Rudman targets had legislated the deficit to be gone.    Explaining the differences and why even the 1987 forecasts of six months ago have gone so far off is instructive. It can help show, to those not too caught up in their own political myths and prejudices, why this whole numbers game, and the Gramm-Rudman targets with it, is mischievous -- and can prove disastrous.    Take the deficit reduction over the past few months. It stems very considerably from payment of taxes on capital gains that investors chose to realize at the end of 1986 before the new tax law's elimination of capital-gains exclusions begins to take effect. But what real difference does that make? Taxpayers coughed up now to avoid turning in more later. Such a reduction in the current deficit would then presage greater deficits in the future.    (The payment of taxes is correctly viewed as generally depressing private spending, but if current payment is associated with the expectation of lesser future payment, current spending as a consequence may well be increased and the economy given an actual boost.)    The differences between CBO and OMB on the 1988 forecasts are partly technical, relating to the accounting and timing of various payments, which makes little difference in the long run. Yet, the amounts can be large -- witness the handling of about $3 billion of funding for a new government-employee 401(k)-type retirement plan. The General Accounting Office would have this included in the government budget, thus adding to the deficit, and the CBO does so. But since it is essentially inhouse juggling of paper, the OMB could be right in not counting it now.    However, the biggest differences in those deficit forecasts relate to underlying economic assumptions. The CBO looks to real economic growth of about 2.7% a year, actually slightly above that shown in major econometric models and by many private forecasters. The OMB looks to real growth at a much heftier 3.3% a year. Correspondingly, unemployment from 1989 to 1992 runs about half a percentage point less in the OMB projections. Thus the CBO foresees less in tax revenues and more in unemployment-compensation outlays. Similarly, the OMB has interest rates, short and long, drifting down almost two percentage points below the CBO forecasts by 1992 -- to 4% for 91-day Treasury bills and 5% for 10-year bonds. This means lower Treasury interest payments and hence a lower official deficit.    All this, though, should point up what so much of the usual rhetoric ignores -- the deficit is a consequence of, as well as an important influence on, the course of the economy. We ignore both at our peril. Thus each percentage point of unemployment now adds about $35 billion to the deficit, largely because of the lower tax revenues associated with lower individual and corporate incomes. Each percentage point in higher interest rates brought on by a focus on &quot;fighting inflation&quot; or &quot;defending the dollar&quot; will add to the annual deficit by 1990 about $20 billion through increased interest payments as the existing debt is rolled over.    But the real deficit, adjusted for the implicit tax we pay when inflation eats away the value of private holdings of government debt, and adjusted as well for all the gimmicks relating to switched timing of payments and receipts and sales and purchases of government assets, has some very real effects on the economy. A real deficit, by adding to the real net debt of the government, adds to the perceived net worth of the private sector. The government is in a sense poorer but by that very token the individuals, banks, businesses and pension funds that own that government debt are richer. Thus, despite their bad name, real deficits are good when the economy needs stimulus.    If inflation and rising interest rates reduce the real value of government debt more than the nominal deficit raises it, there is no real deficit. Indeed, the &quot;inflation tax,&quot; which converted supposed Carter administration and initial Reagan deficits into real surpluses, contributed significantly to the severe recession of 1981-82. And the huge real deficits that began in the latter half of 1982 brought soaring private spending and contributed mightily to the recovery from that recession.    Where does that leave us now? While I should like to think otherwise, the CBO forecasts of modest growth are probably the best we can hope for with current policy; OMB's higher figures are pie-in-the-sky. That means the economy can use more, not less, stimulus. Paradoxical as this may seem, CBO's forecasts of larger deficits do not indicate a greater need for tax increases or cuts in otherwise desirable government expenditures. For either of these actions would reduce private incomes and private spending and depress the economy below the CBO's projected path -- and thus prove in part self-defeating even in terms of deficit reduction.    The one real danger from more stimulus is that we end up with too much. If total spending rises above what the nation can produce, the result is inflation. But we're simply not in that state now. Our industrial plant still has all too much unused capacity, and there is little evidence in basic movements of wages and prices that an overheated economy is a present danger.    Meeting the Gramm-Rudman targets, given the inflation tax present even with continued modest price rises, means moving quickly to a substantial real surplus in the government budget -- and corresponding deficit for the private economy. If the government is taking in more than it is paying out, the rest of us are giving the government more than we are getting. And that means that we are not likely to be able to buy what private industry can produce-which spells recession.    The solution lies in making those optimistic OMB numbers prove right. And that is to be found, however much certain misguided &quot;conservative&quot; circles may resist it, in a significantly easier monetary policy. If the Federal Reserve were to move energetically not to tighten but to ease credit, and hence lower interest rates, the deficit would go down and the economy would move up. The lower rates would directly reduce the deficit by cutting Treasury interest payments as the outstanding federal debt, some 40% of which matures within a year, is rolled over. They would also encourage private investment and state and local public investment.    By reducing the relative attraction of foreign and domestic financial investment the lower interest rates would allow the dollar to decline further and thus stimulate exports and reduce our trade deficit. And both the greater domestic investment and the shift in our balance of payments would increase national income and product and reduce unemployment, thus further reducing the budget deficit.    This way of reducing the deficit, as opposed to meat-ax cuts in public expenditures for the physical and human capital of the nation, is the really responsible path of helping the economy now and investing in our future.    ---   Mr. Eisner, a Northwestern University professor of economics, has written widely on the budget deficit. He is president-elect of the American Economic Association. </TEXT></DOC>