<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880620-0140 </DOCNO><HL> White Elephant: FSLIC Needs to Sell Distressed Real Estate Faster or Face Squeeze --- Insurer Must Raise Billions To Complete Its Bailout Of Thrifts Doomed to Fail --- Anger at Hotshot Salaries </HL><AUTHOR> David B. Hilder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> BNK REL TNM </IN><TEXT>   The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp.'s problems in bailing out the nation's deeply troubled thrift industry keep growing.    Just two weeks ago, the FSLIC (&quot;fizzlick,&quot; in industry slang) paid out a record $1.35 billion to depositors in two insolvent Southern California Sandamp;Ls. In shutting them down, the FSLIC acquired their assets, mainly real estate and real-estate loans, with a book value of $607 million. The agency hopes to sell the assets for $418 million.    The FSLIC can ill afford to keep this up. Over the next eight years, by the latest estimate of Federal Home Loan Bank Board Chairman M. Danny Wall, the agency will need $35.99 billion in cash to ensure payment for depositors in 500 insolvent Sandamp;Ls that are still operating but destined for closing or merger. Not to worry, Mr. Wall says: The FSLIC and affiliates will take in $36.02 billion in cash over that period.    But this depends on the FSLIC's realizing $6.2 billion from the sale of the country's least desirable real estate, including rental apartments, condominiums and commercial buildings in out-of-the-way neighborhoods in depressed markets. On the books, the real estate is valued at cost, roughly estimated at $10 billion.    The stuff isn't selling nearly as fast as it must to meet Mr. Wall's projections. Attempts to unload it have proved a dismal disappointment. The FSLIC raised a trifling $210 million from the sale of properties in the fiscal year ended last Sept. 30. Although the pace picked up a bit in the first half of fiscal 1988, to an annual rate of $410 million, Mr. Wall is counting on a lot more than that -- $650 million in fiscal 1988 and $860 million a year in each of the following six years.    Sales are dragging for many reasons. There are problems in getting clear title to some properties. Many of the loans they secure are shared by a dozen or so Sandamp;Ls, some of which prefer not to foreclose and book their inevitable losses just yet. Some of the buildings are unfinished and will require expensive refurbishing by buyers. Nearly all the projects were ill-conceived to begin with.    A new affiliate of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which also oversees the FSLIC, was created to manage the most difficult properties. But the agency got mired in bureaucratic infighting and has dissipated some of its effort in fending off charges of waste, incompetence and conflict of interest.    When properties do get sold, a new problem arises. Because their market value is below the value at which they are carried on the books of the FSLIC and still-operating Sandamp;Ls, each sale creates a loss. Already insolvent by at least $13.6 billion, according to one congressional estimate, the FSLIC will slide deeper into the hole even as it raises the fresh cash it needs. This increases the probability that Congress -- that is, U.S. taxpayers -- may be called upon eventually to bail out the FSLIC itself.    Some specialists think Congress should consider helping now to avert catastrophe later.    &quot;If Congress doesn't make available to the FSLIC adequate funds to close insolvent institutions, one of the effects may be to inhibit FSLIC from an optimal workout of its troubled real-estate portfolio,&quot; says R. Dan Brumbaugh, a San Francisco thrift-industry consultant and former bank-board economist.    Any slowdown in the FSLIC's cash flow compounds the problem. Delays in shutting down unprofitable thrifts can only add to their losses and increase the cost of paying off their depositors. Although Mr. Wall says the FSLIC will need just about $36 billion, less-optimistic estimates put the ultimate cost of the thrift bailout as high as $80 billion.    So far, the FSLIC has muddled through without putting the arm on taxpayers. Deposit-insurance premiums paid by the nation's 3,100 thrift institutions, and the proceeds of bond sales, have financed its operations. Mr. Wall acknowledges that real-estate sales have been slow, but he says the pace should quicken as the FSLIC gets clear title to more properties. &quot;Obviously, in a situation like this, one would like to see it done more quickly,&quot; he says.    The FSLIC normally creates separate receiverships to liquidate the loans and other assets of thrifts it closes. With lessening regulation and a wave of failures that began in 1982, the volume of losing assets mushroomed. In 1984 alone, the FSLIC took over failed-thrift assets valued at more than $1.45 billion, more than it had placed in receivership in its previous 50-year history. To deal with the situation, the agency opened regional oversight offices and began hiring outsiders to help manage and sell foreclosed properties.    Even so, the pace of sales remains tortoise-like. It took four years for the FSLIC's Dallas regional office to make a deal to sell 1,981 apartments along the Interstate Highway 30 corridor northeast of Dallas, and the FSLIC's stake in the properties still isn't fully liquidated; as part of the deal, it must retain a 34% interest. FSLIC officials descibe the deal optimistically. &quot;Instead of just trying to sell it for today's value at a substantial discount, we entered into a nine-year equity partnership,&quot; says Thomas Procopio, Dallas regional director. He hopes to recover about $50 million on the apartments, but even that represents a loss of about $200 million.    Mr. Wall, the bank-board chairman, has exhorted the FSLIC to move faster, and the agency has responded. Real-estate sales by FSLIC receiverships were $96 million in the first quarter this year, up from $35 million a year earlier. The receiverships' real-estate portfolios, however, increased to $1.24 billion this past January from $360 million in Janury 1987. The receiverships began the year with $2.4 billion of loans in foreclosure or default; the property that secures these loans also will wind up in the receivership portfolios for sale.    Three years ago, as the FSLIC's real-estate holdings soared and its cash balance sank, bank-board officials and Sandamp;L industry executives searched for a solution. The executives in particular wanted one that wouldn't force Sandamp;Ls to pay higher premiums for deposit insurance, a cost to the industry running into billions of dollars a year.    A new bank-board affiliate, the Federal Asset Disposition Association (FADA), was born in a burst of enthusiasm. Chartered as an Sandamp;L, it was allowed to borrow money to buy real estate from the FSLIC and sell it to private investors. Unconstrained by civil-service salary limits, it was able to hire highly paid real-estate professionals who never would have considered working for the FSLIC.    The high hopes haven't been realized. It soon became clear that legal and financial tangles made it impractical for FADA to take title to real-estate owned by FSLIC receiverships. Instead, FADA set about managing and selling the properties as an agent under contract with the FSLIC. The relationship has never been smooth. FSLIC employees resented FADA's salaries, as high as $250,000 a year, plus a $75,000 bonus, for FADA's former president, Roslyn Payne. FADA also drew criticism for running up big expenses and charging them to the FSLIC.    &quot;FSLIC perceives that the favored status of FADA operates to insulate FADA from the normal disciplines,&quot; according to a report prepared for the bank board by Stuart D. Root, a lawyer later named executive director of the FSLIC. &quot;Considerable tension exists between employees of FSLIC and the FADA organization,&quot; he concluded.    Ms. Payne's high salary made her a special target, particularly when FADA reported that it sold less than 2% of the assets assigned to it during its first year of operation. FADA tried to point out that only 20% of the assets it received were properties ready to be sold; the rest were loans requiring restructuring or foreclosure.    Congressmen were unimpressed. Although acknowledged as a real-estate expert, Ms. Payne had almost no experience in dealing with them, or with the press. A low point came when a CBS television reporter asked her about charges that FADA tried to bribe one of its critics into silence. Ms. Payne stalked out of the interview while the camera was still rolling, and her exit was featured on the network's evening news show. A bank-board investigation later cleared FADA of the bribery accusation.    Ms. Payne quit earlier this year. She was succeeded by Gerald Carmen, former head of the government's General Services Administration.    Several Democratic members of Congress are pressing the Bank Board to disband FADA, but Mr. Wall is resisting.    Real-estate developers and brokers who have dealt with FADA say many of its early problems stemmed from a rapid start-up. In its first year of operation, from July 1986 to June 1987, FADA took over the management of $5.2 billion in assets, instantly making it one of the largest real-estate managers in the nation. Its bureaucracy swelled. &quot;They were getting very good at making lists or filling out forms, but I didn't see much productive work getting done,&quot; says Robert P. Lacy, a real-estate consultant.    Mr. Carmen wants to hire more real-estate professionals and de-emphasize the role of lawyers. &quot;I'm looking for people who want to sell real estate,&quot; he says.    There's a clear need for better marketing. Last September, with much fanfare, FADA offered to sell six shopping centers in Florida and Texas for a total of $48 million. So far, none has been sold. FADA has accepted offers on three centers for undisclosed amounts but hasn't yet received FSLIC approval for the sales. Two other Florida shopping centers are being reappraised because none of the offers were close to what FADA sought.    FADA's overall record isn't much more impressive. Of all the real estate it had available for sale, FADA says it had sold 16% as of March 31. Last year, FADA sold $378 million of real estate but had to provide $77 million in financing. Mr. Carmen hopes to sell $700 million of real estate this year for cash. He hasn't disclosed how he will achieve this doubling in volume.    Other real estate valued at billions of dollars is held by the bank board's Management Consignment Program, under which managers on loan from solid institutions keep insolvent thrifts operating. At the end of last year, real estate owned by the 69 thrifts in the program totaled $5.63 billion, according to Veribanc, a Woburn, Mass., firm that compiles information filed with the bank board. Some of that has been assigned to FADA for management, loan renegotiation or sale. Public reports don't disclose how much real estate has been sold. But whatever the amount, it didn't come close to the amount of newly foreclosed real estate.    During 1987, the amount of real estate owned through foreclosure by the thrifts in the program grew by 52%, to a total of $4.02 billion. Unless that real estate is sold by the temporary managers or by FADA, it will eventually become yet another problem for the FSLIC. </TEXT></DOC>