<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871013-0034 </DOCNO><HL> By Monica LangleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   {This is the ninth in a series of personal profiles of the 1988 presidential candidates.}    For Jack Kemp, the relentlessly buoyant former quarterback, optimism is more than an attitude -- it's a necessity.    &quot;Jack Kemp has been reinforced that when he's positive, he brings others along,&quot; says lifelong friend Russ Ray. &quot;The minute he gets down or shows any lack of confidence, he fears that will rub off on his friends and they won't follow him.&quot;    Rep. Kemp looks at his own life as an example of what optimism can accomplish. Back when he was bouncing around the nether reaches of pro football, Mr. Kemp was waived to the Buffalo Bills in 1962 for $100. But there he became a star; he was named most valuable player in 1965 and led his team to two league titles. &quot;I hung on at the bottom rung of the NFL ladder, but I didn't have the sense of losing,&quot; recalls the Republican presidential hopeful. &quot;I had the sense of making it if somebody would give me the chance.&quot;    Now the upstate New York congressman is counting on his boundless optimism and message of opportunity to win him new followers who will install him as the quarterback in the White House. And just as in his football career, he is running like a man who wants to prove that optimism and effort can overcome the odds.    Jack Kemp is, as longtime admirer Rep. Newt Gingrich (R., Ga.) says, a &quot;man of contradictions.&quot; His language is football, but his bearing is professorial. He is a devoted family man, but has trouble remembering what year he got married. He is a devout conservative who quoted John F. Kennedy 18 times in a recent three-day campaign swing. He has seen more of his ideas translated into policy than any other House member, and yet he shows signs of insecurity.    Perhaps more than any other candidate, Jack Kemp has a core set of beliefs, particularly on the economy, that he has thought through and pushed to make national policy. He was an early force for tax cuts and tax overhaul, and plays a role in international monetary issues, pushing for a return to the gold standard. He's an ardent supporter of the Contras and the Strategic Defense Initiative, and while his foreign-policy views often aren't as developed as his domestic beliefs, they tend to be consistent and coherent because of strong anti-communist underpinnings. Many critics contend that his positions on such social issues as abortion spring more from a desire to pander to conservatives than from deep conviction, but he probably spends more time with genuine intellectuals than any other presidential candidate.    Yet throughout his career, there's a sense of almost trying too hard to convince the world that he isn't just another dumb jock. Mary Rita Miller, a Republican activist in Buffalo, recalls that when he sought the endorsement of GOP officials in his first House race in 1970, he talked not about his football triumphs but how his connections made him &quot;privy&quot; to numerous insiders and issues. &quot;We told him,&quot; she says, &quot;that where he would be campaigning, privies meant only one thing.&quot;    Colleagues today complain that he still feels the need to assume the role of professor, to demonstrate his knowledge of economics or history, and typically overanswers any question. &quot;I think he overdoes his academic passions,&quot; laments Irving Kristol, a mentor of Rep. Kemp. This is a man who not only doesn't read fiction but dismisses it as &quot;irrelevant.&quot; Says House Republican Whip Trent Lott, whom Rep. Kemp identifies as one of his closest personal friends: &quot;There is some of him that wants to make sure people know he can do more than call plays.&quot;    The congressman, who has a degree in physical education from Occidental College, a small, well-regarded liberal-arts school in California, disagrees that he is embarrassed by any lack of educational pedigree. &quot;A PE major at Occidental, without sounding defensive about it, is the equivalent of a premed course at USC or UCLA,&quot; Rep. Kemp says. &quot;I had 32 units of history, which would qualify as a minor at any other school.&quot;    Even some friends, however, wonder about his ability to distinguish between the intellectuals he consults and the ideological zealots he talks with. Some privately worry that his tendency to crusade for strongly held beliefs, coupled with any lapse in judgment, could get him into the same kind of mess President Reagan got into with the Iran-Contra scandal.    Mr. Kemp's quest for self-improvement stretches back to his football days, when he used to load his gym bag with books on politics, philosophy and history, and always read in the front of the plane while other players played poker. Teammates recall that he continued to impress them with new and bigger words.    Yet sometimes, when Rep. Kemp attempts to demonstrate his erudition, he can be fuzzy. Thomas Jefferson, he says, has had the greatest influence on the development of his political thinking, but here is how he describes that influence:    &quot;Number one, Jefferson and the whole declaration, the Declaration of Independence, to me that's what separates America from all other experiments and even history, and it's no secret that Lincoln was a great admirer of Jefferson, and I love that whole sense of not accepting a static condition on earth.&quot;    In his politics, Rep. Kemp is more inclusive than other Republicans. He confidently wears the conservative &quot;populist&quot; label even though some of his views, such as strong opposition to any protectionism, seem antithetical to that label. He will actively seek out minorities and the poor, trying to convince them that his policies will help them. &quot;Jack has showered with people other Republicans never see,&quot; says Rep. Gingrich.    Former football teammate Ernie Warlick recalls that when he and Mr. Kemp were in New Orleans for an all-star game back in the 1960s, they set out to visit a club in the French Quarter. Clubs repeatedly told Mr. Kemp that he was welcome but his black friend wasn't. Mr. Kemp refused to give up, trying club after club. &quot;Finally I told him I just wanted to go back to the hotel, so he went with me,&quot; Mr. Warlick says.    Rep. Kemp's determination and enthusiasm are his biggest strengths and his biggest weaknesses. Rep. Lynn Martin (R., Ill.) likens him to a pit bull, and adds: &quot;He drives you crazy.&quot; Yet for all his delight in verbal combat, there are those who say that Jack Kemp isn't an easy man to know. &quot;Jack is a hard person to get close to,&quot; observes Rep. Henry Hyde (R., Ill.). &quot;Jack has a compartment some place that's very private,&quot; says Mr. Ray, his old friend, who is now president of PSA Airlines. &quot;You wonder really what Jack is thinking. . . . Sometimes you wonder if his mind is a thousand miles away.&quot;    But at home, Jack Kemp is very close. Unlike Ronald Reagan, who talks a lot about family but rarely attended his children's activities, Rep. Kemp has gone to great lengths to attend his kids' games and other events and insists on being home in Washington's Maryland suburbs every Sunday to go to the nearby Evangelical Presbyterian church with his family. He is devoted to his four children; while in the stands last month to watch son Jimmy quarterback the high-school football team, he brought a portable television set so he could simultaneously watch son Jeff play for the Seattle Seahawks. But Mr. Kemp pushes his children as well. Rather than telling them goodbye when they leave the house, Rep. Kemp calls out, &quot;Be a leader.&quot;    Tom Kemp says his brother's devotion to his family and to his religion was instilled in him by their parents. The Kemps were raised in Los Angeles, where their father parlayed a tiny motorcycle-messenger service into a trucking company and their mother was a social worker.    Richard Valentine, Mr. Kemp's high-school football coach, recalls the future candidate as a scrawny B-squader who eventually filled out and graduated to the varsity. Even back then, Mr. Valentine recalls, young Jack was obviously &quot;extremely competitive&quot; -- though his failure to go for a long bomb in one close game still rankles the coach.    Mr. Kemp married his college sweetheart from the sorority house next door, and began his journey through pro football. When he suffered a severe finger injury, the quarterback had the surgeon mold his finger around a football to ensure he would be able to continue to play.    It was while Mr. Kemp was playing in San Diego that he caught the attention of Herb Klein, the editor of the San Diego Union and an insider in California Republican politics. Mr. Klein invited him to write columns and to give speeches for the newspaper. He also set Mr. Kemp up for an internship with then-Gov. Ronald Reagan, which helped shape his conservative values.    But those days also marked the beginning of rumors, which have dogged him since, that he once had a homosexual encounter. His aides talk openly about the rumors, and they -- and Mr. Kemp -- vehemently deny them. Given &quot;the nature of the business I'm in, rumors are pretty standard fare,&quot; the congressman says. He also denies other rumors -- some even raised by supporters, perhaps to counter the homosexual allegation -- that he has been a womanizer. &quot;That's nonsense,&quot; Mr. Kemp says angrily, calling the womanizer rumors &quot;groundless and baseless.&quot;    But defensiveness isn't the usual style for this exuberant former quarterback, whose biggest hurdle remains overtaking George Bush and Robert Dole for the GOP nomination. For a moment, the eternal optimist allows himself to contemplate defeat. &quot;In my heart of hearts, I didn't get into this without entertaining the possibility that I might lose,&quot; he says. &quot;I think I could take a defeat with dignity. . . . When I was coming off a football field, I never ducked my head.&quot; But then he straightens his broad shoulders and flashes his winning grin, and the optimism returns instinctively. &quot;Hey, I'm not a quitter. I think I've come a long way . . . and I'm going to keep charging the ramparts and telling people to follow me.&quot;    ---   IN BRIEF   JACK KEMP   -- 52 YEARS OLD   --MARRIED 29 YEARS, FOUR CHILDREN    -- OCCIDENTAL COLLEGE   -- REPUBLICAN OF NEW YORK   U.S. CONGRESSMAN 1971 to present; Republican conference chairman 1981 to 1987.    Economist he'd turn to for advice: Ludwig von Mises.    Foreign-policy adviser he'd rely on: Jeane Kirkpatrick.    His worst political mistake: &quot;Promoting David Stockman as OMB Director.&quot;    American liberal he most admires: &quot;John F. Kennedy, for his tax cuts; Hubert Humphrey for the length of his speeches.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>