<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880719-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Iran Embraces U.N.'s Cease-Fire, Offering Best Chance to End War --- Acceptance is Seen Thawing Relations With the U.S.; Iraq Reacts Skeptically </HL><AUTHOR> Robert S. Greenberger and Geraldine Brooks (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST FORGN </CO><G> DEF EXE </G><TEXT>   Iran said it accepted a United Nations cease-fire in its bitter war with Iraq, offering the best chance yet to end the nearly eight-year war, reduce tension in the strategic Persian Gulf and restore some normalcy to Iranian-American relations.    Iran's surprise agreement to stop the shooting in a war that has claimed nearly one million Iraqi and Iranian lives is being read by U.S. officials and Iran watchers as evidence of a fundamental shift in Iranian policy, away from efforts to export its Islamic revolution and toward an attempt to revive Islamic fervor in a war-weary populace. If this analysis proves correct, the greatest significance may not be an end to the war, which largely has been sputtering for at least the past year, but the potential for unfreezing U.S. relations with Iran, a strategically important and oil-rich Persian Gulf nation.    The cease-fire would remove a key irritant in Iranian-American relations by clearing the way for reducing a massive U.S. naval presence in the Persian Gulf. &quot;If peace breaks out, we don't want to stay there at our present level,&quot; a senior U.S. official said yesterday.    Before any of this can happen, of course, Iraq, too, must adhere to a cease-fire. Iraq's immediate reaction was skeptical. &quot;Our previous knowledge of the devious Iranian regime makes us be cautious and wary until peace is achieved . . . &quot; the Iraqi News Agency quoted its information minister as saying.    Actually, Iraq agreed to the cease-fire resolution when the U.N. passed it a year ago. Iraq's fortunes in the war then were flagging, and Iranian troops occupied key pieces of Iraqi territory, including Faw, a tiny tip of land near Iraq's major port city of Basrah. In recent months, Iraq has reclaimed most of its occupied territory and even taken bits of Iranian territory. As a result, Iraq now seems far less enthusiastic about a cease-fire. Indeed, President Saddam Hussein Sunday declared that his nation stood &quot;at the edge of victory&quot; and unveiled a peace plan loaded with conditions Iran repeatedly has refused.    Meanwhile, Iran's ravaged economy, its weary population and its growing international isolation all make it more eager to achieve a cease-fire. Moreover, since the U.N. resolution passed, Iran has lost most of the Iraqi territory it held, so it no longer faces the prospect of having to withdraw from territory it spilled much blood to gain. And, most importantly, the resolution also calls for a establishing an &quot;impartial body&quot; to determine blame for the war. Tehran contends, and much of the world agrees, that Iraq started the war by invading Iran Sept. 20, 1980.    Whether this new overture by Iran actually brings peace depends largely on Iran's sincerity and on the world's ability to press an increasingly cocky Iraq to settle for peace now, rather than press for further humiliation of Iran. That may prove difficult. A cease-fire agreement would raise the issue of who is responsible for the war, and Saddam Hussein is determined to avoid being labeled the aggressor, thus creating a strong incentive to keep any U.N. debate focused on other issues.    White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater called the Iranian announcement a &quot;breakthrough&quot; and &quot;an important first step.&quot; He said the U.S. will continue to try to bring peace between Iraq and Iran, but he didn't outline what new diplomatic steps, if any, the U.S. is pursuing.    Ironically, the accidental shooting down of a civilian Iranian airliner by a U.S. naval vessel earlier this month, which initially worsened U.S.-Iranian relations, may have spurred the Iranian policy change.    &quot;In its own peculiar way, this may have added to their sense of frustration, and their sense that they were, in effect, surrounded and had a superpower at war with them,&quot; said Gary Sick, an Iran expert at Columbia University.    Following the airliner incident in which 290 people died, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini spurned a call by his designated successor, Hossein Montazari, for an all-out war against the U.S., and Iran didn't retaliate for the incident. At last week's U.N. debate over the plane's downing, Iran's rhetoric was surprisingly restrained.    Mr. Sick says these actions are part of a process that began more than a year ago, when Iran concluded it couldn't win the gulf war and began actively seeking a graceful exit. That conclusion came, he believes, after Iran threw all its might into a prolonged battle in January 1987 to capture Iraq's second-largest city, Basrah, and failed. After that, Iraq escalated its war against Iranian cities, relentlessly bombing Tehran and other population centers. Iraq also stepped up its use of chemical weapons against Iranians, increasing their distaste for the war.    All this prompted Iranian officials to seek a dialogue with the U.S. Earlier this month, Secretary of State George Shultz said that Iran made a series of diplomatic &quot;probes&quot; through third parties, and that the U.S. acknowledged its interest in discussions with authorized Iranian officials.    One U.S. official believes Iranian moderates such as House Speaker Hashemi Rafsanjani pushed to get Ayatollah Khomeini's endorsement of the U.N. resolution, with the idea that winning his blessing now to end the war would minimize infighting once the ailing leader leaves the scene. The belief is that Mr. Rafsanjani and his supporters convinced the ayatollah that the continued focus on the war threatens the revolution's survival at home. Despite his harsh rhetoric, Ayatollah Khomeini has shown a pragmatic side in the past, when he became convinced that his revolution was in jeopardy.    All this has brought about a remarkable shift in the war. Iraq, near collapse in January 1987, now boasts of being &quot;near victory,&quot; and portrays itself to Arab neighbors as having single-handedly beaten back the Persians.    How much influence the U.S. and Arab nations such as Saudi Arabia and Jordan, who want the war to end, can -- or will -- exert over Iraq remains to be seen.    Iran's motivations aren't clear either. It is possible Iran is using the call for a cease-fire to end its isolation and to buy time to re-arm. Recently, Iran has been negotiating with China and North Korea to buy arms.    Iran is expected to push hard for quick formation of a U.N. commission to determine responsibility for the war, which can only heighten Iraq's reluctance to proceed with the cease-fire. Since the conflict began, Ayatollah Khomeini has vowed to continue the fight until President Saddam Hussein is removed from power. Now, &quot;they'll try to get his head on a platter diplomatically, instead of militarily,&quot; Mr. Sick says.    Despite these risks, many experts are initially optimistic. &quot;It seems to me when Iran makes such a radical departure in its stated aims, you've got to believe something has changed,&quot; said James Placke, an international affairs consultant and former State Department official with long experience in the Persian Gulf. </TEXT></DOC>