<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0127 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Republican right is escalating its fight against President Reagan's policy of withholding support for anti-communist guerrillas in Mozambique.    The administration has been providing aid to the government in Mozambique, a famine-stricken African country that controls vital transportation routes, in an effort to lure it away from Moscow and into the West's camp. Although Mozambique is easing its rigid economic controls and downgrading its military ties with the Soviet Union, powerful right-wing Republicans argue that the administration should be working to overthrow, rather than change, the Maputo government's Kremlin-backed leaders.    Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) and other conservatives contend that the U.S. ought to aid Renamo, the anticommunist guerrilla organization created by Rhodesian whites and backed by South Africa. To gain leverage, he and 27 other senators are blocking approval of Mr. Reagan's nominee for the U.S. ambassadorship to Mozambique. They also have scored a major victory by bringing presidential hopeful Robert Dole onto their side.    &quot;This has become very much a political issue for '88 for those wanting to prove who is going to be tough enough to stand up to the communists, and I'm afraid it might cause us to lose a significant opportunity,&quot; says Sen. Nancy Kassebaum, former chairman of the Senate African affairs subcommittee and Sen. Dole's Republican colleague from Kansas. &quot;I hate to see us get locked into an ideological fight without understanding the complexities.&quot;    Mozambique still has a large number of Soviet-bloc advisers, and it has left intact the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation it signed with Moscow in 1977, but &quot;the orientation of the regime is clearly more westward than at any time since independence&quot; from Portugal in 1975, says Helen Kitchen, Africa expert at the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies.    However, William Pascoe, a policy analyst at the conservative Heritage Foundation, says the West is fooling itself if it thinks that Mozambique's modest turn toward economic and military cooperation with the West means it is less Leninist.    &quot;Just because someone is willing to take our money doesn't mean it is in our interests to give it to them,&quot; he says. Under a new arms pact, the Soviets will send MiG-23 jet fighters and T-62 tanks to Mozambique, and President Joaquin Chissano has promised that he won't stray into Western dependence, Mr. Pascoe notes.    State Department officials complain that all the Republican muscle-flexing has already prompted Senate moves to block $50 million in extra funds that the administration wanted to offer to black countries in southern Africa. Instead, Senate Republicans, with Sen. Dole at the forefront, want the U.S. to aid Renamo.    Support for these Pretoria-backed guerillas, who maintain a Washington office at the Heritage Foundation, would hurt U.S. efforts to build bridges to black Africa.    (On Friday, Mozambique charged that South African commandos killed three people during a raid against the Maputo offices of the anti-apartheid African National Congress. The South African Defense Force called the reports of the raid &quot;unsubstantiated.&quot; Over the weekend, South African President P.W. Botha rejected U.S. criticism of the attack in Maputo -- but didn't confirm South African involvement -- and accused the Reagan administration of maintaining a double standard on terrorism.)    The conservatives also are fighting to scuttle the nomination of the U.S. ambassador to Mozambique, Melissa Wells, a 29-year veteran of the Foreign Service who has become a political symbol of the Reagan policy. Upset over accusations that she called Renamo bandits, 28 Republican senators voted that her nomination shouldn't even be considered.    As part of her approval process, Sen. Helms had Ms. Wells answer 247 written questions ranging from whether true democracy is too much to ask of blacks commited to &quot;scientific socialism&quot; to whether she studied &quot;scientific socialism&quot; during her youth in Eastern Europe. She was born in Estonia and left at age three.    Conservatives know they can't win Mr. Reagan to their side. They complain that the president is too much under the influence of two women he respects: British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and his daughter Maureen Reagan, both of whom feel strongly about backing Mozambique.    Mrs. Thatcher recently doubled her annual aid to Mozambique and expanded a training program for officers, and Maureen Reagan led the U.S. delegation to the funeral of leader Samora Machel, a man she had grown to admire before he died in a plane crash last year.    However, Sen. Dole is willing to help lead the anti-Mozambique fight, a move that is winning him points with conservatives who are somewhat skeptical of his candidacy. His cooperation with Sen. Helms will help him in North Carolina and with the hard right as he fights for the GOP presidential nomination.    In the past, Sen. Dole has voted for bills that included aid to Mozambique. But now, &quot;he feels the policy of trying to buy Mozambique's loyalty away from Moscow just isn't going to work,&quot; says Alford Lehn, Sen. Dole's national security adviser. As a result, Sen. Dole is joining the right to oppose economic and development assistance, fight the Wells nomination and urge the State Department to establish contacts with Renamo in order to facilitate aid deliveries to areas it controls.    &quot;It's the ideologues in both parties who control the nominating process,&quot; says Mr. Pascoe of the Heritage Foundation. &quot;Among presidential candidates, the battle is now for the conservatives. I'm perfectly willing to accept that Sen. Dole supports the policy due to his presidential ambitions.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>