<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890803-0142 </DOCNO><DD> = 890803 </DD><AN> 890803-0142. </AN><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:@  Going Against the Flow@  ----@  By Stephen MacDonald </HL><DD> 08/03/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   John McPhee's new book, &quot;The Control of Nature&quot; (Farrar, Straus andamp; Giroux, 272 pages, $17.95), is about engineers trying to keep liquids from flowing downhill. They shore up the banks of the Mississippi River to prevent the water from carving a disastrous new channel. They spray sea water on an Icelandic lava flow to harden it before it oozes through a fishing harbor. And they build stadium-sized basins to capture the muddy debris that slurps down the San Gabriel mountains near Los Angeles, sweeping along cars, houses and sometimes people.    The title is ironic. No matter how imaginative, shrewd, tireless and well-financed the engineers may be, and no matter how assertively they spout their confidence, it's likely that in the end these liquid masses will find gravity more compelling than any contrivances of man.    Mr. McPhee is a writer's writer -- a master craftsman whom many aspirants study -- now famous and long ensconced at the New Yorker magazine, where &quot;The Control of Nature&quot; first appeared. For one thing, he has an engaging, distinctive voice. It is warm, understated and wry. Within a paragraph or two, he takes us into his company and makes us feel we're on an outing with an old chum. A talky old chum, to be sure, with an occasional tendency to corniness and rambling, but a cherished one nevertheless.    And Mr. McPhee is the envy of other writers for his ability to follow wherever his fancy leads. He has pulled off whole books, for example, about oranges, his Scottish ancestors, birch-bark canoes and a tail-less airplane. We read his books not so much because we're thirsty for information about canoes, but because it's worth tagging along on any literary journey Mr. McPhee feels like taking.    Lately, however, our old friend has been straining his luck with a series of books about the earth sciences: Even a master can breathe only so much life into plate tectonics. So it was dismaying to learn that in his new book Mr. McPhee is still stuck in the rock pile. &quot;The Control of Nature&quot; may be about water, lava and mud, but it grows from the author's seemingly deep and eternal wonderment with geological lore.    Fortunately, though, the three stories are genuinely interesting, with lots of pleasantly eccentric people and a minimum of talky scientists.    Over time the Mississippi River carries silt from upstream and deposits it near the mouth. The silt extends the river and makes it shallower, until it spills over its banks and begins to cut a new channel. This process, repeated since prehistoric time, created most of the state of Louisiana. But it can't be allowed to continue, or New Orleans and Baton Rouge will be left low and dry along with the industrial complexes that line the current channel.    The biggest threat is the Atchafalaya River, which once merely swung near the Mississippi 300 miles north of New Orleans. Years ago, the Mississippi jumped the gap, and the Atchafalaya became a distributary. A thirsty distributary at that, for each year it took more water from the big river, threatening to swallow it whole. At that point, the Army Corps of Engineers declared war.    Today a reinforced-concrete navigation lock governs the flow into the Atchafalaya, but the Mississippi is already nibbling at its underpinnings. While the Corps voices confidence, other scientists say the river will ultimately make its own path.    In Iceland, what's flowing out of control isn't water but lava. Mr. McPhee reconstructs the 1973 volcanic eruption on Heimaey, an island off the south coast, that rained rock and ash on a town and harbor for 5 1/2 months. And instead of Army engineers, the battle was led by an assistant harbor master with an idea that struck the entire nation as absurd: Squirt water on the lava to harden it before it reached the town or harbor. The massive hosing did indeed stop the early flow. Then, as the eruption continued, the cooled lava barrier actually diverted a new flow right into town, burying 200 buildings. But since the lava narrowed and improved the harbor mouth, the episode is recalled as a triumph.    The fluid that flows so disastrously in Los Angeles is a slurry of muddy debris, including boulders the size of automobiles, from the upper reaches of the San Gabriel Mountains. When conditions are right, the debris breaks loose and thunders down the mountainside, wiping out everything in its path. But wealthy people enjoy the views and the cool breezes, so they continue to build houses on the slopes. As a result, the county has had to build and maintain -- at enormous taxpayer expense -- huge structures high above the houses to capture the debris. But these basins are useless unless they are emptied as soon as they fill, and in any case there aren't enough basins to protect every house in every canyon. Of the three stories, this one cries most loudly of arrogance and futility.    From the opening anecdote, which describes the author unfurling one of his trademark bandannas, the book is unmistakable McPhee: the silky narrative with keen detail and sharp dialogue, the finely drawn characters, the nimble metaphors, easy pace and meandering but skillful organization. The act may be getting familiar, but it hasn't lost much of its allure.    One suggestion for later editions: Some visual aids would help. The relationship of the Mississippi, the Atchafalaya and the Corps of Engineers' locks and dikes, for example, is incomprehensible without a map.    ---Mr. MacDonald observes nature in Ulster County, N.Y. </TEXT></DOC>