<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871217-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Another Brief Shining Moment Come and Gone---By Michael Kinsley</HL><DD> 12/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;At night, before we'd go to sleep, Jack liked to play some records; and the song he loved most came at the very end of this record. The lines he loved to hear were: 'Don't let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief shining moment that was known as Camelot.'&quot; She wanted to make sure that the point came clear and went on: &quot;There'll be great Presidents again -- and the Johnsons are wonderful, they've been wonderful to me -- but there'll never be another Camelot again.&quot;    --Theodore H. White, &quot;An Epilogue&quot;    Life Magazine, Dec. 6, 1963   And, what's more, Jacqueline Kennedy was right. Teddy White's famous article, published just a few days after John F. Kennedy's assassination, helped to encase Kennedy's administration in a shiny coating of nostalgia that has never cracked. Eisenhower nostalgia, a growth industry in recent years, still has nothing on it. Johnson nostalgia doesn't exist, even though LBJ was a far larger figure both personally and historically. For liberals, there'll never be another Camelot again. They'll grow old and die on dreams of the Kennedy era. And for Americans generally, the early 1960s are remembered as a time of happy innocence, before Vietnam, Watergate, inflation, OPEC, the ayatollah, terrorism, and so on.    At the moment, conservatives are furious at President Reagan. Howard Phillips, president of the Conservative Caucus, has called him &quot;a useful idiot for Soviet propaganda&quot; because of his support for arms control. Conservatives are dismayed by Mr. Reagan's support for the budget compromise, with its defense cuts and (barely visible) tax increases; by the Bork/Ginsburg Supreme Court fiasco; and by his love-fest with Mikhail Gorbachev.    But this fury really represents the first flowering of Reagan nostalgia, which has emerged in full bloom even though the man himself -- or what's left of him -- still has another year left in office. Nostalgia is the truth behind the bitter conservative joke, first heard after Judge Bork was shot down: &quot;This never would have happened if Reagan were still alive.&quot; The same nostalgia was reflected in the recent Wall Street Journal editorial headlined despairingly, &quot;Reagan for President.&quot;    Conservatives will spend the rest of their political lives mourning the loss of Ronald Reagan, which occurred spiritually around October 1986. The sun will never shine as bright again for them. Their children will grow up on tales of past glory, which will grow in the retelling. And for Americans generally the early 1980s will be remembered as an age of innocence and optimism like the early 1960s, compared with the more troubled times that are almost sure to follow. Mr. Reagan, like Kennedy, will get excessive credit for the golden memories. Like Kennedy's, his popular reputation will survive withering scholarly debunking.    Seventeen months ago, at the peak of Mr. Reagan's popularity, this newspaper heralded &quot;the onset of an era&quot;: the era of permanent conservative political dominance and the triumphal vindication of conservative nostrums of economic, social and foreign policy. The era didn't last long. Even if a Republican wins the presidency next year, he will be a mainstream moderate, pallid and uncharismatic, and will have to deal with a Democratic Congress. Whether Democrat or Republican, he will reach some kind of modus vivendi with the Sandinistas. He will not build Star Wars. He will propose or at least reluctantly endorse new social programs. He will certainly face terrible economic problems that are the actual legacy of Reaganism, but which Reagan nostalgiacs will blame on his failure to keep the faith.    For those Reagan nostalgiacs, the Ronald Reagan of today is to the &quot;real&quot; Reagan as LBJ was to JFK at the peak of Kennedy nostalgia in, say, 1967: a betrayer of the legacy, a dispeller of the magic. In fact, of course, Johnson's record of achievement far surpasses Kennedy's, and not just because he had longer to do it. Similarly, if the old Reagan's reputation is not to crumble completely, he will have the new Reagan -- the Reagan who is willing to deal with Congress and with the Soviets -- to thank.    Yet devoted Reaganites are already singing the &quot;expulsion from Eden&quot; lament that New Frontiersmen have been wailing for decades. Kennedy, said the liberals of the 1960s, would never have gotten us into Vietnam. Kennedy, say the neoconservatives of the 1970s and 1980s -- some of them the same people -- was a peace-through-strength man who would have avoided McGovernite appeasement and Carteresque softness, who cut taxes, who understood the difference between civil rights and affirmative action, and so on.    No matter what the future political journeys of those who swooned for Mr. Reagan in the early 1980s -- and many of them surely will follow the Zeitgeist back toward the left, just as surely as many Kennedyites followed it to the right -- they will convince themselves that whatever they don't like about the current political situation would never have happened when Ronald Reagan was president.    Reagan nostalgia has the potential to be an even more oppressive presence in our political culture than Kennedy nostalgia. The Kennedy cult was immeasurably enhanced by the fact that he was snatched from us in the prime of life and early in his tenure, before the inevitable disenchantment set in. But Kennedy never achieved the Godlike presence during his lifetime that Mr. Reagan enjoyed barely a year ago. Remember the Time cover story for July 4 last year? &quot;His life is a sort of fairy tale of American power . . .&quot; etc. Mr. Reagan, far more than Kennedy, convinced millions of Americans he had found the secret of everlasting prosperity, peace and general contentment, and convinced his own political allies they would never be out of power again. &quot;The rain may never fall 'til after sundown/By eight the morning fog must disappear . . .&quot; What was supply-side economics if not that?    Of course, the expulsion from Eden was foreordained. Magic doesn't work forever, either in managing the economy or in managing the world. Bills come due, bluffs get called, luck runs out. Furthermore, political swings aren't permanent, either, however they might seem when the pendulum hits one end of its arc.    Who will emerge as the Arthur Schlesinger Jr., the Pierre Salinger, the Dave Powers of Reaganism -- the keepers of the flame? Right now, no one's vying for the honor. But it won't be long before memories of the new Reagan fade away and people will think again of the old Reagan, and how great life was around 1983.    ---   Mr. Kinsley edits The New Republic. </TEXT></DOC>