<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Insider Trading: The Moral Issue</HL><DD> 03/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   I was appalled at SEC Chairman John Shad's claim to the moral high ground on the subject of insider trading (editorial page, Feb. 6). Backed by the coercive power of the state, Mr. Shad can properly claim that insider trading is illegal and that those caught doing it will be punished. But to hear him proclaim that such illegal trading is also unethical is curious.    To his credit, Mr. Shad notes, if only briefly, that some economists think insider trading actually makes markets more efficient by moving stock prices &quot;in the 'right' direction.&quot; But, he asserts, this is small consolation to innocent investors who are exploited when corporate insiders and their confidants trade on material, nonpublic information. How many times must Mr. Shad be reminded that, if markets are truly efficient, stock prices will follow a random walk, and innocent investors cannot be injured by insider trading? Quite the contrary; not knowing tomorrow's stock price, and therefore having made the decision to sell for whatever reason, innocent investors are paid more for their stock than they would otherwise be paid without the participation of insiders in the market.    If insider trading is unethical why have so few publicly held corporations adopted provisions proscribing it? Presumably, competition among corporate promoters would lead them voluntarily to adopt such provisions if it was truly unethical. This really gets to the heart of the ethical issue, which concerns freedom of contract. Corporations are voluntary consensual arrangements to which no investor has ever been coerced into contributing his wealth. Absent distinct and identifiable third-party effects, such voluntary arrangements should carry a presumption of fairness and efficiency.    True to the now-familiar story of bureaucratic imperialism, Mr. Shad and his SEC staff have consistently sought to expand the legal interpretation of insider trading. In the process they have succeeded in increasing the size and scope of their agency, and Congress now proposes further increases. This observation has led many to wonder whose interests are really being served by the rule against insider trading. And as long as we are casting stones, perhaps it should be pointed out that the world would be a far better place if government bureaucrats followed ethical standards that dissuaded them from continually increasing their purview.    Prof. D. Bruce Johnsen   Texas Aandamp;M University   College Station, Texas   ---   Chairman Shad was right on the mark. The entire SEC deserves credit for its war against insider trading, one of Mr. Shad's priorities. The agency's success was evident even before the Levine/Boesky cases. From 1934 to 1981, the SEC brought a total of 77 insider-trading cases. Since 1981, the SEC has prosecuted more than 125 cases, and hasn't shied away from the big and the sensitive cases.    We should be careful not to indict an entire profession for the sins of a few. The scandal will be used as a smoke screen by people with entirely different agendas. This is most apparent in the legislative arena, where those who want to inhibit mergers or hostile takeovers or &quot;junk bonds,&quot; and exert federal control over corporations, are seizing on insider trading as proof that &quot;something needs to be done.&quot; But these are separate issues.    It is no surprise that most insider-trading violations are associated with mergers and acquisitions -- friendly or hostile. There are few events in a corporation's history that cause stock prices to change as dramatically and thus provide such opportunity to make illegal profits on inside information. But the fact that someone can use a legitimate activity to profit illegally does not mean that we should stop the activity to prevent the illegal action.    However, it appears the targets may already be lined up. Arbitrageurs, hostile takeovers, institutional investors, the &quot;casino society&quot; and deregulation have been offered as scapegoats in lieu of the real culprits: greed and moral turpitude. The challenge in this supercharged environment will be to pursue constructive ideas and maintain federal controls only where necessary without unduly infringing on proper corporate management and private-sector financial markets.    Joseph R. Wright Jr.   Deputy Director   Office of Management and Budget    Washington   ---   A market that tolerates insider trading is crooked in the same way that a race track that allows fixed races is crooked.    If I were president of a law or business school where a more-than-average number of my graduates were involved in such shady practices, I would quickly want to investigate my professors' ethics and the content of their curriculum.    Our forefathers knew what it seems our present generation must relearn: that a democracy and freedom cannot exist without a strong religious undergirding.    Joseph Jacob   President, Technology Unlimited Inc.   Wooster, Ohio</TEXT></DOC>