<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880426-0134 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- On Sports: Race Walking: The Slow Road to Seoul </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Indianapolis  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Let it be recorded that the first member of the 1988 U.S. Olympic track and field team qualified at a few minutes before noon here Sunday. He won his event in a walk, but that doesn't diminish his achievement. His event was a walk.    It stretched (or, rather, looped) for 50 kilometers up and down New York Street in the Hoosier metropolis, or 31 miles in real distance. The winner, Carl Schueler, traversed it in three hours, 57 minutes and 48 seconds. That works out to a pace of almost 7 1/2 miles an hour, a pretty swift hike.    About 200 spectators were on hand in gray, chilly weather to applaud when Schueler, a land-use planner from Colorado Springs, Colo., entered the Indiana University Track Stadium alone for the final laps. The throng wasn't large by Olympic standards, but the winner thought it made up in quality what it lacked in size. &quot;I bet I knew half the crowd here today,&quot; the trim, bespectacled redhead said later. &quot;Not a lot of people follow race walking, but those that do are a kind of fraternity.&quot;    Schueler won the title of earliest track Olympian by a couple of hours over Mark Conover, who won the men's running marathon held later Sunday afternoon in Jersey City, N.J. Those two events were conducted early, partly, I guess, because that'll give contestants time to catch their breath before the September Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea.    Sal Corrallo, race-walking chairman for The Athletics Congress, the U.S. governing body for the sport, said that another reason for the early 50K walking trial was that many of the men who competed also will be in the 20K trial here in July. That's a mere sprint of 12.4 miles, and requires &quot;speed work -- a whole different kind of training,&quot; Corrallo said. No kidding, he really did.    That there have been two walking races in recent Olympics represents something of a triumph for the usually overlooked activity, whose supporters claim Rodney Dangerfield as their spiritual father. In 1976 at Montreal, when the Olympics were in a temporary streamlining mode, each sport was asked to jettison an event, and track and field volunteered the 50K walk.    The 20K event has a similarly spotty history. Beginning with the 1956 Games in Melbourne, Australia, it replaced 10,000 meters as the sport's &quot;short&quot; event because of continuing disputes over walkers being disqualified for running, i.e., proceeding without one foot in contact with the ground.    Lengthening the race and slowing the pace did not end such hassles, however. After Daniel Bautista Rocha of Mexico won the 20K at Montreal in '76, photos clearly showed him airborne during some strides. Officials at the 1980 go-around in Moscow got nasty and disqualified seven members of the field, including the two leaders at the 9,500-meter mark, for this offense. The winner, Maurizio Damilano of Italy, moved up from third because of the misdeeds of his opponents. One fella got the hook here Sunday, not for running but for &quot;creeping.&quot; That's what they call not fully extending the leg at each step. If you've seen race walkers in action, you know that they do not stroll as do you and I. They pump their arms and wiggle their hips vigorously, producing a motion that Red Smith once likened to that of earthworms out after a thunderstorm. This can evoke hilarity among unhip spectators, but it also permits the racers to move as fast as they do.    &quot;The hip and arm movements allow full leg extension and a very quick step turnover,&quot; explains the lean Mr. Corrallo, a researcher at the U.S. Department of Education in Washington when he's not supervising walking races or competing in master's events. &quot;The most speed you can get walking in the normal way is maybe four miles per hour, while experienced racers can go twice that fast. I get a kick out of changing gears when I'm walking on the street with someone who doesn't know my background. I love to see his eyes bug.&quot;    Walking has gained ground as an exercise in recent years, and the sport's competitive ranks have grown apace. Still, it is pursued seriously by only a few hundred soles in the U.S., hardly a large enough figure for world domination. East Germans placed 1-2-5 in the 50K at the World Championship in Rome last summer, and an Italian won the 20K.    The U.S.'s best finish at 50K in the worlds was a 16th by the 32-year-old Schueler. Right behind him was Marco Evoniuk, 30, of San Francisco, who placed second here and is the American recordholder at the distance. Evoniuk, a financial consultant, also qualified for the Olympics, along with third-placer Andy Kaestner, a part-time bartender from Racine, Wis., who at 24 is the youngster of the group.    Schueler and Evoniuk are old sparring partners, and 1988 will be their third Olympics. The difference between them on Sunday, about four minutes, might have been attributable to the weather: Schueler likes it cool, Evoniuk warm. &quot;Another 15 degrees and I might have had him,&quot; joked Evoniuk between deep breaths.    After the event, the race-walking people held a public clinic, and about half the audience stuck around to attend. Before long, the IU track was filled with people of various ages and shapes, swinging their arms and wiggling their hips.    Winner Schueler stayed, too, and while he was too sore to take part, he chatted with the folks, patted children on the heads and signed autographs. He was still there when I left, two hours after the post-race interviews.    &quot;Waiting for my lift,&quot; he shrugged.    Carl Lewis always has a car waiting. </TEXT></DOC>