<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880712-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: An American Views Japan's Copycat Culture </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><TEXT>   Donald M. Spero is living proof of the American economic system's special ability to produce innovators and risk takers. He and four college friends set up shop in 1971 to make a microwave-actuated ultraviolet lamp they had invented. After four years of poverty and near failure, they finally got a venture-capital transfusion from a Textron Inc. affiliate and then a life-saving order from Adolph Coors Co. for lamps to dry beer-can labels.    Today, Fusion Systems Corp. is a thriving concern with more than 200 employees, a modern plant in Rockville, Md., and sales exceeding $25 million. Its lamps and related equipment are used internationally not only for drying labels but, among other things, for lithography and fusing semiconductor wafers and coatings to optical fibers. The unique bulb is produced in a high-security laboratory at Rockville. It has no filaments or electrical leads. Microwaves produced by a small generator -- like those in home ovens -- actuate it. Thus, its rays are intense, accurately controllable and adaptable to different applications merely by altering the mix of gases.    Companies such as this are spawned easily in the U.S. in part because venture capital is available and market entry relatively easy. Moreover, Americans have always known that if they invent something new, useful and, in legal terms, &quot;non-obvious,&quot; it is patentable and they have a chance to become rich. Even though economists constantly debate whether patents reduce or enhance competition, there can be little doubt that they foster innovation and initiative. Mr. Spero and his colleagues were willing to risk their savings and live on spaghetti and meatballs for four years because they had a useful, unique and protected product.    But when Fusion Systems went international, Mr. Spero, who has been president from the beginning, was confronted with a totally different arena -- Japan. Fusion has captured 80% of the market for ultraviolet lamps in Japan, but in so doing has attracted the attention of a very large potential competitor, Mitsubishi Electric. Mr. Spero feels he is being subjected to a patent assault in Japan by Mitsubishi. He also believes the Japanese patent system is designed to encourage copying.    &quot;I don't think it is right for American companies to complain that Japan is a tough place to operate, in terms of language and culture,&quot; he says. &quot;We sign up for that when we go over there. We also accept the fact that as a small company we have to compete with big companies.    &quot;But the core of the problem is that the Japanese patent system is structured intentionally with a different objective than the American system. The U.S. system sets up a legal monopoly to give the inventor and the inventor's company a chance to obtain some market advantage. The Japanese system is aimed at avoiding conflict and promoting cooperation, which is part of the Japanese culture. In legal, patent terms that means cross-licensing. So the entire system is set up very, very effectively to convince you and me if we are competing against each other in Japan to cross-license. That is a very disadvantageous approach for small companies in any culture.    &quot;The patent system has a powerful effect on people with ideas. I don't think there is anything culturally or genetically less inventive about the Japanese. It's just that their system encourages them to borrow from other people before they do it themselves. So that's what they do.    &quot;They've gotten good at what they've been encouraged to do by their system. But I have told them that they really should fix this because in the long run they'll be better off. The Japanese could be as creative in terms of fundamental science as anyone else.&quot; Mr. Spero last month argued just that in an article in a major Japanese newspaper.    Mr. Spero cites several key differences between the U.S. and Japanese systems. The U.S. honors the &quot;first-to-invent&quot; while with Japan it's &quot;first-to-apply.&quot; U.S. applicants must disclose all &quot;prior art&quot; and thus prove they have something distinctly new and different. In Japan, says Mr. Spero, it's possible to patent a relatively minor change, such as a &quot;bicycle with red pedals.&quot; Material in U.S. patent applications is secret, whereas in Japan it is made available to potential challengers. And since the process may drag on for six years or so in Japan, compared with two years in the U.S., the applicant is vulnerable to an assault of competing applications with minor variations for a long period, not to mention the possibility of genuine technology advances.    Mr. Spero feels that Mitsubishi is subjecting him to a strategy called patent flooding, filing for many patents on inventions similar to the Fusion equipment. &quot;We don't have any problem now, but we'll have a terrible problem if this strategy succeeds because we've built good products and a good market and it's growing.    &quot;If they tighten the noose then they will eventually enjoy the benefits of the markets we have created. If we say, 'OK, we will cross-license you,' then all of a sudden we are competing against Mitsubishi of Japan with the same products. I don't think we'll beat them based on economic muscle or name recognition.&quot;    Mr. Spero says it is hard to understand why a big world-wide company would risk U.S. retaliation for such a minor market. &quot;The answer seems to be genetic, that they love to look at new technologies and get them. There's nothing that can be proved to be commercially attractive now about superconductivity. There are great dreams of levitated trains and all sorts of things, but that's not real over the next 10 or 20 years. No one is going to make a return on that investment today. But they go after it and their policy has been successful because if they go after all the promising new technologies then a certain number will pan out. The other thing is that in a big Japanese company there are pockets or groups of individuals who operate more or less autonomously. And the people who run the lamp-manufacturing group got onto this thing, and it's their deal.    &quot;I'm not in favor of retaliation. We're not trying to keep their products out of here or ask for special access to the Japanese market. The discussion has been that we think it is reasonable for our government to talk to their government about adjusting the patent system. There have been some people who have talked about retaliation, but I don't think that has been discussed seriously. That would be threatening but not necessarily good public policy.    &quot;It also puts us in an uncomfortable position. You take the risk of being called a Japan-basher as soon as you say something is wrong in Japan. Fusion has this very important market and wonderful customers who are loyal and valued. So it becomes very uncomfortable when that kind of discussion occurs.&quot;    In fact, the U.S. and Japan have formed a working group to review U.S. complaints about patent infringements and unreasonable delays. Other efforts are going forward to harmonize U.S., Japan and European patent law. The national leaders involved might want to ask themselves which system makes the most economic sense. Fusion Systems would itself be a good example of what is right about the U.S. system. </TEXT></DOC>