<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880329-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Firms Find It Tougher to Dismiss Employees for Off-Duty Conduct </HL><AUTHOR> Larry Reibstein (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><TEXT>   A few years ago Potomac Electric Power Co. in Washington, D.C., fired a credit collector for allegedly making obscene telephone calls -- while off-duty -- to the teen-age daughter of a customer. But an arbitrator later reinstated the employee, ruling that he had had a satisfactory work record for many years.    Such rulings have become more commonplace in recent years, making it increasingly difficult for companies to fire workers for certain activities or behavior outside the office -- whether it's marrying someone at a competing company, refusing to participate in a raucous company outing, or committing a crime.    &quot;The trend is to respect individual privacy a lot more and tolerate unorthodox life styles,&quot; says Terry L. Leap, a management professor at Clemson University who has studied off-duty firings. He adds that the growing use of drug testing -- and subsequent firings -- has heightened the issue because it's &quot;drawing the line between public and private conduct.&quot;    It wasn't long ago that companies could effortlessly fire workers for what they did off the job. But now such personnel decisions have become a legal mine field. Max Brittain Jr., a Chicago lawyer who represents management, notes: &quot;Given the advancement in privacy rights for employees and lawsuits for wrongful termination, most of us are being extremely conservative in our advice to clients in off-duty conduct cases.&quot;    Generally, companies still retain broad latitude to fire workers for off-duty conduct -- especially nonunion employees. There is little question, for instance, that a company can fire an employee who has been convicted of selling drugs. But courts and arbitrators have carved out exceptions for some off-duty conduct. Their decisions are part of a broader legal trend that has curtailed companies' right to dismiss employees without any cause at all, known as the employment at-will doctrine.    Workers covered under collective bargaining agreements have the strongest protection against firings; employers usually must show &quot;just cause&quot; for dismissals. But in a few states, courts have extended similar protection to nonunion workers, ruling that a company handbook, policy manual or oral promise constitutes an implied contract between the worker and employer. In those cases, companies must have a good cause to fire the worker, similar to union workers.    In a closely followed 1985 case, Virginia Rulon-Miller, a marketing manager in International Business Machines Corp.'s office products division, filed a wrongful-discharge suit after she was fired because she was dating a former IBM salesman who had left to join a competitor. Her boss fired her a week after Ms. Rulon-Miller received a $4,000 merit raise, contending that the relationship -- and her concern for her boyfriend's success -- created a conflict of interest.    But Ms. Rulon-Miller said that even though she was nonunion, she was protected by IBM's written policies that set out the circumstances under which a person's private life could become a company concern. She argued that her personal relationship wasn't expressly forbidden by IBM's policies and that there was no conflict of interest. A jury agreed, awarding her $300,000. An appeals court upheld the verdict, noting that a company must abide by its own rules and regulations.    Like IBM, many companies find it increasingly difficult to make the link that an employee's off-duty conduct somehow is hurting the company. In cases where an employee commits a crime, for instance, &quot;unless you've got a prominent individual or a strong moral element to the organization -- like a church -- it's difficult to demonstrate a business's reputation has been damaged,&quot; says Prof. Leap.    In one such case, the Internal Revenue Service claimed damage to its reputation when two agents, after an evening of drinking, made obscene gestures to a group of women in a parking garage. While the act was &quot;sophomoric,&quot; the arbitrator said, an employer may not &quot;exaggerate unduly what the public may think of incidents having no bearing on their job.&quot; He reversed the employees' suspensions.    Increasingly, nonunion employees fired for off-duty conduct are also invoking the so-called public policy issue to win reinstatement. The firings, they claim, undermine or violate a compelling public policy or public good. For instance, courts and legislatures have held that employers can't fire employees for attending jury duty, whistle-blowing, lobbying against the company's interests or filing for workman's compensation claims.    Says Clyde Summers, a law professor at the University of Pennsylvania: &quot;The court is looking at whether the conduct of the employee is a good thing, whether the public has an interest in an individual's freedom to do whatever the conduct is.&quot;    Or not do. Consider the case of an Arizona nurse who claimed she was fired because, in an off-duty rafting trip with her supervisor and other nurses, she refused to join in such activities as singing &quot;Moon River&quot; while &quot;mooning&quot; the audience.    The Arizona Supreme Court reversed the dismissal in 1984, citing the state statute against indecent exposure. &quot;We are compelled to conclude that termination of employment for refusal to participate in public exposure of one's buttocks is a termination contrary to the policy of this state,&quot; the court said.    While the specific &quot;public policy&quot; involved in the Arizona case was clear, plaintiff lawyers are trying to broaden the definition of public policy to more subtle and controversial areas, like the right to privacy or family unity. The courts are reluctant, though.    In an Oregon case a merchandising manager for J.C. Penney claimed that his right to privacy was violated when he was fired because he was dating another employee. Although the employee had a strong work performance and no company policy prohibited socializing with colleagues, the Oregon Supreme Court upheld the dismissal in 1986.    &quot;It may seem harsh that an employer can fire an employee because of dislike of the employee's personal life style,&quot; the court said. But, it added, private firms aren't barred from discriminating against workers for their choice of mates.    Even a marriage may not be a clear enough public policy to prevent a firing. In a case in New Mexico in 1986, an employee with an excellent work record was fired because she was married to a worker at a competing supermarket. In her suit she claimed that public policy encourages &quot;family unity and the maintenance of family discipline.&quot; But a federal district court found that claim &quot;too amorphous,&quot; saying that the woman failed to pinpoint a &quot;specific expression of the public policy favoring family unity.&quot;    Despite such rulings, legal experts expect that more courts will eventually adopt privacy as an important public policy, by pointing to privacy rights suggested in the U.S. Constitution and state common law.    Moreover, lawyers are expected to increasingly use the privacy argument to defend employees fired after testing positively for drugs. Cliff Palefsky, a San Francisco plaintiff lawyer who helped represent Ms. Rulon-Miller, contends in an interview that drug testing measures a worker's off-duty conduct, not work performance, and argues companies have no business monitoring their employees' private lives.    But management lawyers think they can defend such suits. For one thing, says Adin Goldberg, a New York management lawyer, only a few states have specific statutory or constitutional provisions granting privacy rights. So courts will be reluctant to declare privacy a public policy.    Further, he says, companies can argue that, in fact, a public policy exists that discourages the use of drugs. &quot;Therefore, a court can't find a public policy against testing because that would run contrary to a clear public policy against drug abuse,&quot; Mr. Goldberg says. </TEXT></DOC>