<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880330-0170 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: How to Make Europe More Competitive </HL><AUTHOR> Carlo De Benedetti </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> MILAN, Italy  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Until a few years ago, many Europeans seemed resigned to inevitable economic decline and eventual subordination to richer, more dynamic areas such as the U.S., Japan and industrialized Asia.    Certainly, a global political situation based on balancing two opposing blocs had placed Europe in a weak and uncertain strategic position. The technological revolution had accentuated Europe's economic weakness. Today, this image of Europe as the weak link in the world economy is obsolete -- but the battle is not yet won.    The rigidity and fragmentation of Europe's markets have become major obstacles to change. These factors have been exacerbated by an entrenched conservatism and attention to special interests and the abnormal growth of the welfare state. An example of the sort of problems that can arise from such a rigid structure has been provided by the controversy involving Societe Generale de Belgique. Think of the strenuous defense of specific interests from the old management, and of delays and hesitations by Belgian authorities who control the financial market.    The Old Continent's economic integration planned for 1992 provides Europeans with an unprecedented opportunity to organize industry and infrastructure on a completely new basis. Sweeping technological change has the potential of being a major growth factor for Europe. Technological innovation today leads directly to globalization, and Europeans are more accustomed than most to moving their national boundaries and cooperating on different markets.    Thus we have a concrete opportunity to break with the negative features of Europe's recent past, taking only the positive aspects forward with us. I believe that three factors have a pivotal part in national policies: the political ideal, which can be a formidable propelling force; urgent necessity, which speeds the decision-making process; and economic return, which guides the use of human and capital resources.    In the past, the importance of European integration has not always been clearly understood in the business world. The end of the 1960s and the beginning of the 1970s witnessed a first wave of agreements and alliances among European companies. Nearly all these ventures quickly failed. In general, they resulted either in plurinational companies lacking a clearly defined center of control and coordination, or in multinational companies in the classic sense -- highly integrated companies based on a centralized decisional structure, with uniform procedures and products.    The times were not yet right for the idea of the &quot;network,&quot; as opposed to the &quot;monolith,&quot; to take hold. The network model is that of a pan-national structure where different corporate cultures and products coexist within a highly flexible, decentralized organization, and with a center of control whose role is to stimulate mutually useful cooperation at all levels.    European companies have matured since then, from at least two points of view. First, they have made great progress in developing an international mentality. In the past few years, the process of economic globalization has created opportunities to exchange technological know-how, components, finished products and manufacturing processes. This nurtured a practical, business-oriented current of thought in favor of unification. Those with a world-wide perspective tend to see today's customs controls, financial restrictions and contradictory regulations as anachronisms that accentuate the fragmentation of Europe's markets.    Second, companies have realized that a unified Europe is no longer an option, as it might have been 15 or 20 years ago, but a necessity. Without at least a Continental dimension -- in terms of market shares, production and commercial structures, access to the financial markets, and so on -- it is impossible to cope with the dual competitive pressures from the U.S. and Japan.    The threat to European companies is growing visibly. American competitors are assisted by a weakened dollar, while U.S. market restrictions on Japanese exports have increased the level of Japan's commercial pressure on Europe. This competitive threat is compounded by increasingly close commercial, production and financial ties between the U.S. and Japan.    A combination of fear and economic return -- a stick and a carrot -- therefore lies at the root of the corporate sector's conversion to the idea of Europe. Companies are now playing a leading role in the process of European integration, not only by stimulating an economic and industrial revival but also by lobbying governments to enact institutional and structural reforms within a European framework.    My own strong belief in these ideas is reflected in both the personal commitment and financial resources I have dedicated to the construction of the first truly European holding company -- Europe 1992. With regard to this I am pleased to say that internationally known companies such as Nestle of Switzerland, and Cobepa and Gevaert of Belgium have joined my initiative and that others could join us.    I am well aware of the risks this initiative runs, though I will mention just two. The first is that the idea may be ahead of its time, that economic and political circles are not yet ready to accept the type of European model I propose. The second is that the formation of Europe 1992, and my commitment to invest in Societe Generale de Belgique, could be misinterpreted as no more than another takeover or merger operation for purely financial purposes. Initiatives like Europe 1992 encounter opposition because they affect the interests of those attempting to maintain special privileges, sometimes of a nearly feudal character.    There are 16 million unemployed workers in the European Community, and 5.7 million of them are under age 25. This is a dramatic waste of valuable resources. Europe has the largest concentration of savings in the world. All too often these savings are poorly used. They are employed to finance budget deficits and obsolete industrial activities. They should, instead, be utilized to finance investment and to create new jobs. These resources are needed to build a decent future for Europe. Europe is also a major center of research and development, spending almost as much as the U.S. and more than Japan on research; but the efficiency of these investments is lowered by the duplication and fragmentation of research work.    Achieving a new and truly European dimension for our companies is the only way to return to real growth; and only a major European entrepreneurial approach can turn today's waste of labor, savings and technology into the resources required for this growth. To be sure, a new wave of entrepreneurialism will set off something resembling Joseph Schumpeter's &quot;process of creative destruction&quot; among those institutions that today survive only through subsidies and protection.    It is clear though that the future is no longer in the hands of individual companies and countries operating from a national or regional perspective. The global competitive challenge requires teamwork on a Continental scale.    ---   Mr. De Benedetti is chairman of Ing. C. Olivetti andamp; Co. </TEXT></DOC>