<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861208-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Day-Care Centers for Elderly Spring UpAs Alternative to Costly Nursing Homes---By Clare AnsberryStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/08/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   When Ruth Fisher suffered a series of severe strokes, her eight grown children initially decided that they, not a nursing home, would care for her. But they still faced nagging questions. Would one son or daughter quit work to care for Mrs. Fisher during the daytime? Or would they hire a full-time private nurse?    The family discovered a third choice: a day-care center for adults. For eight years Mrs. Fisher, now 73 years old, has spent five days a week at Life Center Inc. in Concord, N.C., just 20 minutes by van from her home in Mount Pleasant, N.C.    At Life Center Mrs. Fisher, who is paralyzed on her right side, has learned how to weave baskets by teaming up with another stroke victim. She also spends time preparing church bulletins for mailing, listening to guest speakers on nutrition and taking supervised trips to museums and factories. For the care, she pays only $14 a day -- &quot;chicken feed,&quot; her daughter says.    Mrs. Fisher's is a life style shared by a growing number of the elderly. &quot;What child care was in the 1970s, adult day care will be in the 1990s,&quot; says Arlene Snyder, the executive director of Vintage Inc., a Pittsburgh provider of adult day care.    Already, day-care centers for adults have cropped up in nearly every state. Nationwide there are more than 1,200 centers, up from a mere dozen in 1970, reports the National Institute on Adult Daycare, part of the National Council on the Aging, a nonprofit service organization. Such centers have a combined annual budget estimated at $150 million and now care for an estimated 28,000 people. Charges usually run from $10 to $70 a day.    Besides providing the elderly with companionship and, in many cases, with medical care, the centers give families a break from the often-fatiguing job of looking after aging relatives. And the centers with medical care provide a cost-saving alternative to conventional nursing homes, which care for clients round-the-clock.    For many people, the impact of a center can be enormous. For example, the social interaction at Life Center has buoyed Mrs. Fisher, who according to one daughter had grown despondent. The center &quot;gave back my mother a reason to live,&quot; says her daughter Jessie Blackwelder.    The main reason for the spread of such centers is the aging of the U.S. population. Between 1970 and 1980, the number of people aged 75 or older surged 32%, to nearly 10 million. That number, moreover, is expected to soar to 17.2 million by the year 2000. Also, with more couples working, fewer adult children are at home to care for aging parents.    Companies may also eventually help pay for adult day care as more employees face the financial and mental stress of caring for aged parents. At Wang Laboratories Inc. in Lowell, Mass., 20 employees will receive day-health services for adult family members as part of an employee-benefits study.    At Westinghouse Electric Co., David Cowfer, a human-resources program manager, says that &quot;people are looking for alternatives to nursing homes.&quot; Company newsletters and lunch-time discussion groups will explore what community programs are available to help employees care for adult family members, he says.    Of existing centers, about three of every four are private nonprofit institutions run by churches, hospitals and centers for the elderly. Christ United Methodist Church in Pittsburgh, for example, began an adult-care program after church members began confiding in the minister that they were having a hard time caring for elderly parents. &quot;They would say, 'My mother just sits and stares at four walls. She needs some stimulation,'&quot; says Patricia Evey, the director of the program.    Services and prices vary widely. Some centers provide hot lunches and transportation, while others ask people to pack sandwiches and arrange their own rides. Nurses and therapists staff some centers, providing, among other things, routine eye and dental exams at no extra cost. Other centers have no medical personnel but are staffed by social workers who counsel frustrated family members. And all the centers provide social activities.    &quot;The idea is to keep people mentally and physically stimulated so they can maintain some reasonable level of functioning,&quot; says Thelma Freeze, the Life Center's director. McAuley Bergan Center in Omaha devoted a week to Japanese culture, offering seminars on such topics as origami and theater. At Vintage, discussions focus on Libya one day, the demise of the two-stick popsicle the next.    Many centers provide medical supervision. At Windsor House near Boston, nurses take blood pressure, watch blood-sugar levels and note any changes when medication is altered. Dr. Alan Abrams, a Boston-area internist, says he relies on nurses at the center to monitor changes in patients' behavior and appearance. &quot;It is my experience that people who are left at home fail more often,&quot; Dr. Abrams says.    The On Lok center in San Francisco, which opened 15 years ago, provides one of widest assortments of services. On Lok, whose Chinese name means &quot;happy, peaceful abode,&quot; offers everything from acute hospital care to routine medical tests. Clients can stay overnight if their families want to rest or vacation.    For $1,800 a month -- often heavily subsidized by the Medicaid and Medicare programs -- On Lok will assume responsibility for a client's total long-term care. But On Lok is the exception. Most centers charge by the day and don't assume responsibility for long-term care.    Because their fees often don't fully cover the actual costs of services, many centers require outside subsidies. In Omaha, a hospital foundation holds an annual golf tournament to raise funds for McAuley Bergan Center. In Fairfax County, Va., adult day care is administered by the county health department, and the county subsidizes some costs.    Private insurance policies, for the most part, don't cover the costs of adult day care. Part of the reason may be the haphazard regulation and licensing of such centers. Only 15 states require licensing while 13 have certification programs. In many states, the centers don't have to meet any requirements.    State standards &quot;are real loose,&quot; says Betty Ransom, who tracks them for the National Council on the Aging. The council has its own voluntary standards, however, which address such matters as the number of toilets a center should install. And Ms. Ransom expects more states to adopt licensing standards as more public funds are used to subsidize centers.    All of which is welcome news to those who have become increasingly dependent on such centers. In Pittsburgh, George Boyle turned to adult day care three years ago to help his wife. She has Alzheimer's disease and requires help for eating, dressing and bathing. The three days a week that she spends at Vintage frees her husband to run errands and catch up on his freelance film production.    &quot;Vintage was a godsend,&quot; he says. &quot;My wife doesn't have much to look forward to, but the center gives her some pleasure. That's what counts.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>