<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871106-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Staying Cool:Most Firms Say TheyAre in Shape to DealWith Any Recession---Unruffled by the Crash, TheyHaven't Slashed Outlays,Call Debts Not Too Large---But Is the Other Guy Sound?---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 11/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)COMPUTERS (EDP)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)PETROLEUM (PET)AEROSPACE (ARO)AIRLINES (AIR)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)RETAILING (RET)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)RUBBER (RUB) </IN><TEXT>   The stock-market crash is reverberating like an earthquake on Wall Street, but in many executive suites across the country, it has been -- so far -- only a minor rumble. It has stirred varying degrees of watchfulness, some contingency planning, a clutch of corporate buy-backs of companies' own stock, and little else.    David M. Roderick, the chairman of USX Corp., expresses a typical view of Wall Street's disaster. &quot;What you have to do,&quot; he says, &quot;is look at the strength of the mass market in the United States, and it is not {those} people that have suffered large losses in the stock market.&quot; He adds:    &quot;I don't really see that people are going to quit driving. I don't think they're going to quit buying automobiles. I don't think they're going to quit buying washers.&quot;    What concern corporate chieftains do acknowledge centers not on the course of stock prices but on the possibility that the market just might be correctly forecasting a recession. But with regard to their own companies, many still take a rosy view.    &quot;Chief executives almost always are more optimistic about their own companies than they are about the general economy,&quot; says George McKinney, a University of Virginia economist and former chief economist for Irving Trust Co. of New York. &quot;They're locked into their own planning and they don't think they'll make mistakes. But they're nervous about the other fellows.&quot;    Few companies now, in fact, will admit to any radical changes in their plans. Nor will they admit to much worry about corporate debt levels.    &quot;It's too premature&quot; to evaluate the effects of the market's crash, Unisys Corp., a computer maker, says. &quot;Like other capital-goods industries, the customer's purchase decisions are usually spaced out over a long period of time.&quot;    Reluctance to react too quickly to the stock-market slump is especially apparent in industries traditionally considered recession-resistant. At Seagram Co., for example, Richard Goeltz, the chief financial officer, says, &quot;Seagram, in line with all other consumer-goods companies, wouldn't expect to see any reduction in demand in this short a period.&quot; He adds that the distiller isn't changing its capital-spending program and calls its ability to withstand any recessionary pressures &quot;superb.&quot;    At Lucky Stores Inc., a spokesman sees &quot;no evidence of any change in customer spending patterns or their buying habits&quot; in its food stores in the wake of the stock-market crash. A Borden Inc. spokesman says that during recessions, &quot;people eat pasta, dairy products and snacks, all of which we sell. In fact, they may eat more snacks because it's an affordable treat.&quot;    But such traditionally vulnerable companies as makers of industrial and farm equipment also are surprisingly calm. Though concerned about a possible recession, few are changing their strategies. &quot;They want some clearer sense before they start cutting costs,&quot; says Karen Ubelhart, an E.F. Hutton andamp; Co. analyst. Besides, says Mitchell Quain, of Wertheim andamp; Co., most such companies have already slashed costs and are well situated for a downturn. &quot;These companies are lean and mean and have big backlogs,&quot; he says.    For the computer industry as well as some others, most of the stock market's impact isn't likely to be felt until early next year. Except for a possible drop in personal-computer sales, &quot;The fourth quarter is in the bag for most companies,&quot; says Steven Milunovich, a First Boston analyst. He adds that the companies, such as International Business Machines Corp., that have been cutting costs are best prepared for a recession.    Even some companies in recession-resistant industries cite the benefits of earlier cost cutting. &quot;The strength of our business today is a result of the restructuring we did several years ago,&quot; says Robert Dircks, the chief operating officer at Warner-Lambert Co., a drug maker. &quot;As a result, we can withstand a downturn in the economy without revising our major programs.&quot;    Moreover, many companies had turned cautious long before the stock market made a spectacle of itself. Apparel manufacturers, stung by sluggish retail sales and the weak dollar, had been preparing for a slow 1988 all along. Says Jerome Wiggins, the chief financial officer of V.F. Corp., &quot;Our planning contemplated a relatively weak year. The signs were already there, and we've been cautious.&quot;    A few industries even discern some benefits in an economic slowdown. One such sector is heavy construction and engineering. &quot;If you're a politician and want to put people to work, what do you do? You build the Hoover Dam,&quot; says David Bartlett, a Ladenburg, Thalmann andamp; Co. analyst. And Robert Van Tuyle, the chief executive of Beverly Enterprises, says a recession could facilitate staffing of his nursing-home company. &quot;We lose most of our nurses to marriage or family,&quot; he says. &quot;But in a recession, Mom has to go back to work.&quot;    Here's the corporate view, in the wake of the stock-market crash, of the prospects for a number of major industries.    Autos: A Slowdown, and Perhaps Much Worse, May Lie Ahead    Even before Black Monday, auto makers were bracing for weaker sales, thanks to the expiration of major &quot;buyer incentive&quot; discounts on Sept. 30. Now, they are hoping that the stock crash won't cause an auto crash.    Auto makers released some encouraging news Wednesday, when they announced that late-October sales of domestic-made cars were flat with a year earlier and that sales of cars and trucks combined actually rose 11.5%. However, they caution that one 10-day period doesn't necessarily mean much.    &quot;You can find dealers who say, yeah, business is shut off, and you can find as many who say they haven't felt anything,&quot; says John G. Middlebrook, General Motors Corp.'s vice president for marketing and product planning. &quot;The bottom line is how sales are coming in, and they're tracking right on our forecast.&quot;    But that forecast wasn't bullish to begin with. &quot;We've had four or five years of tremendous growth in this business, and I don't think a softening surprises anybody,&quot; Chrysler Corp. Chairman Lee A. Iacocca said last week, when he announced an accelerated cost-cutting program. That decision had been made about a month ago, before the stock-market crash but after company officials concluded that auto sales were sliding.    If a recession should hit, it couldn't come at a worse time for the auto makers, especially GM. The slump would coincide with the opening of a slew of new U.S. assembly plants by Japanese auto makers, exacerbating the overcapacity problem. GM, with the highest costs in the business, has been posting paltry profits even in a strong economy. The company already is pushing a major cost-cutting campaign that is just starting to show results. Ford Motor Co. is best positioned to weather the storm; its factories have been working overtime much of this year, and eliminating that would bring minimal pain.    Foreign auto makers, once immune from U.S. sales slumps, aren't any longer. Toyota Motor Corp. recently predicted a drop in its U.S. sales of cars and, especially, trucks. The strong yen has forced the company to raise prices sharply.    Steel: Mills Booming Now, But Dark Days May Loom    Still bleeding from the last downturn, steelmakers could get badly hurt by another recession. Right now, however, they still see more signs of an overheating economy than of a weakening one.    At National Steel Corp., &quot;we have seen no pullback at all in order rates,&quot; says Ronald H. Doerr, executive vice president. USX, the No. 1 steelmaker, says its October steel orders jumped 18% from September. And makers of flat-rolled steel -- used by auto and appliance companies -- report their mills booked through year end.    However, &quot;it's a little early in the game to know what the average consumer is going to do,&quot; acknowledges Mr. Doerr, whose company doesn't plan to trim its $200 million capital-spending budget next year.    Although USX's Mr. Roderick believes that only upper-class Americans got burned by the market's collapse, analysts and economists who track the industry suspect that the impact may be more far-reaching. &quot;There not only has been a loss in wealth but a loss in consumer confidence,&quot; says John Jacobson, a WEFA Group economist. &quot;People are clearly becoming more cautious about new homes and new cars.&quot;    Although steel prices have rebounded since winter, about half the nation's steel is sold at prices fixed up to a year in advance, and many 1988 contracts are under negotiation now. Fears of a recession may stiffen buyers' resistance to price increases. However, Peter F. Marcus, a PaineWebber analyst, says that if the industry succeeds in locking in higher prices now on 1988 deliveries, it can immunize itself from the ravages of a downturn. &quot;We could have higher prices next year even with a recession,&quot; he says.    Moreover, the next downturn might not be as traumatic as the last. When steel plunged into a depression in 1982, the industry hadn't undergone the mill closings and other severe cost cutting needed for survival. Today, Big Steel is far leaner.    Years of retrenchment, though, have battered industry balance sheets. According to the American Iron and Steel Institute, the industry had a year-end long-term debt-to-equity ratio of 261%. The debt figure, moreover, is illusory; it excludes many billions more in pension and long-term liabilities. Thus, a major downturn may nudge some steelmakers into bankruptcy reorganization -- a route that LTV Corp. and Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp. have already chosen.    Chemicals: Already Prepared To Weather a Recession    William R. Young, a Drexel Burnham Lambert analyst, believes that the industry &quot;would weather a recession much better than in the past&quot; because most chemical companies have already pruned weak branches, excess capacity and overhead. &quot;I don't imagine most of them facing any financial squeeze,&quot; he says.    Most observers don't expect a recession, but if one occurs, they say, the companies won't have to revamp their operations. &quot;A lot of weak sisters have already exited some businesses; for example, Monsanto no longer makes styrene or polystyrene,&quot; Mr. Young says. And if there is a recession, he adds, chemical companies may postpone capital spending, &quot;not because they don't have the money but because it's the prudent thing to do.&quot;    However, Fred Siemer, a Lynch, Jones andamp; Ryan analyst, isn't as sanguine. &quot;We were expecting an end to the economic cycle in 1989, but the crash will move up the economic slowdown into 1988,&quot; he says. Nonetheless, he also says the industry as a whole isn't in much danger.    Dow Chemical Co. expects &quot;positive business momentum into '88.&quot; A spokesman adds: &quot;The supply-demand balance for basic chemicals is very strong, and the size and quality of the specialties business has never been better. Our balance sheet is in better condition than at any point in the last decade.&quot; Dow has reduced long-term debt to $3.7 billion from $5.7 billion earlier in the decade, and its debt-equity ratio is 41%, well below earlier levels of 50%. He says Dow doesn't plan to change its capital-spending program, which calls for a 10% increase next year.    However, the analysts say a recession would cause concern about a few companies with high debt levels. &quot;Carbide and W.R. Grace would be skating on thin ice,&quot; Mr. Siemer says. W.R. Grace andamp; Co. declines comment.    At Union Carbide Corp., Clayton Stephenson, the chief financial officer, says the stock-market declines &quot;have had no impact on business short term, and we doubt they will long term. Our chemical and plastics businesses are strong, and that should continue well into 1988.&quot; Nonetheless, Carbide already has a recession-contingency plan.    Mr. Stephenson also plays down Carbide's debt situation. &quot;A chief financial officer is always worried about debt levels, but ours isn't a front-page kind of worry,&quot; he says, adding, &quot;We are in very much better shape than last year in terms of debt and liquidity.&quot;    Petroleum: Industry Insulated From Tough Times    Most major oil companies should safely weather any recession, according to industry observers. Oil doesn't feel tough times as much as many industries do. People keep driving cars and heating homes.    Among the giant companies, Exxon Corp. seems best fortified against hard times, with a low 19% debt-to-equity ratio and a dividend requiring only about 25% of cash flow. &quot;That's lower than in the 1960s,&quot; says George Friesen, a Dean Witter Reynolds analyst. Most big oil companies themselves won't discuss the likelihood or impact of a possible recession.    Mobil Corp. is confident it can handle a slump. Its capital spending won't be affected by the market crash, a spokeswoman says, explaining, &quot;Our capital-spending plans are fundamentally for the long term.&quot; Mobil's balance sheet is sound, allowing &quot;good financial flexibility.&quot;    Texaco Inc. also doesn't disclose its forecasts or capital-spending plans. But it stresses that its fundamental strength is its assets, primarily oil reserves, and says they won't be affected by the stock market's crash or any recession.    Like the oil industry, the oil-service companies closely allied to it are largely insulated from the stock market. &quot;The world price of crude oil is the primary driver of our industry,&quot; says a spokesman for Dresser Industries Inc. &quot;Historically, we have not seen the energy business as cyclical as the general economy.&quot; That's largely because of the long lead times required in oil and natural-gas exploration. And because the slump in drilling was so severe, even the recent slight upturn -- combined with modest price increases -- suggests a relatively strong 1988.    Dresser, one of the financially stronger companies, expects to report its debt at a low 15% to 20% of total capital at the close of its Oct. 31 fiscal year, the spokesman says. And Baker Hughes Inc., which has been steadily reducing its debt since it was formed in a merger last April, doesn't think that the market plunge will affect its plans. The company's debt-to-equity ratio after the merger hit 92%, fell to 74% at June 30 and is expected to be about 67% by the end of the calendar year, says I.C. Kerridge Jr., a vice president.    Aerospace: The Defense Industry Marches   To a Different Drum   Aerospace officials aren't worrying much about stocks. They have another worry. With their companies more dependent on government military and space programs than consumer spending, they are anxiously awaiting the outcome of the federal deficit-reduction talks. So far, none say they have altered business plans.    A General Dynamics Corp. spokesman says the company is protected, for now, by its $22.9 billion order backlog. But the defense contractor's financial strength over the next several years will be &quot;dependent on government actions relative to the defense budget,&quot; he adds.    Healthy backlogs will also postpone a possible recession's effects on the commercial side of the aerospace industry. At both giant Boeing Co. and Rohr Industries Inc., a maker of jet-aircraft parts, market forecasters are already anticipating the end of the current boom in aircraft orders. Thomas R. Craig, Boeing's market-research director, had been expecting a recession in 1989 or 1990 but now says the downturn could begin as early as next year. John F. Walsh, Rohr's director of market planning, says his forecast shows air travel growing only 4.5% next year, compared with a 9% increase this year. He hasn't reduced his projection in the wake of the stock-market plunge, however.    If a slump in air travel hurts airlines, the recent trend toward leasing or buying options on aircraft -- rather than purchasing outright -- could hurt aircraft makers by facilitating order cancellations, analysts say. Some 20% to 25% of aircraft makers' firm-order backlog constitutes planes ordered by leasing companies. A slump in demand would hit aircraft companies in 1989-90.    Airlines: A Recession Is Likely   To Shoot Down Leisure Travel   So far at least, the stock-market crash hasn't affected airline traffic. &quot;We have not seen any booking pattern changes since Black Monday,&quot; Continental Airlines says. Nevertheless, airlines are monitoring traffic figures closely. American Airlines, an AMR Corp. unit, says it has drawn up about 40 different contingency plans.    If the crash does portend a recession, airlines could be hit hard because leisure travel accounts for 45% to 55% of their business, says Anthony Hatch, an Argus Research analyst. But most airlines say that probably not until early next year will any impact of the market crash on travel show up. Many leisure travelers have already made their holiday travel plans, and nonrefundable fares lock most of them into taking those trips.    But if a recession does hit, analysts say, the industry is in better position to weather it than it would have been last year. Fare increases have raised profits. And because the recent consolidation has weeded out the weakest carriers, it is less likely that a desperate airline will start slashing fares in an effort to fill seats. However, some airlines also are heavily leveraged because of recent mergers, and most have expensive new planes on order.    &quot;If there is a recession coming, you're going to have substantial losses in the industry,&quot; says David Sylvester, a Kidder Peabody analyst. He estimates that a 4% decline in gross national product would cause an 8% drop in passenger traffic. In any decline, airlines that depend largely on vacation travelers or international operations could be hardest hit. Consumers are more likely to cut back on expensive trips to Europe, for example, than on domestic travel. Pan American World Airways, already financially weak, and Trans World Airways could be especially hurt.    Texas Air Corp. could suffer because of its high debt load. Also, its Eastern Airlines unit is in the midst of labor strife and has significant operations in Florida, a popular vacation spot. And its Continental unit depends disproportionately on leisure travelers; many businessmen avoid the airline because of its service problems. However, Texas Air has about $1 billion in cash, and Continental enjoys cost advantages over its competitors.    American says it is well prepared for any recession. It cites a 1-to-1 debt-to-equity ratio, $875 million in cash and a $1 billion credit facility. It also arranged its recent plane orders so that it can return them to the manufacturer at minimal cost if it decides it doesn't need them. Delta Air Lines also hasn't changed its spending plans and terms its cash position strong.    Consumer Industries: Big Group Largely Resistant to Slumps    A slew of industries catering mostly to consumers seems strongly resistant to the effects of recessions. Among them:    Food. John McMillin, a Prudential-Bache analyst, says a slump &quot;shouldn't have an impact on the food companies, based on the non-cyclical nature of their markets.&quot; Moreover, their ratios of debt to capital are low, mostly in the 30% to 36% range. Before the crash, companies such as Campbell Soup Co., H.J. Heinz Co. and Kraft Inc. &quot;infuriated Wall Street by running their balance sheets conservatively and their businesses aggressively; Wall Street wanted the opposite,&quot; Mr. McMillin says. &quot;With today's uncertain environment, cash is king.&quot; Stephen Carnes, an analyst at Piper Jaffray andamp; Hopwood, singles out ConAgra Inc. and General Mills Inc. as especially well off. He explains: &quot;ConAgra is diversified as a major producer of meat, pork, fish, flour and frozen dinners. They've got a lot of bases covered. General Mills is strong following a restructuring two years ago when they got rid of their fashion and toy businesses.&quot;    Grocery Chains. Like food companies, grocers expect to weather any recession well, basically because consumers will give up a lot before they cut back on food. Nevertheless, some companies, including Lucky Stores and Safeway, are highly leveraged after recent restructurings and thus are more vulnerable in a recession than before. But even such chains are confident of generating enough cash flow to avoid major disruptions. Lucky still sees its 1988 capital expenditures at about 1986 levels; that would be about 50% more than those this year, when the company cut back because of a late-1986 restructuring. &quot;The lead time on food store locations -- building new ones or remodeling existing ones -- is fairly long, and so it is not the kind of thing you can turn off quickly,&quot; the spokesman says. &quot;I don't think we're likely to do that, certainly not on the mere speculation of a possible recession.&quot;    Beverages. At Seagram, Mr. Goeltz, the chief financial officer, sees a recession as &quot;really quite probable&quot; but says the company won't base its decisions on the &quot;economic outlook for the next quarter,&quot; adding, &quot;We take a long-term view.&quot; The company has a portfolio of about $800 million in cash and short-term securities, and its debt is relatively low. At PepsiCo Inc., D. Wayne Calloway, the chief executive, says he doesn't anticipate any drop in demand and isn't cutting back on its capital expenditures. He adds, &quot;All the hype about the stock-market collapse is grossly exaggerated.&quot; For beverage companies, says John Maxwell, an analyst at Furman Selz Mager Dietz andamp; Birney, &quot;recessions, depressions, inflation -- none of it really has any relevance. People drink Coke or Pepsi, no matter what happens.&quot;    Retailers. Most big stores aren't in bad shape for a gradual slowdown in consumer spending. They were expecting some downturn even before the stock-market collapse and were keeping expenses and inventories lean. Many say they won't change their business plans until they see a drop in sales, which so far are holding steady or have slipped only slightly. Most retailers are betting that any economic slump would hit autos and houses first and that they can get through the holiday season unscathed. But a major downturn would put them in a precarious situation: It is too late to cancel many orders for Christmas, so they would have to cut prices if a big slump hit during the holiday season. At specialty stores, the prospects are muddier. They were already struggling with high inventories because consumers were turned off by rising apparel prices.    Apparel. Manufacturers of women's apparel may be best prepared for a potential recession. &quot;You have to understand that it hasn't been a good year at all for the women's apparel industry. Long before the market crashed, they were feeling the pressure of excess inventories,&quot; says Jay Meltzer, a Goldman Sachs analyst. But on the positive side, the stock-market plunge may discourage big-ticket spending and set consumers to buying soft goods, such as apparel, instead. &quot;Apparel always does better in tough times,&quot; Mr. Meltzer says. He notes that in 1930, while home and auto sales plummeted, consumer spending on nondurables declined 4% at the most.    Textiles. In any new recession, the textile industry will have the benefit of a lot of experience. &quot;It is a cyclical industry. You always have to be mindful of the next downturn,&quot; says Jack Grooms, the president of Quality Mills Inc. The stock-market plunge, he adds, &quot;has everybody thinking that it may come sooner rather than later.&quot; Analysts say the industry generally is better equipped to handle a downturn this time around. Battling a surge in textile and apparel imports since the early 1980s, it has streamlined operations and reduced capacity, and the surviving players are more efficient. But two issues are troubling the domestic industry. For one, it has a much smaller share of the U.S. market than it had during the 1981-82 recession, says George Wino, chief economist for the American Textile Manufacturers Institute. Imports in 1986 were 37% of the overall textile and apparel markets, up from 25% in 1983, he says. In addition, some companies have more debt than during the last slump, primarily because of acquisitions, says Kay Norwood, an Interstate Securities analyst. Referring to some companies' balance sheets, she says, &quot;If you look at the percentage of operating income going to pay interest expenses, clearly they won't be profitable in a downturn.&quot;    Drug Makers. Buttressed by steady cash flows, excess cash reserves and product lines that aren't considered discretionary purchases, the industry is well positioned to go through a modest recession, executives say. But a &quot;drastic recession would affect every sector,&quot; says Hugh D'Andrade, executive vice president of Schering-Plough Corp. &quot;We're not expecting or planning for that.&quot; In the early 1980s, moreover, many of the companies restructured when their overseas operations were being battered by the then-strong dollar. Many of them jettisoned units that either sold high-priced medical equipment -- which are prone to cutbacks during a recession -- or marketed consumer products, such as household goods, with low-profit margins. Many also have slashed their labor costs.    Health Care. Health-care executives and analysts agree that the industry should weather any economic storms; demand would generally remain fairly constant. However, Bama Rucker, general partner with Hambrecht andamp; Quist's venture-capital unit, thinks that companies in the lucrative psychiatric and specialty-care services business may be hard hit. &quot;Is Corporate America going to tighten its belt in that area?&quot; she asks. Meanwhile, few health-care companies are changing their capital-spending plans. National Medical Enterprises Inc. says it will spend about $350 million in fiscal 1988, the same as in the year ended May 31. Beverly Enterprises says it will hold spending at $40 million. Health-care companies don't anticipate any problems servicing debt; most have restructured their operations. Hospital Corp. of America, for example, has sold about one-third of its hospital assets and used much of the proceeds to reduce long-term debt to $2.4 billion from $3.1 billion last Jan. 1.    Tires. Tire makers say the stock-market drop hasn't discernibly affected business. Any impact &quot;will be minor compared to what the tire industry has already been through&quot; in recent years, including the surge of imports when the dollar was strong, says John J. Nevin, the chief executive of Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co. &quot;To the extent the car market gets hit, it'll be at the very high end and will affect relatively low-volume cars,&quot; he adds. Mr. Nevin expects an economic slump as a result of the market plunge but contends that it won't damp consumer purchases of replacement tires. &quot;We have a product that people buy when they need it,&quot; he says. Moreover, tire makers are in good shape to ride out a recession. Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co., for example, is &quot;two years ahead of schedule&quot; in paying down debt incurred in a stock repurchase, says Harry Millis, a McDonald andamp; Co. analyst.    Home Builders. Home builders say that so far sales haven't dropped in the wake of the stock market, but they are cautiously waiting to see the impact on buyer confidence. Builders generally report strong sales in the week after Black Monday. Houston-based U.S. Home Corp. cites a 13% rise in sales for the week ended Oct. 25, to 93 houses from 82 a year ago. On the West Coast, Kaufman andamp; Broad Home Corp. has seen brisk sales in the past two weeks. Bolstering the optimism is the way interest rates have responded. A shift to bonds, an expanded money supply and increased deposits in banks and thrifts all work to drive down rates and encourage prospects to buy now, says Barbara Allen, a PrudentialBache Securities analyst. &quot;There is a silver lining to what happened to the stock market,&quot; she says. </TEXT></DOC>