<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890817-0126 </DOCNO><DD> = 890817 </DD><AN> 890817-0126. </AN><HL> Nuclear Reactors Everyone Will Love@  ----@  By Paul E. Gray </HL><DD> 08/17/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)UTILITIES (UTI) </IN><TEXT>   The American nuclear industry is its own worst enemy. By trying to push ahead with vast, costly projects that have been stalled by political opposition, it exacerbates the irrational public fears that have blocked the development of nuclear power in the U.S. Instead, utilities should be exploring a new type of nuclear reactor that recent technological innovation has put within reach: a reactor type that is environmentally sound and economically competitive.    This reactor type uses new fuels, new design methods to dissipate heat, and smaller units that can be built and tested off-site. It has excited scientists and engineers world-wide, but industry and government leaders in this country -- pessimistic about the public's willingness to accept nuclear power under any circumstances -- are reluctant to adopt it here. That reluctance is wrong. It is time for all of us to take a hard look at modular reactors.    It has become a commonplace to say that the nuclear industry in the U.S., is dead, and that its death looks like a suicide. The problems of Seabrook and Shoreham nuclear plants are persuasive demonstrations of that commonplace.    But oil spills, undisposable garbage, polluted beaches, and -- above all -- steadily increasing atmospheric pollution from fossil fuel are persuading many political leaders to review their prejudices about nuclear energy. Americans who want a clean, safe and domestically produced energy source should follow -- especially because all the practical alternatives to nuclear power, present grave hazards to public safety and health. The perceived risks of nuclear power are grossly overestimated and usually stated without reference to the hazards of other energy sources.    There are, however, two major problems with the present generation of water-cooled reactors. The light-water reactors, or LWRs as they are known to engineers, used in nearly all the plants in operation or under construction in the United States, place heavy demands on their builders and operators. The risk they pose to public safety is an accident involving loss of coolant that could lead to the melting of fuel elements and the subsequent release of radioactivity. The safety systems for these light-water reactors are extremely complicated. These safety systems require explicit anticipation of all possible forms of failure and they must necessarily rely on probability analysis. In a world in which probability is not widely understood, such analysis is not reassuring to most of the public. While these methods lead to margins of safety that are quite acceptable, Americans remain, for the most part, skeptics.    The second problem is that light-water reactors, which are custom-made at the site, cannot be tested in advance to ascertain what would happen in a true disaster.    It is possible, however, to design and build a series of small reactors that could produce the power of a large plant. These reactors could survive the failure of components without fuel damage and without releasing radioactivity because their fuels can withstand the maximum temperatures possible under the worst of circumstances. Their design limits the power density of the reactor core as well as the actual size of the core, and exploits natural processes to remove heat and avert fuel damage in the event of a loss of coolant.    Such &quot;passively safe&quot; reactors can be designed to suffer the simultaneous failure of all control and cooling systems without danger to the public. And their safety can be demonstrated by an actual test: a West German modular reactor has passed such tests three times.    One of the most advanced of these modular reactors is under study at the Massacusetts Institute of Technology. It is based on the West German reactor that has demonstrated its safety, but adds several technologies in which the U.S. still has a competitive industrial edge. The hot gas that leaves the reactor is used directly to spin a turbine (based on aerospace designs), which, in turn, drives a small, very high speed generator (based on power electronics). This combination results in a power generating system that is substantially smaller and more efficient than current LWR systems, which are based on steam turbines and low-speed generators.    By virtue of its inherent or passive safety features, this small, gas-cooled reactor eliminates the complex, active safety systems needed by current LWRs. The gas turbine eliminates the complex, hard-to-maintain, steam generators common both to nuclear plants and ordinary fossil-fired power plants. The result is a power plant that produces electricity not only at lower cost than nuclear reactors (an easy target), but that is competitive with the projected cost of next-generation &quot;clean&quot; coal-fired plants. Power from such coal generators, the Department of Energy calculated in 1986, would cost an average of 5.5 cents per kilowatt hour. Power from modular reactors can be brought to market for 4.5 cents per kilowatt hour.    These savings can be realized because the new plants will be made to a single, prelicensed design in central factories. Construction costs are estimated to be less than $1,000 per kilowatt of electricity. Costs per kwe for the Seabrook reactor in New Hampshire and the Shoreham project in Long Island were more like $5,000 to $6,000, primarily because of long delays and extensive redesign during construction. Operating costs of traditional nuclear plants are also much higher than those of modular plants would be, because the older type require very large staffs -- 700 people per plant -- to oversee their involuted safety systems. Modular reactors could offer much more safety with staffs only half as big.    These new plants will not only be much cheaper to build, but the added bonus of high efficiency means there will be less heat to throw away. The plants will be easier to site because they cause less damage to the local environment. And, best of all, they will not do harm to the atmosphere.    These new reactors do not eliminate the waste disposal problem, but their ceramic encapsulated fuel does simplify it. A fuel that can survive unscathed in a reactor core during an accident is obviously securely packaged for disposal under more benign conditions (albeit at the cost of a significant increase in waste volume). Many of the problems associated with the high temperature achieved by the fuel of the current generation reactors are eliminated and the potential for burial in deep geological sites is enhanced. This same feature also makes it much more difficult for the discharged fuel to be processed to produce unauthorized nuclear weapons.    Smaller, modular reactors will produce less energy than present reactors do: 100 to 150 megawatts of electrical power output compared with 1,000 to 1,500 megawatts, but this difficulty can be overcome, if necessary, by linking together a number of small, individual power-producing modules. Since each module would be identical and centrally built, licensing could be standardized and based on full-scale testing of an actual plant. This is an enormous advantage. It would allow actual demonstration of the reactors' response to severe and demanding hazards.    With an operating risk that is virtually nil and the production of significantly less radioactivity in the environment than coalfired electric power plants, second-generation nuclear power could be a major source of environmentally sound energy if we would only take advantage of it. The failure of the government and the nuclear industry to provide leadership in developing a second generation of power plants based on these developments has already cost us dearly.    ---   Mr. Gray is president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. </TEXT></DOC>