<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880614-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Aid Money That Just Buys Guns </HL><AUTHOR> Doug Bandow </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP GOVMT AFRIC LATAM MDEST FREST </CO><IN> MON BNK </IN><TEXT>   The Third United Nations Special Session on Disarmament is meeting in New York and the air is full of denunciations of the superpowers. But some of the Third World nations now staggering beneath billions of dollars of debt are equally guilty of excessive arms purchases. In fact, if these overburdened debtors are serious about devoting more money to economic investment and social welfare, they need only stop buying so many guns.    According to the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, between 1980 and 1985 developing nations spent $924.6 billion on their militaries. Many of these nations faced no serious security threat; instead, the arms were meant for foreign aggression and domestic repression.    Had Third World states cut arms spending by one-third in 1985, for example, they could have more than covered the annual interest on all LDC loans.    In fact, international aid largely serves to underwrite poor nations' prodigious appetites for weapons. The U.S. and a few other nations provide some assistance explicitly for military purposes, but America's $27.4 billion in &quot;security aid&quot; between 1980 and 1985, for instance, did not come close to covering even the Third World's bill for imported arms, $213 billion, during the same period. The Soviet arms role was larger, but not by terribly much.    Instead, payment was provided largely by the West's many generous economic and humanitarian programs, which channeled $239 billion to developing states from 1980 to 1985. The U.S. gave $44 billion in bilateral economic aid; other nations, principally the Europeans and Japan, contributed roughly $75 billion; and various international agencies allocated an additional $121 billion.    Year after year, foreign aid has in effect fueled a massive arms race in poor debtor countries. A longer view only enhances this picture. From 1970 to 1985, for example, military spending of developing countries grew about fourfold in current-dollar terms, about the same magnitude of increase as for total U.S. economic aid. U.S. security assistance in the period didn't even double in current dollars.    Of course, aid shuffles are not the intent of the nations and organizations that provide loans purportedly for dams, power plants or housing projects. But money is fungible. By underwriting specific development projects, Western donors and lenders free up domestic capital for military uses. Were the foreign aid -- and commercial credit -- not available, Third World governments would have to make far tougher choices before allocating so much of their limited resources to guns.    Though the relationship between aid inflows and weapons purchases is not a simple one, in a number of cases increased assistance has been matched by higher defense spending or arms imports. In Ethiopia, Ghana, India and Nepal, for instance, foreign-aid increases between 1982 and 1985 were generally matched by higher military spending.    Reductions in assistance during the same period were reflected by either falling overall military outlays or weapons imports in such countries as Burma, Chile, Congo, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Liberia, Mauritania, Nigeria, Paraguay, Somalia, Suriname, Tanzania, the Yemen Arab Republic and Zimbabwe. In Burundi and Haiti both aid and military expenditures remained relatively constant, while in Malaysia defense expenditures, arms imports and assistance all moved both up and down, roughly in concert.    Among the poor states that devote disproportionate shares of their gross national products to military purposes are Mozambique (38%), Egypt and Pakistan (both 28%), Ethiopia (more than 25%) and Laos and Zambia (about 20%).    This Western-subsidized arms race has been catastrophic for Third World peoples. A U.N. study of 54 developing nations concluded that in every case higher defense spending resulted in lower economic growth; each additional dollar in military outlays cut agricultural output 20 cents.    Consider Ethiopia, one of the world's poorest countries. The Communist government is determined both to suppress Eritrean separatists and maintain its tyrannical control, and therefore spent $1.6 billion on its military between 1982 and 1985. During the same period it collected $1.8 billion in Western assistance. (Due to Soviet generosity, the value of Ethiopia's weapons imports, $3.6 billion, actually exceeded its defense expenditures.)    There's also Zambia, a country that recently pledged to undertake domestic economic reform but then backed away almost immediately from its promises. Aid from abroad, at $1.6 billion between 1982 and 1985, more than covered Kenneth Kaunda's $700 million arms buildup.    Zimbabwe is moving steadily toward a one-party dictatorship while remaining a favorite of Western donors. Military outlays ran $1.3 billion from 1982 to 1985. Foreign assistance over the same period was nearly $1.5 billion.    The list goes on. From 1982 to 1985, Egypt spent $24.4 billion on its military and imported $6.9 billion of weapons. At the same time, it collected $12.3 billion in foreign aid. During the same period Pakistan spent $7.8 billion on defense and received $3.3 billion in assistance. Tiny Guyana got $139 million and its arms outlays were $96 million.    It is not easy to tie particular aid packages to individual arms sales, since they usually are arranged separately by different ministries. But the timing of some transactions seems more than coincidental. In the fall of 1981 India was simultaneously negotiating a $2 billion purchase of 150 Mirage jets from France and a $3.6 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund. (India ultimately bought only 40 French planes, turning to the Soviets for additional fighters.)    In fact, India, which has proclaimed a desire to eliminate poverty by the year 2000, is engaged in an unprecedented arms buildup. Military expenditures totaled $26.5 billion between 1982 and 1985 and annual outlays have since jumped 60%, to roughly $12 billion. India plans to acquire nuclear submarines, aircraft carriers, new battletanks and lightweight combat aircraft. Its weapons imports alone ran $9.2 billion from 1982 to 1985.    That such an impoverished nation, with a per-capita income of $270, wants to become a regional superpower might not be our concern were it using its own money to buy arms. But India has long been a favorite of the international aid community, collecting $8.8 billion between 1982 and 1985. Last year alone the World Bank lent India $2.8 billion, much of it from the &quot;soft-loan window,&quot; while the U.S. provided $137.7 million in bilateral assistance. Funds also regularly flow from the Asian Development Bank, the U.N. Development Program, European donors, and Japan -- the latter, in fact, is expected to provide India with $1 billion in easy credit this year. Yet every dollar of assistance effectively will go to India's military.    If 40 years of attempting to buy friendships and promote political and economic change abroad have proved anything, it is that the U.S. has little control over the actions of other nations. No amount of American jawboning will prevent sovereign countries from spending themselves into poverty in an effort to expand their militaries for political reasons.    But the U.S. can stop subsidizing the foreign arms buildup. In fact, the Agency for International Development has a legal responsibility to do so -- the Foreign Assistance Act requires the president to take into account military expenditures by recipient governments before doling out funds. In the past, AID has routinely concluded that no country, even relatively unfriendly ones such as Zambia, should be barred from receiving assistance because of excessive arms expenditures. But the new AID administrator, Alan Woods, has made a point of linking uncontrolled military spending to underdevelopment. He should turn rhetoric into action by recommending the end of U.S. aid to dozens of nations that are essentially using American economic and humanitarian assistance for military purposes.    Such a cutoff just might have an impact. Nigeria, for instance, allocated $5.8 billion for its military between 1982 and 1985, during which time it received $5.6 billion in Western aid. But Nigeria sharply cut its military expenditures in both 1984 and 1985 when Western assistance dropped. The same phenomenon was evident in the countries cited earlier.    France and West Germany now plan to forgive part of the debt of poorer African countries, but those debtors are largely responsible for their own plight. They should start cleaning up the mess themselves instead of looking for a foreign bailout. And their first step should be to slash unproductive weapons expenditures.    Until they do, the U.S. and other Western donors should refuse even to consider proposals for increased aid. For if Third World governments won't abandon their expensive militaristic programs, increased assistance, whether higher World Bank lending or additional U.S. support, will only subsidize more tanks and soldiers that will be used to terrorize domestic dissidents and neighboring nations alike.    ---   Mr. Bandow is a Cato Institute fellow. </TEXT></DOC>