<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880930-0161 </DOCNO><HL> Notable andamp; Quotable </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>      Foreign policy analyst Christopher Layne, in the fall issue of the National Interest:   It was not foreordained that Western Europe's defense should depend on American nuclear weapons. On the contrary, as conceived between 1947 and 1949, America's containment strategy envisioned that the Soviet Union would be checked by powerful local forces of resistance on its periphery. Despite West European attempts to entangle the United States more deeply in European security, the 1949 North Atlantic Treaty was seen by Washington as primarily a symbolic gesture of reassurance. It did not obligate the United States to go to war if Western Europe was attacked, did not establish an integrated military command for the Alliance, and did not commit America permanently to deploy combat troops in Western Europe.    It was only after the North Korean attack on South Korea in June 1950 that the structure of the Alliance and the nature of American strategy changed radically. A unified NATO military command with an American as supreme commander (SACEUR) was established and U.S. combat troops were dispatched to Western Europe on a permanent basis. But it was evident that neither Washington nor the Europeans were prepared to build up their conventional forces to the levels thought necessary to defeat the Soviet army. Instead, a decision was made to Americanize and nuclearize Western Europe's defense. America, superior in long range nuclear delivery systems and virtually immune from Soviet retaliation, could credibly threaten to strike the Soviet homeland if the Kremlin marched against Europe. In essence, the protective &quot;umbrella&quot; of American nuclear power was extended to protect Western Europe as well as the United States.    As early as the mid-1950s, however, strategic analysts understood that the advent of U.S.-Soviet nuclear parity would compromise fatally the credibility of the U.S. nuclear guarantee to Western Europe. Once Moscow acquired the capability to respond in kind to a U.S. nuclear strike on the Soviet Union, America could not be relied upon to come to Western Europe's defense if it meant exposing its own cities to nuclear destruction.    Nuclear parity should logically have caused NATO to shift from nuclear deterrence to conventional defense, or led to the Europeanization of NATO's nuclear deterrent. Indeed, for a quarter of a century, American defense planners have acknowledged the need to reduce extended deterrence's risks by &quot;raising the nuclear threshold&quot; -- that is, by decreasing NATO's dependence on nuclear weapons. Doctrines and concepts such as Flexible Response, No First Use, Air Land Battle 2000, and Follow on Forces Attack were all efforts to raise the nuclear threshold, as was Samuel Huntington's proposal that NATO adopt an offensive strategy of responding to a Soviet Attack by thrusting deep into East Germany and Czechoslovakia. However, while a high nuclear threshold would advance America's strategic interests, West European traditional security elites do not believe it would serve theirs. Any policy that lowers NATO's strategic risks to the United States raises -- or at least is perceived to raise -- the strategic risks to Western Europe, particularly to West Germany. Consequently, the major Western European governments remain committed to the Alliance's current nuclear posture. </TEXT></DOC>