<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871008-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Antique Arsenals:Many Defense FirmsMake High-Tech GearIn Low-Tech Factories---Pentagon's Flawed Ordering,Role of Congress Cited;Waste, High Costs Result---'Snugging Up' Missile Parts---By Cynthia F. Mitchell and Tim CarringtonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GQAEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Defense contractors are among America's technological leaders. But you would never know it from some of their factories.    Take Grumman Corp., which developed the F-14. Not long ago, the company was embarrassed to find that the machines cranking out the highly complex jet fighter and four other sophisticated naval aircraft had an average age of 34 years.    &quot;It shocked us,&quot; says Thomas Ivory, a Grumman executive. &quot;We were mostly using equipment provided from the government during World War II.&quot; Under pressure from the Navy, Grumman is overhauling the plant, but it probably won't be fully up-to-date for a couple of years.    When taxpayers learned a few years ago they were being billed for $430 hammers, they were outraged. But a bigger problem -- and a bigger payoff if it is fixed -- is coming under scrutiny: Weapons often are being manufactured by grossly inefficient production processes that couldn't cut it in the commercial sector.    &quot;It's really horrendous,&quot; says John Orphanos, a production and acquisitions deputy with the Air Force Systems Command. &quot;We're probably paying in production costs and poor quality anywhere from three to 10 times as much as we should.&quot; Other, larger issues: the weapons' reliability and the country's ability to produce them in quantity for a war effort.    Over the past decade, the defense industry invested in new manufacturing equipment and technologies at only half the rate of the commercial sector, according to a study by a National Academy of Sciences panel. &quot;Our defense plants,&quot; says Frank Press, the NAS president, &quot;are filled with out-of-date equipment.&quot;    Mr. Orphanos cites a facility making metal parts for military-plane skeletons: First, he says, material is wasted. Instead of forming the pieces out of metal already roughly shaped like the final parts -- a common practice -- the contractor begins by carving up large, rectangular pieces, producing a mountain of scrap. Then, time can be lost. Obsolete machines spew out so many metal chips that they sometimes force shutdowns. Finally, the cutting tools aren't properly flushed with coolants and lubricants -- crucial to most machining processes. So they wear out quickly and produce too many faulty parts.    Mr. Orphanos tells many such horror stories. He describes an aircraft landing-gear factory where the floor is gooey with hydraulic fluid leaking from the huge presses designed to shape metal under pressures of 60,000 to 75,000 pounds per square inch. However, the leaky presses average only 35,000 to 50,000 pounds per square inch and thus produce piles of unacceptable, out-of-tolerance parts. He recalls another plant making submarine parts where the scrappage rate runs 70% to 80% because the outdated machine tools can't hold the prescribed tolerances.    Pentagon officials are reluctant to identify contractors still working in industrial museums. They say they tour plants under unwritten agreements of confidentiality and they don't want to embarrass companies while cajoling them to modernize.    The officials also concede that what mainly is keeping America's defense factories behind the times is a byzantine weapons-procurement system. For years, contractors' profits were based on their costs; thus, the companies had little incentive to modernize if savings were rewarded with a renegotiated, lower-profit contract. On-again, off-again congressional financing for some programs and recent get-tough procurement reforms -- such as stingier progress payments and competitive sourcing -- also make companies hesitate to invest in costly new machinery for business that they could soon lose.    Nearly all experts say weapons would be produced more cheaply under long-term contracts. But with Congress insisting on hashing over the defense budget year by year, the services, unlike most businesses, often buy a few items at a time. And when budgets are cut, programs are seldom canceled but rather are stretched out -- further reducing annual purchases. Thus, contractors, unable to forecast production levels, work inefficiently.    And, in truth, improving a factory just isn't as sexy -- or as profitable -- as designing a more sophisticated weapon.    The upshot? &quot;The resources flow to the commercial side&quot; rather than the defense side of a company, says Thomas Murrin, the president of Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s advanced-technology group.    But the increasingly worried services are laying out money -- about $200 million so far -- to coax arms makers into using robots and computerized production lines. A grab bag of projects, lumped under the Industrial Modernization Incentives Program, puts up Pentagon seed money to analyze a contractor's production methods and plan improvements. The contractor buys any new equipment and is guaranteed a &quot;healthy&quot; return on it. The government gets the rest of the savings.    Supporters hope that the programs will save taxpayers billions of dollars and help strengthen the defense industry. So far, the Pentagon claims overall savings of close to $1 billion from the programs. The Air Force, which has taken the lead, expects to save $6 billion over the next five years from about $400 million in seed money; contractors would invest $1.2 billion.    For example, modernization projects at General Dynamics Corp.'s F-16 fighter plant have so far saved $261 million as a result of $51 million in government seed money and a $175 million capital investment by the company. Over the next 10 years, those programs and new ones costing the Air Force an additional $50 million and the company an additional $150 million are expected to save $500 million more.    Eventually, the Defense Department predicts another payoff: higher productivity for other defense contractors -- which won't necessarily get seed money -- and for commercial companies as well. That's because to qualify for seed money, contractors must agree to show what they are doing to any other interested companies, including competitors.    But so far, the programs have had a big impact at only a few dozen manufacturers, and the problem still is far from licked. Just a few months ago, Robert Costello, the Pentagon's head of acquisitions, took some senior officials to a missile plant reputed to be one of the most modern in the industry. They weren't impressed.    They saw a dirty plant, he says. The air wasn't atmospherically controlled. Workers were cleaning the insides of the missiles' warheads with unfiltered air hoses. At the end of the production line, workers were screwing missile parts together by hand, without making exact measurements. &quot;One employee was instructed to 'snug it up.' . . . This was supposedly a precision job,&quot; one of the Pentagon officials recalls. The dirt, grease and imprecise connections &quot;absolutely affect reliability,&quot; he says.    Grumman found similar problems at its F-14 fighter plant in Bethpage, N.Y. Aided by $9.4 million in Navy funds, it found not only outdated machines but also a lot else crying out for change. Grumman was cutting and drilling some sheet-metal parts in three separate plant locations. And it was working as it had for 30 years -- almost entirely by hand. After tracing a part's pattern onto aluminum sheets, workers would guide them through 30-year-old bandsaws, and then any required holes would be drilled manually.    Grumman consolidated that parts operation in one area. &quot;There was no way we could afford to automate in two or three different places,&quot; says John Huber, the program's manager. Now, two white-smocked technicians tend two enormous $1.5 million machines that automatically cut, drill and trim aluminum sheets. Computers eliminate waste by nesting 10 parts on a four-foot-square sheet. The parts cost half as much to make as before, Mr. Huber says. Grumman expects its $80 million plant overhaul to save at least $275 million over five naval-aircraft programs through 1996.    Westinghouse also concedes that its old defense-electronics assembly plant in Baltimore probably wouldn't have survived in the commercial world. Only three electronics boards out of every 10 produced there passed muster. Assembly was all by hand. Scheduling was haphazard.    &quot;We didn't manage the place, we just reacted,&quot; says John &quot;Tex&quot; Teixeira, who worked in Baltimore and now runs a new electronics plant for the company.    A typical problem: Incoming component kits were incomplete and often faulty. Instead of testing them electronically at the door, Westinghouse waited until they were stuffed onto a finished board. Catching and correcting a bad component immediately might have cost $50, but on a finished board it could cost $500. After a board was in a larger system, the cost might hit $1,500.    Aided by Air Force money, Westinghouse has built a $50 million &quot;factory of the future&quot; at College Station, Texas. Now, components are tested before reaching the factory floor and again at subsequent stages. Also, four robots -- nicknamed Huey, Dewey, Louie and Screwy -- take only eight seconds to place electronic circuits on surface mount boards, compared with 30 to 40 seconds for manual placement, and they can work round-the-clock with little human attention.    So far, the company has slashed expenses by $95.5 million and, by 1992, expects to save at least $200 million more. Jobs are completed in just three weeks, instead of 12, and 85% of its finished boards, rather than just a third, pass muster.    At Rockwell International Corp.'s Collins division, which is making the receiving stations for a mammoth satellite-navigation system, scheduling used to be done manually, largely on guesswork. Dozens of project expediters ran around trying to get their jobs &quot;hot-tagged&quot; because no one was quite sure of the hours of work required for incoming jobs or the availability of machines. Employees might be switched around from one project to another.    &quot;It was chaos,&quot; recalls Dave Hanzelka, a Collins manufacturing executive. Moreover, 80% of the electronics boards needed reworking. Now, he says, a computer tracks the parts requirements and assembly time for each board and automatically dictates which job should come next.    Lately, Congress seems willing to spend money to save money. The Senate Armed Services Committee approved the $159 million that the services sought for modernization programs in fiscal 1988 and added $100 million more. But, some congressional staffers say, support will wane if the programs are perceived as a handout to companies that would make the improvements anyway.    Some government money apparently has gone into such projects. &quot;We're getting Air Force funding to go do what we would do anyway,&quot; admits James Ellis, Raytheon Co.'s manufacturing program manager. That isn't necessarily bad, Mr. Ellis and Air Force officials contend, because the money speeded up automation of a plant making satellite guidance systems, and Raytheon has to share what it learns with others.    There is also debate over how much modernization the programs can achieve. &quot;The Pentagon probably can't do a hell of a lot to influence the reinvestment process except at the margin,&quot; concludes Edward M. Kaitz, a consultant who analyzed incentive programs for the Air Force. Contractors &quot;will modify when it's in their best interest and when they have the cash flow . . . not so much because of a clause in their contract that promises them a share of the savings.&quot; Moreover, not all the automation efforts have worked.    Meanwhile, defense officials are recognizing the need to contend with the tens of thousands of subcontractors -- whose parts account for close to half of most contract expenses -- if they expect pervasive improvements in cost and quality.    The Air Force first dug into that tier by setting up an office at General Dynamics' F-16 plant that dished out seed money to 38 subcontractors for the jet. Now, it is embarking on a similar project for subcontractors of Grumman's $800 million Joint Stars program, a surveillance and target-attack system. And it is sponsoring research projects at tiny subcontractors such as Mayday Manufacturing Co. The Lewisville, Texas, maker of aircraft bearings recently spent $250,000 for an automatic machining cell as part of that program.    &quot;There's a tremendous problem with quality at the supplier level,&quot; says an aide to Mr. Costello. &quot;And we haven't come to grips with that yet.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>