<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0156 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Rapid Increases in Health-Insurance CostsCatch Employers and Insurers Off Guard---By Rhonda L. RundleStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   After two years of fairly modest increases, health-insurance costs are starting to skyrocket again. Average prices paid by companies for their employees' medical benefits could jump as much as 20% this year, and further increases are likely.    Health insurers say large increases in premiums are needed because claims costs since 1985 have been climbing faster than insurance rates. The gap, they add, widened significantly at the end of last year and seems to be getting bigger as efforts to hold down medical costs appear to have run out of steam.    &quot;A year ago we expected 1987 claims costs to be up 8% or 9%. Now we're looking at the high teens for this year and next,&quot; says Robert Bonin, manager of benefits administration at First National Bank of Chicago. At Digital Equipment Corp., claims costs are running about 11% higher for each employee, says Ed Brady, U.S. employee-benefits manager.    To many in the industry, the recent increases are reminiscent of the early 1980s when annual rate jumps of 30% to 40% were common as health-care inflation soared. No one is yet predicting another bout of runaway health-care inflation, but recent figures are unsettling: Last year, hospital charges climbed 6%, and fees for physician services were up 7.2% -- each more than three times the 1.9% pace of inflation overall.    Health-insurance costs are increasing for several reasons. Cost-containment measures, for one thing, have proved less effective than expected. And, because of an increase in patients shielded from rising fees by government programs and other plans with pre-set payment schedules, patients covered by indemnity insurance are having to pay a disproportionate amount of the rising expenses.    Costs also are escalating because of the growing expense of retiree benefits, an increase in cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and a surge in psychiatric and substance-abuse claims.    Moreover, employees covered by company health plans have increased their use of health-care services. The double whammy of steeper inflation and stepped-up utilization has resulted in an unexpected surge in medical-claims costs.    Insurance companies seem to have overestimated the effect of various cost-containment strategies. After losing money in indemnity insurance plans last year, many insurers are playing catch-up by increasing average rates for these plans significantly this year. Prudential Insurance Co. of America is raising rates by an average of about 15%; Equicor, a joint venture of Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S. and Hospital Corp. of America, by 20%; and various Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans by 10% to 20%.    Some benefits managers now are concluding that they were oversold on the effectiveness of cost-containment measures. Among the most common of these steps are to require a second opinion before surgery, to review hospital admissions in advance and to pass more costs to employees through higher deductibles.    Some measures, such as demanding higher employee contributions, may have reduced costs significantly at first, but can't easily be widened to offset new increases. &quot;An average employer that agreed to put in plan changes may have seen premiums increase only 5% last year, but he can't do it again,&quot; says John Wickens, a Prudential vice president of group underwriting.    Techniques intended to cut costs by reducing unnecessary hospital stays and doctors' visits are showing mixed results for many companies. Hospitals and doctors are learning to &quot;game the system,&quot; in the words of one company-benefits manager. For example, while reviews of patients' cases may reduce hospital stays, cost increases for room and board, tests and supplies can more than offset any savings.    &quot;It's like squeezing a balloon,&quot; says Edward J. Susank, of the Los Angeles office of William M. Mercer-Meidinger Inc., a benefits consultant. &quot;You push it in and it pops out somewhere else.&quot;    To offset gaps from inadequate Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements and from the discounts that hospitals give to health-maintenance organizations and other group plans, hospitals and physicians are shifting more costs to fee-for-service patients, who are mainly covered by indemnity insurance. This means that patients covered by private or company idemnity plans will bear the brunt of the current cost increases.    As more employers enter into managed-care arrangements with pre-set payment schedules, the population that remains to absorb cost increases shrinks, Mr. Susank says. He estimates that 10% to 20% of non-Medicare patients are now enrolled in such pre-set payment plans.    The latest round of price increases for indemnity insurance is likely to drive still more employers into some form of managed-care alternative, such as HMOs, consultants say. They note that HMO premium increases -- currently running between 3% and 6% -- are considerably less than those for traditional indemnity insurance. Equicor says its claims-cost increases are two and a half times higher in indemnity coverage than in HMO plans.    But even if more companies offer such plans as an alternative, the firms still may not see overall savings in their health-care costs. Critics say HMOs tend to attract younger, healthier workers, leaving indemnity plans with a higher percentage of older employees, who are more likely to have heart attacks and catastrophic illnesses. As a result, higher costs in a company's indemnity plan may more than offset savings from the HMO program.    Soaring costs for retirees' health-care benefits are exacerbating the problem at some companies, especially those in industries with more retirees than workers. In restructuring, many companies have encouraged early retirement in recent years, swelling their retiree rolls.    &quot;Some companies are seeing that the rate of increase in retirees' (medical-benefit costs) can be three times as high as on active employees,&quot; says Clyde Hanks, director of health-care cost management services at Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co.    The main reason is that employers' retiree plans typically cover the difference between the amount charged for the health-care service and the amount covered by Medicare -- a gap that is growing. The Medicare deductible that is covered at least in part by such plans rose to $520 this year from $400 in 1985.    Health insurers are just beginning to pin down how the increase in AIDS cases has affected costs. Mr. Wickens of Prudential estimates that as much as half a percentage point of the company's increases in claims costs this year have been attributable to cases involving AIDS.    Psychiatric counseling and drug-abuse treatment also have added to insurance costs. An analysis of nine large Los Angeles companies' employee claims found that hospital admissions for psychiatric and substance-abuse diagnoses rose 25% in 1985 from the year before. Atlantic Richfield Co., TRW Inc. and other participants found 40% of employees' total insurance-covered hospital days were for psychiatric counseling or drug-abuse treatment. </TEXT></DOC>