<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890808-0078 </DOCNO><DD> = 890808 </DD><AN> 890808-0078. </AN><HL> Politics andamp; Policy:@  Hostage Crisis Offers Bush Big Opportunities@  For Political Triumph, but Risks Are Enormous@  ----@  By Gerald F. Seib@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/08/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><GV> EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </GV><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   George Bush's presidency has entered a period of extraordinary opportunity -- but equally great peril -- with the latest twist in the hostage crisis.    The Bush administration has become a tacit player in the bargaining that has begun between Israel and the Shiite terrorists holding U.S. hostages in Lebanon. The hostage-holders' willingness to dicker over a prisoner swap, and Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani's offer to help, mean President Bush faces the clearest opportunity yet to oversee an end to the long hostage agony -- and to reap the enormous benefits the triumph would bring. Such a coup would put a substantial foundation under Mr. Bush's high approval ratings in the polls.    But Mr. Bush runs enormous risks that could just as easily bring down those approval ratings, which are broad but not deeply rooted. The rapid movement of recent days could easily give way to prolonged dickering in which the U.S. appears powerless and the agenda is controlled by Israel and Iran. By giving Israel the green light to propose deals for the release of hostages, the administration runs the risk of raising the price of captives -- precisely the trap the president has repeatedly said the U.S. should avoid.    And if the Israeli initiative turns sour and brings more hostage deaths or military action, Mr. Bush could be accused of ignoring the very policy prescriptions he offered as head of the Reagan administration's terrorism task force, when he said the U.S. &quot;will continue to urge other countries not to make concessions.&quot;    &quot;I think right now they're facing both a tremendous opportunity that may not come along again for a long, long time, and at the same time a very real challenge to pull it off,&quot; says Clay MacManaway, who until recently was deputy to the chief of counterterrorism at the State Department.    For all the hope that has arisen recently, the president has lost some of the leverage he held at the outset of the crisis when it seemed he might resort to military action against hostage-holders and their sponsors. After Shiite extremists in Lebanon said they had killed Marine Lt. Col. William Higgins and threatened to kill Joseph Cicippio early last week, there was an expectation the U.S. would use force. The Federal Bureau of Investigation said yesterday it had determined that the hanging victim shown in a videotape released in Lebanon last week was Col. Higgins. But despite that further evidence, the crisis atmosphere has given way to dickering and posturing, and the possibility of U.S. military action has faded.    And as White House aides realize, whatever the tantalizing prospects, the odds of pulling off a grand hostage deal still are daunting. &quot;It seems to me to be very difficult to arrange a swap for all the hostages,&quot; says Shaul Bakhash, an Iranian writer and scholar now living in the U.S. &quot;And expectations have built up for a release of all the hostages.&quot;    So far, President Bush and his aides seem to have handled the hostage drama smoothly. When Israel set the current chain of events in motion by kidnapping Abdel Karim Obeid, a prominent Lebanese Shiite cleric, President Bush publicly distanced himself from the Israeli move.    Then when Israel proposed a grand swap in which it would release the sheik and other Shiite prisoners it holds in return for three Israeli soldiers and all Western hostages in Lebanon, President Bush and his aides artfully moved away from the rigid official U.S. policy on dealing with terrorists, while insisting that they were sticking by it. In both a private message to Israel and in cryptic public statements, the administration declared that it still won't deal with terrorists -- but that Israel was free to do so if it wanted to.    That represents a subtle shift away from earlier declarations that the U.S. would encourage other countries to avoid deals with hostages. Mr. Bush's new posture helped open the way for the weekend proposal in which Mr. Cicippio's captors offered to free him in return for release of Shiite and Palestinian prisoners in Israel.    As a result of the new posturing, United Nations envoy Marrack Goulding said yesterday that &quot;there are certain trends in the international climate which suggest that circumstances may be more conducive to a settlement for this problem now.&quot;    At the same time it has been more supple diplomatically, the Bush administration has tried to maintain a tough posture as well. It advertised that it was moving ships toward Lebanon and Iran. And then, even though final decisions on military retaliation apparently weren't made and U.S. forces weren't prepared to move for at least two days, administration officials privately passed the word that Mr. Bush had decided that he would order bombing of targets in Lebanon if Mr. Cicippio were killed. A story saying so was leaked to the New York Times, where they figured it would have the greatest impact internationally.    Mr. Bush's posture seems to be in step with the U.S. public mood. In a new poll by Time magazine and the Cable News Network, 58% of those surveyed said the U.S. should negotiate with terrorist groups for the release of hostages.    But the danger now is that the hostage-holders and the Iranian government that supports them may have the power to drag out any dickering over the hostages. Iran and the terrorists may calculate that it is in their interest to prolong the bargaining, because in that way they can appear accommodating and avoid any punishment for the apparent murder of Col. Higgins without actually having to make a deal to give up the hostages.    For that reason, some administration aides say the U.S. should give Iran and the hostage-holders a precise period of time to arrange a hostage release before reconsidering its position.    &quot;In this case, we would be making a mistake if we let them drag it out,&quot; says Mr. MacManaway, the former State Department aide. But if the administration were to seriously contemplate military action, it also would have to be prepared to tangle with Syria, whose forces control the area of Lebanon where Shiite extremists operate; and confronting Syria would be politically and militarily difficult.    It's also far from clear that anyone in Iran, Lebanon or Syria has enough control over all the groups holding hostages to order a grand release of the eight Americans and seven other Westerners held captive. The various terrorist cells holding Western hostages are believed to be at least loosely affiliated with Hezbollah, or the Party of God, the Shiite organization prominent in South Lebanon. But U.S. analysts aren't sure there is a &quot;center of control.&quot;    And though Iran's Mr. Rafsanjani appears more willing and able to help than ever before, it's unclear how much control he can exercise over Lebanese terrorists.    In addition, while Secretary of State James Baker said this week that the U.S. is &quot;consulting very, very closely&quot; with Israel over the hostages, it's far from clear that Israel always will have the same goals as the Bush administration. For instance, if Israel could swing a deal freeing its soldiers and a few -- but not all -- of the Western hostages, Israeli leaders probably would jump at it. That might leave the remaining hostages stranded in captivity, with few Israeli or U.S. bargaining chips left to win their release.    ---@ Americans Believed Held in Lebanon    TERRY ANDERSON, 41, chief Middle East correspondent of the Associated Press. Held since March 16, 1985.    THOMAS SUTHERLAND, 58, acting dean of agriculture at the American University of Beirut. Held since June 9, 1985.    FRANK HERBERT REED, 58, director of the private Lebanon International School. Held since Sept. 9, 1986.    JOSEPH JAMES CICIPIO, 58, acting comptroller of the American University of Beirut. held since Sept. 12, 1986.    EDWARD AUSTIN TRACY, 58, author of children's books. Held since about Oct. 21, 1986.    JESSE TURNER, 42, visiting professor of mathematics and computer science at Beirut University College. Held since Jan. 24, 1987.    ALANN STEEN, 50, journalism professor at Beirut University College. Held since Jan. 24 1987.    Robert Polhill, 35, assistant professor of business and lecturer in accounting at Beirut University College. Held since Jan. 24, 1987.    Source: The Associated Press </TEXT></DOC>