<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880607-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Trial and Error: Novel Effort to Settle Asbestos Claims Fails As Lawsuits Multiply --- Many Victims Sickened, Died While Companies Clashed Over How to Pay Claims --- Back to the Legal Crapshoot </HL><AUTHOR> Cynthia F. Mitchell and Paul M. Barrett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EPI OCF AET LPX </CO><IN> CON INS </IN><TEXT>   Joseph Kremenic, a strapping six-footer who spent most of his life working in a shipyard, dreamed of a quiet retirement on his farm in East Texas. In 1980, his dreams were shattered by a chilling diagnosis: asbestosis, a respiratory disease that slowly suffocates its victims.    Some sick co-workers were going to court and winning judgments against asbestos concerns. But Mr. Kremenic's claim got stuck in a clogged court. So in 1986, he took his case to a new agency set up by asbestos companies and their insurers that promised victims speedy settlements.    His settlement demands went unanswered for two years. Mr. Kremenic died in March, his claim still unresolved. &quot;I wonder, Will it ever come to an end?&quot; Margaret Kremenic, his widow, says. &quot;I'm inclined to go to a jury, after all this time, all the suffering.&quot;    That's precisely what the asbestos and insurance companies had hoped to avoid three years ago when they pledged to lay down their arms and pay victims. The Asbestos Claims Facility was an experiment designed to mix cost savings with compassion. Companies wanted out of the courts, where they were spending huge sums to defend themselves. Victims wanted compensation, without the anguish of fighting for it and, in some cases, dying without it.    The experiment failed.    Seven of the facility's biggest members have pulled out of the organization in recent months, citing disagreements over settling claims. The departing companies were responsible for providing more than 60% of the facility's claims budget. Among them are Eagle-Picher Industries Inc., Owens-Illinois Inc., and Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. The remaining members have agreed to dissolve the facility, though they say they may form a new, smaller claims agency.    The Asbestos Claims Facility fell apart just as the flood of claims turned into a deluge. Some 63,000 claims, seeking billions in damages, are pending; new ones are pouring in at a rate of 1,300 a month, triple the rate of a few years ago. Asbestos litigation threatens to overwhelm courts in some areas. Nevertheless, asbestos producers and victims now have no choice but to rely on the courts to referee their disputes. And that is likely to mean more delay and bigger legal bills for both sides.    &quot;It puts us back to square one,&quot; says Fred Baron, a plaintiffs' lawyer in Dallas who represents thousands of asbestos victims. &quot;We're back to the old system of fierce litigation and huge litigation costs.&quot;    The history of asbestos litigation is a long and bitter one. The fiber was used widely as insulation for a century, until asbestos exposure was linked to cancer. The first lawsuit against an asbestos producer was filed in the 1950s, but plaintiffs didn't begin to win big until the 1980s. That's when juries, outraged by evidence that indicated the companies knew of the fiber's dangers long before alerting workers, began awarding millions of dollars in damages. Eventually, Manville Corp. and a half-dozen other concerns were forced to seek the protection of Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.    But court was a crapshoot for both sides. Some victims won huge awards or managed to wring sizable settlements from asbestos producers; others got little or nothing. The only ones for whom the dice were always hot were the lawyers. Producers had retained 1,100 law firms around the U.S. to defend them by the mid-1980s; thousands more lawyers specialized in representing victims.    Asbestos producers found themselves battling not only victims but also their own insurers as lawsuits multiplied. Some insurance companies reread the fine print in their policies and decided they weren't liable for the billions of dollars the asbestos concerns demanded to cover claims. Those disputes also ended up in court.    As it was first conceived, the Asbestos Claims Facility was supposed to represent a truce among all the combatants. Its founders envisioned a one-stop settlement shop for claims, a system that would offer a faster, less costly and more orderly way to resolve claims than in court. The facility even had the support of some of the most prominent plaintiffs' lawyers in the U.S., who promised their cooperation if the asbestos concerns and the insurers settled their differences.    &quot;What might have been . . . would have been wonderful,&quot; says Harry Wellington, who, as then dean of Yale Law School, helped organize the facility. &quot;And it probably would have been advantageous to everybody.&quot;    Fifty companies joined, among them some of the biggest names in the asbestos and insurance industries: Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co.; National Gypsum Co; Lloyd's of London; and U.S. Gypsum Co. Under terms, every member agreed to pay a portion of each claim based on the percentage it had historically paid, regardless of whether the claimant had been exposed to its product.    The facility succeeded in meeting some of its goals. Companies' legal bills dropped, in part because the number of law firms representing asbestos concerns was reduced to 55. Since it opened, the facility says, it has settled or tried 21,000 claims, paying out &quot;substantially more&quot; than $500 million to victims.    But ties to the plaintiffs' bar quickly became strained. Then members started to clash. Some wanted to settle claims quickly. Others, especially those that had limited insurance, wanted to delay. Further, some companies chafed at making payments to victims who hadn't been exposed to their products. The arguments got more and more heated as certain members edged closer to insolvency.    Owens-Illinois, Louisiana-Pacific Corp.'s Fibreboard unit and Pittsburgh-Corning Corp. led a dissident faction that sought to delay payouts. Though a minority, the group often prevailed, by sheer force of its representatives' personalities, according to other board members and facility executives.    &quot;It was tyranny of the minority,&quot; recalls Lawrence Fitzpatrick, the facility's acting chief executive. &quot;They managed to wear everyone down.&quot;    Complicating the situation was a sudden surge in new and, in the view of some members, questionable claims. Most of the early victims had worked directly with asbestos, fabricating or installing it. In recent years, thousands who had less exposure to the fiber -- steelworkers and rubber workers, to name a few -- also have sought compensation.    The claims sparked more dispute. Some members felt that the original formula for splitting the cost of claims among members didn't reflect their liability in the new cases.    The result was a logjam of claims. Victims found themselves waiting months, even years, before their settlement demands were answered. Some never heard from the facility at all before dying of asbestos-related diseases.    R. Bruce Ryan, an industrial electrician from Steubenville, Ohio, was one of them. After years of exposure to asbestos, Mr. Ryan developed mesothelioma, an invariably fatal cancer of the lining of the lung. Thomas White, his lawyer, says the facility never responded to Mr. Ryan's first settlement demand of $750,000, made in June 1986.    A year later, and by then seriously ill, Mr. Ryan made a second settlement demand for $1.5 million. Mr. Ryan died last summer at age 49. &quot;They never responded, even to say yes, no or maybe,&quot; Mr. White says. (The facility concedes it didn't handle the claim in a &quot;timely&quot; way.)    The facility also outraged many by taking a hard line on the types of injuries for which it would offer settlements. It refused to settle cases filed by workers whose lungs had been scarred by asbestos exposure but who weren't yet disabled. Because some victims had won court awards for such injuries, others viewed the ruling as a declaration of war.    It was as if the facility said, &quot;'We don't care what the law is. We don't care what the history is,'&quot; says Gene Locks, a plaintiffs' lawyer in Philadelphia. (The facility admits the ruling was &quot;unreasonable.&quot; It now allows victims who show early signs of disease to file claims, though they still don't get paid until they are disabled.)    Victims fought back -- in court. In some jurisdictions, their plight caught the attention of sympathetic judges. To heighten pressure on the facility to settle claims, some judges scheduled dozens of asbestos lawsuits for trial each month, knowing the facility couldn't risk taking so many cases to trial simultaneously.    The tactic seemed to work, further encouraging lawyers to race to the courthouse. In retrospect, Mr. Fitzpatrick concedes, the facility's tough stance on settling cases undermined its mission to move the asbestos fray out of the courts. &quot;It's a philosophy that shoots you in the foot in the long term,&quot; he says.    Internal strife at the facility further heightened tension. &quot;If I come in with 1,000 cases settled,&quot; Mr. Fitzpatrick, the facility's third chief executive, says, &quot;half the board would say, 'Why didn't you settle 2,000?' The other half would say, 'What, are you crazy? You shouldn't settle more than 500.'&quot;    Mr. Fitzpatrick also says some directors tried to bully claims adjusters into disapproving large settlements. In some cases, he says, directors threatened to fire adjusters if they wouldn't comply. The meddling got so disruptive that the board eventually had to pass a resolution ordering directors to leave the staff alone.    Several asbestos producers announced they would drop out of the facility late last year. In February, Eagle-Picher quit, but, unlike the others, it refused to pay on pending claims. It says only about one-third of the $63.1 million it paid to settle claims through the facility last year was covered by insurance. The company says it believes it can settle claims for less money by negotiating directly with victims and their lawyers.    The remaining members are trying to form a new settlement organization, but without the support of such big concerns and former members as Eagle-Picher and Owens-Corning Fiberglas, it is unlikely to have a significant impact.    The facility's collapse is a blow not just to those involved in the asbestos fray. It is also dismaying news for chemical manufacturers and others who face a rising tide of personal-injury lawsuits over exposure to toxic substances. Those companies had looked to the facility as a model for resolving mass tort claims.    The failure also is a setback for the alternative dispute resolution movement, which advocates resolving cases out of court. Early on, proponents had hailed the facility as proof that the litigation explosion could be controlled. Eric Green, a Boston University law professor who advises companies on alternative dispute resolution, says: &quot;We're going to be living down this disaster for a long time.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>