<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880701-0054 </DOCNO><HL> High-Speed Photography Sheds Its Image As a Tricky Craft With Few Applications </HL><AUTHOR> David Stipp (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PIX EDP FLX </IN><TEXT>   The picture on Eugene O'Connell's business brochure is worth a thousand words about what he does: It shows an unblurred, speeding bullet just after it rips through a strand of spaghetti.    As one of the country's handful of full-time specialists in high-speed photography, Mr. O'Connell makes his living slowing things down. Using cameras that shoot up to 44,000 pictures a second, and then turning them into slow-motion movies, the Boston photographer has helped customers solve problems with baseball pitchers' throwing arms, high-speed factory machines, flashlamps that trigger lasers and a wide array of things that explode, fly, break apart or otherwise move too quickly to be seen clearly.    Until the past few years, high-speed photography was considered a tricky craft with few uses or users aside from defense companies, a few large manufacturers and some well-heeled sports researchers. But the advent of high-speed video systems in the early 1980s, advances in lighting and other technological improvements, including the use of computers, have broadened the field's applications.    High-speed video systems, for instance, offer the ability to make countless, on-site instant replays of fast-moving targets. This advantage helps photographers overcome timing problems, which are a major headache when trying to coordinate high-speed cameras that can zip through a 400-foot reel of film in four seconds with the intermittent, fleeting glitches in fast-moving machines. And despite the expense of highspeed video systems -- more than $60,000 for a low-end model made by Eastman Kodak Co. -- they are doing for high-speed photography what videocameras have done for home movies.    A Boston researcher, for example, is using high-speed video to develop a system for trouble-shooting problems with amateur golfers' swings. And an artist in Groton, Mass., recently used the technology to perfect the split-second timing of sequentially tripped hammers that strike a large gong he created.    High-speed video's biggest promise, however, is in the more mundane world of factory machines. Driven by computers to ever faster speeds and finer tolerances, the machines are prone to subtle problems that occur only when they are moving at blinding speed. With high-speed video, says Mr. O'Connell, &quot;you can get a quick visual image of what's going on, which is usually 50% of solving a problem.&quot; Adds George Drumheller, a manager at Morgan Construction Co., Worcester, Mass., which recently analyzed problems with its steelrod-making machine using Mr. O'Connell's high-speed video system: &quot;It gives us a way to test theories (about malfunctions) without interrupting the machines&quot; and causing expensive downtime.    High-speed video systems can scan a scene several thousand times a second. That is dozens of times faster, and hence produces less blurring of fast-moving objects, than the systems used for slow-motion replays in TV sports. But it is slow compared with the picture-taking rates of the fastest high-speed movie cameras, which can take tens of thousands of pictures a second, each exposed for only a millionth of a second. Such cameras, coupled with fast-flashing lights called stroboscopes, or strobes, can show exactly what happens as an armor-piercing bullet meets a bullet-proof shield.    Even more-exotic cameras have been developed for research on explosions and on turbine-engine blades and other fast-moving objects. One, made by Cordin Co. of Salt Lake City, employs a mirror that rotates at more than a million revolutions a minute to flash a rapid sequence of images through multiple lenses along a strip of stationary film. The camera allows exposures of only 20 billionths of a second -- barely enough time for light to travel across a medium-sized room.    Fastest of all is the &quot;streak&quot; camera, which captures a somewhat blurry image across a piece of film. Streak cameras can make images in as little as 10 trillionths of a second, during which light travels only about a tenth of an inch. Its applications are mostly in defense projects, such as research on nuclear fusion, the subatomic reactions that occur in hydrogen bombs.    All of the high-speed cameras pose lighting as well as timing problems: The faster a picture is snapped, the brighter the light has to be on the subject. In the billionths-of-a-second range, &quot;we need a hell of a lot of light,&quot; says Richard DeIanni, Cordin's sales manager. Getting enough light is often a problem even with the relatively slow exposures of high-speed movie cameras, says Mr. O'Connell. He once put so many lights on one of his subjects -- a plastic shutter on a consumer camera being developed by Polaroid Corp. -- that the shutter melted when he stepped away for a minute.    A laser solved the lighting problem at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Houston, where researchers are using Cordin's rotating mirror camera to study damage done to space vehicles by collisions with man-made and naturally occurring debris in space. Even the millionth-second flash of a special strobe &quot;is very slow&quot; compared with the laser flashes of nine nanoseconds, or billionths of a second, says Jeanne Lee Crews, who directs the research. The camera snaps pictures of sand-like aluminum bits -- fired by special guns at many times the speed of bullets -- as they hit targets that simulate the walls of space vehicles. Without the laser, she says, &quot;we couldn't get enough illumination fast enough.&quot;    High-speed photography is being married with another technology -- computers -- for use in sports. The idea involves digitizing slow-motion pictures, that is, reducing them to patterns of dots whose positions are marked with numerical coordinates for analyzing with a computer.    EQB-Oak Manor Inc., of Unionville, Pa., employs the technique to study racehorses and has compiled a data library containing digitized film clips of some 10,000 galloping horses. The company claims that its computerized analyses of how unproven two-year-olds run, which include detailed comparisons with champions such as Secretariat, enable it to give horse buyers an edge in picking winners.    Computerized high-speed photography is also being used for analytical research on athletes. David Barlow, a University of Delaware researcher, employs the technique to study runners. &quot;We can use automated systems to track certain body landmarks, digitize information and use (computer) graphics to interpret it,&quot; he says. &quot;We can also do mathematical modeling (of athletes' motion) and predict the outcome of modifications&quot; to the motions.    Digitizing pictures typically is done by hand in a time-consuming and expensive process, making computerized high-speed photography impractical for use by most amateur athletes. But James Sudmeier, a Boston researcher, hopes to automate the process with artificial intelligence techniques. His start-up company, SportLabs, is developing a high-speed video system to automatically analyze the swings of amateur golfers and compare them with pros. </TEXT></DOC>