<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870715-0074 </DOCNO><HL> American Megabanks: Scary, Not Scarce---By Irvine Sprague</HL><DD> 07/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   The drive toward concentration of the nation's economic resources in megabanks already has turned into a stampede -- but this apparently is not fast enough to satisfy the Reagan administration.    Undersecretary George Gould has been quoted as saying that the Treasury Department has concluded we should foster the creation of five or 10 giant banks in combination with large industrial companies, setting up powerful institutions to compete in world markets. Although there has been no claim of misquotation, there has been some backpedaling since the Gould interview became public. This is standard practice when secret administration plans, which sound great to a few insiders, become exposed to public view.    There are three basic impediments to this ambitious program: 1) the Glass-Steagall Act, which separates banking and commerce; 2) the Bank Holding Company Act, which prohibits non-banking companies from owning banks; and 3) a deep-seated distrust on the part of many against overwhelming economic concentration.    The idea that bigness is best has been floating around for some time, but it never before reached page-one status during my 30 years in government, including service as a banking regulator with nine different Treasury secretaries and four Federal Reserve chairmen.    The macho instincts of the administration come out when the press reports that the largest banking combines today are in Japan and Europe, while American banks, long among the largest, are now in the also-ran category. BankAmerica and Citibank are the only two American banks in the top 25 in the world today. But what does size itself mean?    We should not forget that banks are not run solely for profit. They are chartered either by the federal government or the states for the specific purpose of serving the public. A finding that an institution will meet the convenience and needs of the public is an essential element in any new bank charter. Becoming larger so there is more capacity to gamble on the Hong Kong and Tokyo currency exchanges or to fuel and finance industrial takeovers that destroy thousands of American jobs hardly can be classified as serving the public interest.    There is no scarcity of American megabanks today. Year-end 1986 figures, the latest available, show growth, mergers and inflation swelling banks to sizes unheard of less than a decade ago: There were two domestic banking organizations with assets of more than $100 billion, seven with assets between $50 billion and $100 billion, 19 with assets between $20 billion and $50 billion, and 35 with assets between $10 billion and $20 billion.    The total of 383 individual banks with assets over $1 billion includes many standing alone, as well as units of the holding companies that dominate the top tier.    Growth and mergers no doubt have moved even these figures up during the past six months. To put the numbers in perspective, in 1972, when the government bailed out Bank of the Commonwealth in Detroit, it was in the then very select category of $1 billion institutions. In 1980, when the government bailed out the $9 billion First Pennsylvania Bank in Philadelphia, it was the 19th-largest banking organization in the nation. Today there are 64 institutions larger than First Pennsylvania was then.    The big combinations are well known: Seafirst and BankAmerica, Wells Fargo and Crocker, Chemical and Texas Commerce, Republic and Texas Interstate, First Interstate and Rainier, First Interstate and Allied.    But the real action is in the regionals. As interstate barriers crumble, the regional combinations abound, and these for the most part are not motivated by damage control, as were many of the big mergers.    A few notable examples of aggressive organizations that have more than doubled in size through merger or acquisition in the recent past: Suntrust Banks of Georgia, First Union Corp. of North Carolina, NCNB Corp. in North Carolina, Sovran Financial Corp. of Virginia, Meritor Savings Bank of Pennyslvania, Goldome Savings Bank of New York. I doubt any of these are through growing, and others are joining their act in the traditional banker reflex of &quot;everybody's doing it. I'd better too.&quot;    Megabanks already enjoy substantial advantages from the government, and to foster the Gould suggestion with additional government aid would require pushing the banker's cherished &quot;level playing field&quot; right off the cliff. Growth -- even to gigantic size -- through the marketplace is fine, but to do it with further government aid, encouragement or intervention would be outrageous.    Big banks today have an absolute guarantee against failures -- they can pursue any course of action, be it sound or reckless or even indifferent, with the certain knowledge that should failure approach, bailout will not be long behind.    The government has never allowed a big bank to fail, and it never will. With the single exception of Penn Square, a tiny shopping-center bank in Oklahoma City that exploded overnight into a $500 million embarrassment, no bank with more than $200 million in assets has ever been closed and paid off. Only five payoffs have been of more than $100 million, and an additional eight have been of more than $50 million. The failing big banks are sold with a heavy government subsidy or they are bailed out. The smaller institutions take their chances.    The irony is that the big banks enjoy substantial government gifts through the structure of their assessments for FDIC insurance. A quirk in the law says that the assessments are paid on &quot;domestic&quot; deposits, which means that foreign-denominated deposits are freebies. For the really big banks, heavily involved in foreign markets, this means that while they have absolute protection on all deposits, they on average pay on only half of them. I know of no one who defends this practice, nor anyone willing to change it.    Continental Illinois paid only $6.5 million in Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. assessments in 1983, yet its full $69 billion in on- and off-book liabilities were protected the following year when it de facto failed. The current loss estimate at Continental stands on the FDIC books at $1.7 billion. As a result, the other 15,000 banks that had enjoyed uninterrupted insurance refunds for 50 years have missed the payment the past two years and will probably continue to do so for the foreseeable future as additional bank failures cumulate. The 100 failures through June far exceed the 63 during the comparable period last year; the total for all of 1986 was 145.    It can hardly be comforting to the community banks and the regionals to read that their government even is thinking about creating five or 10 gigantic competitors with the resources to plow under any bank that happens to be in the way.    The time is past to slow down the interstate moves. But Congress in its current deliberations has a golden opportunity to stop any further blurring of the lines between banking and commerce.    Any concentration of power is oppressive; the concentration of economic power is frightening. Let us hope that Congress will have the guts or the wisdom to draw a line against the unbridled economic concentration that is implied in the Treasury's no-longer-secret plan.    ---   Mr. Sprague was chairman of the FDIC, 1971-81, and a director, 1982-86. </TEXT></DOC>