<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870127-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REBEL SOLDIERS LAUNCHED a coup attempt against the Aquino government.    A Philippine military spokesman said about 300 soldiers said to support ousted ruler Ferdinand Marcos seized an independent television station in Manila, but were surrounded by forces loyal to Aquino. The Manila government was attempting to negotiate with the rebel troops. Government radio also reported that rebel soldiers tried to storm two Manila-area air force bases and that at least one mutineer was killed. A military spokesman said pro-Aquino forces put down the mutinies at both bases.    The attempt followed a march on the presidential palace by about 15,000 people protesting the killings last week of at least 12 demonstrators by marines.    ---   GUNMEN KIDNAPPED three men in the mainly Moslem sector of Beirut.    Police said four gunmen abducted two men, believed to be Poles, from a store in West Beirut. Hours later, a Saudi national was reported abducted in the Lebanese capital. It was unclear whether the kidnappings were related to the arrest by West Germany of a Lebanese man wanted by the U.S. in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jet. In Kuwait, a report said Anglican envoy Waite had been placed under &quot;house arrest&quot; by hostage-takers. It couldn't be confirmed.    The Reagan administration condemned the latest wave of kidnappings and advised Americans to leave the &quot;chaotic situation&quot; in Lebanon.    ---   REAGAN ANSWERED &quot;all questions&quot; from a panel probing arms sales to Iran.    The president met for 76 minutes with the three-member committee he named Nov. 26 to investigate the actions of the National Security Council staff following the disclosure that profits from the covert sales were diverted to Nicaraguan rebels. It was the first time Reagan had discussed his role in the Iran initiative with any outside group. Details of the meeting weren't disclosed.    A spokesman said Reagan has completed his State of the Union address, which is to be delivered today. He is expected to speak about the Iran affair.    ---   Nicaragua announced that Sam Nesley Hall, an American arrested last month near Managua, would be released for health reasons into the custody of his brother, a congressman from Ohio. The ailment wasn't described. Hall was arrested Dec. 12 at a restricted air base, and he later admitted that he was spying on military installations.    ---   Morton Thiokol Inc. admitted that it &quot;never fully understood&quot; the workings of the booster rocket blamed for last year's explosion of the space shuttle Challenger. The company, which is redesigning the shuttle's rockets, said it had made major changes in its testing procedures.    ---   Peking's Foreign Ministry ordered Agence France-Presse to transfer a reporter accused by the Chinese government of activities &quot;incompatible with his status&quot; during recent pro-democracy student protests. The move followed Sunday's arrest of a Chinese student who allegedly provided intelligence data to the reporter, an American.    ---   Thousands of South Koreans staged three separate protests in Seoul over the Jan. 14 torture death of a 21-year-old student during a police interrogation. The demonstrations were held as the National Assembly met in special session to discuss the death of the student, who was being questioned about anti-government activities.    ---   Black activist Winnie Mandela said she was &quot;totally puzzled&quot; over why South African police raided her Soweto home Sunday and detained her for questioning. Mandela said it could have been a &quot;propaganda&quot; effort by Pretoria to coincide with Shultz's meeting this week in Washington with African National Congress leader Tambo.    ---   Kohl said voters gave a clear mandate to his pro-NATO coalition, which scored a convincing victory in Sunday's West German election. The chancellor, however, said his Christian Democratic Party's worst showing in nearly 40 years was due to bad weather, low voter turnout and quarrels within his coalition during the campaign.    West Germany's Greens party emerged as the biggest victor in the nationwide election, boosting its share of the vote to 8.3% from 5.6% in the previous election. For the Social Democrats, the election revived the temptation to form an opposition alliance with the Greens.    ---   Pakistan announced that its foreign minister would visit New Delhi for talks aimed at defusing tensions that have prompted new military buildups on both sides of the Indian-Pakistani border. Islamabad said the decision was in response to an invitation Sunday from India urging the discussions.    ---   A major storm moved along the East Coast, dropping as much as 16 inches of snow from Alabama to New England. The storm, the second in the region since last Thursday, caused the closure of airports and scores of schools. The federal government gave non-essential workers the day off.    ---   Iran said it would send 100,000 troops to the Persian Gulf war front early next month in an attempt to end its conflict with Iraq. The commander of Tehran's paramilitary guards also said that Iranian troops gained ground in the offensive against the Iraqi port city of Basra. Baghdad, however, said Iran was &quot;in a state of retreat.&quot;    ---   Died: Lester A. Burcham, 73, former chairman of F.W. Woolworth Co., Saturday, in Winston-Salem, N.C. </TEXT></DOC>