<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880923-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): The Players --- Ethereal Market: Electronic Trading Creates New Demand For Price Quotes, Other Data Services </HL><AUTHOR> Janet Guyon </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> RTRSY TLR DJ CCI AUD T </CO><IN> TEL PUB EDP SCR </IN><TEXT>   THE AGE OF INSTANT electronic markets has provided thousands of traders around the world myriad new opportunities to make lots of money. It also has created enormous new demands for information.    Most &quot;markets&quot; these days really are just networks of people sitting at computers and telephones looking for price quotes and making trades. The London Stock Exchange abandoned its trading floor in 1986. The Eurobond and currency markets never had any.    The system allows for some fancy arbitrage plays and nifty hedging strategies. But it also makes up-to-date pricing information both essential and hard to get.    In the early stages of electronic markets, several companies started out collecting quotes for different instruments, and each developed its own system to deliver them. Thus a trader interested in the foreign-exchange market might have a Reuter's terminal on his desk, while a few feet away a colleague following the stock market would have a Quotron machine.    Now, with terminals all over the place, the information companies are branching out to offer more types of information on them. At the same time, the proliferation of personal computers at securities firms has created a whole new market for software packages that can analyze trends and investments. Thus, the financial information industry is both consolidating and fragmenting at the same time. Big players are buying up small players while new upstarts are emerging to sell far more than just price quotes.    Bankers, brokers, investors and speculators will spend about $1.53 billion this year for electronic postings of prices and other bits of economic news, estimates Link Resources Corp., a New York-based consultant. By 1991 that figure is expected to rise to just over $3 billion.    It's like Hollywood in the 1920s, says Peter Keen, head of the International Center for Information Technologies, a research group funded by Washington-based MCI Communications Corp. &quot;Somebody is going to get very rich, but we don't know who.&quot;    Here's a rundown on some of the major players and where they are headed.    REUTERS   Reuters Holdings PLC is the dominant world-wide disseminator of financial quotes. With 160,360 terminals in customer offices, it sees itself as a supermarket of financial information. Its historic base is in currency prices, and its home is the U.K. But it has made a major push into the U.S. over the past six years, and it now offers quotes on a wide variety of instruments.    Reuters has developed an electronic system that allows dealers to execute trades at the prices they see on their screens. The company says use of the system for currencies, bullion and Eurobonds has gone up about 50% since last October. Last year Reuters gained a beachhead in U.S. equities quotes through the acquisition of Instinet, which automatically matches buy and sell orders for stock.    Geographically, Reuters is focusing on Asia right now, says Andre Villeneuve, president of Reuters North America. &quot;The Japanese banks have fantastic resources just at the time when the North American banks and brokerages are looking more carefully at costs.&quot;    TELERATE   Telerate Inc.'s strength has been providing quotes on fixed-income securities and foreign exchange in North America. With the purchase last year of CMQ Communications Inc. it hopes to establish a base in equities prices. CMQ is predominantly a Canadian equity quote supplier but it covers North American exchanges and certain Asian and European exchanges as well, says Scott Rumbold, senior vice president, marketing.    Dow Jones andamp; Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal and several news wires, has bought 56% of Telerate over the past three years. Dow Jones executive vice president William Dunn says the company's Telerate investment was made primarily to take advantage of Telerate's electronic distribution network. But, access to Dow Jones news, &quot;rounds out the {Telerate} picture nicely,&quot; says Mr. Rumbold.    Several years behind Reuters in selling transactional systems, Telerate formed a joint venture with American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. last year to develop such a system that initially will be offered to foreign exchange traders. Due out in the first quarter of 1989, Mr. Rumbold says it will eventually include markets for most types of financial instruments.    QUOTRON -   Quotron Systems got its start distributing U.S. stock quotes. Citicorp bought it in 1986 to expand into financial information services, but competitors have warned that Quotron faces an uphill battle keeping its established customers because most view Citicorp as a competitor. Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. have already placed big orders with Quotron competitor ADP, making ADP the largest provider of equity quotes in the U.S.    David Hann, Quotron's president, says Citicorp is helping it to expand overseas and to develop new products. Just as Reuters and Telerate want to grab a piece of Quotron's territory by offering U.S. equities quotes, Quotron is eyeing their turf and mulling ways to offer pricing information on fixed-income instruments and foreign currencies. It also wants to go head-to-head with ADP providing back-office computer support.    In addition, Quotron is experimenting with software that would display its numerical information in graphic form. This would allow a trader to see at a glance how a market is moving, without having to read and digest the numbers.    ADP   Automatic Data Processing Inc. got into the business of supplying equity quotes with its purchase in 1986 of Bunker Ramo. Prior to that, ADP was primarily a back-office computer-service company that specialized in serving brokerage companies.    Arthur Weinbach, senior vice president, administration and finance, says the company knows that eventually &quot;the market will become an international one and people will require information across not just equities but other financial instruments.&quot; For now, however, he says, ADP plans to concentrate on expanding its share of the U.S. equities-quote business.    ---   Ms. Guyon reports on telecommunications from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>