<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861203-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Guinness ProbeIs Said to IncludeU.S. Investors---Share Price Manipulation,Sources Say, Is LikelyFocus of Investigation---By Gary Putka and Peter TruellStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/03/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The British government investigation of Guinness PLC's takeover activities appears to be focusing on possible share-price manipulation by parties that include major U.S. investors, sources familiar with the investigation said.    The investigation by Britain's Department of Trade and Industry stems from Guinness's $3.6 billion takeover of Distillers Co. earlier this year. The British brewer won control of Distillers after a bitter battle with Argyll Group PLC, a British supermarket chain.    In Parliament yesterday, a member of the opposition Labor Party alleged that the U.S. takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky played an instrumental role in helping Guinness win control of Distillers.    In a debate on Britain's widening insider-trading investigations, the Parliament member, Robin Cook, alleged that Mr. Boesky used selective selling in the London market to depress Argyll's share price at a crucial stage in the two companies' competition for Distillers. At the same time, Mr. Cook said, an ally of Guinness in the U.S. bought a large number of Guinness shares, increasing their price. A sharp increase in Guinness's share price last April helped the company prevail over Argyll because both bids were priced in a fixed number of the rivals' shares.    Mr. Cook, a spokesman on business matters for the opposition Labor Party, gave no evidence for his statements in Parliament, where politicians are immune from defamation laws.    In the U.S., Theodore Levine, a lawyer for Mr. Boesky, said that he hadn't any comment on the allegations and that Mr. Boesky wouldn't comment.    During the takeover fight, Argyll had alleged that Guinness's share price was being manipulated to boost its value and, thus, its offer for Distillers, a Scottish maker of spirits. Argyll had named the Schenley Industries unit of Rapid-American Corp. as one of the U.S. investors whose buying drove up Guinness's share price. Guinness has identified Schenley as a major shareholder, but yesterday declined to comment on Argyll's allegations that it acted in concert with Guinness.    Mr. Cook's statements came yesterday as evidence surfaced that the government is widening its investigation of Guinness. Inspectors from Britain's trade department, which launched the Guinness probe Monday, have taken trading records and other documents from at least four London securities firms that acted as investment bankers or brokers in the Distillers bid, sources close to the investigation say.    Officials who have handled the trade department's requests for information said they believe the government is acting on information supplied by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission that was discovered during the SEC's investigation of Mr. Boesky. Last month, Mr. Boesky agreed to pay $100 million to settle SEC charges against him, and he also agreed to plead guilty to a criminal charge.    As reported, Morgan Grenfell Group PLC, Guinness's main investment banker in the Distillers bid, has acknowledged receiving a surprise visit from government inspectors seeking records. A Morgan Grenfell official said the firm is cooperating with the investigation.    A source close to the investigation said the three other firms visited by investigators are Cazenove andamp; Co., Kleinwort Benson Lonsdale PLC and the Wood Mackenzie unit of Hill Samuel Group PLC. Officials at Cazenove and Kleinwort Benson declined to comment. But an official in the Hill Samuel Group acknowledged the government's visit, and said his firm had complied with requests for records. That government investigators have sought evidence from a specific firm doesn't mean that it has committed a crime or is under suspicion.    Officials at both Hill Samuel and Morgan Grenfell noted that the investigators had sought records of the firms' trading in Guinness shares. An official of Samuel Montagu andamp; Co., which advised Argyll in its bid for Distillers, said a 25% rise in Guinness's share price during the bid was the deciding factor in the contest.    The investigation of Guinness, one of Britain's largest and most acquisitive companies, has shocked the London markets, and raised further questions about the company's controversial takeover tactics. The battle for Distillers was among the most acrimonious of British takeover fights, marked by frequent appeals to the courts and regulators.    In late March, according to sources in the Argyll camp, the company complained to Britain's Panel on Takeovers and Mergers about heavy buying in Guinness shares that was rapidly adding to the value of the Guinness bid.    Samuel Montagu, Argyll's adviser, told the mergers panel that it believed the buying was coming from parties acting on Guinness's behalf, and should be disclosed as such. In its complaint to the panel, according to one source on the Argyll takeover team, Samuel Montagu named one substantial U.S. buyer as &quot;Atlantic Nominees,&quot; which it said was controlled by Rapid-American.    Rapid-American officials couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.    Samuel Montagu also said it believed that the buying of about eight million Guinness shares had been by U.S. investors, whom it couldn't identify. The takeover panel, which makes such rulings in private, told the Argyll camp that it could find no evidence that the buyers were linked with Guinness.    In Parliament yesterday, Mr. Cook said that Mr. Boesky owned more than $100 million of Distillers shares, assembled &quot;well in advance of the announcement&quot; of the Guinness bid for the company. At market prices prevailing in advance of the Guinness bid, that would have represented more than 3% of Distiller's shares outstanding. But such an interest wouldn't necessarily represent any advance knowledge of Guinness's intentions, as Argyll's original bid for Distillers attracted speculators' attention before Guinness launched its bid. </TEXT></DOC>