<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870209-0008 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A U.S. HOSTAGE DELIVERED an ultimatum from Moslem kidnappers.    American hostage Alann Steen, in a six-minute videotape delivered to a news agency in Beirut, said he and three other kidnap victims would be killed if Israel failed to release 400 Arab prisoners by today. Israel rejected the demand, saying it wouldn't &quot;act in accordance with ultimatums.&quot; Foreign Minister Peres, however, said the government was willing to discuss the swap of an Israeli airman missing in Lebanon for the jailed Palestinians.    The Church of England denied a claim by a Moslem group that envoy Terry Waite, missing in Beirut since Jan. 20, carried a transmitter to pinpoint Lebanese targets for a U.S. attack.    ---   A TRUCE EXPIRED between the Philippine government and communist rebels.    The government refused to grant an extension to the 60-day cease-fire because the country's communist insurgents wouldn't resume &quot;substantial negotiations&quot; to end an 18-year-old insurrection. An Aquino spokesman said the government would step up military patrols and pursue peace talks on a regional level. A rebel umbrella group urged its members to &quot;wage militant and unremitting struggles on all fronts.&quot;    The Manila government, in an apparent attempt to gain support in the countryside, unveiled a program to distribute 24 million acres of land to farmers.    ---   A Wall Street Journal reporter spent the weekend in seclusion after being released unharmed by the Iranian government Friday following a week in detention. The correspondent, Gerald Seib, denied any involvement in espionage, and said authorities hadn't expelled him or told him he couldn't return to Iran.    ---   Weinberger said the first phase of Reagan's space-based antimissile system could be deployed &quot;somewhere in the 1993-1994 range.&quot; Meanwhile, Shultz indicated that the administration favored abandoning a narrow interpretation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty for a broader one that would allow testing of the system.    ---   The White House denied that a memo written by an aide to Vice President Bush contradicted Reagan's explanation of covert arms sales to Iran. In the memo, published by the Washington Post, the Bush aide said last summer that the U.S. was &quot;dealing with the most radical elements&quot; in Iran, rather than the moderates cited by Reagan.    ---   The Kremlin has released over the past few weeks at least 42 dissidents from labor camps, prisons or exile, a spokeswoman for dissident physicist Andrei Sakharov said Saturday. While the move appeared to be part of limited amnesty for political prisoners, some activists said they were unsure if it was a change in policy on dissent.    Pravda published a draft economic law that would ease bureaucratic controls and emphasize profit, competition and consumer demand. The proposal was linked to Gorbachev's drive to spur productivity.    ---   Two Soviet cosmonauts inspected the orbiting space station Mir in preparation for months of experiments and the arrival of a space observatory carrying Soviet and West European scientific equipment. The cosmonauts, sent into space Thursday, docked their craft with the Mir station Saturday.    ---   South Korean authorities placed opposition leader Kim Dae Jung under house arrest to prevent him from attending a prayer service for a student who died last month during a police interrogation. Officials in Seoul also began questioning nearly 800 people detained Saturday in violent anti-government rallies over the student's death.    ---   A federal appeals court ordered the Labor Department to issue a field sanitation standard guaranteeing farm-workers access to drinking water and toilets. By its order Friday, the court said it hoped to end a battle over whether the U.S. government should adopt rules to improve sanitation facilities for farm-workers.    ---   A New York State health council adopted smoking regulations that would ban or restrict smoking in work sites, schools, restaurants, museums, stadiums, public transportation and other public places. They would apply to work sites in both the public and the private sectors.    ---   France has reinforced its military forces in Chad, moving troops and equipment toward the country's demarcation line as concern mounted over a Libyan troop buildup in the north, defense sources in Paris said. A Defense Ministry spokesman said France was establishing new bases with antiaircraft systems and landing strips.    ---   Spain's opposition party elected Antonio Hernandez Mancha, a populist who entered politics 10 years ago, to succeed founder Manuel Fraga as president of the right-wing Popular Alliance party.    ---   China's vice foreign minister traveled to the Soviet Union for talks today on a longstanding border dispute between the two nations. The discussions in Moscow, the first since 1978, were viewed as part of a slow improvement in Sino-Soviet relations.    ---   Died: Stuart T. Saunders, 77, former chairman of Penn Central Transportation Co., Saturday, in Richmond, Va. </TEXT></DOC>