<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871103-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Who's News:Is Elmer Johnson Running for Something?---By Jacob M. SchlesingerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GMAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   To some, he is a corporate Franklin D. Roosevelt, boldly stepping in to rescue a depressed industrial giant from incompetent, unpopular management. To others, he is a board-room Robespierre whose bald grab for power will ultimately self-destruct.    But there's one thing everyone at General Motors Corp. does agree on about Elmer W. Johnson, 55 years old, who earlier this year was named a director and promoted to executive vice president heading GM's key operating staffs. In his campaign to overhaul GM -- and, some say, to become the next chairman of the No. 1 auto maker -- he's shaking up the staid hierarchy like no one since the controversial John Z. DeLorean did more than a decade ago.    &quot;Everybody feels strongly about him,&quot; says one GM veteran now indirectly reporting to Mr. Johnson. &quot;There are Elmer lovers, and Elmer haters.&quot; What do the supporters say? &quot;I don't know, you'd have to talk to one.&quot; Then what do the detractors say? &quot;Nothing. They're afraid to.&quot;    Mr. Johnson isn't saying anything either. He stopped giving interviews, worried that recent publicity he's received will create a backlash within GM.    His GM career began just 4 1/2 years ago as one plank in Chairman Roger B. Smith's grand platform to reshape the world's largest manufacturer. Mr. Smith reorganized the corporate structure and started buying huge technology companies. He hired Mr. Johnson as a sort of free-agent reformer. Lured from his comfortable perch as a managing partner of Kirkland andamp; Ellis, Chicago's largest law firm, Mr. Johnson was officially hired as GM's general counsel. But he was promised a new job every two years -- all with the common theme of helping to reshape GM.    From day one, by his very presence, Mr. Johnson represented change. Virtually everything about him -- his background, his interests, his career path -- set him apart. Most auto executives join a Big Three company immediately after graduating from a Big 10 school -- or perhaps General Motors Institute -- where they studied engineering or finance. They climb the corporate ladder one rung at a time. Their leisure activities tend to range from fishing to golf.    Mr. Johnson -- Yale graduate, lawyer, virtuoso trumpet player -- is different. Outside of work, he has developed an academic interest in theology, philosophy, economics, and how they merge into business ethics. During a midlife intellectual crisis, he spent seven years plowing through a self-assigned 150-book reading list, ranging from Plato's &quot;Republic&quot; to D.H. Lawrence's &quot;Lady Chatterley's Lover,&quot; routinely waking up between 2 a.m. and 5 a.m. to crack the books.    He is currently co-authoring with a University of Chicago philosopher a chapter about &quot;efficiency, morality, and managerial effectiveness&quot; for a book by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.    Mr. Johnson's main accomplishments at GM have been important, but largely legalistic. They include: drawing up the strategy behind the controversial $750 million buy-out last year of feisty board member H. Ross Perot and masterminding the subsequent campaign to appease disgruntled investors; coordinating GM's victory over the federal government's attempts to fine the auto maker $4 million and force a recall of 1.1 million X-cars for allegedly faulty brakes; and drawing up GM's unique stock system with different classes for different subsidiaries.    But Mr. Johnson is stalking larger prey now. His self-proclaimed mission is to completely overhaul the mind-set of GM's half-million U.S. workers. For now, he is focusing on the 123,000 white-collar employees, particularly the 4,200 bonus-eligible managers. He wants to eradicate long-cherished principles of de facto lifetime job security and guaranteed raises, instead pegging pay and promotions to performance. He has already linked bonus pay more heavily toward achievement.    Mr. Johnson recruits executives who share his views. He personally has hired five of the six vice presidents running GM's operating staffs, in areas ranging from materials management to sales and marketing. He fired GM's longtime personnel vice president, then skipped over several logical successors to pluck a plant manager from Tarrytown, N.Y., to fill the slot. For other jobs, he has rejected recommendations from more senior executives.    &quot;When I was in private practice,&quot; Mr. Johnson said in a speech to GM staff members in February, &quot;I counseled a number of once-great organizations that lacked power of institutional self-renewal at critical junctures . . . . &quot; GM, he said, must resolve &quot;whether we can discard, where appropriate, our old ways of doing things.&quot;    GM apparently does need drastic remedies. Over the past year alone, its share of the U.S. car market has slipped nearly five percentage points to 37%. And last week, only an accounting change spared the auto maker the embarrassment of posting a $536.9 million operating loss for the third quarter.    Still, all the troops aren't lined up squarely behind Mr. Johnson. There are other prominent names mentioned as possibilities for the top job: Robert C. Stempel, president; F. Alan Smith, executive vice president, finance; William E. Hoglund, group vice president for Buick-Oldsmobile-Cadillac; and Lloyd E. Reuss, executive vice president, North American car and truck operations.    The main criticism against Mr. Johnson is that, behind the boyish charm and sheepish smile is a cold, calculating man. Specifically, critics say he is blatantly campaigning to become chairman after Roger Smith, 62, steps down, which will be 1990 at the latest. Some associates say that even when Mr. Johnson was first hired by GM, he openly discussed that possibility. At the time it may have seemed like a shot in the dark, but his promotion in May to GM's powerful six-man executive committee made that suddenly seem a real possibility.    Mr. Johnson has publicly declined to comment on his ambitions. But it's the number of times he has offered public comments of any sort that have raised eyebrows. He followed his promotion with a spate of press interviews, culminating in August in largely positive profile in the Detroit Free Press Sunday magazine. That shocked industry observers accustomed to the low profile preferred by GM executives. &quot;That sort of thing used to happen all of the time when I was at Ford,&quot; says one retired official from the rival auto maker, referring to the personality cults once rampant there. &quot;But I was absolutely floored&quot; that it is happening now at GM.    Behind the chairmanship speculation is a greater debate about Mr. Johnson. In the auto industry, people are labeled by their training. Roger Smith is, as GM's top executive traditionally has been, a &quot;finance guy.&quot; Some critics say that is emblematic of the auto maker's problems, and that a &quot;product guy&quot; should run the company. Does GM, they ask, really need a &quot;legal guy&quot;? Mr. Johnson's supporters respond that management qualifications are as important as automotive expertise.    But some question Mr. Johnson's management capabilities and see a certain naivete in his ideas. As the executive overseeing the recently completed negotiations with the United Auto Workers, Mr. Johnson pushed for drastic breaks with the past. Most notably, he wanted the union to abandon its long-cherished practice of fixed wage increases regardless of individual performance, and accept variable compensation pegged to productivity and quality. He also wanted GM to push for a contract tailored to its specific problems, rather than accept the one signed by the more profitable Ford Motor Co.    &quot;He helped us to look at the different options,&quot; says Alfred S. Warren, the GM vice president leading the negotiations under Mr. Johnson. &quot;He was very refreshing in some of his thoughts and ideas.&quot; But the ideas never became reality. GM eventually signed a traditional pact patterned closely after Ford's.    Others, wary of Mr. Johnson's programs, say his revolution among the salaried ranks, rather than creating a happy, productive staff, could actually push miserable white-collar workers into the the unthinkable act of joining a union.    In the tradition-bound culture of the auto industry, open disputes are rare, even for so controversial a figure as Mr. Johnson. So it isn't surprising, perhaps, that his biggest public critic is Mr. Perot, the Electronic Data Systems Corp. founder who was openly attacking GM even when he served on its board. Mr. Johnson, after all, played the heavy in ridding GM of the outspoken Texan.    &quot;We've got the damndest maneuvering for power,&quot; says Mr. Perot. &quot;He's obviously running for the chairmanship.&quot; On the day he was quoted in a recent newspaper story blasting Mr. Johnson, Mr. Perot says he got calls all morning from &quot;people who know how to build cars at GM&quot; telling him, &quot;thank goodness somebody finally said it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>