<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880218-0012 </DOCNO><HL> GOP Cat Fight Is Beautiful Music To Democrat Ears </HL><AUTHOR> Albert R. Hunt </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> MANCHESTER, N.H.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis was ebullient after the polls closed here Tuesday. As much as his own victory, however, it was the bitter Republican race that was bringing joy to Mr. Dukakis, as well as to other Democrats.    Voters now have spoken in the disparate states of Iowa and New Hampshire, and the fortunes of the two political parties are shifting; a year that started off favoring the Republicans is now beginning to look much better for the Democrats.    One reason is the almost certain protracted battle for both nominations. The Democrats long expected a drawn-out fight, but the Republican race, as gleefully noted by Gov. Dukakis, promises to be more bitter -- and, as the minority party, the GOP can ill-afford that. Moreover, this year the Democrats aren't going to nominate a flake. The choice probably will come down to Gov. Dukakis, Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt or Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore; all have weaknesses, but there isn't a George McGovern in the bunch.    Finally, the clearest vision or message is coming from candidates who aren't going to win nomination: Religious broadcaster Pat Robertson and New York Rep. Jack Kemp on the GOP side, and the Rev. Jesse Jackson and former Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt among the Democrats.    But after eight years in power, all this may prove more troublesome for the Republicans. &quot;It'll come down to a question of continuity vs. change,&quot; predicts Kirk O'Donnell, president of the Center for National Policy, a Democratic think-tank, &quot;and it'll be easier for the Democrats to make the case for change.&quot;    Mr. O'Donnell and most of his fellow Democrats believe that's especially so if the Republicans choose George Bush. The vice president's comeback victory Tuesday in New Hampshire was impressive, but even in these friendly environs there were warning signs. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News election-day survey showed that only a quarter of New Hampshire Republicans believe that Mr. Bush would be a &quot;very strong&quot; leader.    Mr. Bush scored effectively with his attacks on Sen. Robert Dole, but voters still have trouble identifying what the vice president really stands for. Given both the character of the man and the nature of the presidential campaign, it's unlikely that a more finely honed Bush persona will emerge in ensuing months.    Until Tuesday night, the Democrats dreaded the prospect of facing Sen. Dole in a general election. But the Kansas Republican went a long way to assuage those fears by the way he handled defeat. When NBC's Tom Brokaw asked him if he had anything to say to Mr. Bush -- television screen to television screen -- Sen. Dole did his best imitation of Richard Nixon and lashed out: &quot;Quit lying about my record.&quot; Even before that bit of gracelessness, a sizable chunk of New Hampshire voters said Bob Dole has a &quot;mean streak.&quot;    But Sen. Dole's problems are deeper. Even more than George Bush, he offers no sense of where he would like to lead the country except the promise that wherever he goes it will be competently and forcefully. His main issue is to reduce the budget deficit, a political proposition that largely has eluded success for Republicans and Democrats for most of the past half-century.    The Republicans are going to have to contend with the Rev. Robertson through their New Orleans convention next August. Some of the Robertson coverage is cheap; when the television hyperventilators, as this newspaper's Dan Henninger calls them, breathlessly report that he once called on God to cure hemorrhoids, both context and relevancy are missing.    But Pat Robertson's views on issues ranging from Social Security to debt to nuclear weapons will play a role in setting the Republican agenda this year. And it is a good bet these will threaten the political coalition, ranging from religious fundamentalists to money-hungry yuppies, that Ronald Reagan so successfully stitched together.    The Democrats, of course, have their own reverend problem -- Jesse Jackson, who gave them fits last time and might do it again this year. Further, the major contenders have visible flaws: Michael Dukakis often seems like a bloodless technocrat with naive views on national security; Richard Gephardt comes across as an opportunist who tailors his position for political expediency; while Albert Gore exudes a plastic youthfulness.    But if there are no giants in this group, they have grown out of the dwarf stage. Mr. Dukakis is a polished television performer with a good record as governor, and he could shore up his foreign-policy posture if he would listen to some of his able advisers. Dick Gephardt's message is broader and more attractive than mere protectionism; he argues that Americans must take back control of their economic destiny, a theme not dissimilar from Ronald Reagan's eight years ago, even if the villains are different. And that Al Gore remains a serious contender after bombing in Iowa and New Hampshire is a tribute to his political skills.    To be sure, as the past 10 days have demonstrated, there will be a lot of unpredictable twists and turns in 1988. Events such as a foreign-policy crisis or an economic surge or downturn could reshape the election.    If either the vice president or Sen. Dole scores a string of sweeping victories over the next month, the GOP might coalesce sooner around a more forceful winner. The Democrats still must confront the Jesse Jackson factor, and their nominee must develop a more persuasive sense of what kind of change he envisions for the country.    But as political analyst Alan Baron notes, &quot;It's now clear that we're going to have a very traditional Republican-Democratic election with two mainstream nominees.&quot; In this year, that's good news for the Democrats.    ---   Mr. Hunt is The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau chief. </TEXT></DOC>