<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880111-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Texaco to Take $4.9 Billion in Charges; Step Praised by Analysts but Not by Icahn </HL><AUTHOR> Allanna Sullivan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TX PZL TWA </CO><IN> PET BCY TNM </IN><TEXT>   Texaco Inc.'s announcement that it will take fourth-quarter after-tax charges totaling a staggering $4.9 billion as part of its restructuring efforts has won the praise of analysts but not the support of its major shareholder, Carl C. Icahn.    In the first of a series of restructuring steps, the company said Friday it will write down $2.1 billion of its assets as well as take a $2.8 billion charge that will reflect its $3 billion settlement with Houston-based Pennzoil Co. In addition Texaco said it expects to sell at least $3 billion of its assets to reduce debt.    &quot;These things needed to be done,&quot; said Paul Mlotok, oil analyst for Salomon Brothers Inc. &quot;It indicates plans are in motion&quot; to rebuild the company.    Investors reacted favorably Friday to preliminary reports of the restructuring. Despite the plunge in the stock market, Texaco's stock fell only 75 cents a share to close at $38.125 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.    A major element of the restructuring involves seeking joint venture partners to operate certain Texaco assets. One senior Texaco executive said that of the seven U.S. refineries owned by Texaco, three of the largest have been identified by management as potential joint-venture candidates. Texaco is seeking partners for its Delaware City refinery in Delaware; its Convent, La., refinery; and its giant Port Arthur facility in Texas.    But even as the oil company launches its restructuring program, sources close to Mr. Icahn expect him to file suit this week against Texaco, in a move that could derail the settlement pact struck late last month between the White Plains, N.Y., oil giant and Pennzoil as part of a reorganization plan. Mr. Icahn asked for permission from the bankruptcy court last week to file a second reorganization plan that would strip Texaco of its takeover defenses.    According to David Friedman, Mr. Icahn's bankruptcy counsel, a secret agreement between the two companies that forbid either from formulating or supporting any reorganization plan other than the one they jointly filed is illegal. The so-called cease-fire agreement was signed by Texaco's chief executive officer, James W. Kinnear, and Pennzoil Chairman J. Hugh Liedtke when they signed off on the reorganization plan, but the seven-page document was never filed with the bankruptcy court.    &quot;We're looking for a declaration from Judge Howard Schwartzberg that the agreement isn't binding,&quot; Mr. Friedman said. &quot;Under the bankruptcy code, any activity outside the regular course of business must be disclosed. And it's illegal to solicit (support for a plan) until disclosure statements are approved by the court,&quot; an event that won't occur until late this month at the earliest.    &quot;These arguments have no merit,&quot; said Harvey Miller, Texaco's bankruptcy counsel.    Mr. Icahn, who owns 12.3% of Texaco, has been seeking support for his reorganization plan from Pennzoil, the creditor committee and the equity committee. In the past, Judge Schwartzberg has said he would back a plan approved by those three parties.    And in an interview over the weekend, Mr. Icahn said Texaco's restructuring efforts haven't prompted him to withdraw his request to file a second plan. &quot;I'm not excited&quot; by Texaco's restructuring efforts, he said.    Mr. Icahn insists that any fair reorganization plan should include measures that allow shareholders to demand accountability from management.    &quot;We need them (Texaco management) to be answerable in the event they screw things up again,&quot; Mr. Icahn said.    The reorganization plan filed by Texaco and Pennzoil after weeks of grueling negotiations resolved the bitter four-year-old legal battle between the two. It would also allow Texaco to emerge from bankruptcy-law proceedings.    Texaco filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code last April to forestall enforcement of a $10.3 billion judgment rendered against it by a Texas court that ordered Texaco to pay that amount to Pennzoil. The court said Texaco had improperly interfered with Pennzoil's acquisition of a portion of Getty Oil Co.    Mr. Icahn's actions introduce a new round of bizarre gamesmanship into the proceedings with all sides battling over Texaco's takeover defenses in ways that could threaten Texaco's entire reorganization plan and the $3 billion settlement unless cooler heads prevail.    Texaco itself may also seek a modification of the plan, but on a more substantial basis than Mr. Icahn. The company believes that the quarreling over some of the specific terms of the plan give it an opportunity to walk away from the agreement to pay Pennzoil $3 billion and seek a settlement at a new lower amount.    When settlement talks began in earnest in December, Mr. Icahn promised Pennzoil he would use his influence to have a settlement worked out if Pennzoil used its seat at the bargaining table to try to have Texaco's defenses dissolved as part of a reorganization plan. But even though a settlement was attained, Pennzoil was unable to obtain the changes in Texaco's corporate charter that it had agreed to seek on behalf of Mr. Icahn. Mr. Icahn, sources say, was furious.    Then last week Pennzoil issued a statement that may have been partly intended to mollify Mr. Icahn. The statement said that while Pennzoil was contractually obligated to support the current plan, Pennzoil would &quot;not object&quot; to any changes in Texaco's corporate governance so long as the changes didn't tamper with the $3 billion settlement.    A Pennzoil spokesman asserted the company was prompted to issue the statement by numerous inquiries. But it's known that there was contact between Mr. Icahn and Pennzoil last week on the reorganization plan Mr. Icahn seeks to file.    Texaco officials were outraged that Pennzoil would publicly volunteer its support of Mr. Icahn's demands. A source close to the company called Pennzoil's statement &quot;a hostile act&quot; and a breach of Pennzoil's agreement to support the reorganization plan. Pennzoil's alleged breach, in turn, could enable Texaco to go to court demanding dissolution of the entire agreement, thus enabling Texaco to try to seek a settlement for less than $3 billion or resume its efforts to have the underlying verdict reversed by the U.S. Supreme Court, one senior Texaco strategist theorized.    Except for Texaco, no one wants to threaten the $3 billion settlement. Mr. Icahn, who met with the creditor committee in New York Friday and the equity committee in Florida Thursday, assured both groups that the $3 billion settlement would remain the cornerstone of his proposed plan. The equity committee, which has thrown its support to Mr. Icahn unless Texaco includes measures to dissolve takeover defenses in its plan, will try to arrange a meeting of Pennzoil and the equity and creditor committees to discuss support for Mr. Icahn. The creditors have already voted in favor of the Texaco plan while Pennzoil is trying to support Mr. Icahn without upsetting the settlement pact.    The huge financial charges Texaco declared as its first step toward rebuilding its business will wipe out its anticipated 1987 earnings of $470 million and result in a whopping loss of $4.3 billion, one of the largest corporate losses ever.    As previously reported, Venezuela and Saudi Arabia have contacted Texaco about buying a portion of its refining business. A top Kuwaiti official said that Kuwait is interested in purchasing refining operations, but he ruled out any joint ventures.    In addition to selling partnerships in its refineries, Texaco is looking to sell U.S. oil and natural gas reserves containing about 60 million barrels of oil valued at $350 million to $400 million. These sales will involve thousands of small, marginal fields that could give a better rate of return to a smaller operator with less overhead costs, the senior Texaco executive said.    It shouldn't take long to find buyers for assets. &quot;Every oil company in the business has been evaluating the company and knows what they'd like to buy and what they'd pay,&quot; said Frederick Leuffer of Cyrus J. Lawrence.    But the senior Texaco executive cautioned that the entire restructuring could take as long as a year if fire-sale prices are to be avoided. Already negotiations with a group of banks to set up a bridge loan are under way. </TEXT></DOC>