<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880818-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Whither Voodoo Economics? </HL><AUTHOR> Robert L. Bartley </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> ECO </IN><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With Ronald Reagan's mantle falling on the man who coined the epithet &quot;voodoo economics,&quot; what will become of the Reagan economic policies? Will President Reagan's tax-cut, free-market policies leave a lasting legacy or prove to be a chimera that vanishes without the president's personal magic?    A Niagara of conventional wisdom, of course, has thundered that Reaganomics is a fraud, that the economy is headed toward some kind of precipice, that Mr. Reagan's deficits are leaving an intolerable burden for our grandchildren, that &quot;everyone knows&quot; a tax increase is &quot;inevitable.&quot; A whole institution, The National Economic Commission, has been appointed to play Dutch Uncle to the voters -- explaining to them why, though they just voted against higher taxes, the next president has to overrule them. And to be sure, unease is not confined to the establishment; even while enjoying prosperity and voting against tax increases, the ordinary man feels economically insecure, haunted by the instinct that something is wrong.    This is scarcely the way it looks, naturally, to those of us who've offered intellectual support to the Reagan policies. From the supply-side perspective, the Reagan economic policies have been a historic success; indeed, they have spread prosperity throughout the world. Unease remains, of course, because the full agenda is not yet complete, with the last pieces still slowly falling into place. Indeed, supply-side thinking has been adopted even by those who profess bitter criticism. To understand why some of us believe the Reagan policies will have -- have had -- a lasting impact, review the economy of the Reagan years from the standpoint of someone who from the first lived and understood the intellectual debate:   Start with the commonplace, rehearsed by President Reagan himself in his address to the Republican Convention here Monday. The nation remains in the most sustained peacetime economic recovery ever recorded. The double-digit inflation of the 1970s is only a memory, if one that hauntingly returns with a two-month blip in the price indexes and a rise in the prime rate. The economy's problem is not unemployment but a labor shortage. The &quot;misery index&quot; devised by the late Arthur Okun -- unemployment plus inflation -- shows a spectacular success.    Critics are free to contend these successes are not the whole story, but as Burke once said, the welfare of the current generation cannot be put entirely out of the question.    &quot;If the policies were so wrong, why are they still being so widely imitated?&quot; asks Anthony Harris of the Financial Times. Canada, France, Britain and a host of smaller nations have in various ways imitated the Reagan tax cuts, in particular slashing the highest marginal tax rates. The world's finance ministers and central bankers are seeking greater exchange-rate stability and talking about measuring monetary policy by commodity prices -- as most supply-side economists have urged.    Ironically, the most rudely ridiculed feature of supply-side economics has also been the most widely imitated. The original &quot;voodoo&quot; jibe was directed at the Laffer Curve, the assertion that sometimes you can increase tax revenues by cutting tax rates. As Mr. Harris put it: &quot;The Laffer curve -- the undefined point at which higher taxes have such a disincentive effect that revenue falls -- was actually found to exist&quot; -- not only in the U.S. but in other nations with governments eager for real revenues. And, leaving aside a few honest purists, even the critics of Reaganomics now talk of value-added taxes rather than steeply progressive rates to &quot;soak the rich.&quot;    ---   Here a historical excursion may be helpful. Supply-side thinking rose to prominence in the middle 1970s as a response to &quot;stagflation.&quot; It poured into the vacuum created by the collapse of a Keynesian mainstream that had no explanation for simultaneous stagnation and inflation. With different economists and politicians coming to similar conclusions, tax cuts were in the air: The Steiger amendment cutting the capital gains tax, Proposition 13 in California, the Kemp-Roth bill in Congress. Indeed, the Senate, pushed by Sen. Lloyd Bentsen's joint economic committee, actually passed a Kemp-Roth look-alike that was stopped only in conference committee. All this before Ronald Reagan became president.    But at the intellectual level, the supply-side prescription from the first was a twopronged strategy: tax cuts to fight stagnation and tight money to fight inflation. This prescription was utterly baffling in a Keynesian world where fiscal and monetary policies were supposed to be &quot;complementary.&quot; But as Columbia University's Robert Mundell kept stressing, for each policy objective you need a policy lever.    This, then, was the intellectual landscape as Ronald Reagan was inaugurated and proposed the tax cuts that became the heart of Reaganomics. Suddenly Arthur Laffer's curve was being drawn on napkins across the land. In a kind of conspiracy by advocates and opponents of the tax cut, it came to be understood as an assertion that any tax cut will always pay for itself immediately. So opponents crowed that the Laffer Curve and supply-side economics were forever refuted when passage of the 1981 tax cuts was promptly followed by the 1982 recession, with a dip in government revenues and soaring deficits.    In fact, though, as the tax cuts passed, the consensus economic forecast was for a mild upturn, and only supply-siders were worried about 1982. As actually passed, the tax cut was staggered over three years in an effort to keep the deficit low, and already enacted Social Security increases and bracket creep offset the first two tranches of rate reduction. The impending cuts actually created incentives to postpone income out of 1982. The tight money side of the prescription was already firmly in place, following Jimmy Carter's 1979 appointment of Paul Volcker as Federal Reserve chairman. But there would be no net tax cut to offset tight money until 1983.    These openly expressed worries did not prevent the conventional wisdom from blaming the 1982 recession on deficits, tax cuts and supply-siders. But while typically depicted as the worst downturn since the Great Depresssion, the 1982 recession had a curious feature: What economists call &quot;final domestic demand&quot; actually rose. That is to say, the 1982 recession was concentrated in two National Income Account sectors: inventories, bound to be reduced as inflation ended; and the foreign sector, which did not enjoy tax cuts. It seems likely, in other words, that even the staggered tax cuts helped moderate the impact of tight money.    When tax cuts finally arrived, the twopronged prescription worked. Inflation was conquered far more quickly than the conventional wisdom believed possible. As 1983 opened, the headline of our first editorial of the year was &quot;At Last, a Tax Cut.&quot; The consensus forecast was that deficits doomed the economy to sluggish growth at best, but supply-siders were talking boom. Alan Reynolds of Jude Wanniski's Polyconomics hit the growth number on the head -- 6.5% growth for the fourth quarter 1983 over the fourth quarter of 1982. This was the start of the recovery we still enjoy as Ronald Reagan prepares to leave office.    ---   The debate over Reaganomics is no longer about marginal tax rates. No one is proposing we return to top rates of 70% to &quot;soak the rich;&quot; the principle of the Laffer Curve is understood if not acknowledged. Tax proposals center instead on the likes of a value-added tax, where small marginal rates can raise a lot of revenue by hitting rich and poor alike.    The current debate, rather, is about a second strategy of Reaganomics: limiting the size of the public sector by constraining taxes. However financed, a large public sector inhibits economic growth by taking the lion's share of any incremental proceeds and reducing incentives for the private sector. In international comparisons, Japan, with the smallest public sector of the OECD nations, has experienced the fastest growth. Especially before recent market-oriented reforms, European nations with large public sectors have been the most stagnant.    Republicans have of course preached the private-sector gospel for years. But holding out the carrot of lower taxes only after spending cuts left Republicans with the worst of both worlds; indeed, it left them repeatedly urging higher taxes to validate Democratic spending increases. Mr. Reagan cut this Gordian knot by putting tax cuts first and letting spenders worry about deficits, precisely for the purpose of curbing a spendthrift government. &quot;We can lecture it about extravagance until we're blue in the face,&quot; he said, &quot;or we can discipline it by cutting its allowance.&quot;    On the evidence so far, the success of this strategy has been, if by no means complete, greater than usually understood. The tax cuts have served merely to stabilize tax revenues within their historic range as a percent of gross national product. The big deficits resulted because spending continued to increase. But remarkably, under pressure of the deficit, spending as a percent of GNP peaked out in 1983 and has since been on a gradually declining trend.    Watching drought-relief and catastrophic-health bills roll through Congress with the Reagan administration's blessing, there's reason to doubt that Republicans are yet ready to stay the course, especially in an election year. But the recent trend certainly shows that $200-billion deficits are by no means inevitable as far as the eye can see. A &quot;balanced budget&quot; remains hard to spy. But if recent spending restraint could be made to prevail, it is not hard to envision a year with a deficit small enough to produce a declining trend in public debt as a percent of GNP.    Some of course see a &quot;riverboat gamble&quot; in Mr. Reagan's willingness to tolerate deficits to hold the line on taxes. Yet somehow the calamitous effect of deficits, despite repeated predictions, has yet to appear.    ---   The lack of impact from the high deficits is at least partly explained by recondite issues about the very meaning of the words &quot;deficit&quot; or &quot;balanced budget.&quot; The National Income Accounts were designed in a Keynesian era to answer Keynesian questions. The &quot;deficit&quot; is an instrument of &quot;fine tuning,&quot; set up to measure the money &quot;injected&quot; by the government and spread through the economy by the &quot;multiplier.&quot; This archaic mumbo-jumbo has nothing to do with anything anyone would currently want to measure.    For one thing, note that everyone talks about the federal deficit, the federal government being the instrument of fine tuning. But in measuring, say, supply and demand in the credit markets, much of the federal deficit is offset by the surplus in state and local government pension funds. Other nations measure not a federal deficit but a general government deficit including all levels of government. When appropriate adjustments are made, as the OECD regularly does, the current U.S. deficit is not out of line with that of other industrial nations.    Beyond that, the deficit is measured on a cash basis, rather than on the basis of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. Under a GAAP accrual accounting, you would measure all future obligations undertaken, not merely those for which bonds have been issued. And you would separate capital from current expenditures, recognizing that capital items create an asset to be used over future years. This would be the measure you would seek if asking, say, what kind of burden we are leaving our grandchildren.    As it happens, Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. has periodically undertaken to put the government's accounts on a GAAP basis. Its studies show a total deficit roughly twice that measured by the conventional measure, principally because the latter does not include the unfunded liabilities of the Social Security system. While the conventional deficit grew in the Reagan years, unfunded Social Security liabilities declined and more of the spending was on long-lived assets like aircraft carriers. The Andersen studies show that while the &quot;federal deficit&quot; grew to 5.2% of GNP in 1984 from 2.9% in 1980, over the same years the GAAP deficit fell to 9.3% of GNP from 12.5%. Under Reaganomics, the burden we are leaving to our grandchildren has not been mushrooming; it's been shrinking.    ---   OK, if everything's so fine, howcome I feel so bad? Clearly a sense of economic insecurity has haunted the Reagan recovery. Clearly, too, all cannot be well economically while interest rates remain at historically unprecedented levels even while inflation declines. Nor can all be well in the world when its strongest economy imports capital instead of exporting it to developing nations where opportunities ought to be greater.    The answer to these puzzles, or at least one man's answer, lies in the unfinished agenda. In cutting tax rates in developing countries and otherwise removing impediments to investment, for example. In the monetary half of the supply-side prescription, and above all in the undigested development of a truly interdependent world economy. One of Prof. Mundell's aphorisms has long been, the only closed economy is the world economy.    In the supply-side view, at least the branch I subscribe to, the trade deficit is a non-problem. In one sense it is merely an artifact of history -- a reflection of where politics has drawn lines on a map. If statistics were collected, Manhattan Island would be terrified by an astronomical trade deficit. In another sense it is an artifact of economic fashion: a reflection of where economists currently choose to draw lines in a great circle of transactions: Once everything -- goods, services, bonds and so on -- is included, the accounts must balance; for every buyer there has to be a seller.    The international accounts, too, are more likely to be driven from the capital side than the merchandise side. In this era of instant capital transactions, a year's worth of world trade amounts to only a week's worth of capital flows. The U.S. trade deficit arose when U.S. banks stopped exporting capital to developing nations, and when, because of the Reagan tax cuts, the U.S. economy was the only growth opportunity in the world. These developments resulted in a tremendous net capital inflow; the deficit in merchandise trade was necessary to balance the equation. Indeed, in my view, as inflation was brought to a sharp halt in the early 1980s, the U.S. trade deficit was the only thing standing between us and a second world depression.    The disruptive element in this integrated world economy, and the basic reason for the general feeling of economic insecurity, has been monetary instability. While the world has one economy, it has a gamut of different monies. In an interdependent economy, price signals and profit opportunities ought to be directing goods and capital to their best use, but the signals are constantly swamped by changes in the value of different monies.    The seemingly arbitrary movement of exchange rates wipes out investments, closes and opens factories and destroys and creates jobs throughout the world. No wonder interest rates are high, no wonder many people feel economically insecure, and no wonder different nations toy with the poisonous nostrum of protectionism.    On the exchange-rate issue, the Reagan administration has reflected the conflicts among conservative economists who otherwise agree. Martin Feldstein, for example, has advocated/predicted a lower dollar to balance the trade accounts. Milton Friedman, a powerful voice in any crowd, strongly believes in the positive virtues of floating exchange rates. Even among supply-siders a strong school of monetarists remains, represented by Paul Craig Roberts and Norman Ture, who as Treasury officials were instrumental in the original Reagan tax cuts.    Yet the international meetings of finance ministers and central bankers represent a movement away from floating rates. In the Plaza agreement in September 1985, the G-7 nations agreed that the dollar was too strong. In the Louvre accord in February 1987, they agreed its depreciation had gone too far, that its undervaluation was disrupting the world economy. When this consensus started to fall apart last October, stock markets collapsed around the world. When in the first week of January the central banks moved to fix the dollar, the financial crisis went away.    The world has moved some way, then, toward a system of fixed exchange rates, which would simulate a unitary currency for the interdependent world economy. And at World Bank-IMF annual meeting last fall, Treasury Secretary James Baker talked of an international economic policy based on &quot;the relationship among our currencies and a basket of commodities, including gold.&quot; This was a big step toward the kind of regime Bob Mundell and Art Laffer talked about in the mid-1970s.    ---   So how will &quot;voodoo economics&quot; fare in a post-Reagan era? The man who coined the phrase is now running for president saying he won't increase taxes &quot;period,&quot; that he would cut the capital gains tax and thereby increase revenues. George Bush speaks slightingly of the National Economic Commission, and the strong man in the Bush campaign and presumably any Bush administration is the same James Baker who included gold.    Michael Dukakis, the Democratic nominee, is said to listen to Harvard economists peddling the industrial planning ideas that have failed and been junked in Europe. But unlike the last Democratic nominee, he is not bragging about wanting to raise taxes. He brags instead about the Massachusetts miracle, which is to say, economic growth. If elected he will want to be re-elected, and he certainly does.    Among supply-siders, though, there is an uneasy sense that another 1982 may lie just ahead. The current year profited from cutting the marginal tax rate on top incomes to 28%, a success undreamed of when Ronald Reagan came into office. But, since &quot;everyone knows&quot; that a tax increase is &quot;inevitable,&quot; there has been a considerable incentive to push income into 1988, an effect likely to be a drag on 1989.    And the Federal Reserve has just raised the discount rate even when a falling gold price and rising dollar suggest no further tightening is in order. While the U.S. may indeed face an inflation uptick from the earlier overdepreciation of the dollar in the foreign-exchange markets, it looks as if the Fed is primarily setting out to stem growth in the real economy, despite Rep. Jack Kemp's complaint, &quot;inflation is not caused by too many people working.&quot;    If the Fed overtightens just as tax incentives change at year-end, 1989 may mark the end of the current recovery. If this happens, no doubt Reaganomics, deficits and supply-siders will be blamed again. Yet it somehow seems unlikely that either a Bush or a Dukakis administration will in the end try to tax its way out of a recession. Even with Ronald Reagan gone, voodoo economics will still wield the force of ideas.    ---   Mr. Bartley is editor of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>