<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880201-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Nicaraguan Farmers Are Caught in the Cross Fire </HL><AUTHOR> Geoffrey Biddulph </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> LAGUNA VERDE, Nicaragua  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The column of anti-government rebels, 160-strong, wound its way into the valley and to the small farm here.    The Contras gathered 30 head of cattle, selected four of the best, and calmly shoved knives deep into their throats, butchered them, and roasted the meat over snapping fires.    A commander with the nom de guerre &quot;Yajok&quot; explained that the owner of the farm is a Sandinista sympathizer who takes to the hills when the rebels come. But the next morning, a thin farmer from a nearby ranch who stumbled into the Contras' campsite told a different story. According to the farmer, the ranch is owned by Excelon Arauz, a small-time rancher who doesn't involve himself in politics. &quot;The poor guy. Last week the government troops came through and took two of his cows. Now these guys eat four more. Soon there won't be any left.&quot;    As the 10,000-man Contra army warily waits to see how the U.S. Congress will vote this week on $36 million in additional aid, the rebels are better armed and better trained than ever, enjoying the fruits of more than $100 million in CIA-handled supplies over the past 16 months. But, based on my own observations, the insurgents still have not convinced the majority of their potential supporters -- independent, conservative farmers -- that the Contra cause is the solution to their problems with Nicaragua's government.    This wasn't the message the Contras intended to send when they invited three groups of journalists to travel with them on the eve of Congress's vote. One group included this reporter, who traveled with the Contras and their supporters for three days in the hills and jungles north of the town of San Rafael del Norte in the northern department of Jinotega.    The primary goal of the trip, the Contra leaders who organized it said, was to show the journalists extensive networks of civilian support. They are considered crucial to achieving victory in the insurgents' six-year-old guerrilla war.    These support networks clearly exist in some areas. Before the trip began, the Contra leaders told us to meet the rebels in a small hamlet north of San Rafael del Norte. After 12 hours of waiting, we were contacted in the middle of the night by a farmer with the nom de guerre of &quot;Caliman,&quot; who said he would take the reporters to the rebels the next day.    At dawn, we started climbing 5,200-foot Samaria Mountain. During the ascent, Caliman was joined by 10 other farmers who led the way to the Contra hideout and warned that Sandinista troops were also in the area.    These farmers said they are willing to take up arms against the government because they see fighting as the only response to Sandinista repression. &quot;I believed it would be better under the Sandinistas, but now it's worse than it ever was under Somoza,&quot; Caliman said. The Sandinistas came to power in 1979 after overthrowing dictator Anastasio Somoza.    Caliman said soldiers beat up his brother and killed his cousin because they supported the Contras. These farmers also said the government has for several months indiscriminately shelled populated areas near their homes. We were shown bomb shelters constructed by local residents and mortar holes.    Later, we talked to Ramona Tinoco, 33, who said she moved to the area from the eastern town of Siuna after the Sandinista army accused her husband of collaborating with the insurgents and killed him. Her voice steady, but tears streaming down her face, she asked a reporter to help her locate two of her children, who she said were kidnapped by the army in Siuna.    In Managua, Maj. Ricardo Wheelock, chief of intelligence for the Sandinista army, said in an interview that indiscriminate shelling &quot;is clearly not the policy of the government.&quot; Calling Sandinista troops &quot;very disciplined,&quot; he also denied they kill or kidnap Contra supporters or civilians.    In dozens of interviews, farmers had other complaints. They said that the Sandinistas force them to sell their crops to the government at prices a fraction of the black-market rate and refuse to grant them loans. The farmers also denounced military conscription of males aged 16 to 25 and reserve duty for men 25 to 45.    The Contras have taken these causes as their own, but the number of farmers who translate this anger into active collaboration seems relatively small. Most farmers we encountered seemed less than eager to give what little food they have to the hordes of rebels passing through their land. The soldiers sometimes pay for the food, but once-a-month CIA-run supply flights do not provide enough funds. When faced with a hungry rebel with a gun, the farmers become willing to make their food a &quot;gift.&quot;    In several trail-side press conferences, &quot;Orion,&quot; the regional commander for the rebels, prodded farmers to proclaim their allegiance to the Contras. But when speaking privately later, many said they were allied with neither side.    The farmer who visited the Laguna Verde ranch was soon pressed into service as a guide for the rebels as they traveled through the Nicaraguan hills. If the trails had been mined, he would have been the first to know. After two hours, Orion said the farmer could go, and he did.    The rebels did not engage in battle while we accompanied them, although they said they were eager to have witnesses to their military prowess. On the third day, Orion said the rebels would try to surround a group of Sandinista soldiers who were nearby. But when they saw a government-owned truck pass by on a road several hills away, they made a detour to attack and burn it. By the time they arrived, the truck had left.    Armed with sophisticated explosives, rocket launchers, mortars and Redeye anti-aircraft missiles, the rebels are the strongest they have ever been in the six-year-old war, military analysts say. The addition of the Redeyes, which fire heat-seeking missiles, has significantly changed the way the war is fought. Still, although the Contras now roam the countryside, they control no territory. The rebels traveling with us said that only two men out of their band of 160 were recruited in the past year.    Credible military analysts say the Contras' casualty rate is roughly equal to that of the Sandinistas. They note that guerrilla forces, generally smaller than the armies they are fighting, must inflict more casualties than they take if they are to survive.    The Contras say they are committed to fight until death or victory, regardless of whether Congress approves more aid. &quot;I hope Congress approves more aid, because it's better to get more pressure on the Sandinistas,&quot; said &quot;Jogger.&quot; &quot;But if they don't, we'll keep on fighting, throwing rocks if we have to.&quot;    Each Contra defines victory differently, however. &quot;Falcon,&quot; a five-year veteran trained by the U.S. in North Carolina, says the only solution is the departure of the nine Sandinista comandantes who rule the country now. Other rebels say all Sandinista leaders must leave or be killed. Still others say they would be satisfied with the establishment of &quot;democracy,&quot; but their definition implies no power sharing with the Sandinistas.    Meanwhile, the Nicaraguan farmers are caught in the middle of a war nobody wants but everybody keeps fighting.    ---   Mr. Biddulph is a free-lance writer living in Managua, Nicaragua. </TEXT></DOC>