<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0113 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Heat on Arsonists IntensifiesAs Detection Devices Improve---By James P. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   ARSON INVESTIGATORS sifting the ashes of fires such as the New Year's Eve disaster at San Juan's Dupont Plaza Hotel today have access to an array of tools whose increasing sophistication is improving the odds of solving a crime that consumes most evidence.    New laser devices retrieve fingerprints from surfaces that stymie the old powder-and-brush method. Hand-held detectors search out minute traces of flammable liquids from charred, water-soaked ruins. In the laboratory, technicians use gas chromatographs, infrared spectrometers, and scanning electron microscopes to wring clues from evidence once thought too fire-damaged to yield any information. Infrared and low-light photography help spot suspects near the fire. And the computer's ability to sort mounds of data is being used to identify arson patterns across jurisdictional lines and to pinpoint structures ripe for a for-profit blaze.    WHILE EMBERS still smolder, investigators track the often subtle signs of a fire's path to its point of origin, then use portable hydrocarbon detectors, or &quot;sniffers,&quot; to seek out the presence of petroleum distillates often used to accelerate intentionally set fires. &quot;The advent of hydrocarbon detectors has improved our technique,&quot; says Los Angeles County Fire Department Captain Max D. Curtis. But he cautions that the devices, in widespread use only in recent years, are still prone to false readings generated by common petroleum-based construction material. Says another investigator: &quot;The nose is probably the best detector around, and each inspector comes equipped with one.&quot;    If they find the ashes of a gas-soaked rag, suspected petroleum residue in charred flooring, or some other indication of arson at a fire scene, investigators take samples to the laboratory for scrutiny by a battery of equipment.    The workhorse machine is the gas chromatograph, which separates the ingredients of a mixture and permits solid identification of such arsonist favorites as kerosene, gasoline or turpentine. The chromatograph's findings can be bolstered by an infrared spectrometer, which provides chemical identification by measuring the amount of infrared light a substance absorbs. While gas chromatographs have been testing fire-scene samples since the 1950s, says federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms forensic chemist William Dietz, recent computer-assisted models of the machine are faster and more sensitive. &quot;We're throwing fewer cases out&quot; as a result of such refinements, he adds.    WASHINGTON STATE PATROL forensic chemist Dale Mann says he recently used the gas chromatograph to help convict an arsonist of murder by showing that gasoline which had soaked into unburned carpeting at a fatal fire matched that found in a can stored in the trunk of the suspect's car. Combustion so alters the volatile elements of a flammable liquid, however, that burned residue found at the site is usually useful for proving only that arson occurred.    Scientists are pushing the boundaries of the device's uses, too. A federal researcher reports initial success using the gas chromatograph to test soot from fire scenes for telltale molecular structures formed when accelerants burn. Such a development could someday allow investigators to confirm gasoline was used even when no residue was present, he says.    Technology also helps squeeze information from other material left at fire scenes. The ATF's San Francisco lab uses an $80,000 laser device whose beam, when viewed through an amber filter, causes latent fingerprints to fluoresce a bright orange. ATF fingerprint specialist Clive Barnum says the device allows him to pull prints suitable for evidence from surfaces which never yielded to older fingerprinting methods. &quot;This machine will be crucial when arsonists make mistakes,&quot; he says, &quot;and they do.&quot;    INVESTIGATORS SOMETIMES use low-light film to secretly videotape onlookers at a fire, because they know that some arsonists enjoy watching fires they've set. And while authorities won't discuss details, new infrared surveillance is also helping link suspects to fires set in certain target areas.    An arson investigation involves screening an unusually large amount of information. Who owns the structure, and who insured it? Has the building, or others owned by the same person, been hit previously by fire? In the past, investigators had to rely on their memories or bulky files to cross-check such data. But many major cities are beginning to load fire information into computers, which can quickly sift a myriad of factors for links to previous fires. &quot;Rapid retrieval of information is essential to an arson investigation,&quot; says San Francisco Fire Department Captain Richard Crispen.    The insurance industry, too, has joined the rush to computerize arson data. An industry group has been helping test a computerized system that checks such factors as unpaid taxes and fire code violations and flags local authorities to possible arson targets. Most major insurance companies have also joined together to establish a data base that lists all fire claims with a value of more than $1,000. The Property Information Loss Register system quickly finds claimants who have a lengthy previous history of claims, even if they were made to different companies. Local agents can then be alerted to the possibility of a fraudulent claim, explains an official. Since the system's inception in 1980, he says, &quot;We've become like motherhood, the American flag and apple pie&quot; to grateful claims adjustors around the country. </TEXT></DOC>