<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870825-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Ma Bell Wants More Room to Wheel and Deal---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 08/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   James E. Olson, 61, rose from the phone-company manholes of Grand Forks, N.D., to chief executive of American Telephone andamp; Telegraph, reaching the top spot last year at a crucial time in the company's 100-year history.    In his year at the helm, Mr. Olson has had to face up to the task of eliminating 27,400 members of ATandamp;T's 321,000-employee work force, a project that now is about half complete. An accompanying $3.2 billion write-off nearly wiped out 1986 earnings. Some big sharks -- IBM, GTE and Martin Marietta among them -- are circling his long-distance voice and data transmission business, hoping to bite off a bigger piece for themselves. And even though he says he will persist in his counterattack in the field IBM dominates, computers, it is not going swimmingly.    Yet Mr. Olson does not pine for the old days of comfortable regulated monopoly. All he wants, he says, is more freedom to compete with his market adversaries. That's why he is campaigning on behalf of a Federal Communications Commission proposal to end rate-of-return regulation of his company's long-distance telephone business. The proposal was put out for public comment early this month. Implementation seems probable late next year, but the proposal is drawing heavy fire from consumer lobbies and the like.    The FCC would continue to set maximum rates, but that doesn't bother Mr. Olson much at this point in the proceedings. &quot;Rates will go down,&quot; he says. &quot;There is nothing more effective than the free market for controlling prices.&quot;    Not many serious economists would disagree on that point, but of course the crucial question is whether a free market, or the possibility of one, yet exists in long-distance voice and data transmission. The answer is not simple, but there probably already is a great deal more competition, of a sort, in long-distance communications than most people realize, especially if you take into account the existence of and potential for private systems.    Mr. Olson notes that he has two direct competitors in long distance, MCI Communications Corp. and US Sprint, a joint venture of United Telecommunications Inc. and GTE Corp. But he also cites several hundred other companies that compete in a sense, mainly through private long-distance transmission of voice and data.    Some of these companies, such as the oil industry's Williams Cos. of Tulsa, have been getting deeper and deeper into offering telecommunications services. Indeed, the seven so-called &quot;Baby Bells,&quot; created out of the 22 local-service operating companies detached from ATandamp;T on Jan. 1, 1984, by the famous consent decree, have been stretching their intrastate service to include more of what was once considered long-distance transmission. So have independent phone companies, which are by no means any longer the little mom and pop operations of distant memory.    Indeed, as Mr. Olson notes, there will soon be about 52,000 miles of high-capacity, high-efficiency fiber-optic cable in the U.S. and quite a bit of that will be spare capacity. &quot;Whenever you have excess capacity you get competition,&quot; he says. ATandamp;T itself has 12,000 miles of the cable but expects to have double that by the end of 1989. Additionally, for long-distance communication, satellite transmission offers a relatively low-cost alternative to other means.    ATandamp;T's share of the long-distance market has slipped to 63% from nearly 68% just after the 1984 breakup. Both MCI and Sprint have gained, but they have not found it easy to compete with ATandamp;T. As long-distance rates have fallen, both of those companies have encountered increasing difficulties trying to make a profit.    But this is only the opening round of telecommunications competition. It became evident a long time ago that the merger of communications and computer technology would be the wave of the future. ATandamp;T began positioning itself by getting into the computer business, designing not only hardware but software as well. IBM approached from the other direction, acquiring Rolm Corp., a promising telephone-equipment maker, and buying a 17% interest in MCI. It has offered MCI a $300 million credit, which MCI expects to make use of later this year. IBM's agreement with MCI limits its share in the company to 30%, but that certainly is enough to guarantee a close working relationship.    Transmission is ATandamp;T's &quot;leverage&quot; business and computers are IBM's, but they are both heading in the same direction, as are several other industry combinations. All are trying to line up allies in such fields as the computerized networking of large, far-flung business and government operations.    ATandamp;T has a cooperative arrangement with Electronic Data Systems Corp., the GM subsidiary specializing in networking. On the other hand, EDS teamed up with US Sprint in competing for the huge $4.5 billion Federal Communications System 2000 contract, whereas ATandamp;T teamed with Boeing Computer Services. Martin Marietta leads a group consisting of Northern Telecom Inc., MCI and the Baby Bells. The bidding is bogged down in a dispute between the General Services Administration and Rep. Jack Brooks over the congressman's argument that the contract should not go just to one team but should be shared by two.    That's another story, but Mr. Olson considers the FCC's rate-of-return regulation to be an undue and unnecessary restriction on his freedom to compete in this field of heavyweights. &quot;I wish someone would help me compete in the computer business,&quot; he says ruefully, suggesting, of course, that the FCC's rate-of-return regulation gives aid and comfort to IBM.    The ordinary home telephone user's stake in all this is not entirely clear yet. But it is of some significance that Mr. Olson says he is willing to continue averaging prices systemwide, which seems to constitute a promise not to cross-subsidize services that are highly competitive at the expense of, let us say, rural homeowners. Consumers don't seem to be terribly unhappy at this point with the fruits of the 1984 consent decree. The Bureau of Labor Statistics consumer price index for telephone services rose some 6% from the end of 1983 to the end of 1985. But it fell slightly last year. Robert Crandall, a deregulation expert at the Brookings Institution, thinks the long-term trend is probably downward.    It is hard to disaggregate all of those costs. Local service charges went up and long-distance costs went down. Consumers increasingly have been buying their own equipment, some of it from ATandamp;T and some from other suppliers. That represents an element of cost for consumers but relieves them of the rental charges once included in their phone bills. It also has relieved phone companies of some revenues, a problem Mr. Olson has been trying to solve by making ATandamp;T's unregulated manufacturing operations more competitive. He is having some success, particularly in switching-equipment.    If the rule change goes through, how fierce will competition be? &quot;We know how to run networks,&quot; says Mr. Olson, &quot;but our competitors are pretty good too. They should be. They learned it from us.&quot;    One of the ironies of all this is that if ATandamp;T is to enjoy more of the freedoms and efficiencies of deregulation, its competitors will have to show that they are worthy opponents. Most likely they will. </TEXT></DOC>