<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871022-0135 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. RetaliatesAgainst ChineseFor Sales to Iran---Technology Curbs Are KeptDespite Beijing's DenialsIt Sold Missiles Directly---By Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Reagan administration, complaining that China has ignored its requests to stop supplying Silkworm missiles to Iran, has shelved plans that would have made it easier for Beijing to purchase certain high-technology American products.    The decision came after China refused last week -- as it has done repeatedly in recent months -- to even acknowledge that it is selling weapons to Iran. U.S. Ambassador Winston Lord delivered a protest to Chinese officials after a Chinese-made Silkworm missile struck the Sea Isle City, a U.S.-flagged oil tanker anchored off Kuwait. A day earlier, a U.S.-owned tanker in Kuwaiti waters also had been struck by a missile believed to be a Silkworm.    Administration officials estimate that China, Iran's largest arms supplier, contracted to ship about $1 billion of weapons to Tehran this year. By making China pay a price for its continued shipments to Iran, the Reagan administration hopes to persuade China to stop the sales, which endanger the lives of American military men aboard some 29 ships in the Persian Gulf and prolong Iran's seven-year-old war with Iraq.    China's motivation for the sales, U.S. officials say, is money. The Chinese army reportedly is allowed to keep foreign currency it earns from such sales -- an important consideration given the fact that China's economic reforms have shifted resources away from the military. Furthermore, U.S. officials say, China wants to maintain a cordial relationship with Iran lest Beijing's old enemy, Moscow, have a free hand to capitalize on Iran's international isolation.    Though China denies the weapons sales, the U.S. says it has solid evidence that China is supplying Silkworms and other weapons to Iran, according to senior officials. The administration has shown Chinese officials U.S. intelligence data, including photographs of ships loading weapons at Chinese ports and unloading at Iranian facilities.    Despite the administration's latest action, the U.S. has only limited leverage in its relations with China. To be sure, Beijing covets American technology and certain military equipment. A recent U.S. agreement, which isn't affected by the latest turn of events, provides for the sale of $500 million in avionics equipment for China's F-8 jet fighter.    But the U.S. also gains much from the relationship. Since 1981, China has made available to the U.S. intelligence facilities in Xinjiang, in western China. These facilities, which provide a listening post to the Soviet Union, replaced facilities the U.S. had in Iran before the shah's fall.    The U.S. also is constrained because of its concern about China's relationship with Moscow. American officials aren't disturbed by Sino-Soviet attempts to normalize relations. But they would worry about anything that might restore an alliance between Beijing and Moscow that would freeze out the U.S. and jeopardize its intelligence-sharing relationship with China.    China continues to insist that it isn't supplying the weapons to Iran. But U.S. jawboning efforts haven't gone unnoticed. This summer, according to U.S. officials, China held a high-level meeting about its arms policy. Beijing apparently decided to continue selling to Iran, but last month, in what may have been a slight concession, a senior Chinese official said that his government would try to prevent exports of Chinese weapons to other countries from being diverted to Iran. North Korea, an ally of China, is also thought to be a major arms supplier to Iran.    Following the latest Chinese denials, an angry Secretary of State George Shultz, who was traveling in the Middle East, Friday ordered that the plan to ease China's procurement of U.S. high-technology products be suspended. Under the plan, known as &quot;green-lining,&quot; the U.S. would have eliminated a requirement that exporters obtain licenses for shipping to China products below a certain sophistication.    The U.S. green-lined certain products for China in 1983. Beijing, anxious to increase its purchases of U.S. technology, has been pressing the administration to expand the list of products that it could obtain without a license. The latest U.S. proposal was to have been presented to Washington's trading partners at a meeting in several weeks.    It is believed that China has shipped Iran about 30 Silkworms, which are surface-to-surface, mobile, anti-ship missiles. Beijing is also thought to have supplied anti-aircraft missiles, artillery pieces and ammunition.    Since last year, the U.S. has campaigned vigorously to dissuade the Chinese from selling weapons to Iran. Secretary Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger have complained to Chinese officials. And recently, Frank Carlucci, the national security adviser, had a similar discussion with the visiting Chinese vice foreign minister.    The U.S. currently is engaged in delicate diplomacy to try to persuade China and the Soviet Union to join other members of the United Nations Security Council in an arms embargo against Iran if Tehran refuses to honor a July U.N. resolution calling for a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war. Iraq has said it would agree to the cease-fire if Iran does, but Tehran insists that the U.N. simultaneously appoint a commission to determine who started the seven-year-old war.    Currently, the U.N. secretary-general is trying to win approval of the cease-fire resolution. </TEXT></DOC>