<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870707-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Southland Corp.Buyout to ForceSome Unit Sales---Thompsons Must Pare BackTo 3 Basic BusinessesTo Fund $4 Billion Pact---By Karen BlumenthalStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SLCTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON) </IN><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Thompson brothers' proposed $4 billion purchase of Southland Corp. will force the founding family to pare back the diversified concern to its 7-Eleven stores, distribution centers and half-interest in Citgo Petroleum Corp., Southland said.    To help pay the $5.1 billion in new debt the family will take on to buy shares outstanding and refinance current debt, Southland will have to sell its ice-making unit, Southland's original business, along with its dairies, snack foods manufacturing plants and chain of 465 Chief Auto Parts stores.    As previously reported, terms of the proposed purchase call for a family entity called Thompson Co. to buy as many as 31.5 million common shares for $77 each through a tender offer that began yesterday.    Thompson also is offering to buy all 2.5 million convertible preferred shares for $90.27 each. Once the tender offer ends July 31, Thompson proposes to acquire the remaining common for $61.32 in cash, and 0.6272 of a new $25 face value exchangeable preferred stock.    In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Southland shares soared $7.25, closing at $75.75. It was the Big Board's most active issue, with 4.1 million shares changing hands.    The slimming down will require a complete turnabout in strategy for the Thompsons, who over the years have diversified into a number of related businesses. The dairies, for instance, sell products to other retailers and make licensed goods, like Dole Fruit 'N Juice bars and hot fudge sundaes for microwaves.    But other expansions, such as the 1983 purchase of Citgo, dismayed some on Wall Street who accused Southland of moving too far afield. Even the company's decision to finance its own roll-out of videocassette rentals, rather than contracting the business out to independents, led to a barrage of criticism from analysts and institutional holders who thought the project was too costly.    It may have been the commitment to that strategy that prompted the proposed leveraged buyout.    Neither Southland nor the Thompsons will discuss why the brothers are offering to buy the concern. But according to the tender offer document filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Canadian investor Samuel Belzberg approached Southland and said he was interested in acquiring the company in a leveraged buyout during one of several meetings with Southland's Chairman John P. Thompson. Mr. Belzberg said he owned 4.9% of Southland's stock. He also said he was interested in considering a leveraged buyout at $65 a share, perhaps in partnership with the Thompson family.    The document says that after several meetings, Mr. Thompson told Mr. Belzberg that Southland wasn't interested in pursuing such a transaction. But the company began looking at possible actions it could take to increase shareholder value, such as selling assets, buying back shares or a leveraged buyout.    In May, the document says, the Thompson family began considering a leveraged buyout. In June, Mr. Belzberg told the company he was considering buying additional common shares. The company said it doesn't know whether any additional shares were purchased, but it indicated that it would be in the company's best interest for management to proceed with its own offer rather than wait to react to another.    The proposed buyout of the nation's largest convenience-store chain is coming at a most inconvenient time for the founding family. Earnings are still smarting from volatile gasoline prices, a new price-cutting strategy and the expensive roll-out of new marketing programs, including movie rentals.    The first phase of the company's mammoth real-estate project, called Cityplace, is going up while Dallas is mired in a real-estate depression. And the Thompsons, who plan to tender at least some of their 9% Southland stake in the buyout offer, must do so at a time when tax rates are least advantageous for capital gains.    But for the brothers, sons of Southland's founder Joe C. Thompson, the purchase will allow the business to stay in the family. And despite Southland's size and rapid growth, says director Frank L. Carney, &quot;They've always treated it as a family enterprise.&quot;    Analysts estimate the operations to be sold would generate a few hundred million dollars, with the Chief Auto Parts stores fetching perhaps $200 million. Southland also could raise additional cash by selling some real estate in Dallas and elsewhere, including land in the 160-acre Cityplace development.    Some analysts also have suggested Southland could sell and lease back the property where its stores are located, which could bring in as much as $1 billion. But a source familiar with the transaction said the company owns only about 25% of the properties and doesn't plan a sale-leaseback.    John R. Sloan, president and chief executive officer of Thompson Co., said the new company will have $200 million in common equity, and the brothers are prepared to exchange much of their current holdings, about 4.6 million shares, for the new equity.    But ideally, he said, the Thompsons will buy $125 million of the equity, giving them a 62.5% stake; the remainder would be sold to institutions.    The brothers' shares that aren't converted to new equity will be tendered under the current tender offer and handled like any other shares, Mr. Sloan said.    Southland currently has 48.8 million common shares outstanding.    Thompson Co. is owned primarily by Mr. Thompson, Southland's 62-year-old chairman; Jere W. Thompson, 55, Southland's president and chief executive officer; Joe C. &quot;Jodie&quot; Thompson, 46, a Southland director who left the company in January to buy a liquor-store chain; and the brothers' families.    The company manages several entities, including Texstyrene Corp., a maker of foam cups and insulation; Carver Boat Corp., a boat maker; and a Los Angeles-based distribution company that imports and distributes consumer goods.    Altogether, Mr. Sloan said Thompson has about $500 million in annual revenue.    Though the brothers sometimes differ, Mr. Sloan said they &quot;have an uncanny ability to agree with each other.&quot; And, he said, &quot;Once a decision is made, it is a collective decision and everyone teams up and goes forward together.&quot;    Others who work with the Thompsons say the brothers are willing to delegate responsibility to their managers while keeping an active interest in the business their father founded with an icehouse here 60 years ago. John Thompson took over when their father died in 1961, increasing the number of stores to about 3,000 from 600 by 1968. Currently, there are about 8,200 7-Eleven stores.    Despite their wide age differences, friends and associates say the Thompsons all are soft-spoken and share an interest in Dallas Cowboys football and the University of Texas at Austin, where all were football-team managers. All three have served on boards at the university and contributed a professorship and funds for minority scholarships.    Separately, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it is reviewing Southland's long-term debt and preferred stock ratings for a possible downgrade, potentially affecting about $580 million in securities. The rating concern cited the additional debt Southland will take on as the reason for the review.    Southland's senior debt currently is rated Baa-1 and its subordinated debt and preferred is rated Baa-2. Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. put the company on CreditWatch with negative implications two weeks ago after the company said it was considering restructuring alternatives. </TEXT></DOC>