<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880407-0106 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Remember Corinto </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM GOVMT </CO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   In the name of avoiding more Iran-Contra affairs, the Senate has passed a bill professing to require the President to notify Congress within 48 hours of all covert actions. Rather than accept such an encroachment on the constitutional prerogatives of all future occupants of his office, President Reagan should dismiss any such bill with a one-word veto message: CORINTO.    The senatorial leak of the CIA mining operation in Corinto Harbor blew the best single chance for a non-communist Nicaragua, and also ignited the distrust that led to the Boland amendments, the Iran-Contra spectacle, and the whole debate over covert actions and congressional notification. None of these issues can be adequately understood without reviewing the Corinto episode.    In the spring of 1984, the Contra resistance was making great strides against the Sandinista forces, controlling huge areas of land and several supply routes. One big reason was the mining of Nicaraguan harbors, which slowed the delivery of Soviet weapons, damaged a Soviet vessel, and made Lloyd's think twice about insuring commercial deliveries to the regime. While the details of the mining were secret, everyone in the world paying attention understood that the CIA was helping the Contras, so that this dramatic and effective action was also a show of American resolve.    The CIA briefed Congress 11 times on the mining, starting in January 1984. Director William Casey gave the House and Senate intelligence committees a classified report that said, &quot;Magnetic mines have been placed in the Pacific harbor of Corinto and the Atlantic harbor of El Bluff, as well as the oil terminal at Puerto Sandino.&quot; While the sentence is in the passive voice and doesn't specify who was placing the mines, it came in a context of reporting on CIA activities.    It was probably inevitable that this would leak out -- other congressmen were also divulging the news -- given a congressional minority hotly opposed to the whole U.S. policy in Nicaragua. The decisive leak came in spectacular fashion, in April, and in a most unusual place -- the floor of the U.S. Senate. In &quot;Veil,&quot; Bob Woodward described the events. Joe Biden was reading about the mining in a staff-prepared classified memo. Senator Biden asked William Cohen if he knew about it, and according to Mr. Woodward's account, they then asked committee Chairman Barry Goldwater about it. &quot;Goldwater, angry and caught off balance, asked for permission to speak on the floor, and began reading the classified memo to his colleagues. Goldwater's staff director, Rob Simmons, raced over to Cohen, demanding, 'Get him off, get him down, stop him from reading that.'&quot;    The Goldwater comments were struck from the Congressional Record, but any newsman learning of these events in so public a forum is duty bound to report them, and the first account appeared in this newspaper. The leak was unfortunate enough, but the real scandal was the Pecksniffianism that followed: The Senate decided the whole blame lay with the CIA.    Senator Goldwater told Mr. Casey he was &quot;pissed off&quot; that he didn't know. Senator Daniel Moynihan temporarily resigned from the committee, claiming he wasn't told, because the CIA's sentence did not specify that the President had approved the operation. Once public, the mining soon ended. The Contra gains in Nicaragua were quickly sacrificed. And the ideological left took the opportunity to gather support for the infamous third Boland amendment, which prohibited intelligence agencies from running the Contra aid program.    The amendment didn't cover the National Security Council (a fact that continues to escape Lawrence Walsh), so helping the Contras fell to a few workaholics in the Old Executive Office Building. Ollie North made this point in a plaintive 1986 computer message to John Poindexter. &quot;What we most need is to get the CIA re-engaged in this effort so that it can be better managed than it now is by one slightly confused Marine Lt. Col.&quot;    Naturally, so spectacular and damaging a leak, and especially the congressional reaction to it, was bound to increase executive-branch distrust of Congress. Senator Moynihan today wants to argue that Corinto was the start of deception that &quot;mutated into a policy of deceit.&quot; We see it as congressional irresponsiblity eliciting the predictable reaction among people with serious business to do and lives on the line. You can argue over the semantics of the CIA briefing, but the bottom line is that Congress leaked, and maybe lost a war.    Our view of this affair is that congressmen could not forgive the CIA for notifying them about the mining, forcing them to explain their acquiescence or deny that they knew. The Corinto leaks and the diversionary debate about who knew what when are good arguments against any restrictive notification requirement. Nor was Corinto the only leak from the Senate committee. The successors to Messrs. Goldwater and Moynihan on the intelligence committee were Dave Durenberger, who is under investigation for leaking that the U.S. recruits Israelis to spy on Israel, and Patrick Leahy, who resigned from the committee after admitting he'd leaked a preliminary draft of the Iran-Contra report.    It is of course good to build confidence, and a President may very well want to experiment with 48-hour notification of a different intelligence committee headed by David Boren. But it is quite another thing to promise the same thing for all future Presidents and all future committees. It is yet another to accept the idea that a majority of Congress can pass a bill binding all future Commanders in Chief. If it seems constitutional hairsplitting, remember the practical lesson of Corinto. The Nicaraguan people are living with the consequences. </TEXT></DOC>