<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870105-0102 </DOCNO><HL> How Hong Kong Beat the Textile Quotas---By David Birnbaum</HL><DD> 01/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTTEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   A group of U.S. congressmen with interests in the textile and garment industries recently told the governments of Japan, Taiwan and South Korea that if these countries continue to restrict imports of American goods, Congress will retaliate by placing further restrictions on their exports to the U.S. of garments and textiles. The lawmakers' message, delivered during a trip to Asia in November, was loud and clear -- at least until they visited Hong Kong. Then it was only loud.    The Hong Kong government put forth the sensible argument that Hong Kong, which has virtually no import restrictions, should be exempted from any retaliatory action. Not so, answered the congressmen, whose group was led by Rep. Dan Rostenkowski and included Rep. Ed Jenkins, sponsor of a textile import-limitation bill that was successfully vetoed last summer by President Reagan. Instead, they said that if other Asian countries do not relax their restrictions on American exports, Hong Kong will suffer the same consequences as its errant neighbors.    In their discussions in Hong Kong, the congressmen showed little knowledge of the Hong Kong garment industry, little knowledge of their own domestic industry and, most disturbing, little understanding of the system of export-restriction quotas that the U.S. has imposed on Hong Kong and the pernicious effects of that system on the American garment industry. Not only has the quota system failed to protect U.S. garment makers, but it is also a prime cause of that industry's present state of collapse. The quota restrictions, supposedly aimed at protecting American garment makers, were the greatest factor in building Hong Kong's preeminent position as a garment exporter.    The problem began with the imposition of the first quota restrictions in 1962. In that year, almost all the garments sold in the U.S. were also produced there. Although Hong Kong was turning out substantial quantities of garments for export, these were of poor quality and suitable only for the lower end of the market.    The U.S. government nevertheless considered this fledgling industry a threat to domestic manufacturers. So, despite the fact that domestic garments were, and still are, protected by tariffs five times greater than those on most other products, it imposed quota limitations on all garments made of cotton fabric.    The quotas acted as a subsidy to the Hong Kong factories. Since supply was now artificially limited, the factories raised their prices, charging a cash premium for the possession of exporting rights under the quota restrictions. This price increase naturally was passed on to the American consumer.    Nor did the quotas inhibit the increase of Hong Kong garment production. Just the opposite took place. New factories were built to produce garments of synthetic and wool fabrics, which were not then covered by the quotas. A whole new industry was created, geared to the production of higher-quality garments and financed largely by the windfall profits from the quota premium charges.    When the U.S. imposed quotas on garments of synthetic and wool fabrics in 1972, the supply of these garments was also artificially limited and Hong Kong factories lost no time imposing quota-premium charges on these garments as well. This period saw the birth of Hong Kong's linen, ramie and silk garment industries -- again, items not yet covered by quotas. By the mid-1970s, Hong Kong had become the world's largest garment exporter.    The quota restrictions had another important effect on the Hong Kong garment and textile industry. Since quota premiums drove up the prices of garments, the makers of cheaper garments, unwilling to give up this business, expanded overseas to areas that were still quota free. In the early stages, overseas expansion was limited to the areas closest to Hong Kong, such as Malaysia, Indonesia and China. When the U.S. imposed quotas on these countries as well, the Hong Kong manufacturers, through their overseas branches, once again benefited from the higher prices brought by an artificially limited supply. They took this opportunity to expand further overseas, opening factories in such places as Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Mauritius.    Today, many Hong Kong factory owners are looking to expand into Europe or North America. Some would even like to open in the U.S. but are unable to do so because of the irrational system of tariffs and restrictions imposed by the U.S. on its own domestic industry.    Take the case of the owner of a Hong Kong factory that produces high-quality women's sportswear and suits. The factory owner holds a substantial number of rights to export under the quotas, but cannot expand further in Hong Kong. Neither can he open a factory in a Third World country, because these countries lack the skilled labor and support industries (manufacture of such items as linings, interlinings and shoulder pads) his product requires. To the factory owner, the U.S., with its good supply of skilled Chinese labor and excellent support industries would be an ideal place to build a new factory.    Unfortunately, the U.S. discriminates against its own domestic factories that produce women's woven sportswear and suits. It does this by imposing a 42% duty on imported wool fabric. This is more than double the duty on imported wool garments. The customers of the Hong Kong factory owner, because they are in the higher end of the market, usually prefer European fabrics, so the exorbitant wool duty acts as a subsidy for imported garments and penalizes the domestic maker.    And so, the Hong Kong factory owner is now considering Israel. It has skilled workers and necessary support industries, and he is confident that the U.S. will never impose quotas on Israeli goods.    Yet in the face of this disaster, 25 years in the making and wrought mainly by import restrictions, a delegation of American congressmen has concluded that the solution lies in more restrictions.    If the American garment industry is to be revived, the U.S. government and the people in the domestic industry first must realize that the old justifications for the failure of that industry are absurd. The problem is not cheap labor from Third World countries. The problem is neither the American labor unions nor the American worker. Cries of worker laziness are simply the justifications of inept management.    American garment makers' problems are little different from those of any industry verging on collapse: shortage of capital, chronic inflexibility and poor management. To these common problems must be added another, special to the garment industry: The system of tariffs and quota restrictions that first helped destroy the industry now stands as an obstacle to revitalizing it. The way to revive the American garment industry is not to introduce new restrictions, but to dismantle the current ones, opening the door to foreign manufacturers with the capital, management skills and customers that the U.S. garment industry needs. The irony is that the U.S. garment industry can best be revitalized by the importers and foreign manufacturers blamed for ruining it.    ---   Mr. Birnbaum is a garment manufacturer in Hong Kong. </TEXT></DOC>