<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0005 </DOCNO><HL> World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT UPHELD an affirmative-action plan for women.    The justices reaffirmed support for voluntary affirmative action by employers, upholding for the first time hiring goals to correct bias based on sex. The court ruled 6-3 that federal law permits an employer to correct a &quot;manifest imbalance&quot; in the work force through an affirmative-action plan, as long as the rights of other workers aren't &quot;unnecessarily trammeled.&quot; The decision is likely to remove some uncertainty surrounding affirmative action, and may pressure employers to hire and promote more women and minorities.    Women's groups and businesses said the ruling will clarify and support current programs and accelerate advances for women in the workplace.    ---   REAGAN WAS INFORMED about covert efforts to arm Nicaragua's rebels.    According to current and former administration officials, the president's advisers briefed him about secret Saudi Arabian contributions to the Contras and other clandestine efforts to arm the insurgents after Congress halted official U.S. aid to the rebels. The officials, however, said it isn't clear whether Reagan and other top aides knew that Lt. Col. North was controlling a secret arms network and providing military data to the rebels.    Special prosecutor Walsh indicated that many of the people in his criminal Iran-Contra inquiry were entwined with private efforts to aid the rebels.    ---   Premier Zhao opened the annual 16-day session of China's law-making National People's Congress by defending the economic changes introduced by Deng. Zhao, however, acknowledged some criticism leveled recently by Communist Party conservatives who advocate a slower approach to economic change.    ---   The White House is expected to report to Congress next week that arms suppliers in Israel and several Western European nations are providing weapons to South Africa in violation of a U.N. embargo. The report is expected to say that the Israeli government condones the practice, according to Reagan officials.    ---   Afghan jets raided Moslem rebel camps inside Afghanistan near the borders with Pakistan and Iran, killing about 80 fighters and civilians, rebel officials said. On Monday, Afghan planes bombed three Pakistani villages, killing at least 85 people.    ---   A Soviet military official said Britain and France eventually would have to surrender their independent nuclear forces if comprehensive arms accords in Europe were reached by the U.S. and Soviet Union. Gen. Yuri Lebedev's remarks came as Britain's Thatcher prepared to visit Moscow this weekend to discuss disarmament.    ---   Italy's premier-designate told President Cossiga that he was unable to reconstruct the country's five-party coalition after two weeks of talks, sources said. The move by Andreotti, a Christian Democrat, puts Italy on course for early elections.    ---   Pope John Paul II issued a 114-page encyclical reaffirming Roman Catholic doctrines on the Virgin Mary, teachings that some Protestants have asserted block Christian unity. The encyclical also reaffirmed traditional Catholic teaching that excludes women from the priesthood.    ---   Libyan troops appear to be preparing to leave their last major position in northern Chad following the loss Sunday of their strategic air base of Ouadi Doum, French defense sources said. The Libyan garrison at Faya Larrgeau, about 500 miles from N'Djamena, was believed to be destroying fuel and ammunition stocks before evacuating.    ---   A congressionally ordered study found that requiring payment for human tissues and cells used in biomedical research could add &quot;significant burdens&quot; to the developing biotechnology industry. The Office of Technology Assessment study examined the legal, ethical and economic implications of human-tissue ownership.    ---   A U.S. judge in California ruled that employees who allegedly have been exposed to toxic substances but who haven't developed clinically diagnosable evidence of injury can sue, unfettered by the state's workers' compensation laws.    ---   Thieves entered an Argentine museum and escaped with six paintings by Goya, El Greco, Veronese and others, valued at about $12 million, police said. Among the stolen works was El Greco's &quot;The Evangelist,&quot; which authorities at the museum, about 190 miles north of Buenos Aires, said was valued at about $4.5 million.    ---   India's opposition parties decided to bring a no-confidence motion against the government in an apparent bid to exploit reverses sustained by the ruling party in state elections. Gandhi's Congress (I) Party was defeated in Kerala and West Bengal, but scored a victory in Kashmir. The no-confidence motion was expected to fail.    ---   Police in San Salvador said an armed man and a woman who said they were leftist guerrillas took over a school, holding about 1,000 students and teachers hostage. They later freed the captives and surrendered. The reason for the takeover wasn't known.    ---   The Israeli cabinet agreed to keep secret the testimony from three Israelis linked to American spy Jonathan Pollard, in an apparent attempt to protect them from possible U.S. prosecution. The three men later agreed to testify before a special panel.    ---   Police in Athens clashed with thousands of supporters of the Greek Orthodox Church as bishops held a service protesting government plans to take over church lands. There weren't any injuries or arrests. </TEXT></DOC>