<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870901-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Frightened Money:Problems of Banks,Sandamp;Ls in Texas WorrySome Depositors There---Many Transfer Their FundsTo Sounder Institutions;Governor's Scary Stance---A Scramble for New Deposits---By Leonard M. ApcarStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT CHL FBTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After six months of watching and worrying, Ardyce Deuel walked into her savings and loan association last January and withdrew some more money.    She had read reports of loose lending practices, big losses, and failing banks and Sandamp;Ls. &quot;If they were going under, I was going under,&quot; Mrs. Deuel declares.    Over the past year, she has withdrawn more than $100,000 and opened an account at the city's largest bank. &quot;I felt safer,&quot; she says, &quot;because they've been around for a while.&quot; But the bank is losing money, too. &quot;You really don't know what to do with your money,&quot; she says with a sigh.    In other places, cocktail-party chit-chat may focus on rising home prices or the stock market, but in Texas people talk about bank safety. Their worries are sparked by news stories on insolvent Sandamp;Ls being seized by regulators and by bank losses due to declines in energy and realestate prices. In addition, confidence has been shaken by a widening federal investigation of prominent banking and real-estate people in Texas; nearly 400 people, including the state's top thrift regulator, are under investigation.    And in mid-August, Texas Gov. William Clements stunned the state's banking industry by criticizing federal efforts to prop up some Sandamp;Ls, and he warned Texans that their money may not be safe.    &quot;I think there's a lot of fear,&quot; says a Dallas executive secretary who recently took the trouble to look up bank ratings in a library and switched her savings from three poorly rated banks to others with higher marks.    Bank safety is &quot;obviously on the minds of people,&quot; says J. Michael Cornwall, the chief executive officer of First Texas Savings Association, a large Dallas thrift. Noting that people question him about bank safety at social functions, he comments, &quot;They're looking for reassurance.&quot;    So far this year, 122 banks have failed in the U.S., double last year's pace, and 38 of them have been in Texas -- a rate of one a week. Most have been small institutions whose collapse was handled routinely by bank regulators. But the steady drumbeat of failures is fraying the nerves of Texans, and they are quietly moving their funds from one institution to another or even out of state -- despite the government's guarantee of deposits of $100,000 or less.    While deposits at banks and Sandamp;Ls nationwide have been rising during the past several months, they have been falling in Texas, in what regulators call &quot;a gradual and persistent withdrawal&quot; of money. Since the 1986 fourth quarter, Texas Sandamp;Ls report a $790.9 million net drop in deposits despite a slight gain in June. Texas bank deposits started shrinking early last year. The state's major banking firms say that as of March 31, their domestic deposit base had declined by more than $4.5 billion from year-earlier levels, including a $1 billion drop in the first three months of this year.    As a result, some Texas banks and many Sandamp;Ls are scrambling for deposits. Texas newspapers and airwaves are full of ads offering interest rates above the national averages. Of the 20 U.S. institutions paying high rates on six-month certificates of deposit, 18 are in Texas, according to 100 Highest Yields, a North Palm Beach, Fla., newsletter.    Most experts don't expect confidence to be restored until banks begin reporting profits and until the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. begins raising money this fall to help restore its fiscal health through a series of bond offerings recently approved by Congress. But a Texas real-estate recovery, on which the fortunes of the state's financial institutions depend, is several years away. The earliest anyone expects any signs of a general economic upturn in the Lone Star State, such as sustained gains in employment and consumer spending, is 1988.    Large, out-of-state depositors have shunned Texas banks ever since the energy industry started to slump four years ago and some big bank lenders started to post losses. Last year, more money managers ruled out Texas institutions after bank losses spread to real-estate loans and credit ratings of Texas bank holding companies slipped. Local corporations and individuals remain loyal to the banks, but lately their confidence is waning, too.    Some of the money is going to stronger banks from weaker banks or weaker Sandamp;Ls. And some funds are leaving Texas altogether, such as a $100 million deposit that Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. pulled out of a Houston Sandamp;L a few months ago. At banks and Sandamp;Ls alike, deposits exceeding the federal insurance limit of $100,000 are declining, and smaller deposits are increasing. The reason: Customers, unsure about the safety of their money, are making certain that their deposits are fully insured.    But bankers concede that they see insured amounts also being withdrawn, especially at institutions whose losses are frightening customers.    Before Austin's United Bank of Texas failed last June, for example, more than $100 million in deposits -- more than half of the total -- dried up in about six months as customers pulled out their money. BancTexas Group Inc., of Dallas, watched some $500 million, about a third of the deposit base, flee its banks last year. &quot;It has been an extremely difficult task to keep the deposit base and the confidence level with the earnings reports that we've had,&quot; says Daniel S. Pigott, a senior vice president of BancTexas, which was rescued from failure in July by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. The FDIC injected $150 million into it, together with $50 million raised by a merchant-banking firm.    American Petrofina Inc., a Dallas energy company controlled by Petrofina S.A. of Belgium, opened back-up checking accounts in Dallas when it grew concerned about InterFirst Corp.'s troubled flagship bank here. American Petrofina also had been using InterFirst to pay and collect millions of dollars daily over its bank wires, but its corporate cash managers became nervous about InterFirst's troubles and those of other Texas banks. Fearing a failure or at least some interruption of service, the energy company switched its payments and collections business to a bank out of the Southwest.    &quot;We just didn't want any disruptions,&quot; an American Petrofina executive says. (InterFirst has since been acquired by a local rival.)    In Austin last month, city officials became concerned when some local banks refused to honor their own letter-of-credit commitments that the city requires real-estate developers to put up, in lieu of cash, to guarantee payment for roads, sidewalks and sewer systems in some projects. Sometimes, the city draws the funds from the banks to pay for the work if the developer doesn't have the cash.    &quot;Lately, what had happened is that some banks weren't honoring the draw,&quot; says Tracy Watson, the acting director of the city's Office of Land Development Services. The banks didn't say they didn't have the money, but they often gave technical excuses for refusing to come up with it. So, the city, which is holding about $200 million worth of letters of credit for various projects, adopted a policy that rejects credit from several Austin banks and Sandamp;Ls with low ratings, even though some of the banks are part of big holding companies.    In Amarillo, Gov. Clements sent depositors running for their money after he predicted that the beleaguered FSLIC insurance fund wouldn't fully back deposits. In interviews, he contended that the FSLIC would wind up paying deposits &quot;like 30 cents on the dollar and give them a piece of paper like a bond&quot; for the rest.    His comments alarmed bank and Sandamp;L regulators. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas made preparations to airlift currency to Amarillo in case of a run on deposits. And federal thrift regulators in Dallas and Washington called news conferences to rebut the governor's remarks.    No run occurred, but some Amarillo Sandamp;Ls experienced &quot;higher than normal&quot; withdrawals. One man carried about $30,000 -- his life's savings -- from a savings association to the bank across the street.    The Clements episode clearly indicates that regulators and industry executives worry that the slightest nudge could stagger some Texas banks and Sandamp;Ls. &quot;You just don't toy with the fears of depositors in a bank and savings and loan in normal times, let alone in distressed times,&quot; says Tom S. King, the president of the Texas Savings and Loan League, an Austin-based trade group.    Regulators at the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas have begun a program designed to channel up to $3 billion in surplus funds to Texas's weakest thrifts in an effort to reduce interest rates paid on deposits. So far, about $500 million is in the program, but that, by itself, has done little to lower rates.    In addition, the regulators are pushing another program in trying to persuade Wall Street securities firms to put millions of dollars into weak Texas thrifts. Usually, when a thrift closes, major depositors aren't assured of recovering funds exceeding the $100,000 federal-deposit-insurance limit, and interest isn't paid on insured funds in the time between the Sandamp;L closing and regulators' payment of the money.    Under the proposed program, multimillion-dollar deposits would be divided into insured amounts at weak Texas thrifts, and interest would be paid on the funds until they are returned to the customer. So far, the idea hasn't got off the ground because of doubts at Wall Street firms, many of which are still angry about the lengthy delays suffered by depositors -- mostly large depositors or groups of depositors -- when a big Arkansas thrift was closed last year.    Meanwhile, several institutions are exploiting the uncertainty. MeraBank, a Phoenix-based thrift with offices in Texas, recently ran an ad for deposits in Dallas newspapers that took a none-too-subtle swipe at its shaky Texas rivals. The ad's headline was a Will Rogers quip: &quot;I'm not so much interested in the return on my money as the return of my money.&quot;    Gibraltar Savings Association of Houston and First Texas Savings, two units of First Texas Financial Corp. that are among the state's largest thrifts, say deposits are up. &quot;We're getting new customers,&quot; Mr. Cornwall says. &quot;All of these people didn't just move to town.&quot;    Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc., acquired last May by Chemical New York Corp., has been trumpeting its increased strength and snatching nervous customers away from weaker institutions. New individual accounts opened at its big Houston bank have been increasing some 20% to 25% a month. Much of the money comes from other Texas banks, and the movement &quot;has accelerated in the last couple of months,&quot; says Marc J. Shapiro, the chief executive of the Houston bank.    Corporations are calling Texas Commerce banks and inquiring about moving their business to them, he says. For example, a national title-insurance company that keeps an average of about $9 million in several Texas institutions, including Texas Commerce, is considering switching all its funds to Texas Commerce. Another company recently moved its bill-collecting operation to Texas Commerce's Dallas bank from a rival institution.    Seizing the opportunity, Texas Commerce is calling on big customers of its competitors and trying to woo them away by stressing Chemical's size -- it is the nation's fourth-largest banking company, with more than twice the assets of Texas's largest banking concern -- and the recent increase in Texas Commerce's debt rating. Last month, Texas Commerce ordered each of its 600 calling officers to make 20 visits a month to business prospects, up from 14 to 16 calls previously. It also is adding 15 to 20 new officers to the team.    First City Bancorp. of Texas Inc. and other troubled Texas banks and savings institutions are fighting back. Nearly all of them are pushing deposit-gathering promotions heavily. &quot;It's a very hotly contested arena,&quot; says Bruce J. McCall, First City's senior vice president and marketing director.    In publicity stunts designed to attract deposits over the past year or so and to stay liquid, First City has offered everything from Arabian colts, yachts and Porsche sport cars. The latest gimmick is to seek long-term money but not charge a penalty for an early withdrawal after 90 days. Moreover, if the deposit stays in the bank for five years, it earns a 2.25-percentage-point annual interest &quot;bonus&quot; on top of a competitive interest rate. Mr. McCall says First City has gathered about $71 million in these accounts; about half of it is new money.    Commodore Savings Association, a troubled Dallas Sandamp;L, is trying a different approach. At most institutions, the longer the money is deposited, the higher the interest rate; at Commodore, the larger the deposit, the higher the rate. For example, as little as $1,000 deposited for five years earns an 8.25% rate, but an $85,000 deposit for just 90 days gets the same rate.    But some Texans aren't enticed. Tamara Kay Gough, a marketing manager in Dallas for a national accounting firm, has decided to avoid all Texas financial institutions. Most of her money is at the credit union of a former employer, Electronic Data Systems Inc., the General Motors Corp. unit founded by H. Ross Perot. &quot;If it's good enough for Ross,&quot; she says, &quot;it's good enough for me.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>