<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861215-0126 </DOCNO><HL> Why the Private Sector Fails---By William Celis IIIStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/15/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As Mary Wilson opened her dresser drawer one morning, a rat leaped up on her. Shaken, she walked down a hallway, carefully avoiding rotted spots in the floor, to call her landlord.    Mrs. Wilson, a five-year resident of a public-housing project called Desire, had gone through this ritual many times. If it wasn't rats, it was a broken toilet or a broken heater. The Housing Authority of New Orleans, she says, was slow to respond to her complaints. She sued the agency for $300,000 in December after child-welfare officials threatened to take her six children to foster homes if repairs weren't made in her ground-floor apartment.    &quot;I'm very bitter because the conditions are beyond my control,&quot; Mrs. Wilson says. Although her $56-a-month four-bedroom apartment eventually was repaired, Mrs. Wilson says, she is pursuing her suit because of the hardship she suffered in the meantime. Mrs. Wilson, whose only income is $316 in federal Aid to Families With Dependent Children, says of the state of affairs, &quot;It's getting worse.&quot;    Public-housing tenants in many other cities agree that conditions are getting worse. As the public-housing program approaches its 50th year, many projects across the country are in an advanced state of decay, and the deterioration is accelerating.    Maintenance programs that struggled even in good times are now floundering badly under the weight of sharp budget cuts. Serious and often dangerous repair problems are piling up, forcing residents either to live with leaky ceilings and broken boilers or to sue to get them fixed. Some buildings -- including a 286-unit project in Washington, D.C. -- are being abandoned because repairs are too expensive. Many are being torn down, tightening the already worrisome squeeze on housing for the poor.    The Department of Housing and Urban Development says that about 70,000 units are boarded up and 1,000 units are demolished every year nationwide because repair costs exceed the units' worth. HUD contends the figures haven't risen much in recent years, but public-housing officials in many cities paint a different picture. In Indianapolis, the number of housing units has declined to 2,622 from 3,500 five years ago, largely because of deterioration. San Francisco now has 6,700 units, down 300 from five years ago, with current plans to demolish additional 333 apartments.    &quot;The deterioration has definitely deepened in recent years, and it's getting worse,&quot; says Robert J. Rigby, the executive director of the Newark, N.J., Housing Authority and a former HUD official.    Not all public-housing facilities are suffering. Some smaller agencies are able to control deterioration, mainly because their size makes maintenance easier. Phoenix has kept all of its 1,600 public-housing units occupied and in compliance with local ordinances, according to HUD officials.    But projects in many larger cities are crumbling, and federal budget cuts are a major factor. Under the Reagan administration, authorized funds for housing programs fell to about $8 billion in fiscal 1986, down 70% from the $30 billion authorized in 1981, according to the Council of Large Public Housing Authorities. At other local housing agencies, repair efforts are hobbled by infighting and sloppy finances.    Such difficulties are worsening housing shortages at a time of great need for lowincome units. The Jersey City, N.J., authority says a family placed on its waiting list today could wait up to 10 years. Private-sector programs intended to ease shortages are failing as developers find ways to exclude low-income tenants.    Almost all of the nation's 3.4 million public-housing tenants receive Social Security or other federal assistance. About half are elderly, and most of the rest are in families headed by women. Public-housing experts believe many families are illegally doubling up in public-housing units.    Without such doubling up, the nation's problem of the homeless would be even worse. New York City provides shelter for 16,000 members of families and 9,800 single people. The total of 26,000 homeless people has more than doubled since 1983.    &quot;America today faces a crisis in low-income housing which is almost unparalleled,&quot; says Barry Zigas, the president of the National Low-Income Housing Coalition. An obstacle to resolving it, says Florence Roisman, a Washington, D.C., lawyer who represents public-housing tenants, is that &quot;no one makes the connection between homeless people and the decrease in public-housing stock.&quot;    Actually, public housing wasn't supposed to be permanent in the first place. Initially proposed in the 1930s, as the U.S. recovered from the Depression, it was designed to give construction jobs to thousands of unemployed workers and to provide them with temporary shelter until they could save money to find better private-sector housing. Consequently, the plumbing, the wiring, and even the structure weren't always up to snuff. With the buildings still occupied year after year, the maintenance problems grow larger. Fund cuts make some of the problems insurmountable.    The Philadelphia Housing Authority closed two 15-year-old towers last year because the estimated $18 million repair costs were prohibitive and financing prospects were dim. The 286-unit building in Washington, D.C., was closed because structural damage would have cost $8.5 million to repair. Missing gutters and broken plumbing had allowed water to seep beneath the foundation, causing it to tilt.    In New Orleans, the floor of Mrs. Wilson's wood-frame apartment, elevated to resist hurricane-related flooding, has been rotting for five years. When fire damaged part of her kitchen last spring, seven months elapsed before repairs were made. In the meantime, maintenance workers boarded a damaged window but left a crack to allow for circulation. The opening also allowed stray cats and birds to wander in, and when it rained, the kitchen was drenched. &quot;When I tell people what has happened to me, they find it unbelievable,&quot; Mrs. Wilson says.    The New Orleans authority, which shelters one-tenth of the city's population, was sued an average of three times a day last year over living conditions. Officials say their problems are so numerous that it is difficult to repair everything in a timely fashion. &quot;The solution would be to repair all of this, but that's easier said than done,&quot; says Wayne Minor, the director of the agency's claims department. &quot;It's going to take a great deal of money.&quot;    At the North Beach Housing Project in San Francisco, resident Hope Halikas recalls when even burned-out light bulbs in street lights were quickly replaced. Then, around the late 1970s, she says, the project's 40-year-old boilers began breaking down, making tenants worry that they would explode. In addition, plumbing backed up often and the porcelain levers on toilets, which hadn't been replaced in at least 30 years, finally broke off, making the toilets difficult to flush.    Tenants sued the authority six years ago over these conditions and won, but Miss Halikas says that only in the past two years have preventive-maintenance programs been established. &quot;It's like pulling hen's teeth. It's very hard to get things done,&quot; says Miss Halikas, who has lived in public housing for 21 years.    James E. Clay, appointed chief of San Francisco's public-housing programs last year, concedes that the authority is overwhelmed. &quot;Problems weren't taken care of,&quot; he says, partly because the authority didn't have the money. Two years ago, the authority was taken to court by the city for about 300 outstanding violations of local safety and fire codes dating to 1981. Many of the problems have since been dealt with, but Mr. Clay says $500 million is needed to upgrade the city's 42 housing projects.    Getting that amount won't be easy. HUD, which supports local housing agencies through subsidies and building funds, proposed to trim modernization funds to $760 million in fiscal 1987, down from the authorized $1.4 billion last year. Though Congress restored budget levels at 1986 levels, public-housing executives say the delays and the difficulty in getting modernization money to the countryside has contributed to the decay of public-housing projects.    &quot;In recent history, the Reagan administration has been most hostile to public housing,&quot; says Mr. Rigby of the Jersey City authority.    HUD has also become more rigorous about recapturing allocations that aren't spent by authorities within the required three years. Two years ago, it took back a little more than $1 billion, including $3 million for seven projects budgeted for the Los Angeles housing agency. Neighborhood opposition delayed the site selections, throwing the authority behind in hiring builders and contractors.    &quot;The program just didn't move as quickly as it should have,&quot; says Robert J. Zampino, then the acting executive director of the authority.    HUD Secretary Samuel R. Pierce denies that the Reagan administration impedes efforts to shore up deteriorating units or maintain sound finances. The budget cuts are part of its effort to trim the federal deficit, HUD says. In the recapture of funds, a HUD spokeswoman says, each case is reviewed, and extenuating circumstances are considered.    The strain on finances is complicated at times by housing-authority mismanagement. In the early 1980s, for example, sloppy accounting allowed San Francisco's authority to spend millions of dollars it didn't have, former and present officials say. It still has a deficit of $4.5 million despite spending cuts.    In East St. Louis, Ill., last December, HUD seized control of a local authority after internal disputes had brought maintenance programs to a virtual standstill. The move came after HUD found, among other things, that two housing commissioners were taking over the executive director's jobs of signing checks and hiring and firing workers, against HUD policy. The commissioners, who have since resigned, also tried to fire the authority's executive director and attorney.    The situation &quot;created a lot of chaos,&quot; says Marqua McGull-Billingsley, the authority's attorney. The authority, which complains of a shortage of maintenance workers and a further deterioration of housing units, stopped accepting rental applications because a 3,000-person waiting list was growing.    Private-sector housing programs designed to ease the public-housing crunch aren't faring so well, either. These programs, allowing developers to build apartments with the aid of tax-free bonds, require that 20% of the units be reserved for low-income residents. But the tax-overhaul bill makes such apartments less attractive because it eliminates accelerated depreciation on the buildings. By greatly reducing start-ups of new multifamily dwellings, this change is expected to increase rents by as much as 20%.    Some housing experts say the program hasn't been working anyway, because many developers simply ignore the 20% requirement. The Internal Revenue Service, which monitors compliance, says it doesn't know how many violations occur yearly, but the tax bill contains a clause that is supposed to make it harder to avoid the obligation.    But even that isn't likely to stop developers as determined as those who built a sprawling $233.7 million luxury complex in Chicago called Presidential Towers. The developers went all the way to Congress, ultimately winning a special dispensation allowing them to sidestep accommodations for the poor.    &quot;It makes me feel like I've been cheated,&quot; says Constance Johnson, a Chicago public-housing resident. Miss Johnson, who earns $800 a month as a temporary office worker, would like to move out of her apartment but can't find affordable housing. &quot;I don't guess there's anything I can do,&quot; she says. </TEXT></DOC>