<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870504-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Liberation Argentine Style---By David Asman</HL><DD> 05/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> TEODELINA, Argentina  </DATELINE><TEXT>    In the modest household of atenant farmer is a small room that is treated as a kind ofshrine. In the room, there sits on a pedestal a prized itemfor which Argentines are willing to pay thousands of dollarsand wait years to get. Newspapers regularly print lettersfrom people who have waited 15 years or more to obtain onefrom the state monopoly. Places on waiting lists are barteredfor and even put in wills to be passed on to heirs. The itemis a telephone.   But the farmer's phone is not &quot;government issue.&quot; It has been purchased on the black market and is connected to a ham radio tuned in to a frequency shared by a private answering service in town. For a monthly fee of about $12 (plus the price of each call), the answering service -- actually a &quot;dialing service&quot; -- will dial your desired number, call you back and patch you into the call. A red light on the phone indicates when one of the service's 20 other customers is using the line. The patching system works fine. But the answering service usually has trouble getting a clear connection on the government-operated trunk lines, which often require five or six attempts under the best conditions. Embossed at the base of the phone is the name given to this device by its anonymous inventor: Privatizador Selectivo, or &quot;Selective Privatizer.&quot;    The selective privatizer reveals two important things about Argentina. First, despite its abundant resources and good living standards, the nation is hopelessly overregulated and its industries protected in ways that prevent it from modernizing traditional operations, let alone joining the world-wide technological community. Second, the creative, entrepreneurial spirit of the Argentine people cannot be stopped no matter how restraining the regulatory morass. Practically every government regulation or tax is countered by illegal or quasilegal roundabouts, wasting tremendous capital and energy in the process.    The good news is that these facts are finally gaining wide acceptance by groups whose opposition to such notions had long been considered unyielding.    World attention has focused these past several weeks on President Raul Alfonsin's showdown with rebellious army officers. However, the president's track record for forging political unity based on his sensitivity to public attitudes -- in addition to the lack of support in Argentina for a military coup -- should have left little doubt that democracy would survive that skirmish. A greater challenge to the president may well be his attempt to wean the country from the crippling legacy of corporate-statism introduced on a massive scale by President Juan Peron in the 1940s.    The powerful interests that have benefited from this system include government bureaucracies, state industries, Peronist trade unions and, perhaps the most resistant to change, private industrialists protected from local and international competition through regulations and tariffs. Lack of capital, and a recognition that the only vitality in the business community comes from the black market, are changing opinions. But old habits die hard.    &quot;I have heard about the phone patch system,&quot; says Nicolas Vicente Gallo, general administrator of the national phone company, &quot;and we have not regulated against it. We have a new attitude now: If we spot an area where the market works, we will not move against it.&quot; But why not change the system that forces citizens to go to such lengths to avoid government &quot;services&quot;? &quot;That would be too much,&quot; Mr. Gallo says. &quot;The Congress would never pass a law to privatize the whole system. Besides, I don't think the private sector here is mature enough to control this type of activity.&quot;    This is an attitude one finds often in the Alfonsin administration: a recognition that the government is far overextended, but a nagging sensation that the private sector is too &quot;immature&quot; to take over.    Pedro Trucco, minister of public works and services, is one of several &quot;Young Turks&quot; in the administration who have rankled many old-line interventionists by their privatizing zeal. Says Mr. Trucco: &quot;I am about to issue a report that will shock the country about how much money is wasted by state industries. YPF (the state-owned oil monopoly) loses $350 million a year; Aerolineas Argentinas loses $130 million a year. People are fed up with the regulatory system, and they are fed up with paying taxes for inefficient state enterprises.&quot;    Mr. Trucco has set about privatizing many government holdings, but even he adds: &quot;Those who say 'let's deregulate everything at once' just aren't realistic. Neither the unions nor the industries would allow an open market.&quot;    The administration has taken one major step in quelling criticism by the Peronist union leadership, long known for its nationalist/protectionist sentiments. In a clever political maneuver, the president recently appointed a moderate leader of the Peronist General Confederation of Labor (CGT), Carlos Alderete, as his new secretary of labor. The appointment helped erode support for the far more strident CGT general secretary, Saul Ubaldini, who has publicly denounced any government moves to open the economy.    But union support for Mr. Ubaldini's nationalist war cries was on the wane even prior to Mr. Alderete's appointment. Eight general strikes and 700 smaller strikes in three years have taken their toll on union membership, simply because there are no strike funds in Argentina. Many workers are being driven into the underground, nonunion sector to make ends meet.    Former Finance Minister Roberto Alemann explains the reason for the unions' interest in deregulation: &quot;Investment -- and, thus, wage increases -- in union-dominated industries is at a standstill. The only way the unions see to maintain power is to support growth by supporting deregulation. Behind every regulation is a vested interest. And when these interests are no longer served by regulation, there will be deregulation.&quot;    The protected industries, too, are finding that their interests are less served by regulation than in the past. The country's chambers of industry require all Argentine producers to receive permission before importing materials that are produced by a member of one of the chambers.    But the paper work and contacts required for permission to import are so involved and expensive that many smaller producers smuggle items into the country through Paraguay or other routes. One 84-page weekly lists thousands of contraband items available by phone. And, says a top Buenos Aires business consultant: &quot;Since the government has no more money, even the companies that relied on government contracts are beginning to call for deregulation. But these companies have been protected for so long that they are still afraid of competition.&quot;    Protected or not, all producers today find ways of avoiding government laws and regulations to control production and profit flows. This is particularly apparent in the methods used to get around the Central Bank's currency controls, which require dollar earnings to be exchanged by the bank for local currency at the official rate, resulting in a 30% loss due to the differential between the official rate and the black market rate. And when producers need to import materials, they must pay in dollars that they are supposed to buy at the official rate.    To get around this, Argentine importers often arrange with their offshore clients to draw up manifests that indicate a fictitious, extra 10% of imports (any more than that and inspectors could not be &quot;persuaded&quot; to look the other way). The importer shows the manifest to the Central Bank representative, pays the applicable duty and exchanges australs for dollars to pay for the entire manifest at the official rate. The importer then trades the dollars received for the fictitious extra 10% of goods on the thriving, black-market exchange for a 30% profit.    Likewise, exporters often arrange with their offshore clients to under-invoice by about 10%. Extra dollar earnings are squirreled away in foreign bank accounts or in dummy Panamanian companies. The cost in lost efficiency of these operations is relatively easy to figure. When the differential between the black-market and official rates is below 15%, exporters and importers say they submit to clean manifests rather than risk getting caught.    Argentine merchants face a more direct method of taxation and deal with it in a more direct fashion. In a Buenos Aires shopping center, a leather-shop owner says: &quot;I have two stores. When the tax collector comes around, I pay him a bribe. I also have to bribe the union representatives because my employees are nonunion. My other store is a complete phantom; the government doesn't yet know it exists. But the union knows it exists, and I have to pay it an extra bribe.&quot; The shop owner would like to have one big store, and even get into exporting, but he is afraid that would expose him to the tax collectors' superiors. Thus, internal growth and export earnings are lost to the country.    Central Bank President Jose Luis Machinea agrees that confidence in the ability of government to regulate the economy is at a low ebb. However, he is bothered with the idea of freeing the exchange rate or lowering taxes. &quot;I don't see either as beneficial in the Argentine case,&quot; he says. &quot;A free exchange rate would result in a recession, and if we lower the taxes, we won't have the revenue we need.&quot;    But if taxes are lowered and the exchange rate liberalized, retailers and exporters might be convinced that the costs of keeping their enterprises clandestine exceed those of operating legally.    &quot;I'd prefer to operate in the open,&quot; the leather merchant says. &quot;I don't like making payoffs and hiding my profits in dollars that I can't reinvest in my business.&quot; The same could be said for the big industrialists, whose avoidance costs are also great. Instead of sweating over lost revenue, the government should consider how an economy of born entrepreneurs would boom if it were liberated.    ---   Mr. Asman edits the Journal's Americas column. </TEXT></DOC>