<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870513-0020 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan, King Fahd Discussed Saudi AidTo Contras During Ban, Sources Claim---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan's diary indicates that he discussed Saudi Arabian contributions to the Nicaraguan Contras during a private meeting with Saudi King Fahd in February 1985, said two sources familiar with the account.    But the president wrote that the monarch had raised the subject, and that he expressed his appreciation to the Saudi leader for the assistance, the sources said. The contributions came at a time when the administration was trying to convince Congress to lift a ban on U.S. aid to the insurgents.    The president's diary contradicts Saudi denials that the country gave funds to the Contras, and that Mr. Reagan and King Fahd ever discussed the aid. Yesterday, President Reagan again denied that he ever solicited aid to the Contras from Saudi Arabia. But White House officials have stopped short of saying the subject was never discussed.    In his second day of testimony before congressional committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane tried to downplay the president's role in obtaining Saudi aid for the insurgents. Mr. McFarlane said he knew &quot;for a fact&quot; that Mr. Reagan didn't raise the subject in his meeting with King Fahd, and added that the president didn't mention the subject when he briefed aides on the meeting.    The 1984 law banning aid to the Contras has been widely interpreted as prohibiting high government officials from soliciting contributions for the Contras. Mr. McFarlane has been careful in his testimony to say that the administration only discussed with foreign countries a desire to find aid for the Contras.    Saudi contributions to the Contras began in the summer of 1984, three months before Congress halted government aid to the rebels, U.S. officials have said. The Saudis initially contributed $1 million a month to the Contras, but gave about $25 million -- or about double their previous annual donation -- shortly after Mr. Reagan met with King Fahd.    Meanwhile, congressional investigators said that a $10 million donation from the Sultan of Brunei to aid the Nicaraguan insurgents mistakenly ended up in an account controlled by a shipping executive in Switzerland. No connection has been found between the businessman, whose name wasn't disclosed, and any of the figures in the Iran-Contra affair, investigators said.    The misguided bank transfer was believed to have occurred because Reagan administration officials relayed the wrong number for a secret account used to funnel aid to the Contras, investigators said. Both this account and the one held by the businessman were at Credit Suisse in Geneva, and have similar numbers. The error could be explained by the transposition of two digits in the numbers of the two accounts, investigators said.    Mark Belnick, a senior counsel for the Senate panel investigating the Iran-Contra controversy, said it isn't clear why the businessman didn't come forward when he discovered that the large deposit had been made into his account. Shortly after the deposit was made, the businessman transferred the money out of Credit Suisse and invested it in a certificate of deposit at a second Swiss bank, where it has accumulated an estimated $253,000 in interest, Mr. Belnick said. Investigators said Swiss authorities have frozen the funds.    A spokesman for the Swiss Federal Ministry of Justice and Police said that country hasn't launched a federal investigation, but Swiss sources confirmed that Credit Suisse has asked local authorities in Geneva to look into the matter. Mr. Belnick said that the businessman was Swiss, but the general description he gave of a prominent 60-year-old shipping magnate might also fit other wealthy Europeans who operate out of Geneva.    Yesterday's disclosures came as House and Senate investigative committees continued a detailed cross-examination of Mr. McFarlane. Of the principals in the controversy, Mr. McFarlane has been among the most willing to appear before Congress, but his testimony has included major inconsistencies.    House counsel John Nields methodically confronted Mr. McFarlane with a trail of documents indicating Mr. McFarlane had withheld information from Congress in the past, and asked: &quot;What did the Congress have to do for you to tell them what you actually knew?&quot;    In response, the former White House aide said he has been quick to accept &quot;responsibility&quot; for past errors. Through two days of testimony, he has said he never intended to mislead lawmakers, but he conceded that he had been too &quot;categorical&quot; in his answers to some of their questions.    Last fall, Mr. McFarlane helped to prepare a chronology which said the White House hadn't known until much later that Israel intended to sell Hawk missiles to Iran in November 1985. Records released by the committees, however, show that Mr. McFarlane had met with Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin only days before the planned sale.    Mr. McFarlane also has repeatedly minimized the role his former aide, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, played in providing assistance to the Contras. But in some cases he allowed Col. North to draft answers to earlier congressional inquiries about the matter. And he acknowledged that he had his aide prepare altered drafts of internal memos in 1985 before dropping the effort on the advice of a government attorney.    Col. North's free-wheeling style sometimes produced surprising results. In an interview Monday night on the ABC television program Nightline, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, a principal in the Iran-Contra affair, said Col. North gave three Iranian officials on a clandestine visit to Washington a secret tour of the White House one night last September.    Gen. Secord said the three were smuggled into the U.S. as part of an effort to open a new channel of communications from the White House to top officials in Tehran. He criticized the administration for abandoning the channel after the secret arms sales to Iran were disclosed to the public last November. </TEXT></DOC>