<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0046 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Crude Oil Prices Rebound on AttacksBy Iran and Iraq and Technical Factors---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Crude oil prices spurted sharply higher on spot and futures markets amid renewed fighting between Iran and Iraq and technical factors, but bearish market fundamentals remain, analysts said.    Iraq said its warplanes attacked several Iranian cities and oil centers. Iran, meanwhile, said it shot down three Iraqi jets.    The fighting -- coming just ahead of tomorrow's visit to the Persian Gulf by the United Nations secretary-general to work out a U.N. peace plan -- followed Iran's apparent willingness Friday to negotiate an end to the war and took some traders by surprise, analysts said.    &quot;The feeling had been strong that Iran and Iraq had moved closer to negotiating a peace settlement,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc. in New York. &quot;Now a cease-fire looks a lot less likely than just&quot; a day earlier, he said.    As a result, some traders scrambled to cover short, or selling, positions, bidding prices higher.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude for October delivery rose 44 cents, to $19.38 a barrel. Heating oil and gasoline futures prices also rose sharply.    The spot, or noncontract, market, surged as well. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, rose 45 cents a barrel to $19.40, while the spot price of North Sea Brent, an abundantly traded European crude, rose 15 cents a barrel to $17.80 in late trading.    Technical buying guided by trend charts added further fuel to the futures market rally, particularly late in the session, traders and brokers said.    Some traders, moreover, are reluctant to hold large selling positions ahead of today's meetings of the production and pricing committees of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    Although the meetings are unlikely to stem the cartel's current above-quota output, &quot;no one wants to stay short for very long&quot; ahead of the sessions, said Madison Galbraith, an oil broker at Merrill Lynch Futures Inc. in New York.    Even so, bearish factors in the market remain, analysts said. European oil inventories, for instance, are almost 3% greater than the large stockpiles of a year ago, said Edward Krapels, president of Energy Security Analysis Inc., a Washington, D.C., oil consulting firm.    And several major U.S. oil companies, reflecting the recent bearishness in the market, yesterday lowered the price they pay for West Texas crude oil. Sun Co. and Phillips Petroleum Co., among others, lowered their posted prices 50 cents a barrel to $18.50.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: The Agriculture Department is expected to report after the close of trading today that it slightly trimmed its forecast of the U.S. soybean harvest and modestly raised its U.S. corn outlook. Many traders expect a revised corn estimate of 7.24 billion bushels, up from the 7.23 billion bushels projected last month. A revised soybean estimate of 1.99 billion bushels, down from two billion bushels, also is expected. Although anticipation of the report should have little effect on futures prices today, traders are looking for surprises in U.S. soybean yield and overseas wheat estimates. Rains late last month might result in a record soybean yield of 35 bushels an acre, compared with the government's August estimate of 34.7 bushels, an analyst said. That would generate a larger-than-expected soybean harvest of about 2.02 billion bushels, she said. And some analysts said the department might trim its estimate of high-quality wheat exports by the Common Market and India, which would signal stronger demand for U.S. wheat abroad. Too much rain has delayed the wheat harvest in Western Europe, and a drought in India last month may have cut the acreage suitable for the planting of wheat, an analyst said. Wheat futures prices rose yesterday, amid renewed speculation that China is preparing to buy U.S. wheat. Soybean futures prices fell amid profit-taking, analysts said.    COCOA: Futures prices dropped to the lowest levels in 4 1/2 years in New York and London as producing and consuming countries continued to disagree about the intervention price to support the market. Also depressing prices was the forecast Tuesday by the International Cocoa Organization of surplus production for the fourth consecutive year during the season beginning Oct. 1. December cocoa on the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange in New York fell $34 a metric ton to $1,866. London prices were favored a bit by a decline in the pound against the dollar -- which normally stimulates buying of sterling-denominated cocoa futures in London and simultaneous selling of the relatively more-expensive dollar-priced futures in New York. However, &quot;arbitrage can't do very much to help a market with as much pressure as this one,&quot; an analyst said. The ICCO predicted that world production will exceed consumption by 80,000 tons, while it reduced its estimate of the surplus for the current season to 20,000 tons from the 94,000 tons projected in March.    COFFEE: Futures prices rose strongly amid signs that Central American coffee-producing nations are more tightly united in favoring restoration of coffee-export quotas. The producers began meeting Friday in Mexico City and concluded yesterday. Brazilian and Colombian representatives were observers and didn't participate. An announcement after the final session said the meetings helped consolidate the producers positions regarding the need to reimpose quotas. The International Coffee Organization's council itself meets next week in London.    INTEREST RATES: Treasury bond futures prices ended higher, after fluctuating wildly during a rumor-rattled trading session. Prices plunged initially, partly because of rumors, originating among bond traders in Tokyo, that the Federal Reserve Board was about to raise the discount rate again, said Jeffrey Priest, head of fixed income trading at Miller, Tabak, Hirsch andamp; Co. in New York. Friday, the Fed raised the discount rate it charges member banks to 6% from 5 1/2%, sparking a steep slide in bond prices. Once that rumor was discounted, another surfaced in New York saying the U.S. July trade deficit -- to be reported tomorrow -- widened from June's $15.7 billion gap, Mr. Priest said. For the past few months erroneous rumors have rocked the fixed-income markets prior to the monthly release of trade figures. </TEXT></DOC>