<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871019-0023 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Reagan administration moved closer toward acting against Iran for its missile attack Friday on a U.S.-flagged oil tanker off Kuwait.    Following weekend deliberations, President Reagan told reporters yesterday that he had decided how the U.S. should respond. But it wasn't clear whether the president was planning to order a military strike against Iran, or considering trade or diplomatic sanctions.    Asked whether he intended to make a decision soon on options prepared by his advisers, Mr. Reagan said: &quot;I've made it.&quot; Asked what the decision was, he said, &quot;I can't tell you.&quot; The White House declined to elaborate.    The Associated Press reported that Mr. Reagan -- hours after making the remark -- had called congressional leaders to the White House to discuss U.S. options in the Persian Gulf. A White House spokeswoman refused comment.    Military planning for possible actions in the Persian Gulf moved &quot;slowly&quot; over the weekend, U.S. officials said. Despite the buildup of U.S. forces in the area, they cautioned, any strike against the kind of Iranian missile sites used in Friday's attack could be complicated by Iranian air defenses.    In some scenarios under consideration, U.S. planners see a threat of attacks on American pilots by Iranian Hawk missiles, which are operational largely because of the Reagan administration's earlier shipment of Hawk parts to Tehran in an arms-for-hostages swap.    After four months of playing the buffer in the bloody Iran-Iraq war, the Reagan administration is weighing the prospect of becoming an active participant through retaliatory strikes against Iran. Neither the White House nor Secretary of State George Shultz, in the Middle East over the weekend, would send any clear signals on how the U.S. might act. But at the Pentagon, officials were working on contingency plans that the president could order them to carry out. A strike on Iranian missile sites would be the most likely.    U.S. officials emphasized that tensions between the two countries entered a new, more perilous phase with Friday's Silkworm missile attack on the U.S. flagged ship, anchored off Kuwait. The Silkworm struck the Sea Isle City, a Kuwaiti oil tanker operating under the U.S. flag and with Navy protection, during its oil runs through the gulf.    Before the attack, U.S. actions could be labeled self-defense. The U.S. Navy scooped mines out of the path of tanker convoys it led through the gulf and, on one occasion, set ablaze an Iranian ship U.S. helicopters had caught laying mines. The U.S. also struck three Iranian gunboats that had fired at U.S. helicopters.    Officials in the Pentagon and several Senate aides said yesterday that the most logical response the U.S. could make would be a strike against Iran's Silkworm batteries on the Faw peninsula. U.S. officials believe that it was from this area, on the northern rim of the gulf, that Iranians fired their missile Friday.    In addition, an attack on the Faw peninsula would allow the U.S. to avoid striking the Iranian mainland. The peninsula is formally recognized as Iraqi territory, although it has been held by Iran since 1986.    But military planners see problems with such a strike. For one thing, the Faw peninsula is heavily fortified with anti-aircraft weapons. Pentagon officials also point out that Hawk ground-to-air missiles may be installed on the peninsula, or close enough to it, to threaten U.S. planes attempting to carry out air strikes. The Hawks, mostly obtained during the Shah's rule, were considered mostly inactive until the Reagan administration in 1985 and 1986 sold Tehran the parts needed to put them on alert.    Although Iraq has an air force superior to Iran's, it hasn't used it to mount major assaults on the peninsula. The reason, military analysts say, are the formidable air defenses there. Pentagon officials also expressed caution about attacking the area. &quot;We know it's heavy with anti-aircraft,&quot; said one Navy officer. &quot;There are guns and maybe Hawks.&quot;    The Navy's massive flotilla, totaling more than 40 ships in the region, is largely designed to lead tankers on oil runs and to deflect any attacks that occur along the way. So far, the main threats have come from mines and small-boat attacks. Mounting a retaliatory strike on a fortified missile site would call for different hardware, Pentagon officials say. They added, however, that the U.S. could augment its forces in a matter of days if the president called for retaliation.    To date, the U.S. has avoided bringing its big-deck aircraft carriers into the shallow and relatively constrained gulf waters. Striking the Faw peninsula with carrier-based aircraft currently operating south of the Straits of Hormuz would require the U.S. to arrange for refueling the warplanes. So far, Arab states have been reluctant to provide anything beyond quiet, behind-the-scenes support to the U.S. military.    The U.S. also keeps the battleship Missouri south of the Strait of Hormuz. It is stocked with guided Tomahawk missiles that are designed to strike targets from as far away as 500 nautical miles. However, using the huge battleship might be seen as an escalatory and heavy-handed move. Besides, the Tomahawks aren't necessarily programmed to home in on the Faw missile batteries.    The new tensions come amid mounting fears in Washington that the U.S. is being drawn into a protracted Middle East war. The Senate Committee on Foreign Relations over the weekend issued a report, based on a staff trip to the area last month, which warns that the U.S. gulf operation &quot;is likely to invite more Iranian attacks of increasing severity.&quot;    The report also warned that an Iraqi defeat is a &quot;realistic possibility.&quot; It noted that Iraq is at an &quot;enormous disadvantage&quot; because most of its industrial plants, oil facilities and population centers are close to the Iranian border. Moreover, the report said Iraq is further weakened by the stubborn insurgency of ethnically distinct Kurds on the northern Iran-Iraq border.    The Senate analysis characterized an Iraqi defeat as &quot;catastrophic for Western interests.&quot; Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, which have supported Iraq in the war, would be sure targets for Iranian retribution if Iraq succumbs, it warned.    The report, coming as the U.S. exposure in the gulf war deepens, will likely add to congressional apprehensions. Congress has been debating the invocation of the War Powers Act and other vehicles to limit the administration's operations in the gulf. </TEXT></DOC>