<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880114-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Morgan Stanley, Spear Leeds Are Said To Be Probed in Stock-Parking Inquiry </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MS GE JEFG MER TAXES </CO><IN> SCR STK </IN><G> SEC </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., one of Wall Street's most prestigious securities firms, and Spear Leeds andamp; Kellogg, the largest specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange, are under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission as part of a wide-ranging probe of possibly illegal stock parking, according to people familiar with the investigation.    Morgan Stanley and Spear Leeds are named in recent SEC subpoenas related to the investigation, these people said. Also named in the subpoenas are several institutions that have been identified as being under investigation for possible illegal parking activities. They include Kidder Peabody andamp; Co., Jamie Securities Co., Jefferies andamp; Co., and Seligmann, Harris andamp; Co.    The investigation is an outgrowth of the Ivan F. Boesky case, the people familiar with the investigation said. Mr. Boesky was sentenced to three years in prison for his role in Wall Street's insider trading scandal, and earlier settled SEC charges for a record $100 million.    Government prosecutors said at Mr. Boesky's sentencing last month that the former arbitrager had implicated numerous others in criminal activity, and illegal parking has been a continuing focus of the government's investigation. But it isn't clear whether the names on the current subpoenas were identified by Mr. Boesky or by others who are now cooperating with government investigators.    Parking occurs when one investor buys securities for another who wants to conceal the true ownership of the securities. Parking arrangements may enable buyers to accumulate large positions in the stocks of takeover targets without complying with federal disclosure or capital requirements. People familiar with the investigation said the SEC is examining both of these motives in its current investigation. Mentioned in the subpoena are numerous companies' stocks, many of them involved in takeovers during recent years.    Spear Leeds' specialist activities, in which it makes markets on the New York Stock Exchange, aren't involved in the SEC's probe, according to the people familiar with the investigation. Spear Leeds also conducts a large arbitrage, or takeover speculation operation, which is the focus of the SEC's interest.    Neither Morgan Stanley nor Spear Leeds has been charged with any wrongdoing. The fact that the SEC is seeking information from others about their dealings with these firms doesn't mean that they are guilty of any wrongdoing or that they will be charged with any civil or criminal charges. No one at Morgan Stanley was available for comment. A spokesman for Spear Leeds declined comment.    Jamie Securities hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing either. As previously reported, the government has obtained invoices linking Jamie to a stock-parking arrangement with Mr. Boesky. John A. Mulheren, the firm's head and a well-known takeover speculator, is understood to be cooperating with the government's investigation. A spokesman for Jamie declined comment.    Seligmann Harris, a London-based brokerage firm, was mentioned in charges against Mr. Boesky's former head trader, Michael Davidoff. Mr. Davidoff pleaded guilty last year to one felony for engaging in a parking scheme with Seligmann Harris, but Seligmann Harris hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing. Thomas W. Streeter, executive vice-president, declined comment.    Kidder Peabody settled SEC charges which included allegations of a parking scheme with Mr. Boesky. Kidder neither admitted nor denied the charges. Boyd L. Jefferies, the former chairman of Jefferies who pleaded guilty to two felonies, admitted to engaging in a parking scheme with Mr. Boesky.    Gary Naftalis, an attorney for Kidder Peabody, said the firm has settled all outstanding matters with the SEC and isn't aware of any new inquiries. A spokesman for Jefferies said the firm isn't aware of the subpoena.    Gary Lynch, head of enforcement at the SEC, declined comment, as did Bruce Baird, the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the Boesky investigation.    As the Boesky investigation has contiued, its emphasis has shifted from the illegal use of inside information to other securities law violations, many of them arising in the context of takeovers. Suspicion of parking offenses, for example, figure prominently in the government's on-going investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and the head of its junk bond operations, Michael Milken. Drexel and Mr. Milken have denied any wrongdoing.    Meanwhile, people close to the investigation said that Drexel is a focus of a federal tax fraud investigation of Princeton Newport Partners L.P., a Princeton, N.J., investment firm whose offices were searched last month by federal agents.    The people said that Princeton Newport, a customer of Drexel's Beverly Hills junk-bond office, has been questioned by government investigators about its dealings with Drexel. They added that the government may be trying to use the tax-fraud probe to press Princeton Newport officials to cooperate in the Drexel probe.    The federal agents searched the offices of Princeton Newport and related investment firms seeking information about suspected schemes to park securities and create fraudulent tax deductions. The government also requested correspondence between employees of the Princeton firms, and two Drexel employees and one employee of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.    The people familiar with the investigation said the government is trying to determine whether the Princeton firms and others violated so-called &quot;wash sale&quot; regulations, which prohibit an investor who takes a tax loss on the sale of securities from repurchasing the same securities for 30 days. The government is trying to determine whether securities were parked to enable Princeton Newport or others to retain ownership during the 30-day period.    People familiar with the investigation said that Merrill has been told it isn't a target of the tax-fraud probe. A Drexel spokesman declined comment.    Ted Wells, an attorney for James Sutton Regan, managing general partner of Princeton Newport, said that his client &quot;emphatically denies any wrongdoing.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>