<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870406-0003 </DOCNO><HL> United Air GetsPurchase OfferBy Pilots Union---Bid of $4.5 Billion Is DubbedPublicity Stunt by Firm;Trump Role Is Rumored---By John Koten and Judith ValentineStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> UAL LABORTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The union representing pilots of United Airlines offered to buy the carrier from its parent, UAL Inc., for $4.5 billion.    Officials of UAL, which has often been at sharp odds with its pilots, immediately branded the out-of-the-blue offer a publicity stunt. Later, top executives of the carrier met and last night a spokesman said the company wouldn't comment until the union proposal had been studied. The spokesman stressed that the proposal was unsolicited. &quot;It isn't an offer but an invitation to negotiate,&quot; he added.    However, officials of United Air's branch of the Washington-based Air Line Pilots Association emphatically insisted that their offer is a serious one. In a letter delivered yesterday to UAL's management, the executive officers of the ALPA branch, which represents 7,000 United Air pilots, said they had retained the investment banking firm of Lazard Freres andamp; Co. to assist in the proposed buyout.    The offer prompted immediate speculation about its possible connection to the recent acquisition of a small interest in UAL by New York investor Donald Trump. It's understood that Mr. Trump, who owns just under 5% of UAL's common, last week had lunch with Felix Rohatyn, managing director of Lazard. Sources said the pilots' proposed buyout plan was mentioned at the lunch. Mr. Trump declined to comment on the union's offer.    The union's letter to UAL management, which cited concerns over the direction of the airline and over potential takeover threats to UAL, said the pilots proposed to buy the carrier through an employee stock-ownership plan. The letter added that the pilots would invite unions representing other United employees to join in the buyout.    The union's plan for financing such a huge transaction, however, seemed somewhat unclear. In the letter, signed by F.C. Dubinsky, chairman of the Master Executive Council, the union said it planned to use $300 million of its retirement plan assets toward the purchase. It also said the purchase price would include subordinated notes, assumed debt and other financing.    A purchase price of $4.5 billion is almost 50% more than the current market value for all of UAL, based on the closing price Friday of $59 a share in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. However, the company has substantial debt, and it wasn't immediately clear how much of the union's proposed purchase price represented United debt that the union would assume.    The airline has been only marginally profitable in recent years, and the union said the pilots would agree to wage, pension and productivity measures that would save an additional $300 million annually. Presumably, those funds would help service the huge debt the pilots union would have to incur to acquire United.    Under the union's plan, the pension fund assets the pilots said they would use as part of their payment are controlled by the company. The necessary amendment to free excess funds from the pension fund would have to be approved by UAL management.    It's unlikely that UAL's management would respond favorably to the pilots' proposal. Richard Ferris, UAL's chairman, has been outspoken in his criticism of some recent activities of United pilots.    Moreover, UAL's management has been intensely involved in an effort to blend the company's diverse operations in airlines, auto rental and hotel management into a unified marketing company that would seek new competitive advantages in the travel industry. That strategy includes its recent announcement that it will change its name to Allegis Corp. on April 30.    When Mr. Trump's interest in UAL was disclosed, the company reacted sharply to news of the stock purchases with statements saying it believed its current business strategy was the superior approach to achieve favorable results for shareholders.    The pilots union has been at odds with the management of UAL ever since a bitter strike two years ago over a multitiered wage contract. The recent proposal by the union immediately follows a Supreme Court decision last week that went against United's pilots on matters related to that strike.    In its letter to UAL, the union said it believes &quot;the interests of the company will be best served by a restructuring of the company which would separate the airline from the auto and hotel assets.&quot; It added: &quot;United should be returned to its core business.&quot;    Specifically, the union said it was proposing to purchase all of the assets of United Airlines, including planes, gates, facilities and landing rights. The plan raised a question in some minds as to why the union didn't propose to acquire all of UAL, and then sell the unrelated airline assets. There was speculation that such a course might be less expensive.    The union's executive council said its members discussed the possibility of a takeover during the past six weeks at meetings with financial advisers in Chicago and New York.    After two marathon sessions this weekend at a hotel in suburban Chicago, the 30-member executive council voted unanimously to propose the purchase.    If the union's plan succeeds, United would become the largest employee-owned company in the nation, a spokesman for the council said. Pilot union members pay dues equivalent to 2.35% of their gross income.    Union leaders said they plan to brief United's 7,000 pilots on the takeover proposal via a teleconference this week. The membership would have to approve any final transaction with UAL management, but at this stage, the executive council has the power to make such an offer without a vote of the full membership, a spokesman for the council said.    The spokesman said the pilots will ask United flight attendants and ground handlers to participate in the takeover, but that the pilots intend to proceed with the plan even without the support of other airline employees.    Lazard Freres recently worked on an employee ownership plan between pilots and mechanics and Trans World Airlines.    ---   Jeffrey Zaslow in Chicago and Udayan Gupta in New York contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>