<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870720-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Don't Cartelize the Steel Industry---By Robert W. Crandall</HL><DD> 07/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT LABORMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INSURANCE (INS)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Two separate proposals for dealing with plant closings are being debated in Washington. The Senate will soon vote on a trade bill that includes a version of Ohio Democrat Howard Metzenbaum's proposal to require pre-notification of major plant closings. This proposal presumably is designed to slow the rate of plant closures in the Rust Belt so that workers might have more time to adjust.    At the same time, the administration is debating another &quot;adjustment&quot; proposal -- a plan to subsidize plant closings for the steel industry so as to reduce excess capacity and employment. This plan might even allow the industry to decide collectively how much capacity should be closed and whose plants should be closed. Students of &quot;industrial policy&quot; in this country will recall that Franklin Roosevelt proposed a similar plan for the industrial sector of the economy in the mid-1930s -- the National Industrial Recovery Act -- that was subsequently invalidated by the Supreme Court.    It is not inconceivable that both plans could move forward this summer. One might ask why the government is moving in two different directions on the same track. Should the government be in the business of encouraging or discouraging plant closures? Or should it even be involved in what is, after all, a matter for private firms to decide in a competitive marketplace?    It was only 12 years ago that the steel industry wanted government help to expand capacity from about 155 million tons a year to 185 million tons. Since that time, the large &quot;integrated&quot; companies have been forced to adjust their sights to a more modest level of demand as steel consumption has fallen short of their expectations by about one-third. Big Steel has retired about 50 million tons of capacity without any direct government subsidy because of this decline in demand, devastating competition from smaller U.S. steel companies (known as minimills), and increases in imports.    Along the way a number of the large companies -- LTV, Wheeling-Pittsburgh, McLouth, Kaiser and Sharon -- have been forced to seek bankruptcy-law protection. And there are some in the administration who fear that further closures could lead to additional bankruptcy filings.    When major steel companies close plants they trigger the extraordinarily generous early-retirement benefits for their workers that they have built into their labor agreements. These benefits could be sufficient to bankrupt a major firm, thus allowing it to dump its underfunded pension program on the government's Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC).    The PBGC is facing a crisis because of the demands placed upon its reserves by its assumption of the LTV and Wheeling-Pittsburgh plans. If one or two more companies fail, the PBGC will have to find new sources of revenue to shore up its reserves. One possibility is a major payment from federal tax revenue -- a direct allocation from the federal budget. Obviously, the administration does not want to have to ask for any further increase in the budget deficit. The steel industry has a better solution: Help the steel companies reduce capacity with an off-budget subsidy for plant closings.    As long as the steel and equity markets were weak, the large steel companies might have had considerable leverage over the federal government in seeking help. However, the decline in the dollar and the rise in the stock market have combined to raise the market value of equities of non-bankrupt Big Steel. Bethlehem, Armco and Inland shares have more than doubled from their 1986 lows, and their liquidity positions have improved substantially. Several have had equity offerings. None of the major steel companies seem close to bankruptcy now, although further bankruptcies could occur in the next recession. This good news is clearly bad news for the industry's hopes of getting Washington to agree to a new subsidy program for plant closures, but it has not yet caused the administration to abandon the proposal.    Even if bankruptcy were near for one or two of the Big Steel producers, should the government get involved in a concerted plan to reduce capacity in a manner reminiscent of the National Recovery Act? The large closing costs are the result of labor provisions freely negotiated by the companies. Moreover, why should the government substitute its judgment for that of the market in deciding on the &quot;right&quot; capacity for Big Steel?    It is well to remember that the Economic Development Administration funneled money to several large steel companies in the late 1970s so that they could expand and modernize. All of these companies are now bankrupt because the wrong investments were made at the wrong time -- with the active encouragement of the federal government.    In 1984, the steel industry forced the administration to announce a set of quotas for imported steel or face electoral difficulties in Big Steel states. These quotas remain in place today, when the market for slabs, sheet and plate is tightening considerably. To subsidize capacity reductions now with these import quotas in place would simply invite sharp price increases if demand were to strengthen further in the wake of the falling dollar.    The government's principal problem at present is the major mistake made by Congress in setting up a pension insurance scheme that encourages underfunding by not scaling the insurance premiums to the riskiness of the plan. This imprudence has allowed workers to be less concerned about scaling their pay demands to the financial condition of the company, for they no longer have to worry about their firms' ability to fund their pension plans. If their company goes bankrupt, their pensions are safe.    Now the administration is debating a plan to subsidize the early-retirement benefits as well. The adverse incentive effects of such a scheme on labor negotiations are already visible in the current LTV labor negotiations. LTV is asking the court to approve a new contract with liberal early-retirement benefits and a total compensation package that is above the industry average.    Approximately three-fourths of all PBGC claims have come from the high-wage steel industry, even though the industry has paid an infinitesimal share of the premiums. Taxes on the average worker will have to be used to pay pensions for steelworkers, who have traditionally earned 60% to 80% more than the average manufacturing wage and have much higher pensions than the average industrial worker. It makes little difference to these taxpayers whether the taxes are paid directly to the PBGC or indirectly in the form of off-budget loan guarantees for plant closing costs.    The difficult position of the PBGC hardly makes the case for further subsidies to help steel reduce capacity. An off-budget subsidy is not preferable to one that is on budget. And how is the administration to explain a program that is designed to accelerate the rate of job losses in the steel industry? Will it say that the program is needed to allow a few large firms to reduce jobs without managements and stockholders having to bear the full brunt of their labor contracts?    It was only three years ago that the administration blocked a National-USX merger and required adjustments to a Republic-LTV merger because these transactions might lead the companies to exercise the power to reduce output and raise prices. If the administration now advocates government subsidies for reducing steel capacity and, therefore, potential steel output, it will be forced to argue that such contrived output reductions are permissible only when orchestrated by the government.    ---   Mr. Crandall is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>