<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870407-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Leaks in Our Moscow Embassy Are Nothing New---By Robert T. Crowley</HL><DD> 04/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTEXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   The Marines who are undergoing interrogations relating to their alleged involvement in Soviet-directed espionage against the U.S. Embassy in Moscow are the latest in a long list of Americans who have been brought under Soviet control.    When the embassy was established in 1933, the original staff included several Americans who were discovered later to have been active agents of the Soviets. The first military attache, West Point graduate and Russian-language expert Phillip Faymonville, was given the nickname &quot;The Red Colonel&quot; by colleagues who believed he had come under powerful Soviet influence -- a charge substantiated by extensive State Department and Army documentation. Gen. George C. Marshall barred his reassignment within the Army, but a West Point classmate, unaware of Marshall's determination to effect Faymonville's retirement, offered Faymonville an assignment in the new War Department office set up to administer the military side of the Lend-Lease Agreement with Britain.    Following the German attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Harry Hopkins and Averell Harriman flew to Moscow to offer Lend-Lease support to the Russians. In their talks there, Stalin and Molotov proposed that Faymonville be sent as the head of the Lend-Lease mission in Moscow. Within weeks, Faymonville was promoted to the rank of brigadier general and was ensconced in Moscow as the head of the Lend-Lease administration office.    Military documents say that Faymonville supplied the Soviets not only with the weapons, medicine and food authorized under the Lend-Lease program, but also with the hand-held cryptographic device then in use by the U.S. Army and with highly classified embassy reports. In 1943, Faymonville returned to the U.S. and was retired without being charged with any of the grave breaches of U.S. military and diplomatic security he committed during nearly six years in Moscow.    On June 14, 1940, a 27-year-old cipher clerk named Henry W. Anthiel Jr., who was highly regarded in the Moscow Embassy for his dedication and skill, was killed in the explosion of a Finnish transport aircraft flying from Tallinn, Estonia, to Helsinki, Finland, where Anthiel was on temporary assignment. A few days after his death, the State Department noted that Anthiel &quot;during his four years in Moscow has distinguished himself by his loyalty, willingness, efficiency and industry.&quot;    But while taking an inventory of Anthiel's effects, the U.S. legation in Finland found &quot;conclusive evidence that Anthiel suppressed and falsified official telegrams,&quot; as it reported in a telegram to the State Department. There was also a &quot;personal and confidential letter addressed from the Department to the Charge d'Affaires {in Moscow} which had been opened&quot; and left undelivered. Virtually all department codes were compromised by Anthiel and many copies of enciphered telegrams, &quot;with true readings and code text stapled together,&quot; relating to political personnel matters, the purges in the Soviet Union and the detailed political situation were also found. Most startling was the realization that Anthiel had altered more than 50 diplomatic telegrams to and from the Moscow Embassy.    In the wake of the Anthiel affair, the assistant chief of staff for intelligence, Gen. Clayton Bissell, called an emergency meeting with J. Edgar Hoover and the State Department official with overall responsibility for security. Gen. Bissell stated on the record that during 1940, 10 U.S. diplomatic facilities, including Moscow, London and Berlin, had suffered grave communications compromises. He proposed that henceforth two or more armed military officers should accompany all diplomatic bags dispatched to Europe and the Soviet Union. There is no documentation available to indicate that his proposal was put into effect.    Ivan Yeaton, who replaced Faymonville as military attache in 1940, was so alarmed by the vulnerabilities of the embassy that he sent a back-channel message to the War Department urgently requesting that the Army ask the Federal Bureau of Investigation to send a team to Moscow to sort out the mammoth security-related problems involving both personnel and equipment. A single FBI agent was dispatched and a few days following his arrival in Moscow, six embassy staffers were relieved of their duties and sent home.    Finding attractive young women in Moscow has never been a daunting task for members of the diplomatic service and their staffs. During the 1940s the U.S. military and State Department staff lived in American House, which boasted a day room for common use by the male secretaries, clerks, cryptographers and their local guests. Young Soviet women (mostly &quot;ballerinas&quot; between engagements) abounded. When Sgt. Alex Timm came to Moscow in 1944, he &quot;was out on a date eight hours after arrival,&quot; according to a 1948 Associated Press dispatch. The same AP story quoted Sgt. Paul Beatley, who said that on the day he arrived in Moscow in 1946, he was called by three different Russian girls &quot;who asked for me by name and told me that they were eager to make me welcome.&quot;    Sgt. John Biconish, who held the sensitive post of secretary to the military attache, married a Russian woman, Galina Duneava. When Biconish was ordered back to the U.S., his wife was refused an exit visa because the U.S. authorities believed she had ties to the Soviet secret police. (Biconish was never charged with any wrongdoing.) After Biconish left, Duneava took up her post in the day room of American House, and it was there that she met her next target, 21-year-old cryptographer Sgt. James McMillin. For almost two years, while Biconish petitioned the Soviet government for a visa for his wife, young McMillin devoted himself to the care and protection of Duneava. (Biconish finally asked her for a divorce.)    In the spring of 1948, Ambassador Walter Smith received a letter signed by McMillin. It stated: &quot;As a protest against the capitalists who presently run America, I write to protest America and am remaining in the Soviet Union.&quot; Although McMillin's declaration to the ambassador gives his letter an ideological cast, his desertion and defection are more directly attributable to the beautiful Galina, who seems to have specialized in the recruitment of young American cipher clerks.    Given 54 years of experience in running the Moscow Embassy and counting casualties, the U.S. government should have improved its understanding of security problems -- though there is little evidence to support that surmise. Security leaks have occurred, with frequency, during each administration since President Roosevelt's. The methods employed by the KGB against the U.S. mission in the Soviet Union have been demonstrably sound and very profitable. It is not reassuring to learn that the security of our Moscow Embassy has once more been compromised.    ---   Mr. Crowley, a retired CIA official, is co-author of &quot;The New KGB-Engine of Soviet Power&quot; (William Morrow, 1986). </TEXT></DOC>