<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Irian Jaya Natives Resist Jakarta's Control---By Steven JonesStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> JAYAPURA, Indonesia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Far east of everything else in the sprawling Indonesian archipelago lies Irian Jaya.    Jayapura, the provincial capital, is 3,200 miles and two time zones from the tip of Sumatra at the country's western extreme. Its steamy coastal towns teem with immigrants from the rest of the country, while in the central highlands, near-naked Stone Age tribesmen awkwardly confront the 20th century.    Irian Jaya is the Indonesian half of the giant island of New Guinea. The other half is Papua New Guinea, an independent nation. Indonesia wrested Irian Jaya from the control of the Netherlands in 1963, 14 years after Dutch rule over the rest of Indonesia had ended. Jakarta obtained a frontier of enormous economic potential, where oil, minerals and timber abound, as do fish in the surrounding seas.    Yet Indonesian rule has settled uneasily over the province. A small, but persistent, guerrilla force keeps things roiled. And Irian Jaya is among the poorest of Indonesia's 27 provinces, with annual per-capita income of about $200, a third of the national average. Government plans to develop Irian's oil and mineral resources are stymied by the world-wide recession in commodity prices.    Though Irian Jaya is larger than Japan and almost as large as California, it is home to only 1.5 million people. To fly over the province is to see nothing but primal forest, rock and river. There are only 290 miles of paved roads, but 250 airstrips. Some 300 single-engine planes, most of them piloted by foreign Christian missionaries, provide the main contact between scattered settlements.    Most inhabitants of Irian Jaya are Papuans, ethnic Melanesians whose culture and languages have little in common with the rest of Indonesia's diverse ethnic groups, especially the dominant Javanese. Racial tension between Irianese and other Indonesians remains a major obstacle to integration with Indonesia.    A small, fragmented, but persistent guerrilla force calling for an independent state continues to resist Jakarta's control. It calls itself the Organisasi Papua Merdeka, or Free Papua Movement, and is generally known by the initials OPM. The Dutch had promised the Irianese independence. But Indonesian troops invaded in 1962, and the next year the United Nations awarded Indonesia administrative control with the understanding that a free election would determine Irian Jaya's status.    But in 1969, tribal chiefs voted to incorporate Irian Jaya into Indonesia. Their action was criticized for not being a one-man, one-vote plebiscite, but Indonesia argued that a consensus of the chiefs was more in keeping with Irianese culture.    The OPM armed struggle against Indonesian rule began in 1969 and has generally been carried out without modern weapons or aid from abroad. Diplomats and foreign missionaries say the rebels can't hope to win. &quot;They're large enough to cause trouble for Indonesia, but that's all,&quot; says a longtime Roman Catholic missionary who asked anonymity.    Indonesian government and military officials in Irian Jaya dismiss the OPM as just a few &quot;bandits.&quot; The government nevertheless keeps a tight rein on access to the province. Foreigners must have travel permits to venture beyond Jayapura. A group of foreign journalists spent nearly a year getting permission recently for a 10-day supervised tour of Irian Jaya.    &quot;OPM is no more. They are finished,&quot; Brig. Gen. Hapusan Silalahi, deputy military commander for Irian Jaya, told the visiting reporters. There are only about 100 rebels and they have few arms, he said.    Diplomats and missionaries say the number of rebels is more like 500, many with weapons no better than bows and arrows or axes. Operating in small groups, the guerrillas specialize in attacking army patrols and isolated outposts.    Military officials say only a few soldiers are killed each year. Diplomats and missionaries put the number at several dozen soldiers, though the toll was higher in the late 1970s when fighting peaked.    The diplomats and missionaries say the guerrillas lack organization and ideology, and some of its local warlords frequently abuse their own people and steal their food. &quot;It's a ragtag band,&quot; says a Western diplomat in Jakarta. &quot;They're as hard on the people as the Indonesians are.&quot;    Says a Protestant missionary, who asked not to be identified: &quot;These people are hurting their own people more than helping them.&quot; The Catholic missionary agrees: &quot;I tell the people, don't listen to the OPM. The idea of independence is hopeless. You have to learn to work with Indonesia. You are Indonesians now.&quot;    Diplomats say many missionaries who once shared the OPM's notion of independence now see that Irian Jaya hasn't any future outside of Indonesia. In part, this is because the missionaries need Indonesia's permission to work in Irian Jaya. But it also reflects the OPM's violence, including the torture and dismemberment of Irianese who won't follow the guerrillas.    Missionaries and diplomats also condemn the heavy-handed response of Indonesian troops. International human-rights groups have accused Indonesia of torturing and murdering OPM suspects and sympathizers -- allegations denied by Jakarta.    In early 1984 a surge in fighting spurred 10,000 to 12,000 people -- some fearing Indonesian troops and some under OPM pressure -- to cross into Papua New Guinea. Indonesia says 5,000 have returned, but Papua New Guinea says most remain in refugee camps. Many Jakarta-based diplomats believe the number remaining is closer to 10,000.    The 1984 border crossings didn't help the historically uneasy relations between Indonesia and poor, tiny (population 3.2 million) Papua New Guinea. Many Papua New Guineans suspect that Indonesia wants to gobble up their country.    Jakarta's plans -- now changed -- to send 275,000 Javanese settlers to Irian Jaya under its transmigration program also heightened nervousness in Papua New Guinea. The program, which has been scaled back because of budget restraints, sought to move millions of people from densely populated areas of Indonesia to provinces with more available land. Many would have been settled near the Papua New Guinea border.    Missionaries, diplomats and Indonesian officials say it will take years for Jakarta to win acceptance in Irian Jaya and to overcome the racial and cultural differences between the Irianese and other Indonesians. One issue is employment. Unskilled, young Irianese are migrating to cities only to find that jobs are being taken by skilled, ambitious newcomers from elsewhere in Indonesia.    In contrast, native Irianese, who traditionally mark wealth in pigs and wives, are only slowly entering the urban-centered, money-driven world. Education, by most accounts, is Indonesia's greatest contribution, followed by health care and public works. But it will take years, even generations, before education allows Irianese to play a major role in the government and economy of Irian Jaya.    &quot;The rest of Indonesia got started in 1949,&quot; says Izaac Hindom, the province's Irianese governor. &quot;We only got started in 1969.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>