<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Some Major Thrifts Rock the Deposit-Insurance Boat---Institutions Hope to JoinBut Could Jeopardize FSLIC---By John E. Yang and David B. HilderStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Some major thrift institutions are eager to switch federal deposit insurers, but switching could ruin a rescue plan for the industry's current insurer.    Fifteen thrifts, including the nation's 10th largest, already have filed applications to move to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. from the insolvent Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., which is groaning under the weight of supporting troubled institutions and seeking to keep relatively healthy thrifts in the insurance fund. Representatives of nearly 100 other institutions have asked the FDIC what they would have to do to make the jump. &quot;I can't imagine a well-run savings and loan in the country that isn't exploring the issue,&quot; says William Isaac, a Washington-based consultant and former FDIC chairman.    But there are trade-offs. Under the FDIC, the thrifts would face some tougher regulation, including higher capital requirements and limits on kinds of investments they can make and restrictions on interstate operations. And the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which oversees the FSLIC, is determined not to let thrifts just walk away from the insurance fund. It has tried to assess &quot;exit&quot; fees on those going over to the FDIC which amount to several times an institution's annual premiums to the FSLIC.    An exodus of healthy thrifts could threaten the success of a plan now being considered by Congress to salvage the beleaguered FSLIC by selling long-term bonds to raise money for the fund. The result could be a fund dominated by bad risks and without the income to service the bonds. &quot;No insurance system can survive like that,&quot; says John Morgan, a New York savings bank executive who is chairman of the National Council of Savings Institutions, a trade group.    The FSLIC hopes to include the exit-fee provision in the money-raising measure before Congress as a deterrent to thrifts looking to get out. Further, Reagan administration officials are confident that few of the thrifts that are talking about converting to FDIC insurance will actually go through with it.    &quot;When they start to examine all the things they have to do to jump through the hoops and all the things they would have to give up they may decide not to do it,&quot; says one Treasury Department official.    For more than a year, the Treasury Department has sought a five-year, $15 billion recapitalization program to raise money for the FSLIC, which ended 1986 with a $6.3 billion deficit. Earlier this year, the Senate approved a two-year, $7.5 billion program and the House passed a $5 billion proposal. Differences between the two bills are expected to be worked out in a House-Senate conference.    Both measures would raise the money by selling 30-year bonds and would rely on the insurance premiums paid by the federally insured thrifts to make the interest payments on the bonds. But FDIC premiums, which are 60% lower, provide one of the greatest incentives for thrifts to desert the FSLIC. Currently, both funds charge annual premiums of one-twelfth of 1% of an institution's insured deposits. The FSLIC also charges an additional assessment of one-eighth of 1% of deposits to handle the increasing number of thrift insolvencies. Each insurer guarantees individual deposits up to $100,000 at member institutions.    The FDIC historically has insured deposits at banks rather than thrifts, and most of the thrift applications to join the FDIC are from institutions that were purchased by, and converted to, banks. But others, including Home Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association, San Diego, the nation's 10th-largest thrift, cite objections to the FSLIC's assessments.    The cost savings in switching can be significant. Home Federal Savings, with $12.1 billion in assets and $8.8 billion in deposits, would save more than $10 million a year in premiums by going to the FDIC.    Robert F. Adelizzi, president of Home Federal, said the FDIC's lower premium rate was a &quot;major factor&quot; in seeking to switch funds, but also said the switch would &quot;best position the company for its strategic direction.&quot;    Home Federal hopes to avoid paying an exit fee, but Mr. Adelizzi said it would switch to the FDIC even if it was charged an exit fee of two years' of FSLIC premiums, &quot;based on what we know now.&quot; He said a decision will depend on other costs involved in switching, and he declined to say how high the exit fee would have to be to thwart Home Federal.    Switching to the FDIC also would mean exchanging a regulator in turmoil for one that is much more highly regarded. Thrift executives say the continuing upheaval at the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which oversees the insurance fund, is upsetting the industry. The three-member board has had one vacancy since April and is about to get a new chairman to succeed Edwin Gray, whose term is expiring and whose management has been criticized amid high staff turnover.    &quot;There is a terrible lack of confidence (in the Bank Board) within the industry,&quot; says Charles John Koch, president of First Federal Savings Bank in Cleveland, which hasn't applied for FDIC coverage. He predicts that more and more thrifts will seriously consider joining the FDIC &quot;if it looks like the situation is going to go on for a very long time.&quot;    However, switching to the FDIC isn't a practical option for many thrifts. Only 952 of the nation's 3,200 federally insured thrifts, representing 12.9% of the industry's $1.2 trillion in assets, could meet the FDIC's higher capital requirement and qualify for coverage by the agency, according to the Bank Board.    But another 1,291 institutions with 23.6% of the industry's assets could meet the FDIC's requirements by adding only a small amount of capital. Even if only 15% of the industry's assets leave, reducing the insurance fund's annual premium income by the same proportion, that would cause the FSLIC to default on its bonds in just a few years and the recapitalization plan would collapse, Mr. Gray recently warned at a House hearing.    To try to discourage thrifts from switching, and to recover some of the future premiums that would be lost, last year the Bank Board began assessing a fee, usually a high multiple of the thrifts' annual premiums, on those departing the insurance fund. But a federal court judge in Florida struck down the exit charge, calling it &quot;extortion&quot; and &quot;high-handed (and) arbitrary.&quot; The agency then sought to have the fee included in the legislation recapitalizing the FSLIC.    The House bill would limit the fee to two years of current FSLIC premiums, while the Senate bill doesn't address the issue at all. At the level in the House-passed bill, an institution switching to the FDIC would be able to recoup the fee in only three years through savings in insurance premiums. If the fee remains at that level, Mr. Isaac says, the bulk of the thrifts that could meet the FDIC's standards would switch.    That could doom efforts to bail out the FSLIC. &quot;We have left the window open for the biggest boys in the industry to leave the ship,&quot; says Rep. Buddy Roemer (D., La.), a member of the House Banking Committee. &quot;If we are not careful, there will not be enough money in the industry to save the ship.&quot;    Just the specter of default on the bonds could be enough to hurt the plan's chances of success. &quot;How do you float bonds if the chairman has said that if 15% leave, the bonds go into default?&quot; asks Anthony Frank, chairman of First Nationwide Bank, the big San Francisco-based thrift unit of Ford Motor Co. &quot;At the very least, it's going to make it more expensive.&quot;    Other analysts warn that the savings industry's trend of slower deposit growth is another threat to the recapitalization plan's success. Treasury officials, however, say they are not concerned by this, pointing out that the FSLIC continues to earn investment income. Says one: &quot;I have no doubt the plan would work.&quot;    Meanwhile, a large influx of thrifts could create problems at the FDIC. Chairman William Seidman says the institutions would be &quot;brides without dowries&quot; because they would expand the deposits the agency must insure but wouldn't immediately pay any additional money into the insurance fund.    With banks failing at a record-setting pace this year, the ratio of the FDIC insurance fund to insured deposits has already hit a record low. And if most of the eligible thrifts do opt to join the FDIC, that ratio could further drop by more than 10%, Mr. Seidman says.    Mr. Seidman says the FDIC must accept any institution that is found, after an evaluation process that takes about a year, to satisfy the agency's requirements. His agency, however, tentatively approved a policy statement recently saying that it may require a higher initial capital level for converting thrifts than it does for other banks, based on the kind and quality of the institution's loans. </TEXT></DOC>