<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH WAS DESCRIBED as involved extensively in aiding the Contras.    A former State Department consultant, in testimony before the congressional panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair, said he served as a frequent &quot;courier&quot; between the former White House aide and the main Nicaraguan rebel group. Minutes after being named in the testimony, Johnathan Miller, deputy assistant to the president for administration, resigned. Separately, a former National Security Council aide said he helped arrange meetings for North to seek assistance for the Nicaraguan insurgents from foreign countries.    McFarlane offered &quot;no rebuttal&quot; to allegations that the White House misled Congress over the Iran-Contra affair. He said he couldn't recall soliciting Saudi aid for the anti-Sandinista rebels.    ---   Kidnappers in Lebanon released a videotape of American hostage Alann Steen, and he appeared in good health despite earlier claims by his captors that he was near death. It was the first communication from any group of kidnappers since April 2. In the tape, Steen repeated his abductors' demand that Israel free 400 Arab prisoners.    ---   The State Department denied a request from President Duarte to effectively exempt illegal immigrants from El Salvador from the new U.S. immigration law. The majority of Salvadorans aren't expected to qualify for the legalization program, and Duarte has said the Salvadoran economy couldn't absorb a flood of returning workers.    ---   A senior army officer in Fiji named a new government after staging a bloodless coup. However, the governor general, who represents Britain's Queen Elizabeth II in the South Pacific nation, said he had assumed executive power. The takeover came amid ethnic tensions following last month's election of an Indian-majority government.    ---   Weinberger is pushing for the White House to demand tougher terms of the Soviets in arms talks. The defense secretary wants the U.S. to insist that Moscow eliminate all of its midrange missiles in Europe, and not deposit 100 of them in Asia. Many NATO defense ministers meeting in Norway supported the stance.    ---   Egypt severed all ties with Iran and security forces in Cairo announced the arrests of 37 Moslem extremists from a group allegedly funded by Tehran. A spokesman said the Moslems had been involved in a plot to assassinate Egyptian officials.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres pledged to &quot;keep the peace momentum alive&quot; despite a government deadlock over his plan for an international parley on Mideast peace. Peres, who is to meet with Shultz in the U.S. this weekend, continued campaigning for support from Israel's coalition.    ---   South African authorities issued warnings to activists to end a rent boycott in Soweto, and ordered two British television correspondents to leave the country. Meanwhile, the Johannesburg Star reported that the Pretoria government had decided to rewrite emergency regulations to crack down on the news media, unions and universities.    ---   Puerto Rico proposed fines totaling $527,400 against the Dupont Plaza Hotel and Casino, stemming from a fire last New Year's Eve in which 96 people were killed. The commonwealth's Occupational Safety and Health Office cited the San Juan hotel for 28 alleged violations.    ---   A bomb exploded aboard a bus at the main terminal in Peshawar, Pakistan, killing at least six people and wounding about 32 others. Police claimed the bomb was a Soviet-made device, and authorities blamed Afghan agents for the blast.    ---   A former Bolivian official told a court in Lyon that former local Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie had ties to La Paz's military, and was expelled to France because he was a threat to democracy. Separately, a former U.S. intelligence officer said Barbie, on trial for crimes against humanity, was known in 1948 to be &quot;a real war criminal.&quot;    ---   Enrile led about 25,000 supporters in a march near the Philippine military camp where the revolt that toppled Marcos began. The former defense minister, whose alliance appeared headed for defeat in Monday's congressional elections, told the gathering that it might be time to revolt again.    ---   Three Colombians were sentenced in Louisiana to life in prison without parole for the 1986 murder of Adler &quot;Barry&quot; Seal, a U.S. government witness in a case against the leader of an international cocaine cartel. Prosecutors had sought the death penalty.    ---   A British official pledged that the Conservative government, if reelected June 11, would cut the basic income-tax rate to &quot;no more than&quot; 25% from the current 27%. Chancellor of the Exchequer Lawson also said London would continue efforts against inflation and press ahead with its denationalization program.    ---   Prince Sihanouk announced that he would step down for a year as head of Cambodia's resistance movement to protest alleged attacks on his forces by Khmer Rouge allies. Diplomats said Sihanouk's absence would weaken the fragile unity of the three-party coalition, which is recognized by the U.N.    ---   Japan's Tanaka faction moved closer to a split as the chairman of the ruling party group said he planned to enter the race to succeed Prime Minister Nakasone, whose term ends in October. The move put the chairman of the faction headed by former Premier Tanaka in direct conflict with another member seeking Nakasone's post. </TEXT></DOC>