<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870724-0125 </DOCNO><HL> White House Is Near Pact With Key LawmakersOn Notification Procedures on Covert Operations---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   White House aides, reacting to the Iran-Contra hearings, think they are near an agreement with key lawmakers on procedures requiring more prompt notification of Congress about sensitive covert operations and blocking the use of covert operations to bypass laws.    Both administration aides and lawmakers caution that important details still need to be worked out. Also, it's far from clear that pledges from the administration will be enough to head off new legislation governing covert actions, which has been proposed by important House members who aren't involved in talks with the White House.    The two main issues under discussion -- notification of Congress and use of covert action to skirt laws -- are the basic areas where members of Congress think existing laws fell short in the administration's arms sales to Iran. The White House put off notifying Congress about the Iranian initiative by using a provision in current law that allows the president to delay telling lawmakers about particularly sensitive covert actions. In addition, the Iranian covert initiative skirted provisions of an arms export act that blocks weapon sales to Iran and some other nations.    Administration aides, led by National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci, have been discussing changes the administration might make with Sen. David Boren (D., Okla.), chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, and Sen. William Cohen (R., Maine), the ranking Republican on the panel. White House officials are optimistic that the talks will be far enough along that President Reagan can discuss the issue in a speech he tentatively plans for early August to give his reactions to the Iran-Contra hearings.    &quot;We are, I think, very close to a meeting of the minds,&quot; says Sen. Boren, who adds that issues like more regular reviews of ongoing covert actions also have been discussed. Others on Capitol Hill sound a more cautious note. But Mr. Carlucci, in a meeting with reporters yesterday, said that as part of a &quot;dialogue&quot; with Congress, President Reagan is likely to soon sign an executive order laying out new procedures governing covert actions.    Regardless of the details that emerge, the discussions between Congress and the White House illustrate a broader development: Increasingly it appears that the first concrete change to emerge from the long Iran-Contra hearings is likely to be a tightening in the procedures ensuring that the White House reports to Congress on covert intelligence operations. In coming weeks, a debate is likely to grow over whether changes can be made within an existing law, passed in 1980, detailing congressional notification about covert operations, or whether additional legislation should be passed.    In a speech on the Senate floor this week, Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd argued that the hearings have shown a &quot;clear need&quot; to tighten up laws governing covert action, and he added: &quot;Informal or gentlemanly arrangements between the two branches on these matters have proven completely insufficient.&quot;    Similarly, Rep. Louis Stokes (D., Ohio), chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said in an interview that he hasn't been involved in recent discussions with the White House and that he is continuing to push legislation he and others have proposed tightening provisions for reporting covert actions. &quot;I'm not opposed to having some dialogue with them (the administration),&quot; Rep. Stokes said. &quot;Right now my posture is this is a piece of legislation that is needed.&quot;    By laying out new guidelines of its own, the administration would hope to blunt this drive for legislation, as well as begin repairing the broader damage in congressional relations done by disclosures in the Iran-Contra hearings.    The current law governing covert operations requires the administration to give the congressional intelligence committees prior notice of covert activities it is launching. But the law also says that, in exceptional cases, the president can bypass notifying the full committees and instead tell only eight congressional leaders: the chairmen and ranking minority members of the intelligence committees, the speaker and minority leader of the House, and the majority and minority leaders of the Senate.    Also, the law stipulates that the president can choose, in some cases, to avoid any prior notification and instead later give the intelligence committees a written explanation &quot;in a timely fashion&quot; about why he decided to forgo notification. The law doesn't specify what constitutes &quot;timely fashion.&quot;    After the disclosure that the Reagan administration secretly mined Nicaraguan harbors, the committees and William Casey, the late CIA director, negotiated an extensive set of agreements called the &quot;Casey accords&quot; that were designed to flesh out these legal notification requirements and prevent the committees from being kept in the dark. Many in Congress now bitterly charge that the administration flatly ignored these promises by keeping the Iranian arms sales secret even from the small group of congressional leaders.    Congressional and White House officials say that the administration has been discussing ways it might pledge to avoid using the delay mechanism, or to agree that the maximum delay in notification would be a few days. Similarly, the administration has been discussing ways it could show it doesn't intend to use covert actions to skirt other laws.    Specific ideas haven't yet been taken to President Reagan, his aides say. But congressional staff members anticipate that the president probably would discuss such understandings in public remarks, then flesh them out in his new executive order.    The bill introduced by Rep. Stokes and 10 other House members would specify that congressional notification could be delayed only &quot;in extraordinary circumstances&quot; and that the delay couldn't be more than 48 hours.    The legislation also would require the president to send a copy of the &quot;finding,&quot; or official authorization of a covert action, to the intelligence committees and to the vice president, the secretaries of state and defense and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency. That would ensure that top policy makers weren't kept in the dark, as some say they were in the Iran-Contra affair.    As part of its effort to head off restrictive legislation, the administration has been stressing that it already has improved the management of covert operations. The White House has reviewed all &quot;findings&quot; President Reagan has signed authorizing covert operations, and he has revoked or modified some. In addition, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater asserted a few days ago that the administration is authorizing only covert actions that meet four critieria: The actions must be legal, Congress must be briefed about them, the actions must support U.S. policy, and they must be actions that the American people would support if they became public. </TEXT></DOC>