<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880524-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Noriega and His Foes Are Slugging It Out In U.S. Courtrooms --- Who Rules Panama Is an Issue His Lawyers and Delvalle's Fiercely Disagree About </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Kempe (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In President Reagan's battle to oust Gen. Manuel Noriega from Panama, the soldiers are lawyers, the battlefields are courtrooms and the result is confusion.    &quot;This is a revolution by litigation,&quot; says William D. Rogers, a lawyer with the Washington law firm Arnold andamp; Porter. Since March, more than a hundred lawyers from Boston to Miami have been wrestling with legal and financial issues hinging on the seemingly simple question: Who governs Panama?    The U.S. recognizes Eric Arturo Delvalle as president and legitimate head of state. But Gen. Noriega actually runs the country. After Mr. Delvalle tried to dismiss the military leader in February, Gen. Noriega removed Mr. Delvalle instead, and Mr. Delvalle went into hiding.    The contest between the two has largely been fought in U.S. courts, as the Reagan administration continues its efforts to get Noriega to step down. Arnold andamp; Porter represents Mr. Delvalle's would-be government, while the New York firm Rabinowitz, Boudin, Standard, Krinsky andamp; Lieberman represents the Noriega regime.    The firms are as dissimilar as their two clients. Arnold andamp; Porter is part of the Washington establishment. It has its headquarters in a modern building full of expensive art. It isn't far from the White House, and its clients include a long list of big companies ranging from Philip Morris to Fujitsu. By contrast, Rabinowitz Boudin is a maverick firm with offices in a converted manufacturing building in New York's Greenwich Village. Over the years its clients have included a lot of people many Americans love to hate, including Fidel Castro, the Ayatollah Khomeini, and Moammar Qadhafi.    &quot;I was astonished that Noriega would hire a firm like that,&quot; says Mr. Rogers, who leads a team of 20 Arnold andamp; Porter attorneys representing Mr. Delvalle. &quot;He's got enough image problems. You'd think he would get as gray-flannel-suited a law firm as he could.&quot;    Those are fighting words to Terry Gross, Gen. Noriega's lead lawyer at Rabinowitz Boudin. &quot;I take great offense at that remark. This is a calculated attempt by Rogers at red-baiting. Rogers's comments smack of McCarthyism.&quot;    Rabinowitz Boudin first gained fame defending victims of the 1950s anti-Communist campaign of Sen. Joseph McCarthy, and it has tackled tough causes ever since. It has represented Alger Hiss, Amy Carter and the Socialist Workers Party.    The two firms usually don't move in the same circles, but when they meet, they clash. Rabinowitz Boudin represented Chile until Salvador Allende, the country's elected Marxist leader, died in a 1973 military coup. That prompted another Rabinowitz Boudin client, Fidel Castro's Cuba, to cut off sugar deliveries to the Chile of right-wing Gen. Augusto Pinochet. Arnold andamp; Porter, working on behalf of two Chilean sugar companies, successfully petitioned a court to seize a Cuban ship in Panamanian waters that refused to unload sugar already purchased by the Chileans. Rabinowitz Boudin reversed the seizure in a U.S. district court in the Canal Zone.    In the matter of Panama, Mr. Rogers has been winning legal skirmishes, but Mr. Gross appears to be winning the war. Gen. Noriega has been so successful at evading lawyers' moves aimed at removing him from office that Reagan administration officials have lowered their sights. Once determined to throw him out of the the Western Hemisphere, they now merely want him to step down.    In just four months, economic and diplomatic pressure has ruined Panama's economy, encouraged one abortive coup attempt and built up a mountain of fees for the lawyers who are thrashing out complex questions of sanctions and frozen assets. But Gen. Noriega is still there, running Panama.    Negotiations to gain his resignation failed last week, but the administration has launched another attempt in the face of administration disagreement over how to handle the crisis. Both Vice President George Bush and Treasury Secretary James Baker oppose President Reagan's plan for dropping indictments of the Panamanian ruler on drug-trafficking charges in exchange for his leaving office.    Mr. Rogers concedes this point: &quot;If the test is did the legal measures achieve their objectives, and those objectives were to overthrow Noriega, the legal measures were inadequate. They didn't create the chain of circumstances that were desired,that would have led to his overthrow and departure. Res ipsa loquitur,&quot; he continues in Latin. &quot;The thing speaks for itself.&quot;    Efforts against Gen. Noriega have centered on starving Panama financially, and that has largely been successful. The Delvalle forces have moved to freeze Panamanian assets in U.S. banks and to stop U.S. government and company payments to the Noriega regime. President Reagan's decision last month to impose additional sanctions, under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, has further swelled the number of lawyers involved as 35 U.S. companies with operations in Panama search for ways to do business without breaking U.S. law.    Gen. Noriega also has gone outside the Rabinowitz firm to find lawyers. His most colorful counsel is the New York criminal lawyer Barry Slotnick, who defended New York subway gunman Bernhard Goetz. Mr. Slotnick knows Gen. Noriega well enough to have attended a Chinese New Year's party with him in Panama this year. Aside from providing political and legal advice, he made a passionate -- but unsuccessful -- plea in a New York district court against the freeze on Panamanian assets.    Arnold andamp; Porter's success in freezing some $60 million in Panamanian bank assets in the U.S. was the opening shot in the legal warfare. &quot;We have brought the Panamanian banking system to its knees,&quot; says Mr. Rogers. He sees what his firm is doing as &quot;vitally important to the U.S.&quot;    Mr. Gross disagrees about that, too. &quot;This has been unacceptable interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign country,&quot; he asserts.    In arguing that Mr. Delvalle, rather than Gen. Noriega, legitimately controls Panamanian assets in the U.S., Arnold andamp; Porter cites the 1941 Edge Act, which allowed the U.S. to recognize allied governments-in-exile during Nazi occupation in World War II.    Federal courts in Boston, New York and Miami have ruled that the Panamanian government-in-hiding can be treated as Panama's government despite the absence of any foreign occupation, so long as it continues to be recognized by the State Department. Mr. Gross threatens to go as far as the Supreme Court to contest that, arguing that such an interpretation of the law violates the U.S. Foreign Policy Act and the treaty of the Organization of American States.    Meanwhile, rulings favorable to Mr. Delvalle have produced some curious results. In one case, the Republic of Panama vs. Air Panama, a judge's ruling that President Delvalle controls the airline left Arnold andamp; Porter defending both the plaintiff and the defendant. &quot;In 26 years of law practice, I've never seen anything like this,&quot; says Melvin Garbow of Arnold andamp; Porter. &quot;There are no precedents that I know of to a lot of what is happening.&quot;    Court scenes often resemble the old TV panel show &quot;To Tell the Truth.&quot; A number of different lawyers stand up and say, one after the other, that they represent the Republic of Panama. The judge has to decide who the impostors are. &quot;It's the first time I've ever seen lawyers make an objection before the court when an opposing lawyer simply stood up to introduce himself,&quot; Mr. Garbow says.    Sometimes the drama extends beyond the courtroom. Arnold andamp; Porter acts as a &quot;de facto foreign office&quot; for president-in-hiding Delvalle, says Mr. Rogers. The firm prepares Mr. Delvalle's diplomatic notes and carries out government business on behalf of Panama's ambassador to the U.S., Juan Sosa. It also acts as finance ministry, allotting closely audited funds from escrow accounts for the running of ambassadorial business.    Mr. Rogers admits that the economic sanctions and asset freezes his firm has helped engineer have hurt average Panamanians more than they have Gen. Noriega. But, he explains, the firm merely is acting on behalf of the Panamanian people as represented by President Delvalle's government: &quot;Noriega's a tyrant. He's a drug dealer. He's evil.&quot; And Arnold andamp; Porter is helping put together a plan to repair the economic harm once Gen. Noriega is gone. &quot;The longer this goes on, the more costly the recovery is going to be,&quot; Mr. Rogers admits.    Mr. Gross justifies his firm's decision to defend Gen. Noriega, a military dictator indicted on drug-trafficking charges in Florida and accused of civil-rights violations in Panama. Mr. Gross says: &quot;We pretty much unanimously felt it was important we assist him,&quot; given the State Department's campaign to get rid of him. </TEXT></DOC>