<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880707-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Defense Bureaucracy's Corrupting Influence </HL><AUTHOR> Steven Kelman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS </G><TEXT>   The real lesson of the unfolding defense procurement scandal is the opposite of what most people assume. While there are likely to be calls to tighten the procurement regulations further, the scandals actually bolster the case for giving federal managers more freedom to make judgments about who gets the contracts.    The classic form of corruption in awarding contracts has been straight payoffs: a vendor gives a decision-maker money, and the decision-maker throws that vendor the contract. To avoid such corruption in the award of major federal contracts, the government has developed an elaborate regulatory system for determining the winner. Bidders are to be evaluated by technical and price evaluation panels solely on the basis of their written proposals, so as to reduce the role of corruption-tainted (or personal) biases. To make corruption of the evaluation process more difficult, evaluation responsibility is widely shared. For procurements of major weapons systems, it would not be unusual to have five or more different panels evaluating different parts of each vendor's proposal. Each panel has several members.    Almost unnoticed in discussions of the procurement scandal is the fact that this elaborate, indeed tortuous, system seems to have worked, at least on its own terms. Nobody was able to throw a contract directly. Instead, what some contractors seem to have done is to buy inside information that would allow them to prepare a better proposal.    It is perhaps not coincidental that the scandal seems to have been centered in the Navy. Former Navy Secretary John Lehman was known for increasing the pressure for price and technical competition in awarding Navy weapons-systems contracts, hence increasing the pressures on contractors.    If a contractor has information about exactly what the government's specifications for a weapons system will be several months before the solicitation is publicly released, it has valuable additional time to work on its proposal (and perhaps also to have a leg up on assembling the right subcontractors for the job). If a contractor has information about the proposals that other vendors have presented in response to a Defense Department solicitation, it is in a much better position during the negotiations following the initial bids, when the government tries to get vendors to sweeten their bids further.    However, once it has inside information, a contractor can then present a proposal that will &quot;legitimately&quot; make it through the hoops of the formal procurement process and win, because it will indeed be the best proposal, however corruptly it was designed.    All this would perhaps at best be a subject for some observation about the ability of the corrupt to work their way around almost any system were it not for one crucial point. The elaborate regulatory system we have developed to attempt to foil procurement corruption is a very significant obstacle to the government's ability to do a good job acquiring products and services from vendors.    The obsession about biased or corrupt government officials, for example, effectively prohibits public managers from using the single most important piece of information about a prospective contractor -- namely, information a government agency has developed itself (and not appearing in the contractor's written proposal) on how well the contractor has performed on previous contracts with that agency. The theory is that such information is &quot;mere opinion&quot; and a potentially biased personal judgment. This nonsensical policy not only decreases the likelihood that the best vendor will be chosen today, but also is the most potent generator of mediocre performance by vendors tomorrow, since their indifferent performance on the contracts they are awarded now will scarcely hurt them the next time around.    In addition, reducing the scope for potentially biased judgment leads to giving insufficient weight to more subjective evaluation factors, such as the quality of the key managers or technical people vendors plan to assign to the contract. The mountain of regulations and the elaborate layers of review also devastate the morale of a workforce that must attempt to accomplish its program mission in the face of an environment that tells managers that their own judgment and common sense count for little.    We thus pay a big price for our current procurement regulatory system -- and with government choosing more and more to buy what it needs from the outside, the price is growing. Perhaps we could have consoled ourselves in the past with the conclusion that whatever we were giving up in terms of good performance, we at least were keeping crooks at bay. It now turns out the crooks are able to get around the system we have concocted. And the paper trail the system generates hasn't even helped us catch them -- that was left to whistle-blowers, wiretaps, and plants.    We should admit our mistake and set about deregulating and redesigning our procurement system. Such a system should be based on giving program managers greater freedom to make decisions and greater accountability for the eventual results of those decisions. This won't eliminate corruption; we've seen that no system can. But at least it will get us better products and services from the contractors on which the government increasingly relies. And, in a world where we spend about $200 billion a year on government procurement, that's no minor accomplishment.    ---   Mr. Kelman is professor of public policy at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, and is completing a study of federal procurement management supported by the Smith-Richardson Foundation. </TEXT></DOC>