<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0136 </DOCNO><HL> The Intelligence Mystique---By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN GOVMT </IN><TEXT>   The mystique of the secret intelligence services has long held the world in thrall. Ever since William Le Queux and E. Phillips Oppenheim wrote their tales about British secret agents saving the Empire from the Kaiser before World War I, we have all rejoiced in the melodrama of spy and counterspy. Le Queux's fantasies actually led on to the establishment in 1909 of the modern British services. Two world wars nourished the mystique, and the Cold War has given intelligence agencies in every major country unprecedented status, money and power.    It is easy to understand the mystique's appeal. There is something inherently fascinating about stories of daring, intrigue, deception, clandestinenes and unsung heroism. From the gritty realism of John Le Carre to the glamorous romanticism of Ian Fleming, the spy story has diverted our minds and, it cannot be denied, addled our brains. For fascination with the mystique becomes dangerous when governments succumb to the belief -- sedulously encouraged by all intelligence agencies -- that covert methods provide a cheap way to foreign-policy successes.    Nations that fear their world power is slipping away place, in Mr. Le Carre's words, &quot;ever greater trust in the magic formulae and hocus-pocus of the spy world. When the king is dying, the charlatans dash in.&quot;    Now intelligence agencies obviously have their necessary role amid the anarchy of states. No power in our jungle world can afford to do without them. But the mystique magnifies their importance, endows them with superhuman skills and considerably exaggerates the difference they make. As the delusion spreads that the clandestine services alone understand the true requirements of national security, as their budgets grow, as their dark deeds multiply, as their influence swells in the councils of state, one may begin to wonder whether the troubles they cause are not greater than the benefits they bring.    Such thoughts must be much on the minds of people in Israel these days. For years the world has been told how marvelous, accurate and efficient the Israeli intelligence service is. But the Pollard affair finishes that myth. Nor is this an isolated incident. The British government recently discovered that Mossad, the Israeli service, has been forging British passports for use by Israeli hit men. Mossad further enraged the British by kidnapping the Israeli technician who gave the Sunday Times information about Israel's nuclear-weapons program.    These are only a few of the scandals that led Time magazine to conclude that &quot;Israel's vaunted state-security apparatus seems to have gone amuck.&quot; The consequence of a free rein given to Israeli secret agents has been, in the name of national security, to increase Israel's international insecurity.    Britain, meantime, has been having troubles with its own intelligence agencies. Mrs. Thatcher's misbegotten effort to prevent the publication in Australia of a book by Peter Wright, a former MI-5 officer, has brought attention to Mr. Wright's admission that in the 1970s an MI-5 group was engaged in a campaign to undermine Harold Wilson's Labor government. When Mr. Wilson himself claimed some years ago that MI-5 operatives had been doing this, people talked sadly about poor Harold's paranoia.    There can be no doubt now that he was right. The MI-5 gang got it into its head that the prime minister might be a Soviet mole and launched a campaign to drive him out of Downing Street. We &quot;bugged and burgled our way round London,&quot; Mr. Wright now says. In addition, MI-5 forged documents designed to discredit cabinet ministers.    Mrs. Thatcher thus far has blocked parliamentary efforts to establish the details of this MI-5 effort to destabilize a British government. &quot;If it was the United States,&quot; Merlyn Rees, a former home secretary, told the House of Commons on March 16, &quot;there would be a proper investigation. There would be hell to pay.&quot;    Indeed, there would. If a CIA group had been exposed as trying to smear and overthrow an American administration, one can imagine the outcry in Congress. There are advantages to the separation of powers.    The U.S. hardly has been exempt from embarrassments caused by secret operatives. The Reagan administration has shown touching faith in the wondrous efficacy of clandestine methods. And yet, with all the vast resources of the CIA and the FBI at his command, our president tells us that his administration simply cannot find out what his cowboys were up to nor in whose pockets the money generated by the secret arms sales to Iran has ended up.    The answer to such questions, Mr. Reagan keeps plaintively saying, must await investigations conducted by congressional committees and the special prosecutor. If the CIA and FBI cannot even find out what officials of the American government have been doing, what are we paying them for? And why should we take seriously what they tell us about the Russians?    One can continue down the list. The French secret service sank the blameless Rainbow Warrior, the Greenpeace anti-nuclear protest ship, and thereby embroiled France in international troubles far greater than any harm the Rainbow Warrior could conceivably have done. From all accounts, Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev is having his own problems with the KGB.    Intelligence agencies, sealed off by walls of secrecy from the pull and haul of normal life, form closed and claustrophobic worlds. Prolonged immersion in this ultimately hallucinatory world erodes the reality principle. Intelligence operatives begin to see themselves as the appointed guardians of the nation, more devoted and more knowledgeable than transient elected officials, morally authorized to do on their own whatever they believe the nation's security demands. Intelligence services generate fantasy, protect fantasy and indulge merchants of fantasy like Lt. Col. North. And rival intelligence agencies live off each other: The KGB needs the CIA, the CIA needs the KGB and both expend much of their effort in private jousts with the other (like the recent affair of Nicholas Daniloff) instead of concentrating on the collection and analysis of intelligence.    The sad fact remains that we must have intelligence agencies. The problem is how to bring them under control. The first point in a rational program would be to increase external oversight. The English journalist Chapman Pincher, who has written several books exposing real and alleged Soviet penetration of the British services, used to opppose oversight. He has latterly changed his mind and now regards oversight as the &quot;only deterrent&quot; to the misleading of Parliament and the public by official statements &quot;distorted, manipulated and, on occasion, falsified on spurious grounds of 'national interest,' while the real purpose was to prevent embarrassment of departments and individuals.&quot;    He adds that a &quot;degree of oversight far more embracing than anything likely to be accepted in Britain has been operating successfully and safely in the United States.&quot; Recent developments, however, show that our present oversight system is far from adequate. The Reagan administration has flagrantly overridden not only the principles on which legislative oversight is based but also laws enacted by Congress. It has done so with impunity. The laws lack criminal penalties. Effective oversight calls for addition of severe penalties to laws controlling covert action. It also calls for legislation requiring that all presidential intelligence &quot;findings&quot; be put in writing and sent within 48 hours to the National Security Council and to the congressional intelligence committees -- again with penalties in case of violation.    Mr. Le Carre warns that oversight is not enough. External scrutiny of intelligence service, he writes, &quot;is largely an illusory concept. If they're good, they fool the outsiders -- and if they're bad they fool themselves.&quot; The other part of the reform program must be drastic cuts in the CIA budget. For many years the CIA has spent most of its money on covert action. Such action is an infallible means of getting the country into unnecessary trouble. The more numerous the covert action operatives, the more widespread the trouble.    In 1956, Robert A. Lovett and David Bruce wrote a report for the president's Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities condemning &quot;the increased mingling in the internal affairs of other nations of bright, highly graded young men who must be doing something all the time to justify their reason for being.&quot; In January 1961 the same board told President Eisenhower, &quot;We have been unable to conclude that, on balance, all of the covert actions programs undertaken by the CIA up to this time have been worth the risk or the great expenditure of manpower, money and other resources involved.&quot; Covert action, the report continued, had &quot;tended to detract substantially from the execution of its primary intelligence-gathering mission.&quot; Nothing the CIA has done in 25 years since gives reason to alter this verdict.    William Webster would be well advised to accept a large cut in the CIA budget, to order the intelligence community to concentrate on its prime and indispensable function -- collection and analysis of intelligence -- and to reduce covert action to a standby capability. He also should read two excellent new books: Christopher Andrew's scholarly but lively study &quot;Her Majesty's Secret Service: The Making of the British Intelligence Community,&quot; and the usefully skeptical work by Philip Knightley, &quot;The Second Oldest Profession: Spies and Spying in the 20th Century.&quot;    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>