<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Financial Hurdles:Simon's Group FindsBuilding Sandamp;L EmpireHarder Than Expected---Regulators Get Less Helpful,And Some Ailing ThriftsStill Face Big Problems---Devising New Tactics Quickly---By David B. HilderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WFSABANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> Call them the Simon crew  </DATELINE><TEXT>    distinguished adventurersseeking to build a financial empire from the rubble of failedthrifts.   Charting the course -- and raising the capital -- is William E. Simon, a former Treasury secretary who made millions of dollars in leveraged buy-outs and now sails the Pacific in a 125-foot yacht.    Providing an insider's knowledge of regulators is Preston Martin, a former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and a former chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which regulates thrifts.    And handling crucial negotiations for government aid is Gerald L. Parsky, an energetic Los Angeles lawyer and former assistant Treasury secretary under Mr. Simon whose bargaining experience ranges from dealing with Mideastern rulers on behalf of the U.S. to extracting a severance package from movie financier Kirk Kerkorian for a fired Hollywood executive.    A simple theory binds these powerful men, who have tapped capital from Australia and Italy and recruited three Los Angeles real-estate experts to their team. They believe that insolvent thrifts -- cleansed of soured loans and revitalized by private and public capital -- can make fat profits for new owners.    Regulators, caught by a tide of ailing thrifts, welcome that idea. They hope that a surge of private investment will cut the government's cost of liquidating the problems -- a bill that may reach $50 billion.    A look at the Simon crew's work to date, however, suggests that the strategy may be more difficult to execute than they first thought. Regulators apparently have been stung by criticism that they gave away too much in their initial dealings with the group, and now they are trying to drive harder bargains. Moreover, the ailing thrifts still face problems of poor loan quality, above-average interest-rate risk and thin management.    &quot;It's become clear to us that . . . acquiring a troubled savings and loan is different from trying to negotiate and acquire a manufacturing company,&quot; Mr. Parsky says.    But the Simon group has shown that it can recover from setbacks and devise a new game plan on the run. After being stymied in two recent attempts to take over troubled thrifts, the partners this week struck a quick deal to acquire a healthy one with $2 billion in assets. Moreover, they intend to inject more capital into the thrift, Western Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association, of Marina del Rey, Calif., and use it as a vehicle to acquire additional troubled Sandamp;Ls.    &quot;What's on the drawing board is merging in another one and possibly two of the Sandamp;Ls we're working on,&quot; Mr. Simon says. The group will gather in Los Angeles after Labor Day to review potential acquisitions and decide which to pursue in light of the Western Federal agreement, he adds.    Wherever the story leads, it begins with Mr. Simon. The restless financier, who began his career by spending some 20 years as a bond trader, went from three years as Treasury secretary in the Nixon and Ford administrations to stunning success with leveraged buy-outs, in which he is reputed to have amassed $200 million or more. A little over two years ago, however, he started looking for opportunities outside the now-crowded field. &quot;I felt the market had gotten pricey and it was time to sell,&quot; says the athletic 59-year-old.    He contacted Mr. Parsky, asking his help to build &quot;a major financial-services entity,&quot; the lawyer recalls. Although they weren't sure where to begin -- in banking, investment banking, thrifts or insurance -- they wanted to create &quot;a strong base in California and a network on the Pacific Rim,&quot; Mr. Parsky says.    Until he left the Treasury in 1977, Mr. Parsky, now 44, had operated in Mr. Simon's shadow. Declining Mr. Simon's invitation at that time to join his investment ventures, the younger man went to work for the Los Angeles law firm of Gibson, Dunn andamp; Crutcher and is credited with helping it triple in size to more than 500 lawyers. He has remained with the firm and is one of five senior partners who run it through a management committee.    Early in 1985, Mr. Simon telephoned to propose the financial-services venture, Mr. Parsky says, adding, &quot;I felt he was talking to me as a partner, not an employer.&quot; In fact, Mr. Simon and Mr. Parsky own equal shares of about 30% in the companies that own the two thrifts. The 63-year-old Mr. Martin owns about 5%, and other members of the group have stakes ranging from 5% to 15% each.    Mr. Parsky seems to be the group's chief deal maker these days. He has a more active role than Mr. Simon, who felt so confident about his onetime subordinate that he spent four months in Australia this year, living on his yacht and keeping in touch mostly by telephone and telecopier.    Shortly after Mr. Parsky joined the group, Mr. Simon commissioned a thorough study of the banking and thrift industries. Among the conclusions: Thrifts could be bought for less than half the price of comparable banks and offered far greater flexibility. Unlike banks, thrifts -- especially state-chartered ones in California and a few other states -- can invest in real estate and stocks in addition to home mortgages.    Mr. Simon had found his opportunity. Among other things, he was impressed that &quot;thrifts have all sorts of flexibility in making loans that banks don't have.&quot; And relatively low capital requirements -- currently about 3% of assets -- allow for tremendous leverage.    But, before leaping, Mr. Simon took another look. He and Mr. Parsky visited federal regulators and expressed interest in the thrift industry. Eventually, Bank Board officials suggested that the men look at Honolulu Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association -- Hawaii's biggest thrift, with $1.7 billion in assets. The depositor-owned institution had a lot of problems, caused mostly by bad real-estate loans.    During the Honolulu Federal negotiations, Mr. Simon ran into Mr. Martin at the christening of a mutual friend's child. The two men had known each other for some years, but their meeting turned out to be propitious. Mr. Martin, recently departed from the Fed, told Mr. Simon during a ride to Washington National Airport that he might start a private mortgage-insurance concern. Instead, Mr. Simon persuaded him to join his group as the chief executive officer of the various holding companies to be set up to own each thrift.    Last November, with the crew on board, the Simon group completed an agreement with regulators that called for Honolulu Federal to write down its problem assets, rendering it insolvent; for the regulators to declare the depositors' ownership interest worthless; and for the Simon group to take control after injecting new capital.    The group was off and running. In April, it added a second thrift, Southern California Savings andamp; Loan Association, based in Beverly Hills and with $1 billion in assets. Flush with success, it soon was eyeing far bigger game -- Financial Corp. of America, the parent of the nation's largest thrift, the deeply troubled American Savings andamp; Loan Association, with $34 billion in assets. And talks were under way to acquire insolvent Bell Savings andamp; Loan Association, of San Mateo, Calif.    Funds seemed plentiful. In addition to Mr. Simon's personal resources, the wealthy Agnelli family, which controls the Italian auto maker Fiat S.p.A., emerged as a partner. An even bigger commitment of $200 million came from a large Australian conglomerate, Ariadne Australia Ltd., of Brisbane. The access to wealthy outside investors suddenly suggested that the Simon group might draw on vast resources to snap up any number of ailing thrifts.    The partners talked of a grand scheme that would link the resuscitated financial institutions into a vast archipelago spanning the Pacific.    But last month, they ran into some squalls. They shelved their bold bid for Financial Corp., complaining that regulators weren't negotiating quickly enough. And the Bank Board, which in January had selected the Simon group's bid for Bell Savings, backed away from the deal.    In part, the group is a victim of its early success, which called attention to potential profits in government-assisted thrift acquisitions and spurred imitators. The effort to acquire Financial Corp., for instance, was dogged by several competitors, including the thrift arm of Ford Motor Co. A mutual fund has sprung up to invest in failed thrifts, and Robert Bass, of the wealthy Bass family of Fort Worth, Texas, has talked about acquiring several failed thrifts in Texas.    Although the Simon group and federal regulators deny that any preferential treatment is involved, some thrift executives fear -- perhaps with some envy mixed in -- that Messrs. Simon, Martin and Parsky may be taking unfair advantage of bureaucrats eager to unload problem thrifts.    Certainly, the group's negotiating success has been striking. With just $58 million of its own money, the group has gained control of nearly $3 billion of assets. If the acquired thrifts eventually generate profits at the industry's benchmark rate of 1% a year on assets, the investors will reap a 52% return on equity.    Even more astounding, the two acquired thrifts, under special arrangements with regulators, could expand their total assets to about $8 billion without raising additional capital. At that asset level, they might produce a 138% return on equity.    At Southern California Savings, for example, the Simon group put in about $5 million, and Ariadne Australia and the Agnelli holding company provided $35 million. Government regulators, through the FSLIC, put in $217.5 million to cover anticipated loan and real-estate losses. And although the $217.5 million probably will be eaten up by losses, the Bank Board agreed to count it as capital for regulatory purposes -- a concession that could allow Southern California Savings to grow to about $5 billion in assets from $1 billion currently.    &quot;Counting the $217.5 million as regulatory net worth is incredible,&quot; says an investment banker who has studied the Southern California transaction. Mr. Martin responds that regulators must approve Southern California's business plans, including growth strategies.    The FSLIC's limited cash reserves probably encouraged regulators to make the concession because it didn't require a cash outlay. &quot;Our cash position wasn't at its strongest level,&quot; concedes Thurman C. Connell, who was the FSLIC's acting director when the deal was negotiated and currently is the president of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines, Iowa.    However, some thrift executives were aghast when the Bank Board allowed the Simon group to announce that it was the successful bidder to acquire Southern California Savings and Bell Savings before final terms had been negotiated. These executives, competitors of the Simon group, feared that the FSLIC had limited its options by permitting the announcement.    Mr. Parsky says he sees nothing improper: &quot;We felt that it wasn't appropriate {for the FSLIC} to negotiate with us and several others at the same time.&quot; Mr. Martin says the failure to win Bell Savings shows that the group isn't being favored. &quot;If we did have all that clout, why didn't we get these institutions when FSLIC had the money?&quot;    The Bell Savings bid seems to have been undone by the simultaneous deterioration of Bell and the FSLIC, which Mr. Parsky says would have provided $300 million to $350 million in various forms of assistance. As the negotiations for Bell were nearing completion, the FSLIC's cash reserves fell to about $1 billion, a level that the Bank Board wanted to preserve. In addition, Bank Board officials thought that the proposed terms had changed so substantially from the Simon group's initial winning bid that the agency requested another round of competitive bids.    Whether or not the Simon crew has received special treatment, both regulator and private investor apparently still face substantial risks from such transactions. Even as Messrs. Simon and Parsky talk vaguely about pushing into merchant banking -- taking major interests in small companies in various industries -- problems plague their newly acquired thrifts.    For example, more than 20% of Honolulu Federal's assets at the end of last year weren't earning a dime. And by one standard industry measure, the Sandamp;L is about twice as sensitive to interest-rate swings as the average thrift.    That sensitivity proved beneficial as interest rates declined in the first quarter, and Honolulu Federal earned $9 million. But rates have risen since then. Mr. Simon says he expects the thrift to earn $13 million to $15 million this year -- indicating dwindling profits after the first period.    Nor is Southern California Savings without problems. For nearly two years before the Simon group took control, the thrift had been run by temporary managers on loan from a healthy thrift. By the time the Simon group arrived, &quot;other than the chief financial officer, there wasn't anybody left,&quot; Mr. Martin recalls.    Also lacking was information to determine which of the thrift's 30 branches to keep open, says Timothy Childs, whom Mr. Martin hired as its new chief executive. Worse still, the thrift last year wrote only about $20 million in new loans -- all to finance sales of foreclosed property. Other thrifts of comparable size originate several hundred million dollars of loans each year. &quot;It's going to take us some time&quot; to increase lending, Mr. Childs says.    The Western Federal acquisition could help on both scores. Seizing upon the thrift as a new approach to solving its problems, the Simon group praises Western Federal's management team and has asked it to stay on. Western Federal also has built a significant mortgage-banking operation, originating $1.8 billion of loans and selling $1.2 billion in the fiscal year ended June 30. In the future, some of those loans could help stock Southern California's loan portfolio.    Meanwhile, the Simon group maintains its pace and operating style. On Monday, after negotiating all weekend and concluding the Western Federal agreement at 4 a.m., Mr. Parsky boarded a plane from Los Angeles to Washington and spent most of the flight on the phone. Mr. Martin, in San Francisco, notified the state and federal regulators who must clear the deal.    And Mr. Simon, at a summer house in East Hampton, Long Island, jumped off his exercise bicycle to answer the phone. Puffing a bit, he offered an assessment as optimistic as ever: &quot;I'm glad that we continue to be on track, and if anything, a little ahead of schedule.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>