<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880203-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Computer Records Become Powerful Tool For Investigative Reporters and Editors </HL><AUTHOR> Gregory Stricharchuk (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PUB EDP </IN><TEXT>   Computers are rapidly altering the once-shadowy world of investigative journalism.    Consider:   --Reporters at Knight-Ridder Inc.'s Washington bureau last year pinpointed unusually high death rates at certain hospitals around the country by analyzing computerized Medicare records of open-heart surgeries.    --At the San Jose Mercury News in California, reporters using a computer tapped into a real-estate data bank to help locate U.S. property secretly owned by deposed Philippine leader Ferdinand Marcos and his associates.    --By sifting through computer data on everything from parking tickets to detectives' expense vouchers, the Seattle Times last year proved how a police investigation into the deaths of 46 women was botched.    Where a telephone, a note pad and a good pair of shoes were once the investigative reporter's best tools, computerized data bases have now taken on equal importance. Such records, which can cost several thousand dollars to obtain and analyze, allow newspapers to sift, select and sort information that once took months to compile. Moreover, journalists contend, the information from data bases helps make stories more accurate, insightful and authoritative.    &quot;Computers provide opportunities for reality testing -- showing something that is contrary to what everybody thinks,&quot; says Philip Myer, a journalism professor at the University of North Carolina and a pioneer in using computer data bases.    Editors and academics warn that the press can misuse computer records. Having obtained reams of data, a newspaper may be tempted to spew out information -- such as individuals' salaries or medical records -- without considering whether such information is truly germane to a story. &quot;If they're not careful, reporters can end up harming someone,&quot; says Sherrie Mazingo, a journalism professor at the University of Southern California.    But most journalists say the technology, which is quietly gaining popularity at larger papers, puts reporters on a more equal footing with government agencies and especially Uncle Sam, who has long collected data in computerized form. &quot;The only way a newspaper can effectively monitor the government is to get access to its computer tapes,&quot; asserts Elliot G. Jaspin, a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter at the Providence Journal-Bulletin in Rhode Island who works full time analyzing computer data.    Gaining that access, however, isn't always easy. Some government agencies have resisted or been slow making their computer tapes available. Jerry Berman, who has studied the use of data bases for the American Civil Liberties Union, says media efforts to gain access to computer tapes are occasionally stalled because federal laws don't clearly define what constitutes a record. Consequently, some agencies provide records only in paper form. Also, in blocking access to tapes, government officials often cite concerns over potential invasion of individuals' privacy.    That's what happened to the Boston Globe in late 1985. The newspaper was investigating the flight of large amounts of cash throughout the U.S. after the Bank of Boston pleaded guilty to laundering money for an organized-crime family. The Globe wanted to study the Treasury Department's computer data of cash transactions of more than $10,000, including bank deposits and purchases of vehicles and real estate. (The 1970 Bank Secrecy Act requires banks and certain businesses to report such transactions.)    But Treasury officials balked, citing a concern over invading taxpayers' privacy. To resolve the problem, the Globe's reporter, Peter G. Gosselin, agreed that government officials could remove individual names from the computer tape. &quot;I agree that a reporter can go romping through a data base and come out with information that would endanger a person's privacy,&quot; says Mr. Gosselin. Still, it took a &quot;very frustrating&quot; four months of intensive negotiations to obtain the tape, he says.    The Providence Journal and other papers have been forced to go to court to establish that electronic public records aren't any different than their paper counterparts. &quot;Now it's pretty rare that an agency will fight us on access,&quot; says the paper's Mr. Jaspin. &quot;The courts consistently rule on the paper's side.&quot;    Indeed, the paper has amassed a computer-tape library of about 40 tapes, probably the largest such newspaper library in the country. Among other data, the Journal has state civil and criminal records for the past 10 years, state and municipal financial records, statewide records of business incorporations, real-estate transfers and drivers' licenses.    By comparing data gleaned from several tapes, the Providence Journal has uncovered stories that in the past might never have been possible. For example, when three Rhode Island children were hit and killed in separate school-bus accidents in 1985, the paper compared its list of bus driver licenses to a tape of traffic violations. It discovered that some bus drivers had been ticketed as many as 20 times over a three-year period. &quot;These were people who shouldn't have been allowed to ride a bicycle,&quot; says Mr. Jaspin.    That information, coupled with the tape of criminal convictions, showed that several bus drivers were convicted felons. As a result of the story, licensing procedures were tightened, and buses were made safer. &quot;Without a computer, it couldn't have been done,&quot; says Mr. Jaspin.    Use of computer data, however, isn't a panacea for old-fashioned fact checking. Information from a computer data bank is only as good as the person who typed in the information.    For instance, while working on its series about money laundering, the Boston Globe found large and unexplainable swings in cash transactions reported in certain cities. Ultimately, the discrepancies were traced to a clerk in Detroit, who occasionally added five zeros to actual figures to ease boredom, says the Globe's Mr. Gosselin.    In fact, newspapers have also had problems with self-assembled data bases. For instance, the Cleveland Plain Dealer last year published a lengthy correction after a computer glitch caused campaign contributions to the Ohio governor from a controversial state contract holder to be doubled.    James Long, a reporter for the Oregonian in Portland and part of a team that investigated a secretive Indian religious cult in 1985 by putting together its own data base of 40,000 documents, says such clerical work can actually hurt the reporting effort. &quot;It was a real pain,&quot; says Mr. Long.    Potential problems, he says, include losing or forgetting important facts, especially information punched into the data base by other reporters working on the story. &quot;That could be a legal drawback,&quot; says Mr. Long. His philosophy on computer data bases: &quot;Unless you have a complicated project, forget it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>