<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870204-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Or Other, to Suit Goals;Moscow Is Still Main Foe---Recent Events Disturb U.S.---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> PEKING  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A Chinese journalist explains his country's attitude toward the U.S. and the Soviet Union by quoting a Chinese maxim as old as the Great Wall he is showing off to a visitor: &quot;'Yi yi zhi yi.' That means use barbarians against the barbarians. It is a very old tradition.&quot;    Chinese officials describe their approach more diplomatically, but they clearly aim to increase their leverage with the two superpowers by maintaining some distance from each of them.    American diplomats say China's increasing criticism of U.S. foreign policy and growing receptiveness to Soviet overtures are part of Peking's efforts to find middle ground where it can best manipulate the three-way relationship. One senior British diplomat says the Chinese are turning the strategic triangle into a seesaw: The feuding superpowers sit at the ends and China stands in the middle, manipulating the balance by moving closer to one side or the other, depending on what course serves it best at the moment.    Recent events, however, have raised fears that China's current position -- clearly more toward Washington's end of the board -- could shift somewhat closer to Moscow's. Student demonstrations have provoked conservative criticism of China's opening to the West and led to the fall of the second most powerful Chinese leader, Hu Yaobang, who encouraged ideological liberalization.    &quot;Suggestions are being made in China that the student protests are the fruits of dealing so much with America,&quot; one senior U.S. official in Washington says. &quot;We don't expect our relations to be damaged much, but this will make it more difficult for them to go forward at a good pace. Another problem is that we don't control one of the biggest variables in the three-way relationship: Gorbachev.&quot;    One of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's goals is a summit meeting with Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping followed by restoration of formal relations between the two countries' Communist parties. China insists that it doesn't want to be in either superpower's camp, that it is merely redressing its past mistakes of growing too close first to the Soviets, in the 1950s and early 1960s, and later to the U.S., in the 1970s and early 1980s.    &quot;China is now seizing the foreign-policy initiative and doesn't yield any longer to pressure from superpowers, nor does it intend to associate itself with either superpower's strategies,&quot; says Chung Mingqun, the director of the National Defense Institute, a new school to train China's military strategists.    He describes China's new position as &quot;independent but not equidistant&quot; from the superpowers -- in other words, China wants to repair 25 years of animosity with the Soviet Union but still considers Moscow its biggest threat and will remain closer to the U.S. despite stepping up criticism of U.S. foreign policies.    The conservative backlash against China's student demonstrations nevertheless worries some Americans. Mr. Deng has promised that economic reforms and China's opening to the West will both go forward, but diplomats here concede that the unrest has strengthened the arguments of those who resist reform.    &quot;Any leadership that abandoned the reform course might also adopt a policy of substantially improving relations with the Soviet Union and narrowing the opening to the West,&quot; says Michel Oksenberg, the National Security Council staff's China expert when the U.S. established diplomatic relations with Peking in 1979.    Western experts are especially concerned about the rise in stature of Vice Premier Li Peng, a critic of some economic reforms and a proponent of closer relations to Moscow. He favors the sort of low-cost barter trade that China carries out with the Soviets. One administration official believes that Mr. Li could be chosen premier at the National People's Congress in early March over Zhao Ziyang, who replaced Mr. Hu as the acting general party secretary and is considered more liberal on ideological and economic matters.    &quot;The stakes become higher as China becomes a greater force in the world,&quot; Mr. Oskenberg says. China's increasing economic weight raises questions about how disruptive it could be on world markets, in international organizations and on security matters such as the kind of weapons it builds or how far it goes to recover lost territories.    The superpower competition for influence in Peking gives China strong bargaining power, and it is using its leverage deftly. From the U.S., China wants trade preferences, advanced technology and help in gaining reunification with Taiwan. Washington already has given Peking assurances that it will gradually reduce its arms supplies to Taiwan, although China complains that the U.S. isn't slowing deliveries fast enough. The U.S. has also eased its restrictions on technology transfers to Peking.    From Moscow, China wants the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan and from elsewhere along the Chinese border and an end of Moscow's support for the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. Moscow said recently that it would withdraw a division of troops from Mongolia between April and June. As for Afghanistan, the Soviet foreign minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, has said that he wants to talk about a troop-withdrawal timetable at the United Nations, and the Soviet-backed Afghan government has announced a cease-fire.    The U.S. is trying to put the best face on the improved relations between Moscow and Peking. The thaw will help reduce regional tensions, says Winston Lord, Washington's ambassador to China. Nonetheless, the U.S. is irked by China's renewed practice of lumping the U.S. and the Soviet Union together when condemning imperialism. &quot;We do not appreciate being confused with the Soviet Union,&quot; Mr. Lord says, &quot;and we've told them this.&quot;    The Chinese argue that the U.S. has become far less sensitive to Third World issues during the Reagan administration, and urge changes in U.S. policies toward Nicaragua and South Africa. &quot;You criticize your friend because you want him to become wiser and more correct,&quot; a foreign-ministry official says. &quot;We call a spade a spade.&quot;    Peking often urges Washington to cut back its plans for defense against nuclear missiles so as to gain an arms-control treaty with Moscow. &quot;The idea in your mind is dangerous that you can race the Soviets into {economic} collapse,&quot; warns Zhu Ruizhen of the Institute for Soviet Studies at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. &quot;No country can outdo the Soviet Union in enduring difficulties.&quot;    Washington now is conducting a series of discussions with Peking on arms control and regional issues. It hopes thus to strengthen the political ties in a relationship that has focused largely on economics as China struggles to make its economy more efficient.    China makes no secret that its short-run aim of modernizing its economy is closely linked to its longer-run aim of becoming a major world power. &quot;A powerful China will be a force to safeguard world peace,&quot; contends Yang Zhengqing of the government-sponsored Institute for Strategic Studies. He says that a powerful China will remain nonaligned. &quot;In history, China was bullied and threatened by other powers,&quot; he says. &quot;China won't play other countries like poker cards.&quot;    Currently, China has far more trade and cultural and educational exchanges with the U.S. than with Moscow. Yet there is a coalition of interests favoring better relations with Moscow: Ideological, planning and state security systems find it easier to deal with the Soviets than with the free-wheeling West; leaders who were trained in Moscow often feel friendly toward the Kremlin; and western areas of China would benefit from trade with the Soviets.    Mr. Deng has said he will meet with Mr. Gorbachev anywhere -- breaking his decision not to travel abroad again -- but only if the Soviets pressure Vietnam to remove its troops from Cambodia. That wouldn't be easy for Moscow: The Chinese are offering little in return except friendship, and the Vietnamese could well threaten to withdraw permission for Soviet access to their critical Cam Ranh Bay port if Moscow withdraws economic or military aid for the Cambodian occupation.    &quot;The Soviets are in a dilemma,&quot; says Mr. Zhu of the Institute for Soviet Studies. &quot;I don't think they will give up what they have achieved in military bases to improve relations with us.&quot;    Mr. Zhu says China will be able to gauge Soviet sincerity by how it handles talks on border issues this month. Will it withdraw more than a division from Mongolia and pull back the soldiers a significant distance from the border? Will it give back Black Bear Island, at the confluence of the Amur and Usseri rivers that form the Russian border with northeast China? The Soviets have factories and military equipment on the island.    By such measures as student exchanges and trade, Sino-Soviet ties are expanding faster than those between China and the U.S., but the U.S. is still far ahead. More than 16,000 Chinese study in the U.S., compared with only 200 in the Soviet Union. Sino-U.S. trade was about four times the approximately $2 billion in Sino-Soviet trade last year.    In a reversal of previous trade policies, however, the Chinese recently decided to buy commercial planes from the Soviets instead of from Boeing Co. or McDonnell Douglas Corp. They have also decided to buy nuclear-energy equipment from Moscow despite President Reagan's successful efforts to open up some such sales to Peking.    U.S. officials also fear that new restrictions on intellectuals in China will fuel tensions with Washington if more Chinese studying in the U.S. choose to defect. One Western diplomat also sees signs that the politicians in China who have encouraged contacts with the U.S. are now becoming more wary of &quot;spiritual pollution&quot; from Western ideas.    Nevertheless, some U.S. officials expect America's economic bonds with China to strengthen. Mr. Deng last fall received a delegation from the New York Stock Exchange, &quot;signaling that the Chinese opening is here to stay and there will be continuity after he is gone,&quot; Mr. Lord says.    Like the Soviet Union, the U.S. faces risks in its dealing with China. American officials fear that the Chinese may use warmer relations with Moscow as a lever to pry the U.S. further from Taiwan and to win Washington's support for reunification talks. The U.S. insists that Taiwan and China must settle their problems between themselves and without Washington's involvement. In addition, the increasing flow of U.S. technology to China raises the possibility that some of it could fall into Soviet hands as Peking and Moscow strengthen ties.    With the ripening relationship between China and the U.S. over the past decade, American diplomats say, triangular relations have become less important. But the Chinese and the Soviets clearly believe otherwise. One Chinese official says Moscow sent Oleg Troyanovsky -- a man who doesn't speak Chinese and is considered a specialist on America -- as ambassador to Peking because the Soviets view China more as part of a global balance and hence wanted an ambassador who better understood U.S.-Chinese relations.    Mr. Chung of the National Defense Institute says the Soviets' wooing of China is only part of a larger Pacific and Asian strategy that includes better ties to Japan, expansion of military relations with North Korea and Mr. Gorbachev's trip this past fall to India.    &quot;This is a major strategic step,&quot; he says. &quot;Their aim is to reduce the influence of the Americans and strengthen their position. The struggles between the two superpowers in this region will become more acute.&quot; And China's position on the seesaw will also grow more critical. </TEXT></DOC>