<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAELI TROOPS BROKE UP Palestinian demonstrations in the West Bank.    Soldiers fired tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse Palestinians who stoned them and burned tires in the village of Ram, site of the Sunday killing of a Palestinian woman by an Israeli soldier. The soldier and his commanding officer have been suspended pending an inquiry. Unrest was also reported in a dozen towns and refugee camps in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, but no injuries were reported. Military officials said they were proceeding with scheduled troop cutbacks in the occupied territories.    The U.S. muted its sharp criticism of Israeli plans to deport nine Palestinian demonstrators. A State Department spokesman said violence has lessened.    ---   Shevardnadze arrived in the Afghan capital of Kabul for what the Soviet media called a working visit. The trip wasn't announced prior to his arrival, and the reports didn't say how long he would stay or with whom he will meet. Shevardnadze's visit coincides with the arrival in neighboring Pakistan of two top State Department aides.    An Afghan court convicted French journalist Alain Guillo of spying and sentenced him to 10 years in prison. Afghanistan's official Kabul radio said the photojournalist entered the country nine times to prepare videotapes. In Paris, a government minister said other Frenchmen similarly convicted in Afghanistan were later expelled.    ---   A Bonn embassy employee was shot and killed on a bridge over the Seine River in Paris. An envelope found near the body contained a leaflet of the National Liberation Front of Kurdistan. Separately, a Kurdish group claimed responsibility for the downing of a West German airliner in Turkey Saturday in which 16 were killed.    ---   Moscow issued a ruling intended to prevent abuses of psychiatry, which dissidents charge the Kremlin uses to lock critics away. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet ruling permits relatives of those committed to mental hospitals to appeal doctors' decisions in court, and makes it a crime to commit a mentally healthy person.    ---   NASA said the recent failure of a nozzle component during testing of a redesigned space shuttle booster rocket will force a delay of six to 10 weeks in the first post-Challenger shuttle mission. The space agency had planned to launch the shuttle Discovery June 2, but said the launch date will be pushed back possibly to mid-August.    ---   Ashland Oil Inc. officials said they don't know why a storage tank ruptured Saturday, spilling one million gallons of diesel fuel into the Monongahela River upstream from Pittsburgh. Officials continued efforts to stanch the spill, which cut off water to hundreds of thousands of residents and killed wildlife.    ---   The Warsaw Pact offered to refrain from modernizing some short-range nuclear missiles if NATO pledged the same, the official East German news agency said. The proposal, covering weapons with a range of less than 300 miles, was made in a Dec. 16 letter from East German leader Honecker to West German Chancellor Kohl.    Genscher said the West was mainly at fault for delays in achieving a global ban on chemical weapons. The West German foreign minister, in an unusual departure from diplomatic practice, said in a radio interview that while the Soviets have accepted U.S. conditions for verifying a ban, &quot;Western voices&quot; have stalled negotiations.    ---   U.S. immigration authorities approved the release of 1,149 Cubans from federal prisons, and a dozen who were in lockups torn by recent riots over a deportation order were among 100 already set free. A spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service said the inmates will be released to relatives or halfway houses.    ---   Christian Lebanese blockade ships seized a cargo vessel headed for the Druse port of Jiye, raising fears of a renewal of Lebanon's civil war. The blockade was ordered over the weekend after Druse Moslem leader Walid Jumblatt refused to return a stolen army helicopter. The ship, identified only as the Marcia, was taken to Beirut.    ---   Sikh gunmen killed 10 people in northern India, including a senior member of Prime Minister Gandhi's Congress (I) Party. Jagat Ram, vice president of the party's Punjab unit, and his nephew were shot to death in a town 55 miles northeast of Amritsar, police said. More than 1,000 people were killed last year in violence by Sikh separatists.    ---   A Haitian opposition coalition said it will boycott national elections being organized by the military government for Jan. 17. The coalition, claiming to represent 50 political, religious, student and labor groups, demanded reinstatement of the electoral council disbanded by the government after election violence that killed 34 in November.    ---   Died: Gaston Eyskens, 82, prime minister of Belgium six times from 1949 to 1973, Sunday, in Leuven, Belgium. </TEXT></DOC>