<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880217-0012 </DOCNO><HL> Many 'Women's Problems' Aren't --- Dancing on the Glass Ceiling </HL><AUTHOR> Regina E. Herzlinger </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><TEXT>   At age 43, waiting in a long ladies' room line during a break in a business meeting was a new experience; I usually had the room to myself. Now, here I was at the Financial Accounting Standards Board, jubilantly lining up behind fellow members of an FASB task force on accounting for post-employment benefits other than pensions. All the FASB experts on this arcane subject were women, as were 30% of those representing business, accounting and academia. In 1986, 40% of all accountants and auditors in the U.S. were women, up from virtually none 20 years ago.    The wait in the FASB ladies' room line capped some recent experiences that convinced me that the &quot;glass ceiling&quot; that supposedly keeps women from rising above a certain level in corporations because they are women is a lot of baloney. So, too, is the extensive &quot;documentation&quot; of the especially unhappy lives of young women executives.    Just the week before, I met Potomac Edison's top ranks of middle-management engineers, system analysts, line supervisors and construction crews, at least half of whom were female. The week before that, at Bowdoin College's board meeting, nearly all of the committee chairmen were chairwomen, a feat all the more remarkable in a college that first became co-educational in 1970. And the week before that, I lectured to a packed audience of women entrepreneurs at New York's Lincoln Center. These women were accomplished, authoritative, attractive; they weren't craning their necks looking through a &quot;glass ceiling.&quot; As Lionel Richie puts it in his song, they were &quot;dancing on the ceiling,&quot; savoring a life filled with opportunities never before offered to women.    Further support for my conviction comes from more impersonal data:   --In 1986, 30% of managers, 16% of lawyers, 20% of doctors and 40% of programmers were female.    --In 1986, 83% of the female officers in the Fortune and Service 500 were at vice presidential or above levels, up from 35% in 1980.    --In 1986, 33% of the people receiving MBAs and 14% receiving engineering degrees were female, vs. 2% in 1966.    --In 1984, 3.5 million self-employed women owned 2.8 million firms. This represented 28% of all U.S. companies, up from 7% in 1977. And the number of female entrepreneurs was growing an average of 9.4% annually, twice the rate of their male counterparts.    Of course, prejudices linger, but the common evocations of bitter -- and, worse, unsuccessful -- women managers are wrong, emanating from the following five sources of misinformation.    1) False Prophets: Women are great readers and even better book buyers, devouring schlock about women -- from gothic romances to &quot;Dress for Success.&quot; They are also highly responsive to suggestions for self-help and therefore susceptible to a huge industry of false prophets -- writers, journalists, aerobics instructors, lecturers and nutritionists -- that encourages and depends on nurturing women's unwarranted sense of failure.    The scientific branch of false prophecy is false biology, which differentiates the so-called innate managerial capabilities of the sexes: Women are more nurturing (read &quot;soft&quot;) and less aggressive (read &quot;weak&quot;) than men. Genetic differences are seen as holding women back or, conversely, as the basis for a brave new-future-world of caring management. But until gene mappers find a ruthless gene that is uniquely male and a compassionate gene that is uniquely female, I remain unconvinced that differences in managerial behavior are caused by anything other than differences in social roles.    2) False Arithmetic: Simple arithmetic shows that the production of one 1987-vintage female chief executive officer requires thousands of women to have committed themselves to that goal in the college class of 1952, because it takes an average of 35 post-college years to become a CEO. Since most women in 1952 were thinking about the initials MRS., not CEO, it is not surprising that we are not, as yet, deluged by female chief executives.    When I started teaching at the Harvard Business School in 1972, women were about 2% of the MBA class. By 1976, 15% of Harvard MBA degrees went to women. Using good arithmetic, by 1997 there will be 20 to 30 female big-company CEOs. By 2011, we will see the deluge.    3) False Failures: The &quot;glass ceiling&quot; myth rests squarely on the asserted absence of any female Fortune 500 CEOs. But, in reality, there are three female CEOs of Fortune 500 companies, and one of a closely held company that size -- Estee Lauder. (If the list is expanded to those billion-dollar utilities and financial institutions not included among the 500, the number increases to eight.) Yet, this extraordinary success is deemed a failure, and the extraordinary accomplishments of the female CEOs are denigrated: Katharine Graham's family owned the Washington Post; Estee Lauder and Liz Claiborne are in traditional womens' businesses; and Linda Wachner heads Warnaco, a &quot;lesser known&quot; company.    Geraldine Ferraro is a vivid example of false failure. Although failure is a much more common state than success, the failures of women, particularly the &quot;first&quot; women, are magnified and exaggerated. Ms. Ferraro should be much more notable for her many successes than her failure to attain an exceedingly difficult goal.    4) False Expectations: Does every senior executive expect to become a CEO? There is, after all, only one CEO, and because it is a nice job, the turnover is low. Is the female senior manager's glass half-empty or half-full? In 1986, it was more than half-full: The typical female officer of a Fortune and Service 500 firm earned $117,000 a year, was married, and would not have stayed home even if given the same salary to do so.    Equally false is the expectation that younger managers should be happy. Findings of dissatisfaction by younger, female corporate managers misspecify the cause, attributing it to sex, rather than a low organizational level that makes men unhappy as well.    5) False History: Some point to the failure of the 19th-century woman textile worker, the Suffragette, the Bloomer Girl, Rosie the Riveter and that Cosmo Girl to become the first female Fortune 500 CEO as verification of the unlikely future progress of women in management. But times really have changed. U.S. companies have become truly multicultural -- accepting all kinds of people, as long as they are talented and productive.    I don't wish to end this essay with a declaration of victory. The remarkable and wonderful progress of women in corporations has exacted heavy costs and continues to do so, particularly on children. A 1987 survey in Adweek of female advertising executives found that more than half their employers provide no child-care assistance. A third of the respondents said they would readily switch from their present employer to one offering some child-care support. Further, although MIT found its male and female MBAs in the classes of 1974-79 had equal incomes five years after graduation, the pay gap between men and women in other occupations is large, persistent and inequitable.    Another lingering problem is that the progress of women managers has not been accompanied by a set of comfortable, acceptable images of the new male-female work relationship. Many men and women are therefore unnecessarily awkward and inefficient in working together. For example, a male mentor typically will go out of his way to explain that he has a good, working relationship with a protegee and that the relationship is not sexual.    I hope we will overcome these problems so men and women can work together gracefully and share in this rich life. Then we can all dance on the ceiling.    ---   Ms. Herzlinger is Nancy McPherson professor of business administration at Harvard Business School.    (See related story: &quot;Men Helped Feminize Poverty&quot; -- WSJ Feb. 17, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>