<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870618-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH TOLD congressional Iran-Contra investigators he wouldn't testify privately.    A lawyer for Lt. Col. North said his client would take questions only in public, according to Senate panel leaders. North was to be questioned behind closed doors today and in public next month. Neither the Senate nor House panel is eager to begin time-consuming contempt proceedings, but Senate committee Chairman Inouye (D., Hawaii) said he wanted an &quot;ironclad&quot; agreement that North will testify in public, and counsels have been instructed to begin negotiating one.    The White House rebuked the Justice Department for the &quot;intemperate&quot; tone of its attack on the system of court-appointed independent counsels.    ---   SEOUL BEGAN CLOSING universities in an attempt to halt violent student protests.    Officials shut 28 universities and were expected to close more as students set up street barricades in the capital and violence flared in four other cities on the eighth day of the worst violence against the government of President Chun since he took power in 1979. The U.S. consulate in Pusan was closed because of protests in the area. About 1,200 Roman Catholics led by clergy demonstrated at an Inchon cathedral.    Shultz, in Singapore for talks with Southeast Asian leaders, said the U.S. is &quot;trying to lean on everyone&quot; in South Korea to bring about peaceful change.    ---   CIA ANALYSTS SAID escorting Persian Gulf ships could trigger a terrorist attack.    Rep. Aspin (D., Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said the analysts told his panel they believe Iran would respond to an increased U.S. presence in the gulf. The administration has depicted such an attack as unlikely. Meanwhile, a special Senate gulf task force reported that U.S. credibility would suffer if plans to protect 11 Kuwaiti ships are not carried out.    The Senate Foreign Relations Committee delayed action, probably until next week, on a bill that would bar Reagan's ship-escort plans.    ---   Soviet officials removed the chief of Moscow's air defenses and expelled several other officers from the Communist Party. It wasn't clear whether Marshal Konstantinov, the air defense chief, had been replaced before or after a young West German pilot landed his plane in Red Square May 28 following a flight from Finland.    Gorbachev faces the possible dilution or dismantlement of his plans for a radical restructuring of the Soviet economy at a plenary session of the Communist Party's Central Committee next week. Western analysts say support for his reforms has been unraveling.    ---   Northrop Corp. can't account for about 780 classified documents related to the secret Stealth bomber it is developing for the Air Force, congressional sources said a General Accounting Office investigation has found. But the agency couldn't learn if national security had been compromised, the sources said.    ---   The FAA said more than 20% of all concealed weapons passed through airport security systems at 28 major airports tested at random by the agency. An FAA spokesman refused to identify the airports.    ---   Bonn said it will decide next week whether to extradite Mohammed Hamadi, who is wanted by the U.S. in connection with the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner to Beirut. A published report said TWA crew members who traveled recently to West Germany to view Hamadi have positively identified him as one of the hijackers.    ---   A government panel recommended that South Africa extend the whites-only military draft to include blacks. Meanwhile, police reported killing one black, injuring nine and arresting seven on the 11th anniversary of the 1976 Soweto uprising. More than 1.5 million blacks returned to work after a one-day commemorative strike Tuesday.    ---   Manila said more than 1,000 Communist guerrillas surrendered on the southern Philippine island of Mindanao, exposing an elaborate underground provisional government that collected taxes and included the mayor of a town. Meanwhile, two guerrillas were killed while attempting to assassinate a police officer in Manila.    ---   Israeli warplanes staged two Lebanon raids, killing two people and wounding eight, a day after an Arab man died in Tel Aviv when a bomb he was handling went off, Israeli officials said. Police in Lebanon said one of the raids leveled the headquarters of a Palestinian group near Sidon. In the other, a Shiite position was attacked.    ---   Indians voted in Haryana state for local assembly and two Parliament seats in an election considered pivotal to the political future of Prime Minister Gandhi. The Hindu-dominated state, located between New Delhi and Punjab, has been torn by a guerrilla war by Sikh separatists. Final results are not expected until tomorrow.    ---   Canadian letter carriers widened their strike to three more cities and two strikers were injured and one arrested while trying to halt deliveries. Union officials said 5,000 of 20,000 workers are staying home.    ---   Researchers reported that penicillin is ineffective against syphilis in some patients who are also infected with AIDS, indicating the virus accelerates the progression of syphilis. Meanwhile, the FDA released a report that expands the priority it will give AIDS research and treatment.    ---   Died: Dick Howser, 51, former manager of baseball's Kansas City Royals, in Kansas City, of brain cancer. </TEXT></DOC>