<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0163 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:U.S. Role in Suits Against the Soviets</HL><DD> 02/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTEXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   A Dec. 31 editorial commented on the role of the State Department in two cases in U.S. courts involving the Soviet Union: the Gregorian case involving claims by a private citizen against the Soviet Union, and the Wallenberg case involving claims by the legal guardian of Raoul Wallenberg against the Soviet Union. On the Jan. 28 editorial page, William Pearl commented on the Gregorian case. Both pieces contain inaccurate and misleading assertions.    The State Department is not representing the Soviet Union, nor invoking sovereign immunity on its behalf. The U.S. role is limited to that which the executive has played since passage of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) in 1976. At that time, while acknowledging that immunity decisions henceforth were to be made under the act by the courts, the department noted that the U.S. would maintain a continuing interest in the interpretation of the act because of foreign-policy implications, and would continue to comment on such issues. Since then, the U.S. has repeatedly presented its views to courts. Determinations of sovereign immunity are made exclusively by the courts, however, and not solely on the basis of U.S. government representations.    The U.S. does not appear on behalf of foreign governments, but seeks to convince them that they should appear and present any defenses, including sovereign immunity, directly to the courts. When we succeed in persuading them to do so, we often ask the court to set aside default judgments and hear their claims. Courts have recognized that, where possible, cases should be decided on the merits. The courts have evidenced an even stronger presumption against default judgments in cases involving foreign states and the important principle of sovereign immunity. Courts have often vacated default judgments entered after a foreign country had initially failed to appear.    Some states refuse to appear, however, believing they are immune from suit. The court then may be called on to enter a default judgment. Although the FSIA prohibits the court from entering a default judgment unless the claimant offers satisfactory evidence, the court has before it only the arguments of one party. Under those circumstances, the U.S. may present its views at the request of the court, or because an issue being litigated is of significance to the application of the FSIA.    The U.S. became involved in the Gregorian case in part because counsel for Mr. Gregorian asked help in getting the Soviet Union to respond. After discussion between the State Department and the Soviet Embassy, two of the Soviet state-owned commercial defendants agreed to retain private U.S. counsel to appear on their behalf. The U.S. then asked that the court set aside the default judgment and consider the arguments of the Soviet defendants on the merits, meanwhile suspending enforcement. If the court decides to grant this relief, it may still enter a decision in favor of the plaintiff on one or more claims.    Nor does the department support the Soviet Union in dismissing the case. The U.S. holds that Congress didn't intend to provide jurisdiction over libel actions. This is a general issue under the FSIA in which the U.S. has an independent interest. We have not submitted any views, however, on the contractual aspects of the dispute. Moreover, before the government submitted views on libel jurisdiction, I offered to try to assist Mr. Gregorian's attorney in resolving this case short of further litigation. My offer was declined.    In the Wallenberg case, the District Court entered a default judgment in November 1985 that directed the Soviet Union, among other things, to produce Mr. Wallenberg or his remains within 60 days and to pay $39 million in damages. When the Soviet Union did not comply, plaintiffs filed a motion to hold it in contempt. Recognizing that entry of such an order would involve important foreign-relations issues, the court sought the views of the U.S.    We responded that the exercise of the contempt power in that case would be inconsistent with the purposes of the FSIA, and would be ineffective. We also advised the court that it should not find the Soviet Union in contempt, because the court lacked jurisdiction under the FSIA to enter its original decision. We noted that the U.S. &quot;abhors the Soviet Union's unjust imprisonment of Wallenberg&quot; and continues, through government channels, to seek a full accounting of his fate.    Interpretations of those aspects of the FSIA on which the government has commented in these and other cases have general application to litigation involving other countries. What we do to other countries we should expect to be done to us within their systems. (The Soviet Union, consistent with its views of international law, provides the U.S. far greater immunity than we accord foreign countries under the FSIA.) And we must act evenhandedly in matters involving justice in our courts. This means doing no more for the Soviets than we would do for another state, but also doing no less.    Abraham D. Sofaer   Legal Adviser, State Department   Washington</TEXT></DOC>