<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880601-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Diversity of U.S. Asian Vote Presents Parties With Courtship Challenges and Opportunities </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   More than a decade after the fall of Saigon, a new war is being fought here for the hearts and minds -- and votes -- of Asians.    Democrats dominate the ranks of Asian-American officeholders but Republicans at the grass roots are aggressively pursuing a new generation of immigrants from Indochina, Korea and China. &quot;The Republicans have been much better than the Democrats in reaching out,&quot; says Los Angeles City Councilman Michael Woo. Just as this young Democrat's election in 1985 symbolized the rising power of California's burgeoning Asian-American population, the community's success makes it a target for both parties seeking votes and money.    &quot;Hey brother, you make my day,&quot; cries Ky Ngo, hawking the GOP to his fellow Vietnamese streaming out of a mass naturalization ceremony for thousands of new citizens. In suburban Santa Ana, Hmong tribesmen, who fought for the Central Intelligence Agency before being abandoned in Laos, regroup as the Hmong American Republican Association. In Monterey Park, Chinese-American voters show a significant shift to the GOP since 1984. &quot;It's ripe picking,&quot; says Democrat Robert Matsui, a Sacramento congressman.    Jesse Jackson and Michael Dukakis will pick their share in next week's presidential primary, but as the likely Democratic nominee, Gov. Dukakis particularly needs their support if he is to carry the nation's largest state against Vice President George Bush. Together with Filipinos and other immigrants from the Pacific islands, Asian-Americans already outnumber California's two million blacks. Beyond next Tuesday, the fight has a more lasting significance both for the two parties and this immensely diverse ethnic community.    Four years ago, President Reagan ran somewhat better among Asian-Americans here than among the general population. But surveys by the California Institute of Technology indicate this ethnic community -- almost 8% of the state's population -- isn't firmly aligned with either party. Filipinos, the largest single group, are most Democratic, and the party retains support among many Japanese-Americans. The smaller but faster-growing Vietnamese population leans to the GOP, and the Korean and Chinese-American vote appears most divided.    Outside California and Hawaii, New York, Illinois and Texas have small but important Asian American populations, and this year's political campaign coincides with an in creased awareness of the community's strength -- and vulnerability -- as a minority in the U.S.    Asian-Americans haven't any single hero like Martin Luther King Jr., who inspired the Rev. Jackson. They lack the homeland unity of Greek-Americans behind Mr. Dukakis. Like many Jews, their academic and economic success bring them the unwanted, racist label of &quot;super-minority&quot; and can stir resentment among not only whites but competing blacks and Hispanics.    The multitude of languages and very diversity of the Asian-American community makes it harder to organize. But whether in response to the beating of an Asian in Detroit or alleged quotas on the admission of Asians to California state schools, there is a heightened concern in the Asian-American community about political power.    Virtually all top Asian-American elected figures are Democrats, yet the alliance with the Democrats has been rocky. A Democratic president, Franklin Roosevelt, uprooted Japanese-American families in World War II, and Asian activists have had to fight to gain recognition in the party. Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii), the most prominent Asian-American figure nationally, faces a stiff fight to become Senate majority leader, and though his foreign-policy credentials match any of his fellow Democrats, he is overlooked as a potential Dukakis running mate.    Among the three remaining presidential candidates, Mr. Jackson has been most assertive in bringing Asian-Americans into his campaign and spoke out early against the &quot;Asian-bashing&quot; that charactized some of his party's demands for trade restrictions. Mr. Jackson &quot;comes across as pretty unadulterated,&quot; says Henry Der, a civil-rights activist in San Francisco, &quot;Dukakis is OK, but the epitome of the yuppified candidate.&quot;    If that is so, the Dukakis image is welltailored for a community so oriented to self-achievement. Established Asian-American political leaders show the same caution as the governor and play it safe by resisting Mr. Jackson's crusade. Like many yuppies, they put a priority on a bold &quot;face&quot; and criticize Mr. Bush's wishywashy public image.    Before a Palo Alto research corporation, Mr. Dukakis generously praised Japan, and his moderate stance on trade helped him win early endorsements from Asian-American congressmen.    At a recent Los Angeles fund-raiser, the governor touched a chord when he invoked his immigrant heritage. More personal but less well-known is his wife Kitty's record on behalf of Indochinese refugees, particularly in reuniting families split by war. &quot;One of the reasons I wanted this guy to run for president is what he can do to help,&quot; she says.    Mr. Bush, a former ambassador to China, has his own record to cite, but his greater asset is the system of ethnic clubs built by the GOP and the likes of Orange County's Dennis Catron. The son of a Navy officer and Quaker mother, the 40-year-old housing developer mixes anti-communism with a more compassionate commitment to the welfare of the diverse groups he busily seeks to bring into the Republican mainstream. &quot;It's a two-way street,&quot; he says. &quot;They're also training us about the problems out there.&quot;    Ky Ngo, who sells the GOP to newly naturalized citizens, at age 34 is a success story and a Bush delegate to the August Republican convention. But the newer immigrants, the people he is exhorting, find it harder to explain their political choices. Minutes after becoming a U.S. citizen, Minh Kien Ly, a 28-year-old medical assistant who fled Vietnam in the early 1980s, passes through a gantlet of GOP and Democratic recruiting tables outside the Los Angeles convention center and registers as a Republican. &quot;They were Vietnamese and they were asking me,&quot; he says.    Miles south, Xang Moua, a Hmong who carried an M-16 when barely a teen-ager, proudly frames mailings from the GOP. On the opposite wall hang black-and-white photos from Laos, including one of a brother slain in the war.    Republican pro-military, pro-business themes suit these newcomers. But on social issues, the Asian emphasis on order, the family and the individual produces crosscurrents at odds with both parties.    Past surveys indicate Asian-Americans strongly support both the death penalty -- which Mr. Dukakis opposes -- and gun control, which he promotes. The community backs prayer in school -- a favorite conservative initiative -- but also gives strong support to the Equal Rights Amendment.    &quot;They're a clean slate,&quot; says Cal Tech political scientist Bruce Cain. </TEXT></DOC>