<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880830-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Losing Ground: In Iowa, the Drought Might Seal the Fate Of the Smallest Towns --- With Population Declining And Farmers in Trouble, Future Looks More Urban --- Sandy Mercer's Prized Horses </HL><AUTHOR> Dennis Farney (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ECO CMD </IN><G> EXE CNG AGD </G><DATELINE> MOUNT AYR, Iowa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Sandra Mercer, 19, is freckle-faced and auburn-haired-&quot;sorrel,&quot; she says, like her colt Rambo. As she mends from a near-fatal motorcycle crash two years ago, horses are her consolation. Her peace, her escape.    But there has been no escaping the drought that has tormented the Midwest this summer.    One day recently, Sandy Mercer rode out from her parents' farm and into the early-evening heat. Across brown pastures with grass like threadbare carpet, beneath trees whose leaves hung limp in the sun, and finally to a dried-up pond. There, her mare Lucy abruptly balked, spooked by something at first unseen.    It was the lingering odor of death: The pond bed was littered with rotten fish.    Here in Southwest Iowa, the spring rains came four months late this year -- too late to make a difference in the corn crop, but reviving soybeans and pastures where hungry cattle had been stripping the leaves off trees. The drought, although dented, still imperils a fragile rural economic recovery. But its effects run far deeper.    With its high-profile presidential caucus and a culture still dominated by the values of the courthouse square, Iowa is the nation's pre-eminent symbol of Rural America. A few other states -- Montana and North Dakota, for example -- have been hit even harder by the drought. But Iowa demonstrates as starkly as any state how the dry spell is reinforcing economic and demographic pressures transforming the rural Midwest into something far different from the stable, pastoral world of a Grant Wood painting.    &quot;Iowa is being reshaped by an invisible hand,&quot; says researcher David Swenson of the University of Iowa Public Policy Center. &quot;Its past is colliding with its future.&quot;    The past was rural, prosperous and agriculturally based; the future will be more urban, more white-collar and seemingly more uncertain. Iowa is imploding. Its urban areas are growing moderately -- envious Iowans call the Des Moines area &quot;the golden circle&quot; -- but its rural areas are steadily losing ground. The state population is growing older, more worried about the future and politically more volatile.    This state suffered a net population loss of 80,000 from mid-1980 to mid-1987. And last spring the U.S. Census Bureau issued a stunning, hotly disputed projection of far worse to come. It projected an unprecedented population drop by the year 2010, to 2.4 million, from about 2.8 million.    &quot;The Iowa we have known would cease to exist,&quot; editorialized the Des Moines Register under the headline: &quot;Showing Iowa Its Grave.&quot;    These days, the most emotional political issue in Iowa isn't the Dukakis-Bush race -- it is the long-term question of consolidating rural schools. Against this backdrop, Dale Cochran, the Democratic Secretary of Agriculture, is pushing a potentially controversial idea for this education-conscious state. In effect, he would hold education expenditures down and pour new money into agricultural marketing and value-added food processing.    He notes that education consumes 59% of Iowa's $2.7 billion budget. Yet he talks of a survey of about 4,000 Iowa college seniors that found that about half intended to leave the state; an additional 30%, while more inclined to stay, doubted that they could find Iowa jobs. Like some minor-league baseball club, Iowa is spending heavily to develop stars, then shipping them off to the major leagues. &quot;It's agriculture's turn&quot; for special attention, Mr. Cochran argues.    The Census Bureau projections have been confronted head-on by GOP Gov. Terry Branstad. &quot;They took the worst of our farm crisis years and projected those trends out to come up with this ludicrous number,&quot; the governor says. The state projects a modest population increase, to around 2.9 million, by the turn of the century, and he cites success stories in towns like Mount Pleasant and Mason City.    The governor gets support from independent studies and a separate projection by a Census Bureau sister agency, the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The BEA, factoring in recently improved Iowa economic trends, projects a nearly three million population by the year 2000. Commerce Secretary C. William Verity has assured the governor in writing that these findings &quot;confirm your view of Iowa's brighter future.&quot;    Nevertheless, uneasiness about that future might help explain why Michael Dukakis took a strong early lead over George Bush in this state. In a June Des Moines Register poll, he had a startling 60% to 28% lead among likely voters. Even Democratic observers expect a Bush rebound in the next Register poll. Nevertheless, they say this state is especially receptive to Gov. Dukakis's claims of engineering an economic &quot;miracle&quot; in Massachusetts.    &quot;People,&quot; says Iowa Democratic Congressman David Nagle, &quot;feel they need to make a change, just to keep what they've got.&quot;    What drought-stricken Iowa has is a population that is seemingly changing at its psychological core. The matter-of-fact survivors, unlike the pioneer sodbusters of 125 years ago, don't defy the odds; they endure the odds.    &quot;They feel this {drought} is an act of God,&quot; says the Rev. Samuel Fry of the Mount Ayr Methodist Church. &quot;A nature thing. You have the feast, and you have the famine. This is the famine.&quot; Local churches have instituted a 6:30 a.m. vigil every Wednesday to pray for rain.    Here on the rolling prairie, scorched pastures forced farmers to begin feeding hay in late May or June -- five or six months ahead of normal. Area cattle-sale barns have worked well into the night to process cattle in forced herd reductions. Anxious farmers are bailing up the grass along state highways. When Charles Beck of nearby Kellerton was offered hay free for the cutting, he loaded up his bailer and drove 300 miles, round-trip, to get it.    Rainfall, scattered and erratic, seems to follow &quot;a pattern designed by Satan himself,&quot; Rep. Nagle says. Mr. Beck's farm got a desert-like 2.5 inches of rain from spring thaw through July. Yet neighbors four miles away got almost twice as much. Pockets of the Midwest, including much of north-central Iowa, got far more and are in relatively good shape. The cruel juxtaposition -- have-nots randomly mingled with haves -- is painful.    When the Des Moines Register recently featured a farmer lucky enough to have lush crops, he was the talk of Mount Ayr. &quot;It was like he was rubbing our noses in it,&quot; complains a farm wife here.    Farmer Michael Warin wasn't as lucky. His pickup jouncing down a rutted lane as a turkey vulture circles lazily overhead, he drives a visitor to a field of prime bottom land. Outwardly, the corn there looks green and fairly healthy, until Mr. Warin strips the husk from an ear. The ear has managed to form only eight kernels -- at least 600 fewer than normal.    So the die had already been cast when late-August storms dumped three to five inches of rain on Mike Warin's fields. &quot;It made no difference&quot; to his corn, he says. But the rain could enable him to harvest a mediocre soybean crop -- if $9-an-acre spraying by helicopter can suppress the beetles that have seemed to materialize overnight.    Federal experts recently projected that Iowa's corn crop will average 74 bushels an acre, a plunge from 130 last year. (Earlier this month, the Agriculture Department projected a 37% decline in the nation's corn crop, with soybean production falling to the lowest level since 1976.) And an Iowa State University study says this state's net farm income could drop a third to a half from last year's $3 billion.    For reasons ranging from federalism to fatalism, the feelings stirred by the drought differ from the utter despair that gripped the agricultural Midwest as recently as 1984.    Then, many Iowans felt like scapegoats -- chosen victims of Jimmy Carter's grain embargo and Paul Volcker's tight money, isolated amid a generally prospering nation. &quot;We felt so helpless,&quot; recalls Mount Ayr's Mildred Elliott, 61, an alternate at the recent Republican National Convention. &quot;This is more of a God-made thing.&quot;    And now an election-minded Washington is rushing to pump in drought relief. &quot;We know they're going to put the save in,&quot; grins Mr. Warin over lunch here at the Small Corral. But the Washington &quot;save&quot; will barely touch Iowa's fundamental problem: Stabilizing its small towns and their eroding economic base.    For towns under 500 -- and Iowa has nearly 500 of them -- it may already be too late. Their best option, suggests researcher David Swenson, is &quot;planned obsolescence.&quot; That means just patching their patches, like some farmer making do with a secondhand tractor, until they wither away. The real question, says Democratic Sen. Tom Harkin, is whether the next tier of towns can survive.    &quot;Without a strong rural economic development program -- note, I didn't say farm program -- anything under 2,000 to 3,000 may eventually be gone,&quot; he says.    That means towns like Mount Ayr, a place beyond &quot;the golden circle&quot; just as surely as western Ireland was beyond the ancient English Pale. Mount Ayr claimed a 1980 population of only 1,938 and is the seat of Ringgold County, the second smallest in Iowa.    Four years ago, Mount Ayr seemed doomed. Crops had failed several years running, a bank had just gone under, farmland values had plunged by two-thirds and people were bailing out for Arizona and Texas. Ministers had to bring in out-of-state potatoes to feed the hungry.    Doggedly, the town fought back. It formed an Optimist Club. Mrs. Elliott's husband Jack, an Optimist's optimist, began writing an upbeat newspaper column aimed at Mount Ayr's &quot;PTs&quot; (positive thinkers). Capitalizing on their heritage -- the town's name derives from the Scottish birthplace of poet Robert Burns -- citizens imported a fire-engine-red Scottish phone booth and planted it in the courthouse square.    And, just to hold their own, they intensified economic redevelopment. Once, a factory here helped supply the nation with fiberglass statues of Ronald McDonald. (Which explains one little mystery that confronts a first-time visitor: Why is Ronald standing in the courthouse lobby?) Today, the same factory, under new ownership, makes furniture for restaurants like Hardee's and Taco John's.    And next-door, a buoyant entrepreneur from Des Moines, Link Nylen, is setting up shop to turn out &quot;the finest production hobbyhorse in the world.&quot; Crafted of oak, trimmed with leather and sporting their own brass registry tags, Woodlink Ltd.'s horses will sell for as much as $500, Mr. Nylen hopes.    Precariously balanced between optimism and fear, Mount Ayr is proud of its modern hospital and its well-regarded school system. Yet Dan Cunning, a board member of the county development corporation, can think of only one new house built in town within the last year. That, says this insurance agent and farmland manager, suggests the crux of the problem.    &quot;All these companies say sell, sell, sell,&quot; he says. &quot;Well, you can sell only so much to one guy.&quot;    The drought, he says, couldn't have come at a worse time. &quot;There for a while I thought the trend of rural America was coming back. And it was coming back. Now, I'm afraid it has stopped.&quot;    And for 19-year-old Sandra Mercer, the drought is a direct threat to the dearest things in her life.    She worries that her father, Ernest, is working too hard: Up at six, a break at midday, then more work until darkness at 9. &quot;Dad, we're not here on Earth to work all the time,&quot; she told him recently. And she asked: &quot;Are we going to make it through the winter?&quot;    Her father assured her they would. But then, reluctantly, he told her that if things don't get better by fall, she may have to sell her horses. </TEXT></DOC>