<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880629-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: The Afghan Resistance Keeps Fighting </HL><AUTHOR> S.J. Masty </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>   Just six weeks after the Soviets began to leave Afghanistan, the Afghan resistance still sees more evidence of redeployment than withdrawal. Despite this, these freedom fighters -- better armed and enjoying the highest morale so far -- have overrun more than 100 enemy posts in a strategy that has earned unrestrained admiration from Western diplomats.    Yet for the Afghan mujahideen and their refugee kinfolk, the greatest danger is now internal politics and misplaced pressure from their allies. On May 15, the Soviets held a highly publicized pullout from Jalalabad, later leaving the city of Ghazni and one district of Logar, all near the Pakistan border.    According to the political officer for Younis Khalis's Hezb-e-Islami Party, Abdul Qabir, &quot;Last week the Soviets returned to Jalalabad; lots, but we don't know how many.&quot;    The mujahideen believe the Soviets are eventually going to go, but right now are regrouping their troops around key cities and strategic targets. While that helped postpone a siege of Jalalabad, it isn't slowing down the resistance generally.    Fighting remains furious in the southern city of Kandahar, which might soon fall from within, and the renowned resistance commander Mullah Malang last week opened more than 62 miles of the Kandahar-Kabul road. With it fell an 800-man Soviet post in Qalat: Under heavy fire, the Soviets fled at night leaving thousands of gallons of fuel, armored vehicles, weapons and supplies.    The resistance is also getting more and better weapons from the West. On Friday, Commander Abdul Haq's troops attacked Kabul Airport with new Sacher incendiary rockets. They hit at least one SU-25 Soviet fighter-bomber preparing for takeoff, and the explosion wrecked seven more SU-25s and an ammo dump, causing, by conservative estimate, $200 million in damage.    Mujahideen complain that the Western press keeps asking, irrelevantly, when key cities will fall. That, they say, comes later. Now they're fighting for roads and winning outposts while they play a different strategy inside the cities.    In Ghazni, where the nearest Soviet armored column is almost 10 miles away, mujahideen have free run in and out of the city. Troops of the Soviet-backed regime, by contrast, are bottled up in the governor's mansion, a fortress overlooking the town and other small positions. Cut off from supplies, the regime soldiers subsist on what rations they stockpiled when the Soviets left three weeks ago.    &quot;We could defeat them in a week or two,&quot; says Ruhani Wardak, a Ghazni resistance fighter, &quot;but we want to protect the local civilians and do as much damage as possible from within.&quot;    The resistance leaders have highly localized regional commands, and they know that if one city faces an all-out attack, much of the regime and Soviet air force can pulverize them and the city they hope to govern.    Instead, they plan to continue their blitzkrieg strategy until the Soviet withdrawal hastens and regime troops are highly infiltrated and softened. Then they will try to take several cities simultaneously, diminishing the threat from the air.    &quot;They're doing it right,&quot; says one Western diplomat in Pakistan. &quot;They're being careful not to kill civilians, and they're not being reckless -- even a temporary mujahideen defeat could embolden the regime.&quot;    Assuming that the Soviet withdrawal continues, the greatest threat to the leaders of the resistance lies elsewhere, to wit: pressure from their allies and arms suppliers to form an elected government-in-exile. Proponents say it would give the resistance parties international credibility; opponents say it could split their delicate alliance.    While mujahideen commanders cooperate in the field -- sharing weapons, coordinating campaigns, even selecting the most capable to command joint operations -- their seven political party leaders in Peshawar are hardly so cooperative.    Two fringe parties, the monarchist National Islamic Front of Afghanistan (NIFA) and the extreme Islamic Hezb-e-Islami faction of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar (not to be confused with the Hezb-e-Islami Party of Younis Khalis), have long received the lion's share of weapons despite their being small and militarily ill-managed. Much of their money is spent recruiting civilian party members in refugee camps rather than in fighting the Soviets.    Yet the political fortunes of both are waning, especially since the middle parties have the most commanders. These commanders are the real civil as well as military leaders inside Afghanistan. When the refugees return, the camps and the parties themselves will largely be forgotten at the Pakistan-Afghan border, and options for political moderation will expand.    Sensing this, both fringe parties -- former enemies -- are demanding elections now. Ballot boxes would be set up in refugee camps, say NIFA officials, and key commanders would send representatives from Afghanistan. Votes would go to parties, which would allocate their percentage of seats in a resistance Parliament.    Many refugees in Pakistan are unregistered, hence unable to vote. Two million more live in Iran, two million in internal exile in Afghanistan, and democracy is difficult in a war zone.    &quot;Such elections in the camps could be influenced by anybody,&quot; complains Naim Majrooh, director of the Afghan Information Center in Peshawar. Mr. Majrooh fears corruption, but even the plan's advocates admit the likelihood of an electoral shambles.    Cementing a party structure that was established only with Western pressure as a channel for arms, and with it cementing fringe politics, &quot;could make Afghanistan look like Lebanon,&quot; says Mohammad Naim Farahi, a tribal leader from Farah province.    A better solution, say most Afghans, is a &quot;Loya Jirga,&quot; or traditional Afghan congress made up of district representatives, chiefly along tribal or ethnic lines. Yet this, too, is impractical in wartime. &quot;We can't have a representative government until we get rid of the regime,&quot; says Kabul resistance commander Abdul Haq.    Under mounting pressure for democracy that many say is premature, the seven alliance leaders have agreed only in principle that elections are desirable, while NIFA and Mr. Hekmatyar's Hezb-e-Islami Party push their own detailed agenda for polls in 90 days.    Many hope that as the mujahideen liberate more of their country, the parties will atrophy as the need for weapons diminishes, and returning refugees will contribute to the grass-roots moderacy already evolving inside Afghanistan. They also hope the middle parties can withstand the pressure for a poll.    Yet without Western pressure to forestall premature elections, the political ambitions of the party leaders-cum-arms distributors may do more damage to a free Afghanistan than the Soviets could.    ---   Mr. Masty is editor of the Humanitarian News Service in Peshawar, Pakistan. </TEXT></DOC>