<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870730-0118 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Lemmings v. Bork</HL><DD> 07/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   More prominent Democrats are resigning from the stop-Bork campaign. Lloyd Cutler has written a forceful defense of Judge Bork against his critics. Mario Cuomo says &quot;I'm not referring to anyone in particular,&quot; but judgment should come after the hearing, not before. Now Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd pointedly states that he hasn't decided how he will vote on the Bork nomination and regrets &quot;to see this very important nomination become a strictly partisan matter.&quot;    While we wouldn't want to deny that some Democrats really do want to be fair to Judge Bork, we suspect they also worry that the joy riders on the anti-Bork bandwagon may take the Democratic Party right off a cliff. Republicans might be tempted to say of the stop-Bork movement what North Carolina's Republican Gov. Jim Martin said more than a year ago of the Democrats' plans for a Southern super primary: &quot;I'm almost afraid to talk about it too much for fear they won't do it.&quot;    Consider the spectacle about to unfold:    First, national television will show the congressional hearing process being used, entirely by Democrats this time, to bully an obviously distinguished American. Playing point man, Senator Joe Biden will do his best to be a presidential-looking bully.    If perchance this search-and-destroy mission actually picks up enough craven Republicans to succeed, Bob Bork will be replaced by the odds-on alternative nominee, Senator Orrin Hatch. Democrats should think hard about whether they want 10 to 20 years of Judge Bork or 20 to 30 years of Senator Hatch. As Gov. Cuomo and others have suggested, Judge Bork's deference to policies set by elected legislatures is an advantage to a party that expects to control Congress and many statehouses. Senator Hatch, after years working in the PAC-financed congressional sausage factory, figures to be a more conservative activist, overturning laws he has spent his career opposing.    Finally, consider all the issues that will be on stage for continuous public inspection if the Bork nomination is held up: aggressive abortion policies, school prayer, numerical racial quotas, the exclusionary rule, gay rights. Senator Byrd and other Democrats interested in running a competitive presidential race might ponder whether to get the Bork confirmation behind them this summer or keep it on front pages until November 1988.    The sleeper issue in a long battle would be one of two-time winner Ronald Reagan's favorite topics, judicial activism itself. It's fairly obvious now that the arguments made by Judge Bork's loudest liberal opponents have run the Democrats into an embarrassing intellectual corner. It's clear they believe that appointed judges, not legislatures, ultimately create the nation's laws. Judge Bork opposes judicial policy making. This is the sort of issue that usually doesn't hang in the air of mass politics, but a delayed nomination will ensure that it does so.    These prospects are obvious to a few Democrats, apparently including one announced presidential candidate, Senator Albert Gore. But most of the party is running for the cliff like a herd of lemmings. Opposition has been sounded by Joe Biden, Jesse Jackson, Richard Gephardt, Paul Simon, Michael Dukakis and Bruce Babbitt. And by Ted Kennedy, People for the American Way, the NAACP, Planned Parenthood, the National Organization for Women, the National Abortion Rights Action League, the Alliance for Justice, the Judicial Selection Project and all the other independent duchies of the balkanized Democratic Party.    The Bork nomination, in short, is an exhibit in the built-in suicide complex of the Democratic Party. In order to win the Democratic nomination, a potential candidate is forced to take positions that will be fatal in the general election. You can't win because if you refuse to become fodder for the party's sacred cows, the cows will trample you. The final result of a long, dirty battle against Judge Bork will be to further convince Messrs. Cuomo, Bradley, Nunn and Robb that the nomination isn't worth having.    At bottom, the Democratic Party's problems with Judge Bork are of a piece with its larger problems in the race for the post-Reagan presidency. They are against Judge Bork just as they insist on being against virtually anything Ronald Reagan attaches his name to. But what are they for? The Gephardt amendment? Taxing away the deficit?    To be sure, there is a lot of time until the nominating conventions and the elections. If the Democrats want to use their time running the stop-Bork option past the electorate, that's their business. But in presidential politics, the clock eventually runs out. </TEXT></DOC>