<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871015-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Professorial Babbitt Offers Few Simple Solutions,Stresses Power of Ideas Over Personal Alliances---By John E. YangStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   {This is the 10th in a series of personal profiles of the 1988 presidential candidates.}    FLAGSTAFF, Ariz. -- As a seventh-grader at Flagstaff Junior High School, Bruce Babbitt was, a boyhood friend recalls, &quot;the absolute geek.&quot;    Gawky and bespectacled, the young Bruce Babbitt &quot;really had a tough time,&quot; says Bruce Leadbetter, now a Dallas executive. He struggled to fit in and to be popular, even asking friends about the latest styles and how to do the Bop and the Jitterbug.    But by the ninth grade, says Mr. Leadbetter, Bruce was &quot;in the middle of it with everybody else,&quot; and by the time he was a senior at Flagstaff High School, he was elected president of the class of 1956.    Like a marathon runner out to improve his time beyond the bounds of physical pain, Bruce Babbitt draws on his determination and penchant for self-improvement to achieve his goals. &quot;I've seen him get darn near everywhere he said he was going to go,&quot; marvels his younger brother James.    This Arizona Democrat is a most unlikely presidential aspirant. Trained as a geologist, he has learned to govern, but he hasn't learned to be political. Intellectually, he knows what makes a successful politician, but he is unwilling to make wholesale changes in his personality and seems temperamentally unable to make adjustments in his style. He's a very shy and cerebral man who is more comfortable dealing with ideas than with people.    When he does move in the exuberant world of politics, he does so reluctantly, sometimes awkwardly. He was twice elected governor, after assuming the office upon his predecessor's death. &quot;He would like to win all the elections the way he won the first one, when he ascended into office,&quot; says Ronnie Lopez, a close aide. &quot;He doesn't realize that only works for sainthood and the pope.&quot;    Even some of his most ardent supporters agree that Bruce Babbitt is an acquired taste. His pragmatic, problem-solving approach to government defies easy political or ideological categorization. His fascination with public policy doesn't easily translate into catchy slogans or stirring rhetoric.    He doesn't cater to his audiences; he recently told a group of Iowa municipal officials that he thinks general federal revenue-sharing programs are a bad idea. His aides call it &quot;the candor pander.&quot; He offers few simple answers because he sees few simple questions. Ask him about solving the drug problem in America, for instance, and he ends up talking about the economic problems of Mexico.    Undeniably bright, he loves ideas and pursues them with vigor. After reading &quot;The Second Industrial Divide,&quot; a thick book by two Massachusetts Institute of Technology professors on the socioeconomic effects of technology, he read some of the works cited in the book's footnotes and even asked aides about still more works cited in the second batch of books.    He puts more faith in the power of his ideas than in the power of the personal relationships and alliances that propel other politicians and their agendas. As governor, he approached the Republican-dominated Legislature not as a group of people to deal with, but as yet another problem to be solved.    &quot;Babbitt always viewed government as a marketplace of ideas,&quot; says Andrew Hurwitz, a Phoenix attorney who was chief of staff in the governor's office. &quot;He thought that if his ideas were better, he'd get ahead.&quot;    Mr. Babbitt isn't a rousing orator. He speaks in precise, complete sentences, building them into logical and reasoned arguments. His cadences often make him sound professorial and ponderous. He's at his best when talking with small groups of people, sessions that take on the air of a college seminar. He conveys a quiet intensity, not a burning passion.    He comes by his reticence honestly; it is a strong Babbitt family trait. The scion of a pioneer Arizona family that once dominated commerce in the northern part of the state, he was raised in an atmosphere where even Saturday nights were expected to be spent at home with the family, quietly reading, with no need to speak just to fill the silence.    The family never flaunted its position or wealth. &quot;They were very modest people, essentially shy,&quot; Platt Cline, a local historian, says of the Babbitts. Hard as it may be for non-Babbitts to believe, Bruce is considered the most outgoing of the family. &quot;He really is an anomalous character,&quot; says brother James.    Those who knew Bruce Babbitt as a young man didn't foresee his political successes. When he won his first election, as attorney general, James Naughton, a classmate at the University of Notre Dame who is an editor at the Philadelphia Inquirer, was &quot;surprised that this very serious, very sober, very bookish guy had rounded off the corners enough to become electable.&quot;    It wasn't easy. His speech announcing his candidacy then was &quot;nothing short of disastrous,&quot; recalls Robert Allen, a Phoenix attorney who was Mr. Babbitt's classmate at Harvard Law School. That first campaign was &quot;for Bruce like going to the dentist every day,&quot; Mr. Allen says. &quot;He gritted his teeth and went out and did it.&quot;    When he was a teen-ager, his determination once had calamitous results. Intent on becoming a professional skier, Mr. Babbitt spent winter weekends skiing down the Ponderosa-pine covered San Francisco Peaks that form Flagstaff's stunning backdrop. One year, his left leg was badly mangled in a ski lift accident, leaving it shorter than his right leg. He was back on the slopes the next winter. That year he broke the other leg.    That persistence is part of what he calls &quot;the ethic of responsibility&quot; that was imbued in him by his family -- especially his mother, Frances, whose firm hand earned her the nickname &quot;the general&quot; -- and by the &quot;pervasive presence&quot; of the Roman Catholic Church.    He showed little interest in politics before he left the Arizona highlands for Notre Dame, turning down the California Institute of Technology because his parents insisted he attend a Catholic college. Like most campuses of the time, Notre Dame was politically quiescent. But in that strict, religious setting, Bruce Babbitt discovered &quot;the seeds of social activism.&quot; The experience, he says, transformed his Catholicism from &quot;kind of a ritual responsibility into a much broader and richer meaning, a Christian commitment to community and social change.&quot;    That sense of commitment -- and the characteristic boredom of a third-year law student -- led him to the streets of Selma, Ala., in March 1965, working with the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee in the days after the notorious events of &quot;Bloody Sunday,&quot; when state troopers attacked civil-rights marchers protesting voting-rights discrimination. &quot;It was a very powerful experience,&quot; Mr. Babbitt says. &quot;It really changed my focus.&quot; He had been planning to go to Colombia to work in a land-reform project to be run by Harvard and the Ford Foundation. &quot;But the Selma experience really drew me back home.&quot;    Surprisingly, perhaps, he was less affected by the other great social upheaval of the time, the Vietnam War. A student deferment kept him out of the draft until he graduated from law school in 1965; by then he was about to turn 27 years old, and was classified 1-A but never even called for a pre-induction physical. He opposed the war, but when the demonstrations against it were peaking in the late 1960s, he was establishing a legal career in Phoenix.    &quot;I was just on another track,&quot; he says. &quot;I had done my time in the civil-rights movement and wanted to get on with my life.&quot;    Mr. Babbitt says he experienced the limits of government while an attorney in the U.S. Office of Economic Opportunity's field office in Austin, Texas, traveling the Southwest to set up Head Start, legal aid and other community-action programs. Mr. Babbitt says he saw that the real change was happening not in the poor neighborhoods where he was working but in Washington, where Congress was passing the Voting Rights Act and creating Medicare and Medicaid.    During his tenure as governor, he criticized some federal programs and proposed new divisions of responsibilities between the federal and state governments. Although he reveled in the development of public policy, he preferred to leave the nitty-gritty of running it to others. &quot;It made accomplishment of what he wanted done a little harder,&quot; says James Ratliff, the Arizona House Republican leader. Mr. Babbitt concedes that his inattention contributed to the early financial chaos of the state's health-care plan for the poor.    The greatest controversy of his nine years in office came in 1983 when Mr. Babbitt, the former civil-rights worker who had challenged authority on the streets of Selma nearly two decades before, used the National Guard to enforce a court order against strikers at Phelps Dodge Corp.'s copper mines.    Some saw it as a lack of sensitivity for workers in an industry in decline. &quot;It was a horrible thing that he did,&quot; says Darwin Aycock, retired secretary-treasurer of the Arizona AFL-CIO. &quot;We in labor don't like to have the National Guard called out on us.&quot; But Mr. Babbitt speaks of the incident in tactical rather than personal or emotional terms, seeing it as a matter of maintaining public order.    Mr. Babbitt may be an introvert, but his wife, Harriet, a gregarious and warm woman, manages to soften some of his austere qualities. A successful Phoenix trial attorney, Mrs. Babbitt, known as Hattie, is a strong influence on her husband. Mr. Babbitt's official position never excused him from the duties of a parent in a two-career marriage. The governor's schedules noted the evenings it was his turn to be home with their two sons, or when he had to attend parent-teacher conferences at their schools.    There's less time for that now. For one thing, Mr. Babbitt is again trying to improve, working this time on his performance on television. He's uncomfortable in front of the camera and tenses when he looks into the lens. At the suggestion of Douglas Bailey, the Republican media consultant who is a friend, Mr. Babbitt spends a hour nearly each morning, no matter where he is, practicing before a portable Sony home video camera, playing the tape back and critiquing his performance.    &quot;We're nothing if not learners,&quot; he told a group of Arizona fund-raisers during a recent meeting in Phoenix. &quot;And, by God, we're learning.&quot;    ---   IN BRIEF   Bruce Babbitt   -- 49 YEARS OLD   --MARRIED 18 YEARS, TWO CHILDREN    -- UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME, UNIVERSITY OFNEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, HARVARD LAW SCHOOL   -- DEMOCRAT OF ARIZONA   Attorney, U.S. Office of Economic Opportunity 1965 to 1967; elected Arizona attorney general 1974; assumed governor's office 1978, elected governor 1978, re-elected 1982.    Greatest influence on his politicalthinking: Richard Hofstadter.    U.S. political system's greatest failure in his lifetime: &quot;Failing to respond to structural unemployment.&quot;    His worst mistake in politics: &quot;Inadequate supervision during the early implementation of Arizona's experimental health-care program for the poor.&quot;    Most influential book: &quot;Sand County Almanac&quot; by Aldo Leopold. &quot;Awakened in me a sense of ethic about the land -- a private way of thinking about nature that has helped guide my actions as a public official.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>