<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870819-0088 </DOCNO><HL> South KoreaActs to ResolveHyundai Strike---Workers to Return to JobsAfter Government VowsTo Intervene for Union---By Joseph P. MangunoStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR FRESTAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> ULSAN, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Striking workers of the Hyundai group, numbering about 40,000, called off an explosive two-day confrontation with corporate officials and agreed to return to work tomorrow after the government said it would intervene on their behalf.    The surprise breakthrough came last night after a high-ranking official of the Korean Labor Ministry met the striking workers in a public sports stadium, which they had occupied for more than nine hours yesterday, and pledged that the government would mediate in their dispute with Hyundai.    It was the first time that the government has intervened directly in the labor unrest, which erupted across the nation last month. Labor analysts said it bespoke a new, tough government line with Hyundai's founder, Chung Ju Young, and other Hyundai officials, who they believe are dragging their feet on legitimate worker demands. The government action also may include an element of politics because the ruling party has agreed for the first time to free elections this fall.    Vice Labor Minister Han In Hee proposed a three-point mediation plan. The minister said the government would press Hyundai to grant workers due pay raises by Sept. 1. He also promised to try to persuade Hyundai's management to recognize a newly formed labor alliance among the group's subsidiary companies in the Ulsan area. And Mr. Han said the government would try to arrange a meeting in Seoul today between Hyundai's management and labor leaders.    Mr. Han made the promise of government mediation after an urgent meeting with Hyundai officials and Ulsan police representatives here last night. He told the workers that the offer had been accepted by the ad hoc Consultative Committee of Hyundai Group Unions, which has been representing the workers since the start of the labor unrest.    The workers, from eight Hyundai group companies with plants in this coastal industrial city in southeastern Korea, including Hyundai Motor Co., had been whipped into a frenzy earlier in the afternoon by speeches and protest songs attacking Hyundai group management. They were planning an all-night vigil at the stadium, but agreed after Mr. Han's address to return home for the night, and to their workplaces tomorrow.    Labor analysts here said Mr. Han's offer is only a stopgap measure until genuine good-faith negotiations can begin. The bargaining, they said, is certain to be tough and could erupt into renewed violence within days. But analysts said Mr. Han's bold gestures of flying from Seoul, meeting company and police officials and then braving the hostile crowd at the stadium defused the most violent clash in Korea's latest round of labor unrest.    More than 900 companies have experienced strikes, sit-ins and other job actions since July 1, when President Chun Doo Hwan agreed to introduce widespread democratic political reforms. Many of those companies have since settled their disputes by making major labor concessions, which even they admitted were long overdue.    Hyundai experienced a series of strikes and other job actions in Ulsan earlier this month, but emerged relatively unscathed when workers returned to their jobs to await negotiations.    But Hyundai, at the insistence of Mr. Chung, has resisted the most important of the workers' demands -- recognition of independent and freely elected trade unions at group companies.    Mr. Chung, the group's founder and longtime chairman, retired to the position of honorary chairman earlier this year, officially passing the reins to his brother. But Mr. Chung continues to exert influence from the sidelines. For years considered by the government to be the epitome of a proper Korean corporate citizen, Mr. Chung in recent months has become a thorn in the side of public officials trying to contain the volatile labor problem.    The latest round of trouble at Hyundai's Ulsan plants erupted last weekend after Mr. Chung was quoted as saying he would never recognize the new popularly elected labor leader of Hyundai Heavy Industries, Lee Hyun Gon, or negotiate with members of the consultative group labor committee because they weren't elected in accordance with Korean labor laws. The government has long ago disclaimed those laws as unfair to workers.    Mr. Chung also has refused to meet Hyundai labor leaders directly, saying they should negotiate separately with the presidents of each Hyundai group company through newly formed company-sanctioned employee representatives.    The workers have refused to meet the officially recognized representatives, or the presidents of the individual companies, who they say have no real power to settle disputes. They insist that Mr. Chung must meet their elected representatives, including Mr. Lee.    In an effort to reach a compromise on that point, Vice Minister Han proposed that worker representatives and the president of each Hyundai company go to Seoul together today to negotiate with Mr. Chung. While Mr. Han didn't say so explicitly, it was apparent to most analysts that Mr. Chung would be forced to acquiesce to that suggestion. Mr. Han also pledged there would be no prosecution of workers involved in the Hyundai labor unrest. </TEXT></DOC>