<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871120-0043 </DOCNO><HL> North MulledBounty Offer,Report Shows---Bonus Scheme for CaptureOf Sandinista OfficersWas Never Carried Out---By David Rogers and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The House-Senate report on the Iran-Contra affair discloses that Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North considered using profits from arms sales to Iran to pay a bounty on Sandinista or Cuban officers captured in Nicaragua.    The report offers no evidence that Col. North ever carried out his bounty idea, but notebooks kept by the former White House aide show he considered the payments last year even after the Central Intelligence Agency had resumed U.S. military aid to the insurgents.    Separately, citing classified material provided by the Israeli government, the report says that an Israeli middleman claims to have made as much as $700,000 in payments to Iranian contacts. The report also says that on different occasions middlemen set aside as much as $7 million for such payments.    The Israeli data and Col. North's notebooks are two of the richest veins of new material congressional investigators tapped in writing the massive report released this week. They also reviewed previously undisclosed memos and tape recordings by the Central Intelligence Agency, and the 690-page text of their report is laden with footnotes providing further detail of the often free-wheeling arms network run from the White House.    &quot;Bounty for Sandinista or Cuban officers&quot; reads an October 1986 notation in Col. North's notebooks. It indicates $5,000 would be paid to any Contra commander or soldier who captured an enemy officer. And, the notebook says the Contra army command would receive $200,000 &quot;for each 5&quot; enemy officers captured.    An April 1984 notation by Col. North indicates that his close ally, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, may have been involved in an earlier covert operation separate from the Iran-Contra affair.    A veteran of special operations, Gen. Secord had left the government a year earlier. But in reference to an apparent covert arms transfer in 1984, long-before the first shipment of U.S. arms to Iran, Col. North's notes read, &quot;Can't produce $; similar to Secord arrangement; 65 lift vans; $750K.&quot;    Other notes made by the colonel in 1986, and CIA records, indicate that it was only the Iranians' failure to come up with more money that prevented the U.S. from selling Tehran even more arms than were shipped. One proposed sale that never came to fruition involved two U.S. radar units that Iran purchased during the shah's regime but were being held at a Pennsylvania warehouse pending negotiations between the U.S. and Iran.    The State Department supposedly had control of the equipment. But the deputy chief of the CIA's Near East division said that the agency worked through the Defense Department to obtain permission for the purchase without the State Department knowing that the equipment was intended for Iran. The idea was to resell the radar units to Iran at a profit.    &quot;DOD's price for the radar units, accurately noted in North's notes, was approximately $6.3 million,&quot; reads the congressional report. &quot;However, since Iranian funding for the radars failed to materialize, the Enterprise (run by Col. North and Gen. Secord) missed an opportunity for a second $18 million profit.&quot;    The report shows that top CIA officers were receiving reports that made it clear large profits were being generated by the U.S. arms sales. It also says a senior CIA official's office became &quot;the command post for coordinating&quot; a secret 1985 shipment of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles from Israel to Iran.    The official, Duane &quot;Dewey&quot; Clarridge, then head of the CIA's European operations and now chief of its Counterterrorism Center, denied under oath that he knew the shipment contained missiles. But the committees said they were &quot;troubled&quot; by the fact that two cables disclosing the contents of the shipment were &quot;inexplicably missing from an otherwise intact set of 78 cables sent by CIA officials during the operation.&quot;    The new disclosures come as the Senate begins hearings on proposed legislation to tighten control of covert operations. But in testimony prepared for a closed-door hearing of the Senate Intelligence Committee today, CIA Director William Webster will ask Congress to delay passing any new laws until he has time to make changes of his own at the agency.    Mr. Webster's special counsel investigating the agency's recent performance, Russell Bruemmer, is expected to make his recommendations within a few weeks. Mr. Webster then is expected to announce some shifts in top CIA personnel. Clair George, the CIA's top covert operations officer, has told friends he'll retire at year end. Mr. Webster is said to be considering several possible successors including Ted Price, the head of the CIA personnel office; Theodore Gries, a former officer in Asia and now the CIA's liaison to Congress; counterintelligence chief Gus Hathaway; and veteran operations officer Charles Cogan.    Since the Iran-Contra scandal erupted a year ago, congressional and criminal investigators have suspected that some of the money generated by the Iranian arms sales ended up in the pockets of Iranian officials. A financial chronology provided to the committees by the Israeli government appears to confirm that substantial sums were paid to several Iranians involved in some arms transactions.    According to the congressional report, Tel Aviv disclosed that Iranian arms merchant Manucher Ghorbanifar had an Israeli middleman set aside $5 million for &quot;payments to certain Iranians.&quot; The report says that the money came from a $24.7 million payment that Mr. Ghorbanifar received from Iran in 1985 for the 80 U.S.-made Hawk missiles. The arms deal fell through and, the report said, most of the $5 million was returned to Mr. Ghorbanifar by the Israeli intermediary. The intermediary, who wasn't identified, told Israeli authorities, however, that around the same time he made $700,000 in payments to various Iranians.    The congressional report also provides details on a separate $2 million account that was set up in Switzerland and intended to benefit high-ranking Iranians. It was controlled by by Iranian-American businessman Albert Hakim, a key middleman used by the White House in the Iran-Contra operation. The $2 million was to be paid to Iranians associated with a relative of Iranian Speaker Hashemi Rafsanjani, according to Mr. Hakim's testimony before the committees.    Those payments weren't made, however. After the Iran-Contra scandal erupted, Swiss accounts controlled by Mr. Hakim were frozen by the Swiss government at the request of the U.S. As recently as last May, Mr. Hakim, in a private deposition given to the committees, maintained that monetary &quot;obligations&quot; were still due to Iranian contacts involved in the initiative.    Federal law-enforcement officials said that independent counsel Lawrence Walsh has been looking into whether Mr. Rafsanjani or members of his family received any money from arms transactions. But the issue isn't a major element of his investigation of the Iran-Contra operation.    The congressional report provides little new information on Israel's role in the Iran-Contra affair. Some members of the panels have complained that the investigation of Israel's role wasn't aggressive enough. The committees didn't interview Israeli officials or middlemen involved in the Iran-Contra affair. Instead, they relied on chronologies provided by the U.S. ally.    Col. North's extensive notes are an invaluable record of the affair, but the committees remain uncertain about how much weight to give his account of events. The Marine officer told the committees in a closed-door session last summer that Panamanian Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega offered to conduct sabotage operations against Nicaragua, using funds from the Iran arms sales. But investigators are divided about how seriously to treat the proposal, which never went ahead.    ---   Andy Pasztor and John Walcott contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>