<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870630-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CHUN IS EXPECTED to approve Roh's call for a direct presidential election.    The South Korean president met with Roh to discuss a proposal for political changes. Sources in Seoul said Chun had privately endorsed Roh's plan for a popular vote even before the leader of the ruling party made his proposals. But Roh's plan, which includes greater press freedom and amnesty for dissident Kim Dae Jung, faces a number of pitfalls. Among them is the question of whether the military will remain on the sidelines. The conduct of the opposition also is unclear.    The White House lauded Roh's plan, which has defused Seoul's immediate crisis and calmed nearly three weeks of anti-government street protest.    ---   Reagan met with his advisers and narrowed an initial list of possible successors to Supreme Court Justice Lewis Powell, who announced his retirement last week. Administration officials plan to go to Capitol Hill today to discuss the potential nominees with Senate members.    ---   Premier Ryzhkov described the Soviet economic management system as obsolete and called on the Supreme Soviet, the nominal parliament, to adopt a draft law on economic changes. The 1,500-member body, at its first session since November, is expected to adopt next week the first of 12 measures contained in a plan issued by Gorbachev.    ---   Schlesinger recommended partially dismantling the new U.S. embassy in Moscow and constructing a high-security annex under tighter security precautions than employed in the past. The recommendations by the former defense chief, who conducted a study for Reagan, would cost tens of millions of dollars.    ---   Weinberger said the U.S. and Japan would cooperate to &quot;keep a lead&quot; over the Soviet Union in anti-submarine defenses in the wake of illegal Japanese technology exports to Moscow. The defense secretary's remarks came as Toshiba Corp. said it had launched a drive to prevent a recurrence of the transfer of data to the Soviets.    ---   The U.S. is negotiating final details of a plan to allow Egypt to assemble parts of the U.S. Army's main battle tank, the M-1, a State Department official said. The administration hadn't yet notified Congress of the decision to allow Cairo's participation in the tank's production, a Pentagon source said.    ---   Tennessee Sen. Gore formally declared his intention to seek the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. At a speech in Carthage, Gore said he &quot;eagerly anticipates the new powerful role the South will play in selecting the presidential nominee next year.&quot;    ---   The EPA said it will prohibit new construction of any heavily polluting facility in 14 municipalities, including Los Angeles, Chicago and Cleveland. The EPA found that the 14 cities won't be able to meet a Dec. 31, 1987 deadline for achieving specified reductions in levels of carbon monoxide and ozone.    ---   The Justice Department and Walsh filed court papers defending Meese's backup appointment of Walsh to investigate the Iran-Contra affair. Lt. Col. North has challenged the constitutionality of the independent-counsel law and contends that the parallel appointment is invalid as well.    ---   Iraqi warplanes attacked a ship in the northern Persian Gulf, the fifth such assault since June 20. In Tehran, Iranian parliamentary speaker Rafsanjani warned that the U.S. &quot;is moving toward the brink of an armed encounter&quot; with its plan to protect Kuwaiti vessels in the gulf. He added that Iran was &quot;determined to stand firm.&quot;    ---   Britain's Social Democrats voted against recommending a full merger with the Liberal Party. The vote rebuffed the Liberals, who have sought a merger since the Alliance's poor showing in the June 11 parliamentary election.    ---   An American pilot headed for the U.S. after being freed by Angola. The 33-year-old flier had been held by the Luanda government on suspicion of espionage after his light plane was shot down in April over a militarized zone where Angolan forces are fighting U.S.-backed rebels.    ---   A prosecutor in France urged the judges and jury in the Klaus Barbie trial to convict the former Nazi Gestapo chief of Lyon on all counts of crimes against humanity, saying Barbie hasn't shown remorse for his activities. In Jerusalem, judges rejected a motion to dismiss war-crime charges against John Demjanjuk, a retired U.S. auto worker.    ---   An investigation found that some test data was compromised at the government's air-traffic controller school in Oklahoma, according to sources and documents. The Transportation Department inquiry determined that information pertaining to nine of 14 problems had been circulated. The impact of the cheating was unclear. </TEXT></DOC>