<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871221-0180 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Yves F.M. Hentic, who has gained and lost two fortunes in 12 years on Wall Street, is working on a third with an unusual approach to structuring small stock underwritings.    One public offering he designed was made last Wednesday, and Mr. Hentic, an irreverent 40-year-old Harvard M.B.A., expects two more soon.    Mr. Hentic is a former bond analyst, takeover stock speculator and stock underwriter, and the Paris-born son of a French career army officer and an American W.A.C.    His Wall Street play has both common and unusual aspects. Partly it involves taking public shell companies, or &quot;blind pools,&quot; -- companies without any businesses -- and then merging them with real operating companies seeking to go public faster or cheaper than in a conventional public offering. That's not unusual.    But instead of offering just common stock to the public, Mr. Hentic's shells sell units, consisting of common and usually two series of warrants with exercise prices close to the offering price of the units. Such unusual structure and pricing have big implications.    Six shells have gone public since May through Westminster Securities Corp., a New York-based underwriter. The underwriter's quotes for all six -- most of which rarely trade -- are at or within 10% of their offering prices despite the October crash.    Last Wednesday's offering, Big Merger Inc., will be followed by two others -- Bigger Merger Inc. and Biggest Merger Inc.as early as this week, Mr. Hentic says.    A concern for investors might lie in the companies' typically minuscule common stock floats of as little as 25,000 shares. Such small floats make the issues more vulnerable to manipulation than large capitalization stocks.    Also the prospects for long-term investors seem tied to those of Mr. Hentic, who lost millions last year when his small brokerage and underwriting concern collapsed, and who likens Wall Street to a game of Monopoly: &quot;Sometimes you have to start all over again -- but it's never boring.&quot;    The firm, Yves Hentic andamp; Co. Inc., of Jersey City, N.J., failed last year when Mr. Hentic committed nearly all of its capital to a futile effort to support the market in one of its underwritings-London-based Senetek PLC-despite a tidal wave of selling.    Three years earlier, too rich a bet on an aborted takeover thrust against Houston Natural Gas wiped out his risk arbitrage business as well as his personal fortune.    Mr. Hentic's latest strategy seems to have largely eliminated such threats since it doesn't require him to commit capital.    Mr. Hentic makes money with the shells by having Merger Inc. -- the private company of which he's president and through which he operates -- retain a 5% interest in the shells after their merger into operating companies, and by collecting (typically low six-figure) investment banking fees on the mergers.    The six offerings have involved from 25,000 to 161,000 units, or packages of securities, that have had as many as 20 Class A warrants and 20 Class B warrants for each common share sold. The warrants are detachable so they can eventually be traded separately from the stock or units.    In three of the Hentic offerings, the shell units had a price of 65 cents each, the Class A warrants have an exercise price of 62.5 cents apiece and the Class B warrants 75 cents. In the remaining three offerings, all priced at $6 a unit, the Class A warrants are exercisable at $5 and the Class B warrants at $6.    Five of the six have merged with operating companies, including Joe Franklin Productions Inc., North American Karate Conference Inc., Advanced Video Robotics Inc., K.F.O. Associates Inc. and Nightwing Group Inc.    &quot;We took a look around, and the cost for us to go with a regular public offering was going to be several hundred thousand dollars, triple what it cost to go the Mergers Inc. route,&quot; says an official at Joe Franklin Productions, which has control of the TV talk show host's library of film, videotape and other memorabilia.    The lure to acquiring companies is the tiny public stock float because even modest earnings growth is likely to quickly translate into stock price gains. In turn, because the warrant exercise prices are &quot;in the money&quot; or close to it, stock gains quickly spur increased warrant exercise.    The underwriter loves the tiny float because it makes it easy to maintain a stable market -- at a price high enough to tempt holders of the warrants to exercise them -- with modest trading capital, says John O'Shea, a Westminster vice president. For warrant traders, &quot;the lure is leverage,&quot; Mr. Hentic says. As with options, the warrant prices can rise far more on a percentage basis than the price of the stock itself.    Westminster, which makes a market in all six of the Hentic-designed units, is quoting bid prices of 62.5 cents a share for stock of the three companies whose units were offered at 65 cents apiece; $5.50 a share on the stock of two of the three companies initially offered at $6 a unit, and $6 bid for the units of newly minted Big Merger Inc. However, the quotes might not mean much since only one stock -- Joe Franklin, quoted at 75 cents a share bid -- is actively traded. (Joe Franklin sold at twice that amount before the crash.)    Herzog, Heine, Geduld Inc., which makes a market in the Joe Franklin common, but none of the five other Hentic companies, posted the stock Friday at 62.5 cents bid, 87.5 cents asked.    What Mr. Hentic hopes for now is a bigger role in financing emerging growth companies, bigger and more complex shell deals, and higher fees and eventual wealth from his retained interests in the merged companies -- spell that m-o-n-e-y.    As Mr. Hentic is fond of saying about money: &quot;Send it in, folks. Checks on the left, cash on the right. Two lines. No waiting. Send it in.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>