<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0033 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><TEXT>   Silver prices jumped nearly 11% and led a robust rally in commodity prices amid the dollar's persistent woes and growing speculation about accelerating inflation.    On the Commodity Exchange in New York, silver for immediate delivery leaped 87 cents an ounce to $8.90 -- the biggest one-day rise in 4 1/2 years. All other silver contracts rose the daily trading limit of 50 cents an ounce, with the May contract closing at $8.545 an ounce. Estimated volume was 60,000 contracts. This year, silver prices have risen $3.50 an ounce, or about 65%.    Other precious metals prices surged as well yesterday. April gold on the Comex rose $11 an ounce to $460.40, while April platinum on the New York Mercantile Exchange rose $20.30 an ounce to $621.80.    &quot;Even at these levels, silver is still cheap relative to gold,&quot; said Alan Shapiro, chief bullion trader in New York at Union Bank of Switzerland. Added a Comex broker: &quot;Selling into this market is like throwing a pebble in the ocean.&quot;    Indeed, every time silver dipped throughout the day, strong waves of buying flooded the market, traders said. Speculative demand as well as heavy bullion buying from the Mideast and Far East continue to fuel the gains, brokers and traders said. Also, chart-guided technical traders were heartened by Wednesday's move above $8 an ounce, and that sparked additional buying, analysts said.    Moreover, Peru's decision late Tuesday to halt exports, while having little immediate fundamental effect, added to the speculative frenzy, traders said. &quot;The market had been moving pretty fast anyway, but that acted like a supercharger,&quot; said an exchange official in New York.    Inflation concerns deepened with the Commerce Department's report of a first-quarter increase in prices and a sharp rise in a widely watched commodity-price barometer. The Commodity Research Bureau's futures-price index, which tracks the movement of 26 raw material prices, soared 3.34 to 219.42-its highest level since Jan. 31, 1986.    In other futures markets yesterday:    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Prices surged as the dollar tumbled despite buying in the cash markets by various central banks. Bond futures followed the dollar downward, surrendering earlier gains of nearly half a point. Initially the 4.3% first-quarter increase in gross national product reported yesterday was seen as a plus for the dollar, traders said. But the jump was discounted when most of it was attributed to a build-up in non-agricultural inventories, which may be a drag on second-quarter growth. The GNP increase also means that the Federal Reserve Board won't be likely to cut the discount lending rate in the foreseeable future, said Anne Mills, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York. Still, the currency markets may stabilize in the next several days, traders said. &quot;The Treasury wants to keep the dollar relatively stable&quot; ahead of the department's refunding auction early next month, said Michael Ptack, a currency trader at Gartman Financial Services Inc. in Portsmouth, Va. The administration also will want to keep the markets steady in anticipation of Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone's visit to the U.S. beginning Wednesday, traders said. Later next month, though, the dollar may resume its fall and foreign currencies their rise as traders focus on the U.S. budget deficit and the potential for a U.S.-Japan trade war, analysts said.    ENERGY: Oil prices rose on strong demand by refiners and technical factors, analysts said. Heating oil contracts were the most volatile and posted the strongest gains; the May contract at the New York Merc, rose 1.58 cents a gallon to 49.32 cents, after falling to an intraday low of 47.75 cents. &quot;Traders were completely whipsawed,&quot; said John Hill, a vice president at Merrill Lynch Futures Inc. in New York. Technical buying triggered some of the gains, traders said. Some traders were swayed by higher commodity prices, several analysts said. &quot;We're starting to see the beginning of an inflationary psychology in oil,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc. in New York.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Cattle prices rose, with the June contract leading the way. The market got a boost from traders' expectations that this afternoon's cattle-on-feed report will be bullish for near-term contracts. The 13-state quarterly report is scheduled to be released by the Agriculture Department after trading's close. Despite a lack of retailer interest, supplies of cattle remained tight, and that also helped keep prices firm. Meanwhile, a lighter-than-expected hog slaughter continued to boost pork belly and hog prices. May and June pork bellies rose their daily limit of $2 a hunderweight, or two cents a pound.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Most grains rose, reflecting in part the strong currency and precious metal markets. Wheat also was boosted by renewed rumors that the Agriculture Department will offer to subsidize sales of the grain to the Soviet Union. Corn also was buoyed by a lack of farmer selling. Soybean oil was under selling pressure from predictions that supply as of March 31 stood at a record level. Soybean meal was bolstered by lower-than-expected supply.    COPPER: Prices fell for the second consecutive day as a seasonal supply pinch continued to ease. Traders' liquidation of May contracts exceeded purchases of deferred months, indicating copper positions were shrinking, analysts noted. Contrary to typical trading relationships, copper moved opposite the directions of silver and gold, and traders also apparently ignored the dollar's weakness, which normally pushes copper prices higher. The May contract at the Comex fell 0.65 cent a pound to settle at 61.50 cents, just 0.10 points above the low of the day and 2.20 cents below Wednesday's intraday high. The contract has declined 3.5 cents since mid-March. An easing of regional shortgages and anticipation that demand as usual will slacken in the summer were major factors in the weakness, analysts and industry executives said. Also, analysts noted, a shortage of copper scrap also has eased, London Metal Exchange warehouse inventories of copper have swelled 15,600 metric tons in the past three weeks, and some of the transportation problems in Zambia, a major copper producer and exporter, have also been solved. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds. </TEXT></DOC>