<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871210-0136 </DOCNO><HL> America's Political Cycle Turns Again---By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.</HL><DD> 12/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Over the past years I have often written in this space  </DATELINE><TEXT>   no doubt too often -- about the rhythms of American politics. I inherited from a wiser and better historian, my father, the idea of a fairly regular cyclical alternation between conservatism and liberalism in our national moods -- swings back and forth between eras when the national commitment is to private interest as the best means of meeting our problems and eras when the national commitment is to public purpose.    From this perspective, the Reaganite 1980s, dominated by the conviction that government is the problem and the pursuit of self-interest the answer, are a replay of the Eisenhower 1950s, as the 1950s were a replay of the Harding-Coolidge-Hoover 1920s (and the 1920s of the Cleveland-McKinley 1890s).    In the same way, at 30-year intervals, the nation turns to reform and affirmative government as the best way of dealing with our troubles: Theodore Roosevelt ushering in the Progressive period in 1901, Franklin Roosevelt bringing in the New Deal in 1933, John Kennedy and the New Frontier in 1961.    Nor is there anything mystical about the 30-year cycle. Thirty years is the span of a generation. People tend to be formed politically by the ideals dominant in the years during which they attain political consciousness: roughly between their 17th and 25th years. When their own generation's turn in power comes 30 years later, they tend to carry forward the ideals they imbibed when young. So young people who grew up during the Progressive era when T.R. and Woodrow Wilson were setting the nation's sights -- Franklin Roosevelt, Eleanor Roosevelt, Harry Truman -- reaffirmed the ideals of their youth in the New Deal and the Fair Deal. So young people who grew up when FDR was inspiring the country -- John and Robert Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson -- brought the New Deal up to date in the New Frontier and the Great Society. In the same fashion, John Kennedy touched and formed a generation in the 1960s, and, if the rhythm holds, that generation's time will arrive in the 1990s.    Nor is there any mystery why the cycle turns and turns again. Each phase runs its natural course. The season of idealism and reform, when strong presidents call for active public interest in national affairs and invoke government as a means of promoting the general welfare, eventually leaves an electorate exhausted by the process and disenchanted by the results. People are ready then to respond to leaders who tell them they needn't worry unduly about public affairs; left to private action and self-interest in an unregulated market, our problems will solve themselves.    This mood, too, eventually runs its course. Problems neglected become acute, threaten to become unmanageable and demand remedy. People grow increasingly bored with selfish motives and vistas, increasingly weary of materialism and demand some larger meaning beyond themselves. They begin to ask not what their country can do for them but what they can do for their country. This is what was happening at the end of the 1920s and the 1950s, and it is what is happening today.    Having recently achieved the majestic age of 70, I can recall the succession of cyclical alternations I have survived. My father first propounded the hypothesis in 1924 when it looked as if the prosperity of the so-called New Era would go on forever. He predicted then that the conservative phase would go on till about 1932. In 1939 he predicted the liberal phase would peter out about 1946, which was the year voters elected what Harry Truman called the &quot;do-nothing, good-for-nothing 80th Congress.&quot; In 1949 he predicted a new liberal epoch would begin about 1962, give &quot;a year or two in either direction,&quot; and the next conservative epoch about 1978. Success in prediction creates a certain presumption in favor of a hypothesis.    Each turn of the cycle, however, leads those now elevated to influence and power to suppose that the change is permanent. As conservatives in the 1920s thought the New Era would go on forever, so liberals in the 1930s and 1940s thought the New Deal mood was there to stay. The first flush of cyclical change creates especially extravagant expectations. If I may be forgiven personal reference, I can recall with what skepticism predictions of an imminent turn to liberalism were greeted by conservatives in the 1950s; not, however, by John Kennedy, who understood the cyclical hypothesis and acted upon it.    I recall similarly the rhapsodic forecasts in the early Reagan years of fundamental political realignment with the displacement of the tired old Roosevelt coalition by a shiny new Reagan coalition leading to a new era of conservative ascendancy. Perhaps my friend and fellow Journal columnist Irving Kristol will remember the session he, David Gergen and I had about six years ago for Public Opinion magazine. Then, in face of polite incredulity from the other discussants, I explained why I thought Reaganism, too, would pass. The Chinese had it in right in the Chou dynasty a thousand years before Christ: &quot;The mandate of heaven is not forever.&quot;    As predicted, the cyclical change now impends. The 1986 mid-term election, with the unexpected Democratic gains in the Senate, foretold the future. The Iran/Contra scandals, the Wall Street crash, the exposure of the televangelists, the revolt against deregulation on the stock exchanges, in banking and airlines and telephones, the revulsion against greed as the basis of American ethics, the defeat of a right-wing zealot by the largest rejection vote for a Supreme Court nominee in American history, the bitter internecine fight in the Republican Party over the INF treaty -- all these developments only confirm and accelerate the rhythmic alternations of our politics.    The new phase of the cycle will not come full flood till the early 1990s. This means the 1988 election will be a squeaker. But, even if a Republican wins, Reaganism is finished. Neither Mr. Bush nor Sen. Dole quite sounds like a true-blue, bottled-in-bond, unreconstructed, ideological Reaganite. As for the Democratic contenders, they all unabashedly describe government not as a threat to the people's liberties but as an instrument of their welfare.    What is most ironic and perhaps most indicative is that Mr. Reagan himself seems to have forsaken Reaganism -- or that at least is the impression one derives from the attacks against him by his own party's fanatic right. The &quot;lust for detente,&quot; Howard Phillips said recently on Ted Koppel's show, is promoted by the Wall Street wing of the GOP in order to bail the banks out of their debts and gain markets for the big corporations -- a good neo-Marxist analysis of the situation. These Republicans, added Richard Viguerie, love commerce more than they loathe communism and want to make the world safe for multinational corporations. L. Brent Bozell said, &quot;The president insulted the conservative movement&quot; by suggesting critics of the INF treaty accepted the inevitability of a third world war. Howard Phillips insulted the president back by calling him &quot;a useful idiot for Soviet propaganda&quot; and &quot;a weak man with a strong wife and a strong staff.&quot;    President Reagan, one trusts, will get his treaty, thereby improving his place in the history books and possibly rescuing the last months of his administration. But the significant thing is that, in fighting for the treaty, he is himself accommodating to the impending cyclical change. Let the Democratic contenders take careful note of the rhythms of history before they do themselves in by moving too far to the right when the nation is moving once again to the left.    Still, my conservative friends need not despair. Their time will come again. As Kennedy shaped a political generation in the early 1960s, so Mr. Reagan is shaping a generation today. Mr. Reagan's children's time will come about 20 years from now, around the year 2010, when the mood of idealism and reform will have run its course and the electorate will hark again to the sirens' song about how, left to the unfettered market and the ethos of greed, our problems will solve themselves. Each swing of the cycle corrects the excesses of the other. And so the republic survives.    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>