<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870930-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Death of a Theory? Supreme CourtMay Revamp Insider-Trading Law---By James B. StewartStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DJSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)PUBLISHING (PUB)SUPREME COURT (SUP)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Three prominent arbitragers facing the threat of imminent reindictment for their roles in the Ivan F. Boesky insider-trading scandal may have an unlikely potential savior: R. Foster Winans, the former reporter convicted of insider trading in 1985 for misappropriating information about The Wall Street Journal's &quot;Heard on the Street&quot; column.    On Oct. 7 the appeal of Mr. Winans's conviction is scheduled to be argued before the U.S. Supreme Court, and a decision could come any time after the argument. At stake is the so-called misappropriation theory of insider trading -- the theory relied upon by the judge in the Winans case that also formed the underpinnings of insider trading indictments of Robert Freeman, Richard Wigton and Timothy Tabor.    No one can predict how the Supreme Court will rule. But the betting in legal circles is almost unanimous that the Court didn't agree to review the Winans conviction simply to affirm it, and that some reinterpretation of the law is going to emerge. Moreover, most lawyers agree that a reversal of the lower-court's ruling would be damaging to the government's current investigations and cases involving insider trading -- but not necessarily fatal.    &quot;If misappropriation is thrown out, there are massive problems,&quot; says Gary Lynch, head of enforcement for the Securities and Exchange Commission. Still, he adds, &quot;usually there are backup theories&quot; of liability.    Misappropriation is the principal doctrine that underlies much of the government's current crackdown on insider trading. It has been particularly useful in convicting insider traders who don't fit the Supreme Court's narrow definition of &quot;insider&quot; -- usually a corporate official with direct knowledge of market-sensitive information. The theory holds that it is the theft, or misappropriation, of confidential information by, say, an investment banker or lawyer entrusted with it, that gives rise to criminal liability.    Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor were charged with conspiracy to violate securities laws, and with securities, mail and wire fraud. The government charged that Mr. Freeman, head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., misappropriated and leaked details of a Unocal Corp. stock buy-back to Martin A. Siegel, a former investment banker at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., who has pleaded guilty to two felony counts for his role in the scandal. Mr. Siegel allegedly passed on the information to Messrs. Wigton and Tabor, then Kidder arbitragers, who allegedly traded in Unocal options for Kidder Peabody's account.    Those indictments were dismissed in May when the government said it needed more time to pursue the case, but the government vowed to seek new indictments. All three men have denied wrongdoing.    This isn't the only recent case in which misappropriation has played a role. It was, for instance, misappropriation that led to guilty pleas to securities fraud by Dennis B. Levine and Mr. Siegel, and that helped provide the legal basis for the SEC's insider-trading charges against Mr. Boesky, who settled by paying $100 million.    The misappropriation theory sprang from another celebrated insider-trading case, that of Adrian Antoniu and his stockbroker, James Newman. About a decade ago, Mr. Antoniu, a former investment banker, traded in stocks using information he obtained while working at Lehman Brothers, Kuhn Loeb Inc., as well as information leaked to him by a Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. investment banker.    In 1981 Mr. Antoniu agreed to plead guilty to two felony counts and cooperate as the government's star witness in the trial of Mr. Newman. At the time, the Supreme Court had just thrown out the conviction of a financial printer, Vincent Chiarella, who had traded in stocks using confidential information he obtained from documents being printed. With the reversal, out went the traditional theory used to charge people who technically weren't corporate insiders: that they defrauded unwitting investors who sold securities without benefit of the inside information.    In the Chiarella opinion, the Supreme Court said it wouldn't &quot;speculate&quot; whether Mr. Chiarella might have been guilty under another theory -- one which argued that Mr. Chiarella had stolen information from his employer. The indictment of stockbroker Newman was carefully crafted along those lines. It charged that Mr. Antoniu had stolen, or misappropriated, inside information, and that Mr. Newman was liable as a co-conspirator. This theory of the indictment was upheld by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, and Mr. Newman was convicted. The Supreme Court declined to review that case, thereby affirming the conviction.    There matters stood until the Winans case in 1985. Mr. Winans was charged with misappropriating confidential information belonging to this newspaper -- the timing and contents of the Heard on the Street columns, some of which Mr. Winans wrote. He was tried and convicted of insider trading, as well as mail and wire fraud. This time, the Supreme Court surprised the legal community and agreed to review Mr. Winans's conviction, as well as the convictions of two conspirators, David Carpenter and Kenneth Felis. All three convictions had been upheld by an appeals court.    The Supreme Court has traditionally shown a great reluctance to overturn criminal legal doctrines under which people have been tried, convicted, and spent years in prison, as is the case with the misappropriation theory. But the Court recently showed no hesitation in throwing out a well-settled criminal interpretation of the federal mail fraud statute -- an interpretation that had sent scores of politicians and government officials to jail.    As a result, many lawyers are speculating that the Winans conviction will be the next to be overturned -- and that has some actual and potential defendants hopeful.    Mr. Winans's appeal has already affected at least one other defendant. Earlier this month, a federal judge dismissed insider-trading charges against David W.C. Clark, a New York lawyer involved in the Winans conspiracy, who is also charged with embezzling funds from clients. Judge John F. Keenan noted that, although he has no advance knowledge of the outcome of the Winans appeal, &quot;it is not speculation&quot; to conclude that the decision &quot;will in some way affect&quot; the Clark case. If the Supreme Court sets aside the Winans conviction, &quot;the insider-trading counts against Clark must fall,&quot; the judge ruled. The judge let embezzlement, perjury and tax-evasion counts stand.    Moreover, in a recent memo to clients, the New York law firm of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen andamp; Katz, which represents Goldman Sachs, Mr. Freeman's employer, predicted that &quot;the continued ability of the government to prosecute insider trading would be significantly undermined.&quot;    But many legal specialists caution defendants and potential defendants against breathing too easily. They note that insider trading often gives rise to other charges, such as tax evasion.    In addition, according to Alan Bromberg, a professor of securities law at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, the government still has numerous weapons in its insider-trading arsenal. Under case law that predates the Chiarella opinion, investment bankers and lawyers, in particular, would probably be deemed &quot;temporary insiders&quot; who have the same disclosure duties as actual insiders, Mr. Bromberg says.    According to this theory, Goldman's Mr. Freeman, for example, might be considered such an insider with respect to confidential information entrusted him by Goldman's clients. Arbitragers with no such client relationships might be more difficult to bring within the theory, but Mr. Bromberg says they would probably be similarly liable if they obtained information from an investment banker who was breaching a client confidence in sharing the information.    The government might also rely on more recent legislation that outlaws insider trading in the context of any tender offer. That provision, however, hasn't yet been contested in the criminal context, and doesn't apply to market sensitive information that isn't linked to a tender offer or proxy fight.    Finally, should federal prosecution of insider trading show signs of flagging, state prosecutors might step in. Legal specialists note that New York and several other states have antifraud statutes that are broader than federal mail- and wire-fraud statutes. States also might try to use larceny statutes to prosecute misappropriation of inside information. </TEXT></DOC>