<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870511-0143 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> FREST TAXESNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Last week the House voted, in effect, to ratify a treaty, thereby assuming a prerogative that the authors of the Constitution thought they had reserved exclusively for the U.S. Senate. By a vote of 245-181, the House banned funds for deployment of weapons that exceed the SALT II limits on nuclear missiles. So eight years and many Soviet warheads after the fact, SALT II becomes the defense policy of the House of Representatives. That is only part of the dubious baggage Democrats are piling on the fiscal 1988 defense-authorization bill.    SALT II, of course, was signed by Jimmy Carter and Leonid Brezhnev in 1979. But the Democratic-controlled Senate refused to ratify it, citing verification doubts and the unfair advantage in strategic-missile modernization it afforded the Soviet Union. The U.S. stayed within the provisions of the treaty after its expiration in 1985, even though the Soviets did not. But last year President Reagan decided to deploy new U.S. missiles in excess of the treaty's limits.    Last week's House vote was partly another maneuver by Democrats in both houses to force the president to propose new taxes. Cutting into his defense budget is seen as the most effective way to apply pressure, since national security is, after all, the most important task the federal government undertakes.    But trying to attach some purity to this grabby game by fanning up the dead ashes of SALT II carries a symbolism that the conduct of U.S. foreign policy doesn't need at this crucial stage of arms-control maneuvering. Said Rep. James Courter (R., N.J.): &quot;This sends a clear signal to the rest of the world that Soviet cheating on arms-control agreements doesn't matter to the American people. Cheating doesn't count.&quot;    Worse may be yet to come as the House continues its deliberations this week on the $288 billion bill. House members have offered an unbelievable 220 amendments. Many aim to cut military spending. Others are simply adjuncts to the protectionist mood on Capitol Hill. &quot;Buy America&quot; requirements are being recommended on everything from military uniforms and chemical-warfare agents to fuel pumps. Seldom have we seen a clearer demonstration of the chaos that results when 435 lawmakers are simultaneously creating their own foreign policies.    There are two House amendments that would actually enhance U.S. defense, however. Rep. Jack Kemp (R., N.Y.) is proposing that the Defense Department accelerate the development of a strategic-defense system against Soviet ballistic missiles, with initial deployment by 1993. Rep. Courter is offering an amendment to spend $300 million in fiscal 1988 on the development of a first-phase Strategic Defense Initiative to guard against &quot;accidental&quot; launches of Soviet missiles.    Both measures make good sense. But it's doubtful that they will be approved given the current mood in the House. Last week, for instance, the Democratic majority pushed back a Republican effort to delete provisions in the defense bill that ban the use of funds for the development, testing or deployment of any anti-ballistic missile system that is sea-based, air-based, space-based or mobile land-based. This action comes despite the fact that the Soviet Union is already developing, testing and deploying such ABM systems.    Moreover, the House approved Rep. Les Aspin's (D., Wis.) substitute SDI budget for fiscal 1988 of $3.6 billion, about $2.2 billion less than President Reagan had requested.    Some House Democrats insisted on the importance of adhering to the 1972 ABM treaty. But one Democrat, Tommy Robinson of Arkansas, waved a copy of Pravda quoting Soviet officials as saying that they would never tolerate deployment of a U.S. ABM defense. Rep. Robinson, using a colorful term, made it clear he didn't think the House should bow to such bald threats.    The Senate, too, is building for a confrontation with the White House. The Foreign Relations Committee last week voted 11-8 to add language to the State Department authorization bill calling for a &quot;narrow&quot; interpretation of the ABM treaty. That would effectively preclude advanced SDI testing and early deployment.    It is very hard to see the purpose of all this activity. Surely it must be clear by now that Americans want a strong defense. The means to provide it are at hand. We are beginning to fear that this Congress, as it ignores constitutional edicts and plays games with national security to try to winkle more money out of the taxpayers, will be even more disorderly than the last one. Let's hope the president has his veto ready. </TEXT></DOC>