<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880706-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Mexico's Ruling Party Relaxes Iron Grip --- PRI Attempts to Make Economic Changes Less Painful </HL><AUTHOR> Jonathan Kandell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It was a pretty straight deal, one that has worked since the birth six decades ago of Mexico's ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI. The party, self-styled heir to the social revolution that swept Mexico in 1910-20, took credit for economic growth. In return, it demanded that the electorate accept its victories in every race for president, governor and senator -- even when fraud was alleged.    So what to do when the revolution becomes a distant memory, when the country is hit by the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, when too many citizens complain about voter manipulation and ballot-stuffing? The government has responded with its versions of &quot;perestroika&quot; and &quot;glasnost.&quot; A painful restructuring of the economy is under way, aimed at a resumption of growth. And politics has been liberalized enough to make for an exciting election -- though not enough to threaten the PRI's supremacy.    The strategy's political side is paying off. Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the PRI's presidential candidate, is heavily favored to win today's election and gain a healthy PRI majority in Congress. But the conservative Accion Nacional party, headed by a feisty agribusinessman, Manuel Clouthier, and a leftist coalition led by Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, son of a revered president, are expected to run up far higher totals than PRI opponents in the past.    Mr. Salinas, a Harvard-educated technocrat, promises to continue the economic and political liberalization launched by President Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado, a pledge welcomed by international bankers though not by all Mexicans.    Indeed, economic discontent is high. Measured by Jimmy Carter's &quot;misery index,&quot; Mexico has been on the torture rack throughout President de la Madrid's six-year term, which ends Dec. 1. Unemployment has doubled, inflation has often reached into triple digits and the real income of most people has been halved. There are more landless peasants than before the famed revolution, mainly because there isn't enough arable land left to distribute. Rural migration and a high birth rate are making the cities unmanageably large; Mexico City, with 20 million inhabitants, is the world's largest city.    Mr. de la Madrid has sought to shrink the state's role in the economy, dismantle protectionist barriers to trade, force domestic manufacturers to compete abroad, and maintain the country's credit rating despite a $107 billion foreign debt. The end result, he insists, will be a return to economic growth on a healthier basis.    What is surprising about this Mexican election is the prospect that those policies will continue. Traditionally in Mexico, a lame-duck president struggles to ensure that his programs outlive him while the president-elect, eager to preserve his independence, savages much of his predecessor's legacy.    Hoping to avoid this, Mr. de la Madrid handpicked Mr. Salinas, his protege and planning minister. And Mr. Salinas says, &quot;We have to look beyond a {single presidency} if we expect these programs to bear fruit. I am not at all inclined to reinvent Mexico during my six-year term.&quot;    Slightly built, bald and barely 40, Mr. Salinas is the latest of the technocrats who have taken control of the PRI in the past generation. He spent his government career in economic posts and never held elective office. But he is an able campaigner, stoking enthusiasm among the party faithful and shrugging off hostile crowds.    Mr. Salinas has spread the word to PRI officials that he will look askance at electoral districts that deliver the usual 70%-90% landslides to government-party candidates. &quot;I have publicly committed myself to clean elections,&quot; he says. &quot;Mexico is showing itself to be more pluralistic, more diverse.&quot; But even in the absence of fraud, no opposition party can compete with the PRI's vast financial and organizational resources, or the media coverage its candidates receive.    The prospect of a smooth presidential succession is applauded by foreign bankers and political analysts. &quot;I see a 12-year continuum in terms of monetary and fiscal policy, in terms of trade and development,&quot; says Riordan Roett, director of Latin American studies at Johns Hopkins University. &quot;And that's never happened before in Mexico.&quot;    There are plenty of reasons for the U.S. to hope that Mexico's economic reforms are carried to a successful conclusion by Mr. Salinas. Despite U.S. legislation designed to stem illegal immigration, the flow of jobless Mexicans across the border hasn't abated, and their numbers will increase if economic recovery falters here. An expanding economy would enable Mexico to continue paying its huge foreign debt, much of it owed to U.S. banks. And Mexico, already the third biggest U.S. trade partner, will become an even larger market for American goods and investments as the economic reforms take hold -- although Mr. Salinas has rejected any suggestion of a North American common market of Mexico, Canada and the U.S.    &quot;What has been really striking about these last few years is that Mexico has moved from being the most protectionist of Latin American countries to the least protectionist,&quot; says Sally Shelton Colby, a consultant to U.S. corporations in the region. &quot;Next, I expect Salinas to revise the foreign investment code,&quot; which currently limits foreigners to a minority share in enterprises.    But for most Mexicans, the new economic direction means more pain than gain.    Oscar Nunez has been mangled by the sudden shift in the economy's gears. He used to manage a small plant in the capital that manufactured stereo headphones. But President de la Madrid slashed trade tariffs by 80%, and a flood of cheaper, better-made electronic imports shut down the factory six months ago. &quot;Everyone began to buy products made in Japan and Korea, if they could buy anything at all,&quot; says Mr. Nunez, who in middle age suddenly finds himself driving a cab for a living. &quot;That's good for those countries, but what about all the Mexicans who are losing their jobs?&quot;    Trade has by no means been a one-way street. In recent years, exports have been the most dynamic sector in the Mexican economy, with textiles, auto parts, petrochemicals and construction material leading a surge away from the nation's traditional dependence on oil sales abroad. But exports haven't been able to compensate for the fall in domestic demand. The cement industry, for example, is expected to increase its exports while showing a production decline this year.    Alejandro Solis lost his job as a mixer in a cement factory in Azcapotzalco, a grimy Mexico City industrial district. &quot;They let me go in January even though they were selling better than ever in the United States,&quot; he says. Since then, he has survived by donning a clown suit and juggling balls while standing on the backs of his two adolescent sons at a busy downtown intersection. Just before the traffic light turns green, Mr. Solis pretends to take a fall, and his kids run up to the drivers demanding money.    &quot;As wrenching as these changes have been for most Mexicans,&quot; says an economist with a U.S. bank, &quot;they simply couldn't be avoided by the government. The so-called Mexican economic model has been in serious trouble for a long time.&quot;    That model -- imitated throughout Latin America -- has combined a large state role in the economy and a private manufacturing sector protected from foreign competition. The collapse of oil prices in 1981 brought on the current economic crisis. The government, which had borrowed heavily abroad against future oil sales, suffered a fall in revenues. Meanwhile, interest rates on its foreign loans rose sharply, and a world recession reduced demand for petroleum. By the end of 1982 when Mr. de la Madrid took power, Mexico was unable to service its foreign debt and government spending was out of control.    Mr. de la Madrid set about restoring the balance between the public and private sectors. He curbed government spending, slashed subsidies for a range of basic services and commodities, boosted exports by allowing the peso to steadily devalue, and resumed foreign-debt payments.    By selling or shutting two-thirds of the 1,200 government-owned companies, he also reduced official corruption: With fewer enterprises and smaller budgets under their control, bureaucrats and politicians have less opportunity to enrich themselves.    Mr. Salinas promises to take these reforms even further. &quot;I am depending on private investment and foreign investment to promote economic growth,&quot; he says. &quot;People aren't looking for paternalistic solutions. . . . They no longer expect the state to resolve all their problems.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>