<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880127-0112 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): House of Cards? </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   President Reagan delivered his State of the Union address Monday night before a grand gathering of official Washington -- Congress, the Cabinet, the berobed Supreme Court, the bemedaled Joint Chiefs, sober foreign diplomats, the first lady, honored guests. It was a ceremony befitting the capital of history's richest nation. A standing ovation greeted the Chief Executive after he mounted the dais. An open-mike voice that sounded like Speaker Jim Wright was heard to say, &quot;They love ya, Mr. President.&quot;    But after awhile, we began to wonder about that love. It was when Mr. Reagan held up for public display the physical evidence of an insult that had been inflicted upon him, his office and the American people last month by this same Congress. The President was not laughing as he hefted what passes for federal budget documents. But his audience seemed to find the scene hilarious.    What, we wondered, was funny? Was it the 3,296 pages and 43 pounds of bundled paper? Was it the knowledge of all those special favors for congressional campaign supporters, plus a special punishment for one newspaper publisher, secretly buried in this massive law? Or was it that the President was ruefully and tacitly acknowledging yet another congressional victory? He had been treated with contempt by the legislative branch when it presented him with this core legislation -- central to the disposition of over $1 trillion of the nation's resources -- in a way intended to leave him no choice but to either sign it unread or shut down the government. And he had capitulated.    To be sure, later in his address he threatened a veto if the same thing happens this year. But the threat would have been a lot more convincing if he had vetoed last month, calling all these jolly folks back from Christmas holidays to perform their duties in a constitutional manner.    Even now, investigators probably haven't uncovered all the ways Jim Wright rewarded his loyalists and their friends by handing them public funds. One legislator got a subsidy for sunflower growers, another had federal honey for beekeepers, and on and on. President Reagan will send up a rescissions bill. But rescission bills can simply be stuffed in a drawer. If Congress doesn't approve them, nothing happens, and Jim Wright is not well disposed toward withdrawing rewards already dispensed.    Which brings us to the topic of the President's talk, the state of the union. The American economy is vigorous, but the state of American government is causing disquiet among Americans and America's allies. Congress passes bills that are clearly unconstitutional and the President signs them, merely noting that he believes them to be unconstitutional. Congressmen journey to Central America to conduct their own ad hoc foreign policies, a clear trespass on the constitutional responsibilities of the President and a source of dangerous false signals to enemies and allies.    The U.S. still has a few enemies, even in this era of &quot;glasnost.&quot; Competition and conflict among powerful nations are the stuff of history and there is no reason yet to believe that Mikhail Gorbachev has anything in mind in his friendly approaches other than to conduct his end of the competition in a more adroit and sophisticated way. His venture in Nicaragua has been managed with remarkable subtlety considering that it involves deployment of large numbers of Soviet gunships and tanks. Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze is schmoozing the West Germans with remarkable success. But the U.S. President is locked in mortal combat with congressional leftists over sending a few dollars to Nicaragua's anti-communists.    State and local governments can do almost everything government needs to do better than Washington. But they can't fulfill the U.S. world responsibility for political leadership. The foreign diplomats witnessing Monday night's chortling over Mr. Reagan's weakened position must have had an interesting mixture of emotions, depending, of course, on whether their governments are friendly or unfriendly.    Speaker Wright, Senate leader Byrd, House whip Tony Coelho and the other leaders of Congress let it be known that this President is now a lame duck and that what he said Monday night need not be taken seriously. Congress will set the agenda and run the government -- no doubt with the same degree of proficiency it applied to coming up with a budget three months into this fiscal year. &quot;They love ya, Mr. President.&quot; And no doubt they will continue to love ya, so long as you don't fight back. </TEXT></DOC>