<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0127 </DOCNO><HL> It's the 'Dwarfs' Who Will Be Convention Giants </HL><AUTHOR> Albert R. Hunt </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Two favorite parlor games have hit the inside-the-Beltway political cognoscenti as they eye a brokered Democratic convention.    The first is the long-running &quot;Mario scenario,&quot; in which New York Gov. Mario Cuomo rides to the rescue of the party. The theory is that as the dwarfs kill each other off, the Democrats, hungry for a victory after eight years of Ronald Reagan, will turn to the party's heavyweight to bring home the bacon. Alternative scenarios envision Sen. Bill Bradley or Sen. Sam Nunn, but most of the chatter centers on Mr. Cuomo.    The other game is figuring out who will actually pick the nominee, whether it turns out to be Mr. Cuomo or someone else. The favorite choice for the kingmaker's role is, of course, Robert Strauss, the former Democratic Party chairman and long the media establishment's favorite Democrat.    &quot;Strauss; Shuffling and Ready to Deal,&quot; Newsweek magazine headlined a recent piece declaring that Mr. Strauss was likely to be a key broker at the Democratic convention. The former chairman, the magazine reported, has rented the presidential suite at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Atlanta (site of the Democrats' July convention) in anticipation of his role.    ---   It all makes for marvelous dinner conversations in the salons of Georgetown and Cleveland Park. But it's not going to happen. Mario Cuomo can renew his lease on the mansion in Albany for at least two more years, and Bob Strauss can invite his friends from Newsweek to his Atlanta suite.    In a front-page story in this newspaper two weeks ago, James M. Perry and David Rogers calculated that no Democratic candidate was going to get the 2,082 delegates necessary for nomination through all the primaries and caucuses. Thus, the story strongly suggested, the Democrats faced the prospect of a brokered process -- a brokered process, mind you, not a brokered convention.    The numbers make this calculation compelling. After Super Tuesday, in order to win the nomination a candidate would have to capture about two-thirds of the remaining elected delegates. But with at least two white candidates and Jesse Jackson still in the field then, that almost surely isn't going to happen.    But there are several reasons why the Democrats won't then start looking for an outside savior.    While no candidate will have 2,082 delegates on June 8, after the final primaries, one of them will have 1,700 or 1,800 or 1,900 delegates. That's when the brokering process (as opposed to a brokered convention) begins in earnest. Neither Jimmy Carter in 1976 nor Walter Mondale in 1984 had 50.1% of the delegates after the final primaries, but they were close enough to quickly negotiate their way over the top. This time, it's likely the striking distance will be further, but the process will be the same.    ---   Moreover, there are substantive reasons not to turn to an untested candidate. Whatever the deficiencies of the lengthy and diverse nominating process, it does train someone for the rigors of a general election where, under skeptical and massive media coverage, a candidate daily confronts vastly different regions, people and situations. It is not a natural situation, and someone who isn't prepared for it can encounter lethal land mines.    Mario Cuomo, Bill Bradley and Sam Nunn are three of the most impressive figures in American political life; with the possible exception of George Wallace's negative impact, no Democratic governor in half a century has affected the party as much as Mr. Cuomo has. But ours is an entrepreneurial political system: You go out and run for it, take some risks and test yourself in the political marketplace. Those who haven't done that aren't ready for a tough general election.    Finally, even if all these obstacles somehow were overcome, there's still the personal factor. Does anyone really think that Dick Gephardt or Michael Dukakis or Albert Gore -- after spending scores of nights in Holiday Inns and countless days traveling from airport to airport -- will sit down in Atlanta and say, &quot;You know, ol' Mario and Matilda have spent the last year resting comfortably in New York, so why don't we give it to them?&quot;    If there are to be any brokers this year, they primarily will be the candidates themselves, along with close allies who represent important constituencies -- men like House Democratic whip Tony Coelho, a Gephardt backer, or California Assembly Speaker Willie Brown, a Jesse Jackson supporter. They would wield influence in any negotiations not only because they are talented and current political wheelers and dealers, but because they are a part of the process in a way that a Bob Strauss is not. Political reform and television have ended the days of conventional brokers. The reforms mean that delegates are elected democratically, so no one controls any big bloc of votes. Television makes backroom dealing appear unseemly.    There have been stories about how Bob Strauss and Sam Nunn and Sen. Alan Cranston and others hold periodic meetings in anticipation of their brokering role. Their influence will be proportional to how many votes they can affect. The answer is precious few.    Anyone who has spent anytime around Robert Strauss knows that he is a man of considerable charm. If a Democrat is elected president next November he'd be a fool not to put Mr. Strauss in his cabinet; few people spend more time or so ably practice the politics of &quot;inside the Beltway.&quot; Which is precisely why Bob Strauss's major role is more likely to come after the election.    ---   Mr. Hunt is The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau chief. </TEXT></DOC>