<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890731-0107 </DOCNO><DD> = 890731 </DD><AN> 890731-0107. </AN><HL> Addiction -- America's Drug Crisis@  ---@  Stolen Future:@  Drug Abuse Exacts@  Its Most Tragic Toll@  From Nation's Young@  ---@  Ryan Shafer, a Fan of Baseball,@  Started Using Drugs at 12@  And Died, Addicted, at 16@  ---@  A Family's Rescue Attempts@  ----@  By Ronald G. Shafer@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 07/31/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   {First of a Series}    MCLEAN, Va. -- In America's nightmare of drugs, the most tragic victims are our children.    I know. In this quiet, well-to-do suburb of Washington, D.C., my teen-age son, Ryan, became trapped by drugs starting at about age 12 -- while he still was playing Little League baseball. With his sunny smile, big brown eyes and impish wit, Ryan was a free-spirited charmer who could make you laugh. A voracious collector of baseball cards, he would tell me he could name every batting champion back to the 1960s, &quot;you know, the ancient days of baseball, when you were still young, Dad.&quot;    Now, his laughter is gone. Because of drugs, he is dead. And every day, my heart breaks a little more.    Ryan's death, like countless others, isn't officially recorded in the nation's rising drug toll. On the night of Oct. 1, 1987, at age 16, he drove his tan Mustang off a street in nearby Vienna, Va. He inexplicably fled the minor accident and ran a half-mile down the road, where he was bumped by a car. Even though a passing motorist tried to restrain him, Ryan, with a crazed look in his eyes and a sudden strength far beyond his small size, broke away and ran down a hill and onto a busy expressway; he was hit head-on and killed instantly by a van that didn't stop.    Tests showed no evidence of drugs. But he was speeding from the home of a drug dealer. We later learned that, earlier the same day, he had obtained elsewhere three &quot;hits&quot; of LSD, a hallucinogen that can cause panic and that often doesn't show up in tests. One way or another, drugs took my only son. The only reason my family is now reliving our nightmare in print is the hope that it might save one young person who thinks he or she can control their drug use -- and one family from the pain we will always feel.    In opinion polls, drug use constantly ranks as one of America's top concerns. &quot;It is foremost on parents' minds,&quot; says Lee Dogoloff, executive director of the American Council for Drug Education. &quot;Drug and alcohol use is the thing most likely to wrest their child from them before that child reaches adulthood.&quot;    What is frightening as a parent is that children have an amazing ability to hide even extreme drug and alcohol abuse until it is almost too late. We didn't find out about Ryan until he was 14. And the extent of his use was far beyond our worst fears.    In a paper I discovered only recently, Ryan wrote during a rehabilitation program in early 1986: &quot;I used cocaine a lot. It started out as a weekend use, but soon I had or tried to have it daily. I used PCP {an hallucinogen} about 2 or 3 times a week. I used hallucinogens all the time, such as acid, mushrooms, peyote, ecstasy and mescaline. I used LSD about 300 times.&quot; The omnipresent drug was marijuana. It started Ryan on his downfall and was always the drug he went back to.    He never meant to get hooked. But for reasons nobody yet knows, some people have a predisposition or vulnerability to drug abuse. &quot;For such kids,&quot; says Dr. Frederick K. Goodwin, head of the U.S. Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health Administration, &quot;even a first use of alcohol or an illicit drug may be an irrevocable step, leading to serious substance abuse.&quot;    In the suburbs of America, both drug use and the violence related to it are often hidden. Ryan was coming from the home of a drug dealer who for years had corrupted and molested youths who feared for their lives if they exposed him. After Ryan's death, several young people courageously came forward. In 1987, the man was arrested and charged with statutory rape and selling drugs to minors.    He will never go to trial. Around Christmas of that year, he killed himself by placing a plastic bag over his head and suffocating. His death also isn't counted as drug-related.    I will never fully know why Ryan got involved in drugs. In my view, there is still a dangerous myth that good kids from good families don't do drugs. Children are vulnerable no matter who they are or where they live. My son had his problems, but he was a sensitive, caring and unforgettable young man.    Ryan Glenn Shafer came into our lives on May 27, 1971, when my wife, Barbara, and I adopted him in Prince George's County, Md. He was two months old, and Barb cradled him on her lap as we drove to our home in Laurel. We issued a press release: &quot;Randamp;B Shafer Inc. announces a major expansion.&quot;    In 1976, we moved along with our daughter, Katie, two years younger than Ryan, to McLean, in Fairfax County, Va. Barb chose for the most part to forgo a full-time job and threw herself into school and community volunteer work involving our children. I got involved too, helping to coach most of Ryan's baseball teams.    Ryan grew to be a fun-loving boy with wide and intense interests. His sense of humor charmed his friends and adults. In his first year at Longfellow Intermediate School, he became the first seventh-grader ever voted &quot;Joe Cool.&quot; When a mother was informed of this choice, she said, &quot;Why, of course. He is Joe Cool.&quot;    Despite his glibness, we knew Ryan had been troubled by low self-esteem and by difficulty in school. (We now know that both are early warning signs of a child at risk of drug use.) What we didn't know was that he had begun experimenting with drugs as early as the sixth grade. We were going through the typical stages of parents of drug-abusing adolescents.    The first stage is abject ignorance. Back in 1983, we never suspected that drug use was possible with our pre-teen: He was way too young. In fact, these days, drug-using youths on average begin at about age 12. We began to notice personality changes -- hostility, rebellion -- but they seemed the normal changes we had seen in our friends' teen-agers.    The next step is denial. Ryan's actions worsened, but we didn't accept what we know now were warning signs: use of eye drops to cover up red eyes from smoking marijuana; incense burning in his room to mask the odor; calls from friends whom we hadn't met; trouble at school; money missing from around the house.    By the time Ryan reached ninth grade in 1985 and began McLean High School, he no longer could hide his troubles. He began cutting classes -- a common tipoff to drug use. By the time the school called us, he had missed nearly two dozen classes and was failing everything. We found that school officials at that time didn't know much more about drugs than we did.    The school did guide us to a local physician, Dr. Warren Klam, who has treated hundreds of adolescents. Ryan began urine tests for drugs, or, as the kids call them, the &quot;whiz quiz.&quot; Ryan, as drug abusers do, denied drug use. &quot;You don't trust me,&quot; he self-righteously protested.    The tests showed &quot;low positive&quot; marijuana. (They would have been &quot;high positive&quot; but Ryan told us later that after giving me a specimen while I observed, he later would sneak into our bedroom and water it down.) Actually, he had been cutting classes to smoke marijuana daily.    Next came minimization. Thank God, it was &quot;only&quot; pot. In fact, today's marijuana can be a deceivingly damaging drug for young people, and, in the case of heavy use, can cause short-term memory loss and long-term health problems. Some strains are 25 times more powerful than a decade ago, says the American Pediatrics Association, which adds: &quot;Marijuana is no longer the 'harmless little giggle' referred to by John Lennon in the 1960s.&quot; Pot and alcohol can also be gateways to more serious drugs. By now, Ryan was long past the experimental stage and into planned use.    As Joyce Tobias, a registered nurse, explains in her booklet, &quot;Kids andamp; Drugs,&quot; in this stage &quot;attitudes change and what was once unacceptable behavior is now cool and acceptable. Unexplainable mood swings begin, including withdrawal, anger and aggression. Verbal abuse toward parents, profanity and rebellious attitudes become a constant friction point between parent and child.&quot;    As he moved into the third stage, chemical dependence, Ryan's problems took control of our family. Drugs changed him into a person we didn't recognize -- lying, shouting, scheming, manipulating. My wife and I alternated between anger over his actions, uncertainty over his seemingly persuasive insistence he was innocent, and frustration over our inability to resolve the situation. As the turmoil took its toll on our family, we argued over the proper course. When a child is on drugs, the traditional tools of trust and discipline no longer work. It was time for professional help.    In January 1986, we put Ryan into the Arlington (Va.) Hospital's six-week, residential Adolescent Treatment Program. He had hit bottom and was ready to accept treatment. Drug use was overwhelming his life, but he still hid the full extent from us. The night before he went into treatment, he sat calmly watching television. Later he told us he was on an LSD &quot;acid trip&quot; and saw snakes coming out of the TV set.    The intake tests revealed the frightening extent of his drug use. He was part of the &quot;sicker, quicker generation&quot; of young people known as &quot;garbage heads&quot; who heavily abuse both drugs and alcohol.    Ryan's drug of choice was LSD, which causes vivid hallucinations. Fellow residents dubbed him &quot;blotter boy&quot; because he had used LSD impregnated on blotter paper, and sold like sheets of stamps for as little as $3 to $5 a hit.    We discovered the limits of drug testing. LSD is detectable only in special tests, if at all. Cocaine remains in the system only about two to three days. Marijuana stays in the system about 30 days and, thus, is the most likely to be detected.    Barb and I attended parent-counseling sessions. We learned that, like us, most parents had no idea of their children's heavy drug or alcohol use until the youths could no longer hide their dual lives. Some of the parents were strict, some were lenient, all were caring. There is no magic bullet of parenting against drugs.    They also were middle-class parents, most of whom had insurance. Six weeks at Arlington cost more than $12,000. Elsewhere, treatment programs can cost $30,000 or more. The poor must go to limited public facilities, which in most areas have waiting lines.    The Arlington Hospital program, like most drug-treatment programs, is patterned after Alcoholics Anonymous, emphasizing a support group and education on how alcohol and drugs destroy the body. In a dormitory-like setting, Ryan dove into the program with gusto. He won over counselors and parents with his personality.    When he was free of drugs, we got our real son back. He told us about his drug use; how he had slipped out of his bedroom window at night to buy drugs; how he had started taking drugs to impress older friends, who at first gave him drugs for free; how he couldn't stop without help.    He returned home in time for his 15th birthday in March 1986. As part of the treatment, he attended 15 weeks of after-care five days a week. He also was required to go to 90 meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous in 90 days. He did so with enthusiasm, he dropped drug-using friends, and it seemed our troubles soon would be behind us.    We placed him in a small Northern Virginia school, Enterprise, for troubled youths. The school had only about a dozen students. He got off to a fitful start, but by his 16th birthday in 1987, Ryan, now a 10th grader, was doing great. His drug tests were clean. His grades were the best ever. A dedicated teacher helped raise his reading level, damaged by pot use, to 12th-grade level. He won school awards for &quot;funniest,&quot; &quot;best personality&quot; and &quot;most supportive.&quot; He got his driver's license, worked part-time and had a lovely girlfriend. He was a joy.    Then, suddenly, the old signs began reappearing. His grades began slipping; he began spending money excessively. His behavior deteriorated. A test showed signs of marijuana, probably laced with PCP. School officials told us what we knew: Ryan had to go into another rehab program. We were crushed.    In June of 1987, he entered a new 10-week outpatient program at Arlington Hospital. As he progressed, his tests showed no drugs, but we were troubled. This time his personality didn't change back. He remained abusive and temper prone. Yet, he never got totally out of control. After an outburst, he would apologize.    We believe he truly wanted to stop using the drugs that had consumed him. In a note he wrote in the summer of 1987 thanking us for putting him in treatment, he said: &quot;For the first time in a long time I am very happy with my life. I really don't want to lose what I have just because I want to smoke pot.&quot;    Then the situation took a dark turn. At Alcoholics Anonymous, Ryan claimed to have found a &quot;sponsor,&quot; a recovering addict with longer sobriety whom he could call whenever he felt his own resolve weakening. Inadvertently, we eventually discovered that the supposed sponsor was a man whom Ryan had mentioned briefly and forbiddingly regarding his earlier drug use. According to some of Ryan's friends, the man may have attended AA meetings as a way to recruit young people.    The man, 30 and single, was a shadowy figure who had befriended youths and who had been suspected of providing drugs to kids at his home for several years in McLean and, later, in Vienna, Va. Ryan apparently met the man, a telephone company employee, while in junior high school, when he went to his house with friends, and had become a regular visitor. Exactly how the relationship resumed later still isn't clear.    We forbade Ryan from seeing the man, but he did so anyway. Events moved quickly amid the resulting turmoil.    For the first time, Ryan talked about committing suicide. The next day, in early August, he was ejected from the rehab program after testing positive for marijuana. In a frantic day, we checked residential programs around the country. Springwood Psychiatric Hospital 30 miles away in Leesburg, Va., had one bed open. We could bring him that night. This time Ryan, angry and frightened, resisted. We got him to Springwood, where doctors told us he was in a deep depression. Therapy indicated that at least one factor in Ryan's low self-esteem was subconscious feelings of rejection for having been put up for adoption, feelings he never expressed in our many talks on his adoption. He eventually was diagnosed as manic depressive, suffering the wide mood swings of a bipolar disorder. It isn't known whether drugs caused his problems, or whether he used drugs to self-medicate. Tests at Springwood showed no extensive recent drug use and Ryan this time didn't have withdrawal symptoms, but with LSD there aren't any. We wonder now if he may have fooled everyone all along.    Once again, he responded to treatment. His mood swings could be stabilized with lithium and other medicines. After six weeks, in early September, we took him home. He was accepted at Fairfax County's special education school.    Ryan seemed free from drugs and more like his old self. He closely followed the news and discussed the Supreme Court nomination of Robert Bork with more facts than even his father, the journalist, was up on. Correcting me, he would quip: &quot;I think I know a little bit more about Supreme Court nominations than you do.&quot;    His medicine made him tired, and he often went to bed early. One night in late September, I looked in his room as he was falling asleep in bed and said, &quot;I love you, Ryan.&quot; He picked his head up, smiled and said softly, &quot;Thanks, Dad.&quot;    Within the week, he was dead.    The fatal accident occurred at about 8:30 p.m. on Oct. 1, just as Barb and I were returning from an open house at Ryan's new school, enthusiastic about his prospects there. Until midnight, all we could find out from the police was that he had run from his car and hadn't been heard from. Finally, at Fairfax Hospital, we were ushered, for privacy, into an empty storeroom by a young Virginia state trooper, who began in police jargon to tell us &quot;there has been an accident.&quot; What he was struggling to say hit us like a jolt of electricity: Ryan was dead.    The terror that ripped through my body was overwhelmed by a wrenching reality: that I would never hold my little boy again. Soon came a numbness that has never totally gone away. It is true that if your child dies, a part of you dies with him.    Publicly, Ryan's death wasn't considered drug-related, but we made a decision to talk about the real cause. Acting on our pleas, the state police pursued the probe that resulted in the drug dealer's arrest. He was charged with distributing marijuana and other drugs to minors. He also was charged with the statutory rape of a 13-year-old girl and with soliciting sex from a 14-year-old boy.    Our main concern after Ryan's death was the psychological impact on our daughter, Katie, now nearly 16. Katie has never used drugs and has dealt with the loss of her brother by counseling others against drug use. Despite a recent federal survey showing a decline in drug use among high school seniors, nearly one in two seniors says he or she has tried an illicit drug. The agency also didn't survey those who have dropped out of school.    The key to saving lives is early intervention, during the one to three years that young people typically hide their drug use. &quot;What I see often,&quot; says Dr. Klam, the specialist in adolescent care, &quot;are parents who wait until there is a crisis before they act. If you feel in your heart something isn't right, it's better to get that kid in for an evaluation.&quot;    The only real solution is prevention -- keeping kids from ever trying drugs in the first place. Drug education -- as early as elementary school -- is vital, and it should include parents and teachers.    For Ryan, it is too late. On Oct. 7, 1987, I drove with my wife and daughter to a cemetery near our home. Just over 16 years before, Barb had carried our new son home on her lap. This day, she carried the urn containing his ashes. Now we visit Ryan's grave and we weep, and we ask, Why?    ---@ Possible Early Warning Signs @ Certain behavior may indicate a child is involved with drugs or alcohol:    --Abrupt change in mood or attitude    --Sudden decline in attendance or performance at work or school    --Sudden resistance to discipline at home or school    --Impaired relationship with family or friends    --Ignoring curfews    --Unusual flare-ups of temper    --Increased borrowing of money from parents or friends; stealing from home, school, or employer    --Heightened secrecy about actions and possessions    --Associating with a new group of friends, especially those who use drugs    Source: Department of Health and Human Services </TEXT></DOC>