<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870128-0022 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan to Seek New Power to RetailiateAgainst Curbs to Overseas Market Access---By Art PineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan will seek new power to retaliate against countries that don't give U.S. companies the same access to their markets that their own exporters enjoy here.    The &quot;reciprocity&quot; provision, part of a new trade bill the administration will send Congress next month, would make failure to provide such market access a basis for U.S. retaliation under current unfair-trade practices procedures.    Existing law already gives Mr. Reagan broad leeway to impose punitive tariffs or quotas in retaliation for almost any unfair trade practice of a U.S. trading partner, from violating a treaty to unduly restricting imports.    However, current law doesn't specifically cite failure to grant reciprocal trade access as a ground for punitive action. U.S. officials said that enactment of the proposal would open the way for a more aggressive U.S. trade posture by increasing pressure on the president to adopt full reciprocity as a standard for trade relations.    In the past, the administration has opposed congressional efforts to enact the &quot;reciprocity&quot; principle into law. It argued that doing so would unduly tie the president's hands, hindering his consideration of other diplomatic and economic factors.    Under the new proposal, the administration could invoke the reciprocity provision in cases where countries deny market access either to specific types of U.S. goods or as a general rule. U.S. retaliation wouldn't be mandatory, however.    The proposal is one of some 20 separate provisions in the administration's new trade bill. Details of the package, which Mr. Reagan described in general terms in his State of the Union message last night, are expected to be outlined to members of Congress today or tomorrow.    &quot;We remain opposed as ever to protectionism because America's growth and future depend on trade,&quot; Mr. Reagan said in his speech last night. &quot;But we will insist on trade that is fair and free. We are always willing to be trade partners but never trade patsies.&quot;    The administration hopes to send formal trade legislation to Capitol Hill by Feb. 18, either separately or as part of a broader package of proposals to increase the &quot;competitiveness&quot; of U.S. business.    The administration decided to propose a trade bill this year in order to head off moves expected in Congress for tough, protectionist legislation. The administration proposal represents the minimum the White House believes it could propose and still remain a player in congressional negotiations over trade legislation this year.    As expected, the measure contains no provisions that would reduce the president's discretion to deny import relief to a troubled industry if he believes it is unwarranted. The administration contends its own more aggressive trade posture in recent months has blunted the need for such a crackdown.    The administration plans, as part of its bill, to propose setting a two-year limit for negotiations designed to settle trade disputes with other countries. And it will recommend strengthening the administration's power to prevent foreigners from circumventing penalty duties the U.S. imposes on them for shipping subsidized goods to the U.S. or selling their products here at unfairly low prices.    The bill also would clarify standards for deciding whether producers from non-market economies are engaging in predatory pricing or receiving unfair subsidies. It would prohibit producers in non-market economies from pricing the products they sell here lower than the average for imports from market economies.    A non-market economy is one in which business is largely owned or controlled by the government.    The new trade legislation also will contain provisions designed to prod industries seeking protection from imports to take steps -- from streamlining their work forces to investing in new plant or equipment -- to make themselves more competitive.    Under the proposal, the U.S. International Trade Commission could require an industry to adopt such an &quot;adjustment plan&quot; before it could become eligible for import relief. If the ITC determined that import protection wouldn't make an industry fully competitive, it could reject the industry's plea for protection.    The bill also includes these provisions:    --It would seek congressional authority for the U.S. to continue a number of trade negotiations -- from the new &quot;Uruguay Round&quot; of global trade-liberalization talks just getting under way in Geneva to negotiations with Canada to establish a free-trade compact between the two countries. Agreements involving services, investment and patent, trademark and copyright law would be given expeditious consideration in Congress.    And the White House would be empowered to cut tariffs on its own in exchange for tariff reductions by other countries. Currently, congressional approval is required for such trade concessions.    --It would expand the administration's options for providing protection to industries that have been hit hard by sudden surges of imports. Besides the tariffs and quotas allowed under current law, the new legislation would empower trade authorities to order regulatory agencies to review costly regulations that are impeding the competitiveness of domestic industries; to seek to settle some issues in multilateral trade talks with other nations; and to streamline procedures to resolve disputes involving trade in perishable agricultural products in as little as four or five weeks.    The bill also would enable the ITC to recommend import relief even if an industry has been hurt partly as a result of a recession. It was the absence of such a provision that led to an ITC decision in 1981 to deny import relief to American auto makers, even though they had been hard hit by imports. </TEXT></DOC>