<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880512-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. IS OFFERING to drop drug charges in a proposed deal with Noriega.    The Reagan administration made its first explicit offer to drop the indictments if the Panamanian strong man resigns and leaves the country. Administration officials stressed that agreement hadn't been reached on the offer, which calls for Gen. Noriega to leave Panama by Aug. 12 and stay out of the country until after elections in 1990. Negotiations were continuing in Panama. In addition, the proposal calls for Panama to pass a law limiting the term of Noriega's successor.    Opposition sources said acting President Manuel Solis Palma's government had ordered several consulates in the U.S. to close. Panama issued a denial.    ---   A BOMB EXPLODED near the Israeli Embassy in Cyprus, killing three people.    Police said a Lebanese student was arrested after fleeing his explosives-laden car, which security officers had chased away from the embassy. A caller claiming to represent Abu Nidal's radical Palestinian faction told a news organization that the bombing was the first in a planned terror campaign. In Israel, Palestinian leaders urged preparations for a monthlong protest, and troops arrested six Palestinian journalists.    A grenade damaged the U.S. Embassy in North Yemen. No responsibility was claimed, but the U.S. said it had reason to suspect PLO involvement.    ---   The U.S. and Soviets reached tentative agreement on about half of the verification provisions involved in a dispute that has held up Senate ratification of the treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles. A U.S. official said the dispute will probably be resolved during talks under way in Geneva between Shultz and Shevardnadze.    ---   Reagan endorsed Bush for the Republican presidential nomination at a Washington fund-raising dinner. Robertson officially ended his bid and said he would back the vice president. Among the Democrats, Dukakis had a 1,589-944 lead in delegates over Jackson following victories in West Virginia and Nebraska primaries Tuesday.    ---   Poland's Communist government won some powers to ban unofficial strikes, but dropped an even harsher anti-strike provision. The legislature's vote gives the government broad power to push through economic reforms. The vote came the day after the collapse of a Solidarity-led Gdansk shipyard strike.    ---   Federal officials charged seven members of a &quot;communist politico-military organization&quot; with setting off bombs in the U.S. Capitol and seven other locations in Washington and New York in 1983. All but one of the defendants are in custody on other charges. The bombing at the Capitol blew a hole in the wall outside the Senate chamber.    ---   Sen. Nunn unveiled a national service plan that would offer young people future financial aid in exchange for subsistence-pay duty in the military or social-service sector. The Democratic Leadership Council proposed the plan to address, among other things, a feared shortage in military recruits in the 1990s.    ---   Rival Lebanese militias broke a brief Syrian-brokered truce and resumed heavy fighting for control of Shiite Moslem slums in southern Beirut. At least 33 people were killed and 160 wounded in the battles. Security sources said the Iranian-backed Hezbollah militia appeared to be gaining the upper hand against their Amal militia rivals.    ---   Guatemala's defense minister said an attempted coup by soldiers at two military bases was foiled without bloodshed. The minister said two officers, influenced by &quot;radical civilian elements,&quot; were arrested for attempting to lead troops against President Cerezo's Christian Democratic regime. The U.S. expressed support for Cerezo.    ---   Yugoslavia extended a partial wage-and-price freeze that was due to end Sunday. The extension came after Belgrade secured only half of a $500 million loan it said was needed to end the freeze, which has sparked unprecedented labor unrest but failed to halt rampant inflation.    ---   Hungary's Communist Party said all 102 members of its central committee must stand for re-election at a special conference later this month. The move is likely to end the regime of Janos Kadar, who has ruled since Moscow put down a 1957 uprising.    ---   Indian troops fought gun battles with Sikh separatists at the Golden Temple in Amritsar for the third day in a row, and as many as five people were killed. Police sources said an elite commando unit had joined the 2,500 troops ringing the shrine.    ---   Pravda said an Azerbaijan metalworker went on trial for murder for his part in February ethnic riots that killed at least 32 in the Soviet republic. He is the first of more than 80 people charged to stand trial.    ---   Salvadoran military officials said 15 government soldiers and 10 leftists guerrillas were killed in an attack at a hydroelectric dam that cut the country's power supply in half. Rationing of electricity was imposed throughout the country after the attack.    ---   Paraguay's Stroessner canceled a planned meeting between Pope John Paul II and a church group that has been critical of the president. Paraguay's Roman Catholic bishops said, however, that the meeting will take place when the pope arrives Monday.    ---   Died: Kim Philby, 76, British double agent who defected to the Soviet Union in 1963, in Moscow. </TEXT></DOC>