<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880902-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Seekers of Armageddon in South Africa </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Mulholland </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><DATELINE> JOHANNESBURG  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Revolutionary change, says French intellectual Jean-Francois Revel, flows not from stagnation but from relative wealth and freedom.    Perhaps Oscar Dhlomo, minister of education and culture of Kwazulu, homeland of South Africa's six million Zulus, has read Revel. In any event, Mr. Dhlomo understands better than do most U.S. congressmen that if the South African economy is destroyed by sanctions, so, too, will be the prospects for revolutionary, or even evolutionary, change.    Mr. Dhlomo posits a chilling alternative: Economic ruin will bring about not a shining African democracy but will bring to power instead the white bigots of the right. The Zulu leader warned at the United Nations in July that sanctions and disinvestment constituted &quot;the same pressures which isolated a post-First World War Germany and created a climate in which a monster, Hitler, could harness the anger and reaction of a nation under siege and turn it into a snowballing nationalist force.&quot;    Mr. Dhlomo is not alone in believing an apocalyptic end is possible for South Africa if the economy is destroyed. John Makatini, U.N. representative of the African National Congress, the exiled black liberation movement that supports sanctions, believes so, too. And he welcomes it. In New York in 1986 he declared that &quot;if there were only four million of us left after the revolution, that would be better than the present situation.&quot; Mr. Makatini was aware, when he said this, that he was talking about the deaths of up to 25 million blacks and several million whites.    Perhaps one can understand and forgive the excesses of a Johnny Makatini, a victim of apartheid forced into exile by a cruel and inhuman system. But it is beyond comprehension how people such as American congressmen, and foreign ministers and national leaders of the British Commonwealth can advocate policies whose blatant objective, in the language of a recent Commonwealth statement, is to &quot;stimulate unemployment&quot; in South Africa.    What can be the purpose of stimulating unemployment? One can only assume that the proponents of such a policy hope that when a sufficient number of starving blacks have been thrown on the street, their children sick, dying or dead, their jobs and prospects destroyed, and their homes derelict, they will rise up and throw off the yoke of apartheid. This scenario would probably bring about Mr. Dhlomo's nightmare of the white South African Hitler with the blood of millions of black South Africans on his hands, not to mention devastation in the entire subcontinent. Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Swaziland would all be sucked into the vortex. Their already largely subsistence economies would be destroyed.    In evidence before a congressional committee in Washington in March, John Kane-Berman, executive director of the South African Institute for Race Relations, an impeccably liberal organization, addressed this issue. &quot;One argument,&quot; he said, &quot;is that such sanctions are a necessary adjunct of a campaign of insurgency, and that the two forces combined will bring about the collapse of the government. The other argument is that sanctions are the only alternative to the violent overthrow of the state. These two arguments cannot logically be simultaneously correct.&quot;    All this is not, of course, to gainsay that sanctions have persuasive power. As most businessmen know, however, the trick is to apply pressure in a manner that does not kill the deal or push the other side into a state of panic where irrational forces drive the will to survive.    One can sympathize with the frustrations of foreigners who would like to see South Africa rid of apartheid. We white South Africans who oppose it are also frustrated -- and we have more at stake.    It is fair to ask those like myself, who oppose sanctions, what the alternative is. While it is difficult to be specific, I believe Mr. Kane-Berman of the Institute of Race Relations has it right. He says that only blacks can destroy apartheid. In his evidence before Congress he demonstrated how apartheid law has been eroded by reality. In areas such as trade-union rights, job reservation, the pass laws, influx control and others, the Pretoria government has been forced to retreat in the face of the unworkability of its discriminatory policies.    Black power in South Africa -- that is, the power to destroy apartheid -- flows not from the barrel of a gun or from Winnie Mandela's &quot;boxes of matches&quot; for the inhuman necklace, but from economic gains. To the extent apartheid has been eroded in the workplace, in many neighborhoods, in hotels, movie houses, suburban trains, private schools and on sports fields, it has been black economic muscle and not white fear that has done the job.    There is something arrogant in the notion that 30 million black South Africans aren't capable, without outside help, of dislodging five million whites from absolute power. The insult implied by this assumption is even greater when one considers that a fair proportion of the whites themselves are against the present system.    Black economic empowerment is the most civilized as well as the surest means of rapidly eroding the system of apartheid. This approach requires statesmanship and visionary leadership of the sort that the U.S., the leader of the West, seems incapable of providing. Destruction of the South African economy -- which the Dellums Bill seeks -- would deprive blacks of their most effective means of fighting apartheid.    Soviet thinking on South Africa seems far more sophisticated today than that of the sanctioneers on Capitol Hill. Boris Asoyan, the Soviet envoy to Lesotho, is widely regarded as Mikhail Gorbachev's chief spokesman on South Africa. In a recent Radio Moscow interview, Mr. Asoyan had this to say: &quot;Under the influence of many factors, including (Pieter W.) Botha's reforms, the Afrikaner society has started to move. Deep changes are taking place that entail a destruction of structures of the racial discrimination system.&quot;    Echoing the fears of Kwazulu's Mr. Dhlomo, Mr. Asoyan warns about the possibility of a severe right-wing backlash. While he does not believe the Conservative Party could take power, &quot;I absolutely, definitely assume that they will become more and more negative from the point of view of stability as the country moves toward changes.&quot;    The Soviets, heeding Mr. Dhlomo's warning, might well play a constructive role in the search for peace in South Africa and southern Africa. Certainly Mr. Asoyan's comments and the Soviet role in prodding the Cubans on in the Angolan peace process are indications that this is possible. In addition, there have been several recent contacts between the Soviets and leading South African whites.    Sen. Edward Kennedy is among those in Congress whose refrain it has been that America must be &quot;on the right side of history&quot; in the issue of South Africa. Yet the U.S. may well find itself recorded in history as a destructive and naive player in a process that called for intellect, steadiness and patience. To really be on the right side of history in South Africa, America needs to be on the side of peaceful change to majority rule in a process that would not result in the black majority inheriting an economic wasteland.    ---   Mr. Mulholland, a part-time correspondent for the Journal in Johannesburg 1976-86, is chief executive officer of Times Media Ltd., one of South Africa's largest publishers of newspapers and magazines. </TEXT></DOC>