<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE HOUSE VOTED to embargo the release of $40 million in aid to the Contras.    The measure, passed 230-196, freezes the final installment of last year's U.S. aid to Nicaragua's rebels until Reagan accounts for funds already sent. While final congressional action is expected to be vetoed by Reagan, the vote presages a fight over $105 million that the president wants for the Contras next year. Separately, the House and Senate select panels on the Iran-Contra affair voted to grant immunity to businessman Albert Hakim in an apparent effort to compel him to give lawmakers access to financial records.    Congressional investigators are looking into the role of the National Security Agency, an intelligence organization, in the Iran and Contra operations.    ---   ISRAEL AGREED to launch a limited inquiry into the Pollard spy case.    In a move aimed at mending a rift in U.S.-Israeli ties, the Israeli cabinet appointed a two-member committee to investigate the government's handling of the case involving the American. The action came despite Prime Minister Shamir's opposition to such a probe. Pollard was sentenced last week to life imprisonment for passing classified U.S. military data to Israel.    Shultz said he was &quot;deeply distressed&quot; by Israeli spying on the U.S. and confirmed that U.S. aides were told to shun an Israeli charged in the case.    ---   A federal judge cleared the way for an independent counsel to seek to indict Michael Deaver on perjury charges, denying the former Reagan aide's request for an injunction. Deaver's lawyers, seeking to challenge the constitutionality of the independent counsel law, will ask an appeals court to delay any indictment.    ---   Relief workers in Ecuador ferried food and medicine to some of the 75,000 people left homeless by last week's earthquakes. The temblors, which killed about 300 people, also prompted Quito to suspend interest payments on its $8.2 billion foreign debt. The quakes destroyed a stretch of the nation's main oil pipeline.    ---   The White House was faulted by Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.) over a broad reinterpretation of the 1972 ABM treaty with the Soviet Union, which would permit development of a space-based antimissile system. Nunn said the administration's view was wrong and its adoption would create a constitutional confrontation in the Senate.    ---   A judge in Prague convicted five members of the Jazz Section of the Musicians Union of illegally profiting from publishing books and promoting jazz. Two of the activists were given prison terms; the others received suspended sentences. The cultural group had been banned by Czechoslovakia.    ---   U.S. intelligence agents have obtained much-sought T-72 Soviet battle tanks and are shipping them back to the U.S. for inspection, a Reagan official said. The aide denied that the tanks were connected to the sale of U.S. arms to Iran.    ---   Transportation Secretary Dole granted antitrust immunity to airlines serving Chicago's O'Hare and Atlanta's Hartsfield airports. The move was taken so the carriers can schedule flights in an effort to curb delays.    ---   Chilean President Pinochet signed into law a measure allowing non-Marxist parties to operate legally for the first time since the military seized power 13 years ago. The legislation, which includes tough conditions for the formation of future parties, was faulted by the opposition because of Santiago's continuing ban on free elections.    ---   Garret FitzGerald unexpectedly resigned as leader of Ireland's Fine Gael party, a day after Charles Haughey was elected to succeed him as prime minister. FitzGerald, a two-time prime minister, led the party for 10 years and helped negotiate the Anglo-Irish agreement that gives Dublin a role in Northern Ireland's affairs.    ---   West Germany's Kohl was elected by Parliament for a second four-year term as chancellor. Kohl will head a center-right coalition that has pledged to clean up the environment and combat terrorism.    ---   South Africa said that violent opposition to apartheid had declined sharply this year, but that a nine-month-old state of emergency would remain in force. In Egypt, a summit of nine African states condemned Pretoria's racial policies and urged economic sanctions to end apartheid.    ---   Nicaraguan President Ortega said Honduras may have downed a U.S.-backed rebel supply plane after possible damage to the aircraft's communications system caused by Sandinista troops. Ortega said Nicaragua's forces had fired on a plane shortly before it was shot down Monday night in Honduras.    ---   A hijacker exploded a grenade aboard a Cuban airliner at Havana's airport Tuesday night, injuring 14 people, the Castro government said. The man, described as a &quot;common criminal,&quot; was killed by an off-duty policeman on the plane, according to radio broadcasts monitored in Miami.    ---   Two police helicopters collided about 35 miles from downtown Los Angeles while pursuing a stolen car. Three officers in one aircraft were killed in the crash, and two in the other were injured. The driver of the car was arrested and booked for murder.    ---   Nebraska's governor appointed David Karnes, a conservative Republican businessman from Omaha, to fulfill the unexpired term of the late Sen. Edward Zorinsky, a Democrat. The move narrows the Democrats' edge in the Senate to 54-46. Zorinsky died Friday of a heart attack.    ---   Died: Thomas Richardson, 64, chairman of Northeast Bancorp, in Washington, of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>