<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870727-0031 </DOCNO><HL> ---Several Firms Are DamagedBy Expensive Mistakes;Salomon's Big Upheaval---A Surfeit of Prima Donnas?---By Steve SwartzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SBSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Salomon Brothers Inc. Vice Chairman Lewis Ranieri fell victim to Wall Street's latest fad: management.    A 40-year-old former trader who helped create the mortgage-backed securities business that earned Salomon hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Ranieri exemplified the entrepreneurs driving Wall Street's breathless growth. He loved to buy and sell the instruments he created, but he didn't like to manage or be managed, Salomon officials say.    In recent months, Mr. Ranieri often butted heads with other Salomon executives who are trying to get control of their burgeoning enterprise. &quot;He was better at building businesses, and the transition into management was more difficult,&quot; says Thomas W. Strauss, Salomon's president.    Two weeks ago, Mr. Ranieri's stellar career at the firm ended abruptly when John H. Gutfreund, the chairman and chief executive, summoned him to an early meeting at Salomon's law firm and asked for his resignation. The turmoil continued last week when Mr. Ranieri's chief deputy, Michael Mortara, also was ousted. &quot;We're not going to put up with any more bull,&quot; a high official says. Mr. Ranieri says &quot;we decided to go our separate ways&quot; and adds that it is &quot;naive&quot; to think that he created large, successful business units &quot;without management skills.&quot; Mr. Mortara calls his departure a &quot;pretty mutual&quot; decision.    Fueled by innovators such as Mr. Ranieri and an unprecedented five-year bull market in stocks and bonds, Wall Street investment houses have transformed themselves into powerful, world-wide corporations. Salomon's capital, for example, has surged to more than $3 billion from only $200 million in 1980, and its employee ranks have tripled to more than 6,000.    But Wall Street's management skills haven't kept pace with this explosive growth, securities professionals say. They add that many firms lack the know-how and systems to manage themselves adequately -- especially to police large numbers of people, control costs, monitor and analyze risk, and plan for the future.    The result has been a string of highly publicized management failings. Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. reported a huge trading loss of $377 million after its mortgage department spun out of control. First Boston Corp. lost nearly $100 million in April and May, largely because a few loosely supervised, high-risk traders had put it in a vulnerable position in Treasury-bond options. The group has since been disbanded.    And General Electric Co., citing major lapses in management, removed three top officials of its Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. securities unit, including the chief executive. Shortly afterward, Kidder agreed to pay $25.3 million to settle government charges of insider trading and other securities-law violations. Kidder neither admitted nor denied guilt.    In addition, the securities industry has struggled with problems in controlling the activities of its brokers, traders and investment bankers. Although the firms have always tried -- with varying results -- to ensure that their brokers don't sell options or other high-risk investments to the wrong clients, such as widows, most firms haven't paid much attention to policing their investment bankers and traders.    &quot;I was more naive than I should be&quot; about illegal activity in investment banking, &quot;and that's scary,&quot; says the general counsel of one major firm.    &quot;The industry grew faster than management's ability to handle it,&quot; says David Hunter, the chairman of Parker/Hunter Inc., a Pittsburgh-based securities firm, and a former chairman of the National Association of Securities Dealers. In unusual self-criticism, Robert P. Rittereiser, the chief executive of E.F. Hutton Group Inc., told the firm's 400 branch managers in mid-July that &quot;we are slowly bleeding to death&quot; because the growth in expenses has far outpaced the growth in revenue.    Some executives play down Wall Street's management problems, however. They argue that no industry could handle growth such as Wall Street's in the 1980s without stubbing a few toes. &quot;Our industry has grown from a cottage industry to a global industry of enormous proportions in a short period of time, and to think there won't be problems along the way is naive,&quot; Salomon's Mr. Strauss says.    But others see a more basic problem. They argue that the huge amounts of money that all but the worst-managed firms have made in the past five years have allowed many to ignore the need for management systems to control their rapid growth. &quot;This great bull market has masked a lot of management issues,&quot; says Peter A. Cohen, the chairman of Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.    Now, many firms are trying to put in new management controls. Many executives fear that a serious downturn in the stock and bond markets could slash revenues and force unprepared firms to cut staff and reorganize business lines at a frenzied pace. If the markets plunge, says Philip J. Purcell, the chief executive of Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co.'s Dean Witter Financial Services unit, &quot;there's going to be some blood on the Street.&quot;    But although recognizing the need for more management, many inside and outside the securities business say they aren't sure just what management tools are appropriate for an industry grown big but still heavily reliant on the entrepreneurial flexibility that most large corporations lack. &quot;The investment banks don't have the layers of supervision you get in a corporate structure,&quot; says Samuel L. Hayes III, a professor at Harvard University's Graduate School of Business Administration. &quot;Impose those, however, and you pay a price: You create a bureaucracy which tends to stifle innovation.&quot;    Perhaps no firm has found the transition to a more disciplined environment so wrenching as Salomon Brothers, long known as a group of especially strong-willed traders with virtually no management hierarchy.    Last October, the firm moved to change all that. It named a president, Mr. Strauss, and tapped two other top traders, Mr. Ranieri and William Voute, as vice chairmen. It created an 18-member board of directors and formed two senior committees to monitor its balance sheet and investment risk.    Later, it put in additional controls after its parent company, Salomon Inc., posted an embarrassing 39% drop in fourth-quarter earnings. Cost increases had outpaced revenue gains, with employee rolls jumping 40% for the year. &quot;While we were hiring in some areas, we should have and could have been scaling down others,&quot; a senior official says. Salomon Brothers named its first chief financial officer and developed its first overall budget.    Senior executives, who once spent much of their time on the trading desk, say they never have been in so many meetings. One planning session early this year lasted about 10 hours, sparking rumors of a merger offer for the firm. Afterward, Mr. Gutfreund, the chairman, denied the rumors, adding, &quot;After our fourth quarter, don't you think we have other things to talk about?&quot;    Salomon's new management style has sparked contention. In addition to the two recent high-level departures, the firm's highly respected economist, Henry Kaufman, resigned his top management posts over a dilution of his authority and the firm's decision to begin investing its own money in merger transactions. And competitors say they hear widespread grumbling among Salomon's troops.    &quot;There's resistance here,&quot; one young Salomon sales manager acknowledges. &quot;People don't want a lot of professional managers running around.&quot;    The securities industry's management problems are rooted in its traditionally small size and its bias toward salesmen and traders rather than managers. &quot;I don't think our industry was ever mismanaged; it just wasn't managed,&quot; says Donald B. Marron, the chief executive of PaineWebber Group Inc.    Wall Street long consisted largely of small partnerships selling stocks and bonds to institutions and individuals at fixed, noncompetitive prices. &quot;When I started in this business, the senior partners came to work at 9:30, took lunch from noon to 2:30 and counted the house until 4:30, when they would go play pool before changing into black tie for dinner,&quot; says George L. Ball, the chief executive at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.    In the late 1960s, several securities firms collapsed because their managements had neglected to install the systems needed amid a bull-market surge in trading. Others didn't survive the May 1975 move to competitive commission rates.    Though shaken, most surviving firms didn't feel compelled to toughen their management practices. After taking over a First Boston regional sales office in the mid-1970s, a new manager prepared sales and expense projections for his boss -- and was told: &quot;Are you sure you want to put it in black and white like this?&quot;    Such attitudes left Wall Street largely unprepared for the vast changes erupting in the 1980s. The bull market born in August 1982 has proved unusually fertile ground for scores of new financial products, such as options, futures and securities backed by such assets as mortgages, car loans and credit-card receivables. Deregulation of markets in London and Tokyo sent Wall Street firms scrambling to set up shop there. Many firms also sharply increased their capital by being acquired or through public offerings of securities.    Anxious to generate high returns, the firms began taking larger and larger risks by betting more of their own money in the marketplace. Competitive pressures have quickened the pace. Most firms believe that they have to throw manpower and capital at new markets before others rush in and shut them out.    &quot;It's ready, fire, aim in this business,&quot; Dean Witter's Mr. Purcell says. &quot;If you try to do it carefully, if you do all the studies, Salomon, Shearson and Goldman have already moved in, and the opportunity is lost.&quot;    In many respects, this go-for-broke strategy has paid off. Salomon, for example, has earned more than $1 billion over the past two years, more than any other U.S. securities firm. Firms that have resisted rapid expansion of trading and investment banking, such as Dean Witter and the Prudential-Bache unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, are now struggling to catch up.    But as the past several months have shown, shooting from the hip can inflict wounds in the foot. Officials of Merrill Lynch were rudely awakened to their risk-management inadequacies by its loss in mortgage trading. The firm didn't have a mandatory review process for all new products, and the mortgage department began trading a highly complex new security without fully understanding its tremendous volatility, Merrill Lynch officials say. The problems were compounded when a senior trader, who was supposed to be under close supervision because of a prior trading loss, nearly doubled the firm's position without authorization and then was able to conceal it for a week.    At Kidder Peabody, a three-month study by GE found substantial weaknesses in financial, administrative, managerial and information-systems controls. Current and former Kidder executives say that as the business grew, top management resisted calls for more investment in systems and technology, neglected budget controls and granted unusual autonomy to important revenue producers.    Attacking Kidder's problems, GE took tough action, placing its own people in Kidder as chief executive, chief financial officer and chief strategic planner.    And in the wake of the recent trading losses at Merrill Lynch and First Boston and similar losses last year at First Boston and Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., other firms also are grappling with their ability to monitor their trading risks. &quot;I think the judgment skills of people making trading decisions probably haven't kept up with the size, scope and complexity of the business,&quot; says Stephen Robert, the chief executive of Oppenheimer Group Inc.    But many observers contend that Wall Street won't generally adapt to more disciplined management for some time. Although Merrill Lynch, Hutton and PaineWebber are rebuilding their systems for monitoring revenues and costs -- aided by chief financial officers hired from outside the industry -- the chairman of one of the firms complains that such action &quot;is a process that takes years.&quot; And even if many of management's problems are eventually cleared up by installing the right people and systems, the securities business is inherently difficult to manage.    Strategic planning is tough because which products will sell and in what volume are determined largely by unpredictable factors such as interest rates and stock-market activity. &quot;I'll project my revenues for you if you tell me what the market is going to do next year,&quot; says the chief executive of a big securities firm.    Moreover, Wall Streeters, like college professors and lawyers, are notorious prima donnas who, at best, are difficult to lead. First Boston stopped using the traditional method of breaking out costs and revenues by department because it sparked too much squabbling among department heads.    And although Wall Street desperately needs managers, most securities professionals shun the job. &quot;People who are financially inclined want to be producers, not managers,&quot; PaineWebber's Mr. Marron says. And for those few bankers and traders interested in managing, most firms have no management-training programs.    Even some of those nominally in supervisory roles scoff at anything smacking of traditional management techniques. Says the chief of investment banking at one major Wall Street firm: &quot;I don't sit in my office and think up strategy and set up systems to control costs.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>