<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0117 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The Ethics Weapon</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Former Idaho congressman George Hansen is on day nine of a hunger strike in the Alexandria, Va., jail. Mr. Hansen is behind bars for violating the terms of his parole, after serving six months in prison for being convicted of failing to disclose certain of his wife's financial transactions while in Congress. Mr. Hansen calls himself a &quot;political prisoner&quot; and says he is being jailed for criticizing the Internal Revenue Service.    That is nonsense, but Mr. Hansen is correct in one sense. Political games are routinely played with financial-disclosure laws. Moreover, the surge in hearings and prosecutions in recent years over ethical breaches has given us a basis for judging Washington's enforcement of correct political behavior. What we mainly find is a double standard.    --Last week, the House Ethics Committee concluded that Rep. Fernand St Germain (D., R.I.), the powerful chairman of the House Banking Committee, violated a House rule by accepting transportation from a savings and loan. However, said the congressional panel, the violation involved a small amount of money and didn't suggest a &quot;pattern of improper acceptance.&quot; The committee also confirmed &quot;reporting deficiencies&quot; in Mr. St Germain's financial disclosures, first reported by Brooks Jackson of the Journal's Washington bureau, including the undervaluing of restaurants he owned by more than $1 million. The committee chose to take no disciplinary action.    --Last week, the Justice Department ratified earlier findings of the Senate Ethics Committee and closed its investigation of Sen. Mark Hatfield (R., Ore.) and his dealings with a Greek financier named Basil Tsakos. Sen. Hatfield had supported a trans-Africa oil pipeline promoted by Mr. Tsakos at the same time that his wife was accepting $55,000 in fees from Mr. Tsakos for real-estate and decorating advice. The Journal's Edward Pound reported last week that the Justice Department believed Mr. Tsakos intended to bribe Mr. Hatfield but that there was insufficient evidence of criminal intent by the senator.    --After Geraldine Ferraro became the Democratic vice-presidential candidate in 1984, it was charged that for five years she had filed inaccurate disclosure forms stating that she had not benefited from or known about her husband's business. A House ethics committee found &quot;approximately 10&quot; reporting violations, but held that they were not intentional and took no action. Mr. Hansen's conviction for similar violations that same year led then-Speaker Tip O'Neill to question the scope of congressional ethics laws.    A maverick congressman gets caught and convicted, but by and large Congress and official Washington become quite fastidious about standards of evidence when investigating -- and exonerating -- important or powerful members of Congress. Presumably affronted, however, by the unseemly behavior in the executive branch, Congress in 1978 enacted the Ethics in Government Act. It requires the attorney general, after an initial inquiry, to request that a panel of three federal judges appoint a prosecutor to investigate possible wrongdoing by executive branch employees. Ever since, prosecutions of presidential aides and appointees have been a booming business. For instance:    --In 1980, Carter White House aides Hamilton Jordan and Tim Kraft were accused of cocaine use. Both men lived in legal limbo for nearly a year until they were cleared.    --Former Assistant Attorney General Theodore Olson is enmeshed in a special prosecutor's inquiry over whether the Justice Department misled Congress over access to Environmental Protection Agency files in 1983.    --Michael Deaver, a former aide to President Reagan, is under indictment for allegedly lying about his post-government lobbying activities. He will go on trial in June.    Separately, summations in the trial of former Labor Secretary Raymond Donovan and several co-defendants are scheduled to begin next Tuesday. They are accused of fraud predating Mr. Donovan's government service.    Serious malfeasance deserves vigorous investigation. The post-Watergate era, however, has created an atmosphere in which members of the executive branch are subjected to a degree of accusatory scrutiny from which Congress and the judiciary are exempt. No independent prosecutors are appointed to interrogate senators about misspent bank accounts. Such inquiries are passed on to their colleagues on the ethics committees. Why the double standard?    The persistence and increasing obviousness of this double standard undermines the legitimacy of demanding ethical behavior in public life. It exposes the Ethics in Government Act to charges that its primary purpose is merely to provide the legislature with a political weapon in its struggles with the executive branch. </TEXT></DOC>