<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880126-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Iran's Unlikely Champions in the Gulf </HL><AUTHOR> Dilip Hiro </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   The unity of the six-member Gulf Cooperation Council has come under strain in the wake of the U.S. naval buildup in the Persian Gulf last July. Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are advocates of tough action against Iran, including severing of all links with it, while Oman and the United Arab Emirates have become staunch supporters of continued neighborly relations with Tehran. The remaining two members, Bahrain and Qatar, vacillate between the two positions.    &quot;Oman and the U.A.E. are closer to Iran than the others,&quot; Hussein Shaikholislam, Iran's deputy foreign minister, was quoted as saying in the London Guardian earlier this month. &quot;Some of the gulf states could be very good friends for us while others could at least remain neutral {in the Iran-Iraq War}.&quot;    Oman, which has emerged as a diplomatic heavyweight, is effectively preventing fellow members in the GCC from isolating Tehran -- despite Iran's attacks on neutral shipping in the gulf and despite last year's bloody riots in Mecca involving Iranian pilgrims. It has proposed a formal conference between Iran and the GCC states to be held either in Muscat, the Omani capital, or Damascus, the capital of Iran's ally Syria.    Unlike Syria, however, Oman is a firm ally of the West, very close to London and Washington. It regularly participates in joint military maneuvers with the U.S. Central Command and permits American and British forces to use its naval and air facilities. It was one of the three members of the Arab League (along with Sudan and Somalia) that refused to sever ties with Egypt when it signed a peace treaty with Israel in 1979.    Oman's policy of mediating between Iran and the GCC has puzzled and irritated the U.S. To show Washington's displeasure, Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci dropped Oman from his recent gulf tour. But given the strategic importance of Oman, neither the U.S. nor Britain is likely to go beyond symbolic disapproval.    There are compelling reasons behind Oman's desire to maintain good relations with Iran. Situated as it is on one side of the Strait of Hormuz, Oman has no choice but to cooperate with Iran in patrolling the waterway. The pressure is all the stronger because the territorial waters of the two neighbors touch at the narrowest point of the strait. The Omani ruler, Sultan Qaboos, knows that whatever else changes, this geographical fact will not, and that it is in Oman's national interest to maintain cordial relations with the region's superpower, Iran.    Part of the reason for the tension between the gulf's Arab states and Iran is that the former are governed by Sunni rulers, whose attitudes toward Shiism vary from cold indifference to acute hostility. The only exception is Oman, whose monarch belongs to the Ibadhi school within the Kharaji sect, which is quite apart from Sunnism and Shiism.    Sectarian considerations also enter the diplomatic equation formulated in Abu Dhabi, the capital of the U.A.E. About one-fifth of the U.A.E.'s quarter-million nationals are Shiite. But they have a larger influence on state policies than their number suggests. They are a commercial community and are concentrated in Dubai, the country's thriving port.    Dubai has benefited enormously from Iran's diplomatic and economic isolation. Its commercial links with Iran, the region's largest market, are both overt and clandestine, its entrepreneurs being among the foremost to supply Iranians with such illicit commodities as alcohol and American cigarettes.    Iran accounts for about a third of Dubai's booming re-export trade. Dubai's reexports to Iran in the first half of 1987 -- $218 million -- exceeded those for all of 1986. The two-way trade between Iran and the U.A.E. is now well past $1 billion a year. And the trend is upward.    Part of the reason for the upsurge in Dubai's trading fortunes lies with the growing risks to neutral shipping in the gulf. An increasing number of traders in Saudi Arabia are using the lower gulf ports for their imports and then having the goods transported overland.    In addition to the growing economic ties, the human contacts between Iran and the U.A.E. are widespread and frequent. There are eight weekly flights and ferry crossings between the two countries.    There is still another powerful reason the U.A.E. is trying to maintain good relations with Tehran: Nearly two-thirds of its oil is derived from offshore wells. These outlets are hard to protect from attacks by hostile naval forces. It is therefore in the U.A.E.'s economic interests not to arouse the ire of Iran, which commands a strong navy.    For Oman and the U.A.E., therefore, the combined weight of geopolitical, sectarian and economic factors is such that they cannot afford to adopt the anti-Iranian policy being advocated by other members of the GCC, especially Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.    Nor can the GCC hawks take the risk of alienating Oman and the U.A.E. This is particularly true of Oman, whose good will is essential if Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are to construct pipelines to take their oil directly to the Arabian Sea outlets, thus ending their hazardous dependence on the Strait of Hormuz and the unpredictable moods of Tehran.    The GCC can regain its unity only when the current gulf crisis recedes to the level where most of the Western naval forces are withdrawn. That seems unlikely until after the new American president has been sworn in next January.    ---   Mr. Hiro, a London-based journalist, is author of &quot;Islamic Fundamentalism&quot; (Grafton Books), to be published in Britain in April. </TEXT></DOC>