<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871120-0105 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Theatre:The Tragedy of Alan Turing---By Edwin Wilson</HL><DD> 11/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The reason to see &quot;Breaking the Code,&quot; the new play at the Neil Simon Theater, can be summed up in two words: Derek Jacobi. In the part of British mathematical genius Alan Turing, Mr. Jacobi gives a daring, explosive, yet controlled performance of the kind rarely seen these days.    Turing was the man who broke the German Enigma code in World War II thereby saving thousands of lives. After the war he was a crucial figure, perhaps the crucial figure in the dawn of the modern computer.    The paradox of Turing was that he was as naive in his personal life as he was sophisticated in his intellectual endeavors. A homosexual, he had a series of liaisons with young men at a time in Britain -- the 1940s and 50s -- when consensual sex between two adult men even in private was a crime. In his guileless innocence about these things, Turing told a police officer about one of these encounters and was put on trial.    Moreover, because he had in his head so many security secrets from World War II, he was under constant surveillance by British intelligence, which feared he could be blackmailed because of his sexual activities. In 1954, at the age of 41, he killed himself. The final scene in the play shows Mr. Jacobi dipping an apple in potassium cyanide and eating it.    One of the most difficult tasks in dramaturgy is to make the life of a genius interesting on stage. On the one hand, the fruits of genius speak for themselves, more eloquently than any drama can. On the other, the private life of a genius is often quite ordinary, and when there is a personal conflict, like Turing's, it is far from unique. In &quot;Breaking the Code,&quot; playwright Hugh Whitemore has only partially solved the problem.    Basing his play on the book &quot;Alan Turing: The Enigma&quot; by Andrew Hodges, Mr. Whitemore has attempted to create interest and suspense by moving back and forth in time. He begins with an interrogation of Turing by a police inspector (Colm Meaney), which later in the play leads to his unfortunate revelation about a homosexual episode. The play skips back to Turing's days in prep school and his infatuation with a schoolmate (Robert Sean Leonard) and thereafter moves, almost film-like, back and forth from his wartime work to scenes at his mother's home, to encounters at Manchester University, where he was building a computer.    In a number of these scenes, Mr. Whitemore builds considerable tension: in the scene, for example, in which a fellow code worker (Jenny Agutter) declares her love for Turing and he rebuffs her, and in a later scene when, facing a court trial, he must reveal for the first time to his strong-willed, adoring mother that he is a homosexual. Mr. Whitemore, with the help of Mr. Jacobi, also does a remarkable job of making higher mathematics not only understandable but engrossing.    Despite these accomplishments, the play runs into serious difficulties. The police inspector as well as others representing the establishment are cardboard heavies. Other characters, such as a young Greek boy (Andreas Manolikakis), are mere sounding boards for Turing's monologues about his ideas or past experiences. The serious issues the play might have probed -- such as public good versus private morality -- are insufficiently explored. And when Mr. Whitemore delves into the psychology of Turing, he comes up with a too-simple notion. He asserts that Turing's passions for young men reflect a desire to relive his love for a boyhood friend who died when they were at prep school together.    Many of these shortcomings, however, are successfully camouflaged by the performances of Mr. Jacobi and his colleagues. A man known chiefly for his work with the Royal Shakespeare Company and his television roles such as the lead in &quot;I, Claudius,&quot; Mr. Jacobi here turns to a contemporary figure whom he sketches with all the rich resources at his command.    Speaking with a terrible stutter, unconsciously biting his nails constantly, he shows us the brash, unbridled enthusiasm Turing has for a new mathematical formula, the shy tentativeness as he approaches a young man for the first time, the combination of resentment and need for approval he experiences with his mother. These many shades, as well as the instantaneous switches from schoolboy to mature man, are handled with astonishing and convincing aplomb. Mr. Jacobi is greatly aided by the fluid direction of Clifford Williams and the performances of his colleagues, especially Rachel Gurney as his mother and Michael Gough as an understanding older scientist, who is the epitome of the British establishment.    ---   &quot;Teddy and Alice,&quot; the new musical at the Minskoff Theater, is quite literally a flag-waving extravaganza. I have never seen so much bunting and red, white and blue on stage in my life. The story of Teddy Roosevelt and his impetuous daughter Alice employs the music of John Philip Sousa. The songs are rousing and Len Cariou is sparkling in the lead, but nothing can save the show from the simplistic story of an overly possessive father concocted by writer Jerome Alden. </TEXT></DOC>