<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880804-0126 </DOCNO><HL> States: Making Government Work -- Wyoming Has No Trouble Attracting Tourists, But Luring Industry Runs Into Lots of Problems </HL><AUTHOR> Eugene Carlson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>      {Part of a Series}   CHEYENNE, Wyo. -- Jack Crews gets paid to lure business to Cheyenne. It's a job that demands ingenuity.    He recently spotted a Time magazine story noting that New York state's Suffolk County on Long Island had enacted the nation's first law regulating the use of video display terminals as potential health hazards. He quickly mailed a letter, along with copies of the article and a fistful of Wyoming brochures, to 17 Suffolk County companies that process electronic data.    &quot;We're pleased to let you know there's a positive alternative to the seemingly never-ending obstacles that are thrown before New York's businessmen,&quot; the letter said. It pointed out that Wyoming hasn't any rules regulating VDTs in the workplace and suggested that the likelihood of such a rule in this state was remote.    The response? &quot;No bites so far,&quot; says Mr. Crews with a patient smile, summing up in four words the plight of Wyoming in the late 1980s. Tourists flock to Wyoming's prairies, mountains and trout streams, but new businesses aren't answering the state's call.    Wyoming lacks easy access to capital, a manufacturing heritage and other attractions to new employers. Yet the resources that carried the state in the past -- oil, natural gas, coal, uranium, soda ash, cattle and sheep -- aren't providing new jobs and economic growth.    Strategies that helped pull Michigan, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania out of recession -- a coordinated linking of industry, universities and ample public and private financing -- are either irrelevant or tough to impose on a resource-rich, population-poor state like Wyoming.    The state doesn't have much to build on. Only 3% of its workers are employed in manufacturing, compared with 13% in neighboring Colorado and 28% in Michigan. Study after study has urged the state to broaden its business base. But with half its land owned by the federal government, and most of its minerals controlled by energy companies with headquarters elsewhere, Wyoming, like a Third World nation, has a tough time controlling its economic destiny.    Although Wyoming boasts fine roads and a good school system, &quot;there's a lack of economic infrastructure that makes it difficult to start both businesses that create new jobs, and jobs with value added,&quot; says Steven Waldhorn, who directed a 1985 study of Wyoming's options by SRI International of Menlo Park, Calif. Mr. Waldhorn adds: &quot;That's a problem in Zambia and in Wyoming.&quot;    At a time when states are competing to attract new companies by promoting their high-tech advantages and even pursuing their own foreign-trade agendas, there is a nagging perception here that Wyoming may be permanently left behind, a raw-material artifact in the post-industrial age -- the West Virginia of the Rockies.    In some cases Wyoming's effort to change its economy may have been too conservative. Although it wants new business, Wyoming's economic-development efforts seem aimed primarily at propping up the status quo. Nearly half of the state's $847 million in subsidized loans has been earmarked for agriculture, even though farming and ranching contribute only 2% of state output. The rationale seems to be Wyoming's insatiable love affair with ranching (vehicle license plates bear a bucking bronco, and rodeos get live radio coverage) and the political muscle of agriculture.    &quot;There are a lot of sacred cows in Wyoming, and cows are one of them,&quot; says Pete Williams, press spokesman for Republican Rep. Dick Cheney.    So are energy projects. The legislature has appropriated $30 million for two companies experimenting with &quot;clean coal&quot; technology. And $250 million in subsidies has been pledged to Wyoming's Cinderella project: a proposed 1,000-mile pipeline linking the state's huge natural-gas fields with Southern California.    Wyoming tries to lure businesses by playing up its low taxes. Aside from certain petroleum and mineral taxes, which account for about 70% of tax revenues, the state has the lowest per-capita tax burden of any state except Alaska. It has no personal or corporate income tax, no inventory tax, a below-average sales tax and minuscule property taxes.    But Douglas Reeves, president of Reeves andamp; Co., a Cheyenne brokerage and investment-banking company, says the emphasis on low taxes is misguided. &quot;If cheap is all that mattered, they'd all be migrating here,&quot; he argues. Outsiders won't take the state seriously, he says, &quot;until we talk the Chicago venture capitalist into putting money into Wyoming because it's prudent to do business here.&quot;    For 100 years Wyoming has been riding a roller coaster. When commodity prices rise, people rush to Wyoming for short-term work at boom-town pay. Government revenues, largely underwritten by energy-company taxes, explode. When commodity prices sour, people pull out, often with their mobile homes trailing behind. And revenues slump.    A decade ago, Wyoming's population was growing faster than Florida's and the Census Bureau was predicting a million residents by the year 2000. But the state has been losing people steadily since the energy downturn. Population in 1987 was 475,000, the smallest of any state.    &quot;I confess I'm kind of pessimistic,&quot; says John Wold, president of a Casper-based independent oil and mining company. &quot;We're relatively remote from markets. We have a labor force somewhat spoiled by the oil and gas boom. We don't have a university noted as a great technology center.&quot;    Mr. Crews, president of Cheyenne Leads, the state capital's economic-development organization, sees a bright spot in Denver's decision to build a new airport less than an hour's drive from here. Indeed, Cheyenne and the rest of southeastern Wyoming could take a lesson from New Hampshire, which has lured companies with a combination of rock-bottom taxes and proximity to cosmopolitan Boston.    But resting in the minds of potential manufacturers is this question: How do you hold on to Wyoming assembly-line workers when the next energy boom, with $20-an-hour oil-field jobs, arrives?    There are a few entrepreneurial bright spots. In the uranium mining center of Riverton, DHPrint, a unit of DH Technology Inc. of San Diego, designs and assembles dot matrix printers for customers such as Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. and International Business Machines Corp. Sales last year were $14.5 million. Joe Dennis, DHPrint's general manager, says Wyoming's isolation has advantages: &quot;You don't have housing problems and your employees don't go to work for the company down the street.&quot;    Computer software programmer Roger Amadon, looking for a site to start his own company, moved his family from San Francisco to Jackson Hole in 1982. In six years, Mr. Amadon's firm, Unilink, has designed and sold accounting software to some 2,000 companies. Unilink's 1987 sales were $1.3 million. The picture-postcard beauty of Jackson Hole, at the edge of Grand Teton National Park, is a tonic for Unilink's 25 employees.    Mr. Amadon is a Wyoming success, but his enthusiasm for the state is measured. &quot;I hate to admit it,&quot; he says, &quot;but the rest of the state doesn't do much for me.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>