<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870529-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Army Coup in FijiTarnishes Its ImageAs Big-Brother State---Ethnic Dispute ExacerbatedRegion's Economic WoesAnd Superpower Rivalries---By James P. SterbaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> PORT VILA, Vanuatu  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Pacific islands' first military takeover, in Fiji, has made coup d'etat the latest troublesome notion to invade a region outsiders think of as paradise but residents know to be a poor, struggling and isolated corner of the Third World.    Fiji, being smaller than Hawaii, may seem like just another Pacific microdot country of islands with colorful postage stamps. But it has a relatively large population of 715,000 and had an admirable history of democratic debate, racial tolerance and economic development.    It had long been viewed as a wise and mature big brother for far-tinier republics such as Tuvalu, Tonga, Vanuatu and Kiribati. It may have been pro-Western, but it didn't hesitate to criticize its bigger neighbors, Australia and New Zealand. Nor did it fear confrontation with bigger powers such as the U.S. and the region's only residual colonialists, the French, who test nuclear weapons in French Polynesia and have thwarted the independence struggle of Melanesians on New Caledonia.    Now the big brother is in disarray -- torn by racial conflict between ethnic Fijians and ethnic Indians. And the situation isn't expected to get better soon.    Fiji has become the latest of a long list of regional troubles, ranging from local issues of urbanization, unemployment, crime, ill-health and violence to international problems of increasing superpower rivalry in the region, Libyan meddling, fishing squabbles and declining foreign aid.    The South Pacific Forum is usually a jovial annual gathering of the heads of state of more than a dozen regional nations, including the big ones: Australia, Papua New Guinea and New Zealand. But today's gathering in Apia, Western Samoa, promised far fewer smiles.    For pro-Western members, who make up the vast majority, the only good news to greet the gathering of prime ministers and presidents came from tiny Vanuatu, a seven-year-old nation of 130,000 people, which has had a habit of tweaking the West's nose by befriending Cuba, the Soviet Union and the nonaligned movement. In a surprise announcement Wednesday, Prime Minister Walter Lini said Vanuatu was indefinitely postponing a decision on whether to allow Libya to set up a diplomatic mission in Port Vila, the capital.    Last week, Prime Minister Bob Hawke expelled Libyan diplomats from Australia, accusing them of attempting to &quot;destabilize&quot; the region and interfere in domestic Australian affairs, namely aboriginal rights issues.    The Libyans have been accused of supplying money and &quot;training&quot; to a few dozen militants in the region, especially those fighting for independence from the French in New Caledonia. The French have said they haven't any intention of granting it since Melanesian nationalists are a minority in their own land.    Although New Zealand has allowed Soviet vessels to fish in its waters for years, the U.S. expressed concern when Vanuatu allowed the same thing earlier this year. Kiribati was the first small island nation to allow the Soviets to fish. Its deal expired after one year; the Russians say Kiribati demanded too much money for a renewal.    Vanuatu's arrangement allows six Soviet vessels to fish for a year. The first of them, the Tanga, docked in Port Vila for supplies and crew shore leave in April. Vanuatu officials have said the Soviets have shown themselves to be polite and unthreatening -- something that couldn't be said for American tuna poachers or some fishing vessels from Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.    Washington got nervous after the Kiribati-Soviet fishing deal was signed and began to press for a regional fisheries accord in which the U.S., for the first time, recognized the island nations' 200-mile economic zones as they applied to tuna. Local governments have accused the San Diego-based American Tunaboat Association of poaching in their zones for years.    Last month in Port Moresby, the Papua New Guinea capital, a fishing agreement was signed between the U.S. and 12 of 16 members of the South Pacific Forum's fisheries agency. Under it, the U.S. agreed to provide $10 million in aid annually for five years for allowing up to 35 American tuna boats to fish. The U.S. tuna industry agreed to pay $1.75 million annually in license fees and $250,000 annually to help local fisheries development.    Washington may have thought the poaching issue defused. But various nations have complained that U.S. boats were poaching as usual just before the agreement was signed. And on May 5, Kiribati caught a U.S. boat fishing illegally and impounded it. Crew and owners pleaded guilty and were fined $300,000. Kiribati now expects to sell the $1.5 million vessel back to its owners, netting the equivalent of one-eighth of its national budget on the fine and sale.    At last year's meeting of the South Pacific Forum, members agreed on a watered-down South Pacific nuclear-free-zone treaty that banned atomic-weapons testing and radioactive-waste dumping but allowed passage of nuclear warships. The idea was to get a document the U.S. might agree to. But the U.S. and Britain, along with France, which continues nuclear tests at Moruroa Atoll in French Polynesia, rejected it. The Soviet Union and China signed it. </TEXT></DOC>