<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871214-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NICARAGUA'S GOVERNMENT PLANS a massive military expansion.    According to a senior-level Sandinista defector, Managua plans to about double its active and reserve military force, has agreed to aid rebels in El Salvador, and has requested advanced helicopters and other gear from Moscow. Nicaragua's defense minister, Humberto Ortega, has confirmed some of the information, citing U.S.-sponsored aggression. The White House is hoping the data will help tilt the balance in Congress in favor of aid to Nicaragua's Contra rebels.    Managua's Cardinal Obando is to mediate peace talks today in the Dominican Republic between Nicaragua's government and the U.S.-backed rebels.    ---   NATO APPEARED divided over the future course of arms-control talks.    Following the signing last week of a U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating intermediate-range missiles, strains became apparent within the alliance as West Germany pressed for the start of negotiations on short-range weapons. The move was rejected. NATO voted to focus on strategic and conventional arms talks. Meanwhile, Shultz met with allies about last week's summit. He faulted a proposed nuclear-free zone in the Baltic and urged adequate NATO defense spending.    Shultz said Reagan won't argue with Congress over rules governing Star Wars testing, but will make case-by-case funding requests for the project.    ---   Dissident Kim Dae Jung called on ruling party candidate Roh Tae Woo to allow free balloting, expressing concern that the governing party would use corruption to win Wednesday's presidential election, South Korea's first direct vote in 16 years. Roh accused Kim and rival opposition candidate Kim Young Sam of inciting animosity.    ---   Belgium's Premier Martens appeared headed for defeat in general elections, with incomplete returns showing his center-right coalition losing its majority in the 212-seat Parliament. A new government with the Socialists was predicted. The voting was called in October after the coalition collapsed because of a language dispute.    ---   Israeli soldiers battled Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. About 30 Palestinians were injured in the violence, according to an Arab-run news agency. Protesters also threw a gasoline bomb at the U.S. consulate in East Jerusalem. It was the fifth consecutive day of anti-Israeli unrest in the area.    ---   Riot police in Poland clashed with hundreds of Solidarity supporters at a rally in Gdansk marking the sixth anniversary of the imposition of martial law, an opposition activist said. The violence erupted after Solidarity founder Walesa said the banned union would continue seeking its rights.    ---   Southeast Asian leaders arrived in Manila for the first regional summit in a decade of the Association of Southeast Asian nations. Thousands of Philippine troops were mobilized to ensure safety. The leaders are expected to discuss such issues as Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.    A Philippine Airlines plane disappeared on a domestic flight to Iligan City on Mindanao island from Cebu City with 15 people aboard. A search was suspended after 12 hours because of darkness.    ---   Iran is using a new weapon or a new type of incendiary projectile to torch tankers in the Persian Gulf, regional shipping sources said. Meanwhile, Oslo said a Norwegian captain was killed and 21 crew members were missing after last week's attacks by Iraqi warplanes on a supertanker.    ---   Marauders in Haiti attacked the Port-au-Prince home of a prominent candidate for the country's National Assembly, firing automatic weapons and hurling a firebomb. The candidate, who was unharmed, said he is one of several politicians marked for assassination. The assault came after two weeks of relative calm in Haiti.    ---   The Senate voted 94-0 to confirm Ann Dore McLaughlin as labor secretary. McLaughlin, 45, will succeed William Brock, who resigned last month to become chairman of the 1988 GOP presidential campaign of Kansas Sen. Robert Dole.    ---   A federal jury in Philadelphia acquitted reputed organized crime boss Nicodemo &quot;Little Nicky&quot; Scarfo and four associates of drug-conspiracy charges. Despite Saturday's verdict, Scarfo remains in prison on a 14-year sentence for extortion.    ---   The Justice Department reported that one of every 55 American adults -- a record 3.2 million people -- was on probation, parole or behind bars at the end of last year. It said the number of criminals out of jail and under community supervision was rising more rapidly than the number of people serving time in local jails and prisons.    ---   President Reagan has decided to nominate Maj. Gen. William Burns to succeed Kenneth Adelman as director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the New York Times reported. The Army officer helped negotiate the treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear weapons.    ---   Died: Jascha Heifetz, 86, Russian-born violinist, Thursday, in Los Angeles. </TEXT></DOC>