<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0112 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Ronald Reagan's Future</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN GOVMTEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   As he surveys the events of the past few weeks, Ronald Reagan may well feel frustrated about the turn foreign policy has suddenly taken in his presidency. Mr. Reagan, however, is by nature an energetic optimist, and we believe that if he takes the time to stand back from these recent events he may find that his adversity presents him with an opportunity.    To recognize that opportunity, the president must first see clearly the state of the government he presides over and the world he leads.    The U.S. in 1986 finds itself a superpower in an exciting, integrating world-wide political economy. The fact of Mr. Reagan's influence in this process is made clear to anyone who now meets with the individuals running the governments of France, Spain, Portugal and Britain, to name a few.    This transformation is taking place alongside a disintegrating, dangerous Soviet system, led by a man intent on more aggressively projecting Soviet power and protecting the Soviet Union's strategic interests. Mr. Gorbachev recognizes what is going on around him. He laid out his Asian initiatives earlier this year in a speech at Vladivostok. He has just been to India. He will soon visit Latin America. The Soviets intend to be present at the creation of any new international order. And of course they bring to this task the fruits of many years of building, through both overt and covert means, military power and geopolitical muscle.    This, then, is the world Mr. Reagan must lead in his remaining time. The challenge is complex, and the opposition's politics have become aggressively competitive. The fact is, however, that institutionally and intellectually the current U.S. foreign-policy establishment is not up to prevailing in this game over the next 15 years.    Congress by instinct and tradition is isolationist. The trade legislation of the last session showed its members willing to damage the world economic system on behalf of parochial interests. Though Nicaragua's willingness to become a Cubanized Soviet satellite poses a clear threat to the Americas, Congress has temporized and hidden behind non-policies such as the Boland Amendment.    Nonetheless, the foreign-policy vacuum is not solely the fault of Congress. No major public figure -- cabinet secretary, national security adviser, key congressional committee chairman, or presidential candidate -- is articulating a foreign-policy vision appropriate to the world now. Nor is there any evidence that this sense of direction will be forthcoming.    Herein lies Mr. Reagan's opportunity. Ronald Reagan is a 75-year-old Young Turk. He has cutting-edge instincts and ideas.    Apparently, though, he feels most comfortable working on a day-to-day basis with generational contemporaries to implement his young ideas. Don Regan is 67; George Shultz, 65; Bill Casey, 73; Cap Weinberger, 69. On the domestic side of his cabinet one finds Malcolm Baldrige, 64, and Otis Bowen, 68.    Without joining the chorus demanding this resignation or that, we would suggest that it's time to think about passing the torch.    Maybe now is the time for Mr. Reagan to elevate a younger generation of leaders to give his policies a coherence, intellectual strength and momentum that would carry well beyond his presidency. Many of these people are already serving ably and with distinction in his administration. In filling the vacancy of national security adviser, for example, Mr. Reagan might think not of his California friends, but of the likes of John Lehman or Richard Perle. Paul Wolfowitz, Ken Adelman and Elliott Abrams are other names to carry the basic Reagan foreign policy into the next generation. If even more senior posts open, the president might turn to the likes of Deputy Treasury Secretary Richard Darman or recently appointed Federal District Judge Laurence Silberman.    Similar opportunities exist for Mr. Reagan on domestic policy (recently shown to be floundering in the form of HHS Secretary Otis Bowen's proposals on catastrophic health insurance). Men and women ready to carry forward on the domestic front include Bill Bennett, who has single-handedly revitalized the debate around education policy; U.S. personnel administrator Constance Horner, and Linda Chavez. And should Mr. Reagan have any doubts about the invigorating effects of being around such people, he should ask Ed Meese about the intellectual firepower of the Young Turks around the attorney general at Justice.    The consensus is now providing Mr. Reagan with all sorts of steady-as-she-goes, wise-man advice. We don't for a minute believe that Ronald Reagan wants to allow this Iranian flap to put his foreign policy or the rest of his presidency on cruise control. Mr. Reagan got where he is by staying ahead of the consensus. Men and women are available who are able to keep up with him. </TEXT></DOC>