<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880309-0094 </DOCNO><HL> A Farewell to Arms: How a Mystery Ship Keeps Making Waves --- A Penny-Ante Weapons Deal Is Tied to Shady Schemes From Managua to Pretoria </HL><AUTHOR> Jose de Cordoba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM AFRIC GOVMT </CO><IN> TRA ARO </IN><G> EXE DEF </G><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It sounds like a James Bond movie starring Woody Allen. Mia Farrow is nowhere to be seen, but Pia Vesta plays a prominent role. And when the lights go on, you're still in the dark.    What is known is this: In March 1986, the Danish freighter Pia Vesta left the Baltic Sea carrying a load of East German weapons and trucks ostensibly destined for Peru. Three months later, after eluding the Peruvian navy and air force, the ship was boarded in Balboa, Panama, by Panamanian soldiers, who seized the weapons.    Since then, what was a penny-ante, $1.5 million arms deal has turned into one of the more bizarre episodes in recent hemispheric affairs: the tale of the mystery ship that won't go away. Although the Pia Vesta is still anchored in Panama, its name continues to pop up in the most peculiar places.    Samuel Cummings, an international arms dealer who lives in Monte Carlo, likens the Pia Vesta affair to &quot;the traditional mackerel in the moonlight: It shines but it stinks.&quot; In Peru, Sen. Javier Silva Ruete, who headed a senate investigation of the affair, is still somewhat bewildered. &quot;It's mind-boggling,&quot; he says. In Panama City, a U.S. intelligence analyst says, &quot;It's a good story, but it's classified.&quot;    At one time or another, the episode has been linked to shadowy schemes involving, among others, the Nicaraguan Contras, the Salvadoran military, the U.S. National Security Council, the Pentagon and the Central Intelligence Agency, Peru's Maoist Shining Path guerrillas, the Peruvian navy and -- switching hemispheres -- the South Africans and Angolan guerrillas.    In Peru, the ship's capture by Panama created a political uproar. Politicians and the press speculated that the weapons -- automatic rifles and anti-tank rockets -- were meant either for Maoist Shining Path guerrillas, who have been waging a bloody insurgency against the government, or for the ruling party. An accusing finger was pointed at the navy. When the East Germans were slow to provide information about the arms sale, Peru recalled its ambassador.    After chasing dozens of paper trails littered with nonexistent companies and forged documents, the Peruvians concluded that the Pia Vesta was the work of U.S. and other intelligence organizations routing arms to Central America. The Peruvian connection, says Sen. Silva Ruete, was a red herring, one of many designed to mislead investigators.    In Panama, government newspapers trumpeted the ship's capture as evidence of a U.S. plot against strong man Manuel A. Noriega, who then, as now, was under attack for his alleged ties to drug trafficking, murder and corruption.    Just last month in Washington, Panamanian defector Jose Blandon talked about the Pia Vesta when he testified before a Senate subcommittee. He said Gen. Noriega told him the arms shipment was part of a scheme concocted by Lt. Col. Oliver North to embarrass Nicaragua's Sandinistas by making it seem as if they were providing arms to El Salvador's guerrillas. Later, Mr. Blandon quoted the general as saying, the arms were to be passed to the Contras. But Mr. Blandon told the senators he thought the general was lying.    In Miami, David Duncan, a garrulous arms merchant whose East German weapons were on the Pia Vesta, says he isn't sure anymore about everything that happened. He tells a convoluted tale about an arms deal gone wrong.    Mr. Duncan is a thin, excitable, red-haired man in his 40s who uses a lot of cologne and boasts of his connections to U.S. intelligence agencies. It isn't all idle boasting. In the past, he has discussed arms sales with senior members of the National Security Council and the Defense Department. But just how much access he has had is open to question.    &quot;I thought he was a bag of hot air,&quot; says Nestor Sanchez, a former deputy assistant secretary of defense. Mr. Sanchez says that he once met briefly in his Pentagon office with Mr. Duncan and that Mr. Duncan offered to sell Soviet weapons to the U.S. government. (The offer was not accepted, Mr. Sanchez says.) A former NSC staffer recalls Mr. Duncan telling a wild story about an Asian arms deal that sounded &quot;straight out of 'Hawaii Five-0.'&quot;    Mr. Duncan says he had obtained the weapons aboard the Pia Vesta as payment for a past commission owed him by two French arms dealers based in Geneva and had arranged to sell them cheap to the Peruvian navy. At the last minute, he says, when the ship was already nearing Peru, the Peruvians backed out of the deal for political reasons. Peruvian President Alan Garcia, having learned that the ship was carrying arms but not knowing whom it was delivering them to, ordered his navy and air force to intercept it. They failed.    Desperate to unload the weapons, Mr. Duncan says, he offered from Miami to trade them to the Peruvian navy for shrimp if the navy no longer wanted to pay money. The trade was turned down, he says, and he then considered throwing the cargo overboard or scuttling the freighter. &quot;I was like a rat on a sinking ship, looking around for a cool place to sit,&quot; he says in a high-pitched drawl.    Finally, he says, he struck a deal with the chief of staff of the Salvadoran armed forces (who denies any involvement) to store the weapons in his country until a buyer could be found. Relieved, Mr. Duncan goes on, he ordered the ship -- still off the coast of Peru -- to Panama, where the weapons were to be put in containers and sent to El Salvador. He says that he notified Gen. Noriega and that the general gave the go-ahead.    But for whatever reason -- Mr. Duncan suggests the motive was to steal the ship and weapons, create a diversion from the general's political troubles or quash an alleged U.S. anti-Noriega plot -- the Panamanians impounded the Pia Vesta and its cargo. Shortly thereafter, the Panamanian army drove the trucks in a parade.    Then there is the South African angle. Mr. Duncan says he has since learned that the Pia Vesta was part of a sting operation-a floating version of a shell game-in which he was used as an unknowing front man by the two French arms dealers to bilk South Africa of $26.5 million.    According to Mr. Duncan, the two Frenchmen told South Africa that the Pia Vesta would act as a decoy for a second ship that was to carry armored vehicles mounted with Soviet-designed surface-to-air missiles to South Africa for eventual use by Unita, the Angolan rebel forces supported both by Pretoria and by the U.S. Using a forged end-user certificate and other ship's documents, Mr. Duncan says, his associates were able to obtain the $26.5 million through letters of credit. But he says the whole operation was a scam: &quot;There never was a second ship.&quot;    Speaking through an interpreter in Geneva, Georges Starckmann, one of the two Frenchmen, denies that he and his colleague, Patrice Genty de la Sagne, have ever sold arms or that they have any knowledge of the Pia Vesta incident. Mr. Starckmann says that he directs -- and that Mr. Genty de la Sagne is associated with -- Star Productions, a company that makes movies, videos and a TV cartoon for children about a little bird called &quot;Wattoo/Wattoo.&quot;    But Mr. Cummings, the arms dealer based in Monte Carlo, says Mr. Starckmann is known as a &quot;fringe operator&quot; in the arms business who supposedly has enjoyed French &quot;quasi-government&quot; support in the past. In any case, Mr. Starckmann and his company manage to show up in places that have nothing to do with Saturday-morning children's television shows.    For instance, Robert Owen, courier for Col. North's Central American misadventures, mentioned Mr. Starckmann, Mr. Genty de la Sagne and Star Productions in a memo to the colonel. (He misspelled the two Frenchmen's names.) In the memo, Mr. Owen associated Mr. Duncan and the two Frenchmen with the secret Contra arms operation.    &quot;Mr. Starckmann has nothing to do with this stuff,&quot; says his interpreter. But who will ever know for sure? &quot;The whole Caribbean area is, as the French say, a 'salade' of crazy arms deals,&quot; says Mr. Cummings. &quot;Anything is possible in the bizarre world of clandestine arms sales.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>