<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880617-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Byteing Back: 'Bug Busters' Devise Electronic Vaccines For Computer Viruses --- 'Data Physician,' 'Dr-Panda' Detect the Traps and Get Revenge on the Nerds --- A Mobile Lab Takes Samples </HL><AUTHOR> Asra Q. Nomani (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> EDP </IN><TEXT>   Maneater won't leave Ross Greenberg alone.    For the third time in one day, the dastardly hacker is trying to sneak a deadly bug onto an electronic bulletin board Mr. Greenberg operates out of his Manhattan apartment. It's a simple little tick-tack-toe game, but if it gets on the board, any computer users who take it off through a phone connection and play it will find all the files in their computers destroyed. Maneater is spreading a computer virus.    But this time, he won't infect anybody. Before Mr. Greenberg adds the tick-tack-toe game to his bulletin board for all the world to use, he runs it on a computer programmed to spot foreign invaders. Detected, the virus is rendered harmless. Mr. Greenberg's computer has been vaccinated.    Just as with real viruses and real diseases, experts are scrambling to devise preventives against the computer variety. Inevitably, their defenses are being called vaccines. They are computer program codes that in their simplest form detect the presence of an invader, and at their most advanced automatically disarm it. They come with names like Data Physician, Viraid, Dr-Panda, Checkup. And they're being sold to customers ranging from rec-room techies to IBM and the Internal Revenue Service.    The viruses they're aimed at are invading the land, like some electronic mutant of the Shanghai flu. Sometimes they even have names like diseases: This spring some users were hit by what is called the Pakistani virus, spread by two young software producers in Lahore. Other viruses have infected machines at NASA, the Hebrew University in Israel, the College of Alameda in California and the newsroom of the Providence, R.I., Journal-Bulletin.    Once inside, they suspend the computer's operation momentarily and then take over the operation. Taking advantage of the computer's penchant for simply following instructions, they make it print out a message, draw a picture on the screen -- or worse. A game called &quot;rck.video&quot; innocently entertains the user with an animation of Madonna before surreptitiously erasing all the computer's files. Then it gloats, &quot;You're stupid to download a video about rock stars.&quot;    Sometimes the damage isn't evident for a long time. A virus may transpose, say, two digits in every seventh line in a computer's memory of corporate or government data. Or it may act like an electronic time-bomb, programmed not to take effect until a month or a year in the future. It can spread from one computer to another covertly. Computer viruses are no small threat.    As that threat grows, the effort to create vaccines gathers force. Self-defense drives it, obviously, but so too does the profit motive. There is money to be made serving a need as great as this. Vaccines sell for as much as $199 per copy, the price charged by Digital Dispatch for its Data Physician. &quot;It was amusing when we started,&quot; says Eric Hansen, a vice president of the Minneapolis software developer, &quot;but it's a really frightening topic.&quot; Digital Dispatch's customers, besides IBM and the IRS, include the National Computer Security Center, a branch of the U.S. National Security Agency.    And, as with all things computer, there is the sheer challenge, the joy in figuring out a new trick. Some of the same hackers who have created viruses -- the Pakistanis are an example -- now are trying to figure out ways to outsmart them.    The defenses usually are designed to detect a specific kind of computer virus. Let's say a mischievous hacker calls up a program from one of the numerous electronic bulletin boards and copies it -- inserting a malign command to flash the message &quot;Gotcha!&quot; on future users' screens. A vaccine might detect it by checking the number of characters in a program that could be infected. Any more than normal, and it obviously has been tampered with.    But there are different ways to insert viruses, and no vaccine can catch all of them. Once thwarted, virus writers naturally feel challenged to outwit the vaccine writer. It's a devilish game that the most imaginative -- or persistent -- is likely to win. &quot;There are thousands of people out there hunting and looking and trying to one-up each other,&quot; says John McAfee, a computer expert from Santa Clara, Calif.    The result is that many different defenses are needed: Disk Watcher,ust returned from a mission to the College of Alameda near San Francisco, where he delivered a custom-designed &quot;virus net&quot; to electronically catch a virus that recently invaded the school's computers, slowing down their operation.    By the time he arrives, the damage is usually done. But, like a roving insectologist, he collects samples of the computer viruses to bring back and try to create vaccines against.    Besides buying vaccine products and using them religiously, the measures an individual user can take against computer viruses are pretty scanty. Some experts advise always making copies of disks, in case one gets ruined. David Buerger directs the personal-computer center at Santa Clara University in California, with 850 PCs, and he can't take chances. Before allowing a program to be used, Mr. Buerger runs four different vaccine programs to detect any invader.    He dissects the program line by line and runs it repeatedly on an isolated computer. Then, because a virus might be programmed to take effect sometime in the future, he pushes the date up a year and operates the program many more times. Finally he sets the date forward a decade and does the same. &quot;We're talking a major waste of time,&quot; Mr. Buerger says.    But the stakes are high. The viruses are sending chills through corporate and government data-processing departments, which see the potential of the computer equivalent of biological warfare. Though some experts play down the danger, others speak of frightening possibilities: Suppose a hacker learned how to confuse the computers that manufacturers use to set specifications, or those used by national intelligence agencies, military systems -- or air-traffic controllers. Experts believe that smaller infections occur more often than reported, and that companies often hide them out of embarrassment or to avoid giving people ideas.    Any such tampering is highly illegal, of course, but prosecutions are rare because perpetrators usually can't be tracked down. One prosecution is under way in Fort Worth, Texas, though. There Donald Gene Burleson faces criminal charges of computer sabotage and burglary involving a securities and insurance company called USPA andamp; IRA, where records of employee sales commissions were wiped out in 1985.    At the moment, federal penalties range up to a $250,000 fine or five years in prison. There's reason to think the U.S. Sentencing Commission, which sets guidelines, might be sympathetic to stiffer terms, though: It got hit with a virus itself last spring.    The viral threat goes to the heart of computers and their promise: freer communications. Instead of taking any program they want off electronic bulletin boards, computer users now are being advised against &quot;promiscuous downloading.&quot; Networking -- linking computers -- is the rage in computers these days, but the contagiousness of viruses grows in direct proportion to the degree to which computers are connected.    Against these threats, the vaccine effort so far is meager. &quot;It's like putting a Band-Aid on an elephant with a buckshot wound,&quot; argues Peter Neumann, a computer-security consultant at SRI International in Menlo Park, Calif. Mr. Neumann, who moderates a lively town-hall-like bulletin board on viruses, says computers are too interlinked for the remedies to work, and offer too many backdoors for clever hackers.    In fact, even vaccines aren't completely immune to viruses. Mr. Greenberg, Maneater's target, wrote and distributed three anti-viral defenses on bulletin boards called Flu-shot1, 2 and 3. A particularly astute hacker posted a &quot;Flu-shot4&quot; that was actually a virus in disguise.    In this case, Mr. Greenberg had the last laugh. He countered with another defense, Flu-shot+, that directly challenges his enemy. It includes this message to the virus writer: &quot;Go ahead, you good-for-nothing slime bucket. Make my day.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>