<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880525-0124 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: The Left Looks Back </HL><AUTHOR> Paul Hollander </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Unlike the political passions and infatuations of the 1930s, which inspired much thoughtful soul-searching, there has been little corresponding scrutiny of the political misjudgments of the '60s -- not, at any rate, on the part of those who made them. Too many people -- middle-aged now, young then -- invested too much in the protests to reassess critically the political beliefs and activities of the period. Instead the '60s inspires celebratory nostalgia -- recently a series of warm human-interest stories on the reunion of former radical activists who disrupted Columbia University 20 years ago and regarded the U.S. as a fascist country ripe for revolutionary destruction. Writings about the '60s, much of it produced by former radicals, dwell on the youthful idealism of the activists.    The thoughtful essays in &quot;Poitical Passages: Journeys of Change Through Two Decades, 1968-1988&quot; (Free Press, 354 pages, $21.95) are a notable exception to these trends. They were written by former radical activists, or, by people who were not activists but who shared the adversarial values of the '60s. Contributors include Peter Collier and David Horowitz, former editors of the radical Ramparts magazine; Ronald Radosh, another prominent antiwar activist and author; Julius Lester, the prolific black writer; Joseph Epstein, a literary critic who used to be a left-of-center liberal and director of an anti-poverty program in Arkansas; Martha Bayles, now a television critic for the Journal; and John H. Bunzel, the editor of the volume, who was a professor at San Francisco State College and is now a senior research fellow at the Hoover Institution. An introduction by Edward Shils, the well-known sociologist of ideas (who has never been a radical) lends historical perspective to the collection.    This volume will make uncomfortable all those who preserved their youthful commitments even if they no longer flaunt them. The probing essays challenge too many beliefs and impressions about the period that have become conventional wisdom.    It is one of the mysteries of our times why so many well-meaning, idealistic people bent on liberating themselves and others become supporters of highly intolerant political movements or systems, why such movements or systems are so doggedly misidentified as liberating and worthy of dedication, and why the phenomenon keeps recurring.    One answer &quot;Political Passages&quot; provides is that these political infatuations are produced by the quest for meaning, the need for identity and community. While such findings recall the mentality of the relatively small number of fellow travelers of the '30s, the political misjudgments of the '60s were shared by hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions of people; they provided emotional nourishment for a mass movement, not merely to political sects.    In the '60s there was a remarkable confluence of personal and political motives and gratifications; political morality, self-esteem and a sense of virtue were tightly linked. Moral fervor, as on many other historical occasions, led to double standards; suffering per se did not arouse compassion unless it fit into the proper political-ideological context. Thus the Organization of American Historians &quot;condemned apartheid . . . {but} tabled a resolution . . . opposing Soviet abuse of human rights as irrelevant to the concerns of American historians,&quot; Mr. Radosh notes.    The rhetoric of compassion notwithstanding, people were often treated as abstractions; it was easier to love mankind (or other suitable abstractions such as the people of the Third World) than one's neighbor; people in their empirical realities often were disappointing.    If much of this sounds familiar it should be because it illuminates often-overlooked connections between the New and the Old Left. Many prominent New Left activists came from old line pro-Soviet, communist families. No generational conflicts here, only some adjustments: After the 20th Party Congress (of the Soviet Communist Party) even many members of the American Communist Party had some difficulty persisting in the adulation of the Soviet system. Soon other countries would inspire similar sentiments: communist Vietnam, China, Cuba, Nicaragua. As Peter Collier put it: &quot;Like some sort of revolutionary cargo cult,&quot; the Left was always ready to embrace the next cause. What mattered most was not loyalty to particular political systems but an aversion toward American society that led to automatic sympathy for those hostile toward it.    Why did some activists become disillusioned but not others? What precipitated the loss of faith? The writings collected here do not seek to answer the first question but provide information about the second. Usually disillusionment was a long, drawn-out affair preceded by doubt and unease rather than resulting from some sudden, revelatory experience. For Mr. Radosh his visit to Cuba (including his traveling companions' enthusiasm about socialist vs. capitalist lobotomies) was an important contributing factor; for David Horowitz the alleged murder of a friend by Black Panthers; for Joseph Epstein the realization that &quot;an antiwar crowd was not necessarily an antiviolence crowd.&quot; Julius Lester discovered that Stokely Carmichael's &quot;politics and rhetoric come as much from his ego as from a sense of caring about the lives of blacks.&quot; Jeffrey Herf was struck by the indifference of &quot;caring&quot; radicals toward the fate of the people of Indochina following the communist victory; John Bunzel was a victim of the hostility and violence of the campus radicals and witness to the cowardice of his &quot;liberal&quot; colleagues.    One may be encouraged by the intelligence and integrity of the authors of this highly informative and often eloquent volume; unfortunately one also may be inspired to gloomy reflections by all those, far more numerous, who quietly or with renewed vigor continue to nurture the same basic values and beliefs these authors managed to divest themselves of.    ---   Mr. Hollander is a professor of sociology at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. </TEXT></DOC>