<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0142 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> KADUNA, Nigeria  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Sheik Abubakar Gumi enters, young men flock around him, eager to touch his hand. When he preaches a return to Moslem fundamentals, the mosque is jammed. When he broadcasts, tens of thousands tune in. What he teaches, his followers take as law.    Even as a schoolboy, the sheik remembers, he taught younger schoolboys. His words have always been an authority to measure against other authority. In the village of Maru, he found people cleansing themselves before prayers with sand. The Koran, he corrected them, says the ritual washing must be done with water unless water isn't available. Village leaders challenged him.    &quot;I was investigated,&quot; the sheik says, still outraged after all these years. &quot;The local leaders were afraid of being wrong, of losing their authority,&quot; he says.    Sheik Gumi, now 64 years old, is still teaching and local Moslem officials are still afraid of him. Only now, the stakes are much higher. The soft-spoken Islamic law expert's challenge to what he calls the &quot;less pure&quot; Moslem establishment is a fault line along which the huge Islamic community of Nigeria could split.    Any such division would endanger the stability of Nigeria, which is black Africa's most populous and richest, but also one of its most fragile nations.    Backed by a cadre of devoted young men, the sheik advocates the abolition of the political-religious dynasty (a hierarchy building from village leaders through regional leaders, called emirs, to the Sultan of Sokoto) that has held sway in northern Nigeria since it was founded by Usman dan Fodio, whose warriors accelerated the spread of Islam throughout the area in the beginning of the 19th century. (Nigeria's more than 100 million people are about evenly divided between Moslems, most of them in the north, and Christians. Leaders of both religions claim majorities.)    &quot;The emirs can't continue. In fact that system has already ended,&quot; Sheik Gumi says in an interview, as if his words would make his wishes come true. With such statements, and with attacks on the laxity of modern morals and the failure of Moslems to properly understand their religion, which he broadcasts over Nigeria's most-powerful radio station and makes available on cassettes, Sheik Gumi has become the most controversial and prominent man in the Islamic revival here.    &quot;The most effective weapon for bringing about instability in this country is religion,&quot; says Maitama Sule, a leading Moslem politician and former Nigerian ambassador to the United Nations. He praises Sheik Gumi as a scholar and for living a simple life. &quot;He isn't greedy,&quot; he says.    Does he want a 100% Islamic Nigeria?    The sheik smiles. &quot;I want an Islamic world, not just an Islamic Nigeria.&quot;    What about a political career, as supporters have suggested?    &quot;I don't want to be governor, or even head of state,&quot; Sheik Gumi says. &quot;If I were head of state, I couldn't go to the mosque and teach. I'm satisfied with things as they are.&quot;    His appeal is to educated young men -- civil servants, police, soldiers and lower-level employees of businesses. Their enthusiasm is in part an assertion of pride, in part a seeking of revenge (or at least compensation) for not living well.    It takes education to understand his teachings. It takes frustration with Nigerian life to become an enthusiast. And frustration abounds here. Many feel left out and are shocked by values that have come to Nigeria from the West. So, they agree with men like Hassan Gwarzo, the chief Islamic judge in Kano state, who says: &quot;We are living in a self-destructive social order in which Islamic solutions alone can be effective.&quot;    Ruling Moslem officials deplore influences they have been powerless to stop. A leading member of the existing hierarchy, the Sarkin Kudu of Sokoto, asks rhetorically: &quot;Why fundamentalism? In reaction to anti-Islamic behavior. Drink. Mixing male and female. A man and a woman not his wife walking hand-in-hand. The degeneration of morality.&quot;    A Westerner who 12 years ago lived in Kaduna, the largest of Nigeria's northern cities, returns and finds &quot;great bitterness among people I wouldn't have thought would be affected by religious feuding.&quot; People are bitter over the failure of modernization to lift most Nigerians to a better life and they turn to Islam, where they find a tradition that gives them pride, if not wealth, he says.    Nigeria's recent economic decline is taken as a further indication that Western ways don't work for Nigeria's Moslems. After the 1970s brought billions in oil revenues and conspicuous consumption on a scale that embarrasses many Nigerians, the oil-price collapse brought an austerity program that puts the squeeze on the young, educated middle class that is at the core of the fundamentalist revival.    A much-debated question is how much other Islamic nations have influenced Nigeria's Islamic revival.    Saudi Arabia spends millions here each year. It awarded Sheik Gumi this year's $100,000 King Faisal prize for translating the Koran into northern Nigeria's principal language, Hausa (the sheik gave the money to charity). At least twice a year since 1956, the sheik has visited Saudi Arabia, which finances pilgrimages to Mecca for thousands of Nigerians each year and has contributed to building numerous Nigerian mosques. The Saudi Embassy in Lagos is extremely active socially and distributes vast numbers of pamphlets and books.    Competing with the Saudis are the Iranians and Libyans. Copies of the Koran presented by Libya or Iran are common in Moslem Nigerians' libraries. Both Iran and Libya invite Moslem Nigerians for visits. In turn, they send lecturers to Nigerian colleges and other youth groups.    Less than a decade after the Prophet Mohammed's death in 632, Islam had begun its journey into Africa. Islam fanned out through the continent, spread at times by the sword, but far more often peacefully by Moslem traders who began to reach this region more than 700 years ago.    South of the Sahara there now are at least 125 million Moslems, more than inhabit the Arab Middle Eastern nations. The largest number, perhaps 50 million, are Nigerians.    The Nigerian revival has been building since the early 1970s, when extremists emerged demanding a stricter adherence to the words of Mohammed. At the same time, Moslems began to prepare for the death of the leader of the ruling dynasty, the Sultan of Sokoto. But the ailing Sultan, now 84, surprised everyone and lives on, though on bad days he has to be carried to his chair. The intense maneuvering to succeed him has put the future of Islam here at stake.    &quot;If the right man isn't on the throne, the system will fall apart,&quot; says Mohammad Atta, a powerful businessman and political kingmaker who wants the sultanate to continue. The sultanate's founder, Usman dan Fodio, wanted political and religious leadership united in one man. But over the years the sultans, the regional emirs, the village chiefs, have become more and more secular, leaving religious leadership to others. At local levels some members of the ruling network have only a sketchy knowledge of the Koran. This is the weakness Sheik Gumi attacks.    The sheik is a friendly, but elusive man to interview, pausing frequently for whispered interruptions by supporters who crouch close to him as they seek his advice. He seems almost frail, but his softly spoken words are sharp attacks on his adversaries -- Moslem and Christian. He mixes crude jokes (&quot;Catholics have a strange religion. A leader cannot marry, so if everyone followed the leaders, the religion would die out in a generation.&quot;) with careful words on the need for Islamic law (&quot;It's a mistake for government to say it has nothing to do with religion.&quot;).    His anti-Christian barbs anger Christian leaders. &quot;He doesn't know what he's talking about. If that's how Moslem scholars behave, I don't see anything good in Islam,&quot; says the Catholic Archbishop of Lagos, Anthony Olu Okogie.    As the two men's hostile words illustrate, Moslem-Christian tensions also threaten Nigerian unity. But Moslem vs. Moslem fights have flared more often. It is the Moslem power structure that has the most to worry about from Sheik Gumi. The sheik's movement, says Wada Maida, editor-in-chief of the News Agency of Nigeria, &quot;isn't concerned with non-Moslems.&quot;    And there are groups more radical than the sheik's followers, like the Moslem Student Society. On several campuses, the society has attacked drinking clubs and other non-Islamic groups.    &quot;Unfortunately, they go to extremes,&quot; says Isa Kaita, a Moslem and former minister for education in northern Nigeria. &quot;Islam is so tolerant, but these youngsters are reading things upside down.&quot;    President Ibrahim Babangida, also a Moslem, worries about campus religious groups.&quot;Ordinarily, the existence of such organizations would be regarded as indicative of the younger generation becoming more religious and better citizens,&quot; he says. &quot;But security reports have made it clear that many of these religious associations are of an extreme and intolerant disposition, threatening rather than consolidating social stability and harmony.&quot;    Sheik Gumi deplores excesses, too. &quot;I'm not interested in violence,&quot; he says. Mr. Kaita stresses that the sheik is upset when any of his followers misinterpret his teachings, and while some of his followers belong to the Moslem Student Society, the overlap is by no means complete.    The sheik's followers are as active as any group in seeking adherents. Every weekend, groups of the sheik's movement, called Izala, take to the roads with hundreds of members to bring their provocative message to other Moslems. Mr. Maida, the head of the national news agency, recently came upon such a group as he was driving a country road. At prayer time, the Izala men knelt in the middle of the road, blocking traffic.    Still, not every educated young man supports Sheik Gumi. Adamu Adamu, deputy editor of the New Nigerian newspaper, approves of the Islamic revival. &quot;This is something that happens every 100 years and is completely good,&quot; he says. But, the editor, who has visited Iran and admires the Iranian revolution, says the masses need their traditional leaders. &quot;Gumi preaches to the educated. The village people can't understand him. If I have to choose, I choose the traditional.&quot;    Over the years, Islam has been somewhat Africanized by the inclusion of traditional ceremonies and practices. A good part of what the fundamentalists want is to strip away these additions. For example, Nigeria's Moslems long have held processions and celebrations on the Prophet's birthday. Sheik Gumi says such merrymaking is inappropriate.    As another example, Nigerian Moslems gather seven days after the birth of a child for a party at which the infant's name is announced. Sheik Gumi says the father should simply inform his local mosque of the child's name.    &quot;These differences are taken very seriously,&quot; says Mr. Maida of the news agency. Mr. Maida, who says he neglected his religion while pursuing a Western education, now likes to spend an hour or so a day studying Islam. Yet, he sees a much greater passion in the young.    &quot;Islam will be a force to be reckoned with,&quot; he says. &quot;My 12-year-old daughter starts and ends her letters home with a prayer. I never did that when I wrote to my parents.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>