<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881011-0076 </DOCNO><HL> New Zealand's Painful Economic Cure </HL><AUTHOR> William McGurn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST TAXES </CO><DATELINE> WELLINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If a poll were taken on the least popular man in New Zealand, the country's finance minister would be up there at the top.    &quot;He's bringing us to our knees,&quot; says a Wellington shopkeeper.    &quot;He cares more about his ego than the good of the country,&quot; says the owner of a Christ-church bed and breakfast.    His economic policies are &quot;a callously coldblooded program of despoiling low-income earners and bloating those on high incomes,&quot; says the country's Roman Catholic cardinal.    The man everybody loves to hate is Roger Douglas, the silver-haired architect of &quot;Rogernomics,&quot; a set of free-market initiatives that only last year helped see the Labor government win a second term for the first time since 1946. Mr. Douglas's latest broadside came last week with new tax cuts. Although this is not the flat tax he announced in December, it does bring New Zealand into a much cleaner, two-tiered system whose top rate of 33% is half what it was when he first took office in 1984. The question now is whether the finance minister will be around to reap the benefits.    The reason is that four years of Rogernomics still have not brought about the economic growth that Mr. Douglas himself has always said is essential to his program. The Institute for Economic Affairs here is forecasting a 1.9% drop in gross domestic product this year, followed by a 1.3% recovery next year, and discontent is rife. In his own Labor Party, Mr. Douglas has to deal with a prime minister who wants him to resign and a hard left now bleating about economic policy after having carried the day in foreign affairs. Then there's an opposition hoping to capitalize on all this discord. New Zealanders themselves are growing distrustful, feeling the pinch and suspicious that last week's tax cuts mean only that the government is planning to fleece them someplace else.    &quot;What Roger gives in income tax he takes away in GST {goods and services tax},&quot; says one cabdriver. &quot;So you can't tell me we're better off.&quot;    Looking out on the world from the circular cabinet block known as the Beehive, the 50-year-old finance minister is all calm and confidence. With his biggest initiatives behind him -- tax reform, privatization, deregulation, tight money -- he argues that it is only a matter of time. &quot;Turning a business around takes years, let alone a country,&quot; says Mr. Douglas, a pin-striped politician who runs a successful pig farm in his home district.    In many ways New Zealand's sluggish performance only indicates just how bad things were when Mr. Douglas took over. Yet had the economy not been in a state of crisis -- the day after Labor's upset victory in July 1984 a run on foreign currency forced the Reserve Board to halt transactions -- Rogernomics wouldn't have had a prayer. Mr. Douglas had nailed his capitalist theses to the Labor Party door back in 1980, in the form of a book called &quot;There's Got to Be a Better Way!&quot; His pleas were ignored until economic crisis and a snap election victory gave him a free hand.    He used it. First he devalued the New Zealand dollar, later allowing it to float. Then he set about a rollback of the controls imposed on everything from interest rates to wages and prices under the previous government of Sir Robert Muldoon, deregulating financial services, shearing export and farm subsidies, and opening up markets from banking to airlines to foreign competition. He was particularly successful in selling off state enterprises and nursing others up to where they can be sold, and Mr. Douglas points with pride at the huge gains. The railroads have dropped real freight rates 43% and cut a staff of 21,000 almost in half. Similar turnarounds have been recorded in such areas as coal, forestry and electricity.    At Labor's August party conference, Mr. Douglas bluntly met those who have zeroed in on the massive layoffs involved: &quot;Bleeding hearts are all very well, but in fact the most heartless people are those who don't have enough bleeding brains.&quot;    Rising unemployment, which has soared to 9.4% from 4.9% during Mr. Douglas's tenure, is fueling unease. As the opposition National Party likes to note, this is partly because the labor market has not been liberalized with the same zeal as others; many wages are still centrally fixed, and this government reintroduced compulsory unionism in 1985. As Mr. Douglas is the first to admit, the problem is also aggravated by a welfare system whose expenditures keep going up and whose structure discourages many on the dole from taking up work.    Equally important, however, is that the restoration of incentives to business has not been matched at the personal level. Despite a first round of tax cuts two years ago, for example, the overall tax burden actually has increased under Labor, shooting up to 38% of GDP from 31% -- this in a time of zero economic growth. The reason is that the first round of marginal income-tax cuts was for the most part wiped out by the introduction of the 10% GST, or value-added tax, on everything. Talk remains about jacking up the GST an additional 2 1/2 percentage points, and new taxes on capital gains are slated for next year.    &quot;All the debate has been over tax design and not the tax load,&quot; says the shadow finance minister, Ruth Richardson. &quot;At the end of the day the question of tax cuts is the question whether people have more purchasing power. They don't.&quot;    Not that Mr. Douglas hasn't tried. In December he announced a flat tax of 23% along with some changes in the structure of family support, as much an effort to cut the high marginal rates at the top as to eliminate the effective high marginal rates on those at the bottom who move from public assistance to jobs. This visionary plank, however, was nixed in January by Prime Minister David Lange, though Mr. Douglas still says publicly that he favors the single rate. Nonetheless, the introduction Oct. 2 of a two-step tax scale of 24% and 33% means top marginal rates on income have been significantly reduced. Thus Kiwis may now for the first time enjoy real tax cuts, and both the IEA and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development are expecting it all to come together for some growth next year.    &quot;While we've gone through the process of reversing the negatives, we haven't yet put in some of the positives to kick it all off,&quot; says Ian Dickson, an economist with the merchant bank Fay, Richwhite who just finished a year working in Mr. Douglas's office.    Given the constraints Mr. Douglas faces by the nature of his own party, all his good work may have only set the stage for the Nationals, who are, for example, better placed to go after the rigid labor market. The National Party, though, blows an uncertain trumpet. Go-getters like Miss Richardson would like to carry forward Mr. Douglas's reforms. Others in the national party, including party leader Jim Bolger, are still floundering.    The same day Miss Richardson enthusiastically outlines her free-market agenda to a reporter, for example, the front page of the Dominion carries a story on a promise from the shadow minister for state-owned enterprises that if returned to office the National Party will require foreign owners to sell back shares of &quot;strategic&quot; industries in excess of 24.9%. Had the Nationals been out there with Joshua, the walls of Jericho would still be standing.    The real challenge to Mr. Douglas thus comes from within. Ever since the flat-tax flap, he and the prime minister, once the best of mates, have been on the outs. Although Mr. Lange had asked for Mr. Douglas's resignation, probably for fear of a cabinet revolt against his own leadership, the prime minister appears to have settled for a slowdown. He's done this by attaching two senior-level associate ministers to Mr. Douglas's office and setting up &quot;party conflict committees&quot; to screen cabinet initiatives that conflict with party policy.    Then there is the rank and file, many of whom see Mr. Douglas as a Judas sheep leading Labor principles to the slaughter. On top of it all is a hard left wing that already has tried to take the seat of Mr. Douglas's cabinet colleague Richard Prebble. Because the Labor Party structure allocates some votes to unions, the left uses this to exert undue influence on the party. A number of these people, moreover, are not even Labor Party members but belong to the pro-Moscow Socialist Unity Party. Emboldened by their foreign-policy success in having New Zealand effectively removed from ANZUS, this faction is now eyeing Rogernomics.    All of which only makes Mr. Douglas's achievements the more remarkable. Purists might quibble over details. The fact is, as the finance minister himself notes, New Zealand has undergone a &quot;wider reform on a broader front than any other OECD nation.&quot; This in turn has transformed New Zealand society, to the point where the debate today is not whether to reform but how fast. Mr. Douglas still enjoys strong support from the rest of the cabinet, and even the left wing in the Labor Party will not be able to reverse the gains. Next year's expected growth will go a long way toward dispelling the current bitterness.    Back here on the sixth floor of the Beehive, Mr. Douglas waxes philosophical about what it all means for him. &quot;I've been here nearly 19 years,&quot; he says, &quot;and if you don't have a clear focus on what you want to do by then you never will. Having done all that, I'd be quite happy to leave here and get back to the pig farm.&quot;    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>