<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870505-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Rising Crime Against Cash-Machine UsersHas More Banks Facing Victims in Court---By Richard B. SchmittStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Late one night in Detroit two years ago, Randy Gates was shot in the head moments after withdrawing money from an automated teller machine.    The 24-year-old mechanic died several hours later. His killer was caught and eventually jailed, but his family saw another culprit. In October 1985, they filed suit in Michigan's Wayne County Circuit Court against the machine's operator, Michigan National Bank, alleging that lax security had facilitated the incident.    As the cash-dispensing ATMs have proliferated in recent years, so too have violent crimes against customers using them. Efforts to enact tough safety laws, meanwhile, have been stalled by opposition from the banking industry.    Now a growing number of people are going to court over ATM-related robberies and other crimes, claiming that banks aren't doing enough to make the machines safe. Victims in Florida and Michigan have won settlements recently, while several other cases -- including the Gates murder -- are still pending. (Michigan National denies it was at fault in the Gates case.)    ATM safety has become &quot;a sensitive issue&quot; between banks and their customers, and increased litigation is likely, says F. Barry Schreiber, a professor of criminal justice at St. Cloud State University in Minnesota. Adds Dianne Weaver, a Florida lawyer currently involved in an ATM suit, &quot;You're seeing the tip of the iceberg.&quot;    Banks and consumer groups disagree over the extent of ATM-related crime and even have trouble defining it. Many of the victims in such crimes were assaulted after leaving bank property, a factor that clouds the question of legal responsibility. And crimes frequently go unreported to the banks themselves, making the problem difficult to track and curb.    Nor are banks always eager to discuss the issue. The Bank Administration Institute recently surveyed 400 banks and savings and loan associations, hoping to provide the first authoritative look at the scope of ATM crime. But just one-third of the institutions responded, and not always accurately. Through police contacts, for example, the Rolling Meadows, Ill.-based research group found that a major New York bank significantly understated problems at certain locations.    Such crime is &quot;worse than banks would like to believe,&quot; says Richard Hudak, security director for the institute, which is industry-supported.    One prominent legal question is how far banks must go to make ATMs safe to use. Most banks argue that, as long as they locate the machines in well-lighted areas or on major streets, they aren't liable when criminal acts occur. Moreover, they say, consumers should bear part of the risk for using the machines after dark.    &quot;A bank shouldn't be held responsible for the fact that society is violent,&quot; says Jeffrey Scharf, a Pasadena, Calif., lawyer who has represented banks in several ATM suits. &quot;A bank has a responsibility to provide a reasonably safe place, and I think banks try hard to be reasonable.&quot;    Many bankers assert, too, that consumers generally would rather take their chances than go without the convenience that ATMs provide -- a view some critics consider a slap in the face to customers.    &quot;They have guards for their money, so they ought to have guards for their customers,&quot; says Richard Lenter, the attorney for a Detroit woman who was kidnapped and sexually assaulted outside an ATM. &quot;If it isn't economically feasible, then they ought to shut the damn things down.&quot;    Indeed, victims' lawyers assert that banks' marketing considerations often outweigh safety concerns. They contend that banks are trying to have the best of both worlds, reaping cost benefits from having customers use the machines and at the same time passing off any risk associated with such use. They also argue that, because many banks heavily promote the machines' use, customers are owed special protection, including security guards if necessary.    &quot;When you advertise and encourage people to use a service, you assume a responsibility to make it safe,&quot; says Mrs. Weaver, the Florida lawyer, who is handling a suit against Sun Banks Inc., a unit of Atlanta-based SunTrust Banks Inc. &quot;Banks tell the poor consumer they should have been more careful. But if using the machines is so stupid, why make them available?&quot;    The Sun Banks case, filed last summer in Florida's Broward County Circuit Court, involves a commercial-airline pilot who was robbed at gunpoint in April 1986 after using one of the bank's ATMs in Fort Lauderdale shortly before midnight. One of the two assailants drove off with the pilot's Mercedes-Benz, followed by his partner in another car. During a high-speed chase, one of the muggers was killed and a police officer wounded; the other assailant was later apprehended.    The pilot's suit seeks damages for emotional distress and alleges that Sun Banks put the ATM in a poorly lighted area, making it an easy target for criminals.    Sun Banks denies that the machine's location made it unsafe. The bank is also moving to dismiss the suit, claiming that Florida law bars damages for emotional distress, absent intentional wrongdoing.    In other cases, lawyers for victims allege that banks knew of previous incidents but failed to warn customers or take strong action. In the Gates case, for example, &quot;the crook broke the rules of our society about hurting each other, but the bank broke rules about protecting people from known risks,&quot; contends John Lobur, the family's attorney. Mr. Lobur says he has evidence of several previous robberies at the machine.    While neither confirming nor denying any previous robberies at the machine, Robert H. Martin, an attorney for Michigan National, says the bank had &quot;no legal obligation to tell anyone about specific incidents at specific locations.&quot; He adds that the bank had taken several steps to improve security but that Mr. Gates contributed to his own death, in part by being &quot;totally oblivious to his surroundings.&quot;    In the wake of such cases, many banks are working to avert problems before they occur, by improving lighting or relocating the machines from shrouded areas. Some now distribute brochures with warnings, or have installed surveillance equipment.    Says Bernard L. Pylitt, an Indiana lawyer who has lectured banks on the subject, &quot;Banks are becoming more aware and concerned about their liability when a customer is attacked.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>