<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880412-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. ACCEPTED a plan for withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.    Reagan called the agreement a &quot;triumph&quot; and announced that he is dispatching Secretary of State Shultz to Geneva to sign it Thursday, making the U.S. a &quot;guarantor&quot; of the accord. The pact also will be signed by the Soviets, the Afghan government and Pakistan. Shultz said the U.S. will reserve its right to continue aid to the Afghan resistance as long as Moscow continues arming Kabul. U.S. conservatives attacked the accord, but it helps clear the way for an upbeat superpower summit in Moscow at the end of May.    Soviet television condemned Afghan rebels for shooting down a passenger plane with 29 aboard after announcements that the war's end was near.    ---   HIJACKERS KILLED a second hostage aboard a Kuwaiti jetliner in Cyprus.    Continuing to demand that the plane be refueled, the hijackers threatened to kill the rest of the hostages, now believed to number fewer than 50. The hijackers had demanded release of 17 pro-Iranian terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait in return for the release of the hostages, but sources close to the negotiations said that demand had been reduced to three prisoners. Kuwait refused. Separately, an International Air Transport Association spokesman said weapons were probably smuggled aboard the aircraft in Bangkok.    The kidnappers of U.S. Marine officer William Higgins, who was taken hostage in Lebanon in February, threatened to kill him if the airliner is stormed.    ---   Israel deported eight Palestinians to Lebanon and ordered the expulsion of 12 others, including six from the West Bank village where an Israeli teen-ager and two Palestinian youths were killed last week. The U.S. criticized the expulsions. Meanwhile, a Palestinian was reported killed and the PLO called for a &quot;day of firebombs&quot; April 21.    ---   El Salvador's President Duarte revoked the amnesty granted to three men linked to the 1985 slayings of 13 people, including six Americans, in attacks on sidewalk cafes in San Salvador. The U.S. had threatened to reduce aid over a military judge's inclusion of the three in an amnesty program set up under the Central American peace accord.    ---   U.S. and Pakistani bomb experts began defusing thousands of unexploded missiles and grenades following Sunday's explosion at a munitions depot near Islamabad and Rawalpindi. The death toll rose to 93, reports of injured reached 1,100 and hundreds were missing. President Zia-ul-Haq called the explosion an &quot;extraordinary accident.&quot;    ---   Iraq fired three missiles into Tehran and Isfahan, ending a three-day lull in the war of the cities. Iran said at least 20 people were killed and vowed to retaliate. Iraq suspended missile attacks Friday, just before polling began in Iran's parliamentary elections. It urged Iranian voters to elect leaders who would end the 7 1/2-year-old war.    Khomeini said 150,000 Iranian pilgrims would travel to Mecca this year and stage protests against the U.S. and Israel. Saudi Arabia has said it would limit the number of pilgrims this year. Last year, 402 pilgrims were killed in riots in Islam's holiest city following demonstrations by Iranians.    ---   The U.S. will ask Honduras to pay between $4 million and $6 million to repair its consulate, which was wrecked during anti-American riots that left five Hondurans dead last week, U.S. diplomats said. In Los Angeles, Juan Ramon Matta, whose expulsion to the U.S. sparked the riots, was indicted on drug-trafficking charges.    ---   Managua proposed resuming talks this week on details of a cease-fire, but there was no immediate response from the Contras. The technical talks ended last week in a disagreement over arms shipments.    ---   Foam-packaging producers have agreed to stop by year end using certain ozone-depleting chemicals to make fast-food containers. The agreement, worked out between environmentalists and a trade group, signals growing industry awareness that chlorofluorocarbons can destroy the Earth's protective ozone layer.    ---   U.S. Catholic bishops released a draft pastoral letter urging greater church leadership roles for women, but stopping short of endorsing ordination. The letter is based on a study that gathered evidence from 75,000 women on their role in the church.    ---   Italy's prime minister-designate told President Cossiga he has reached agreement with five coalition partners on the formation of Italy's 48th postwar government. Christian Democrat Ciriaco de Mita said a cabinet list for his new government would be drawn up today. Prime Minister Goria's government collapsed last month.    ---   An Italian judge released financier Licio Gelli from prison because of a serious heart condition. Gelli, 68, is alleged to be the mastermind of some of the biggest political and financial scandals in postwar Italy, including the 1982 collapse of the Vatican-linked Banco Ambrosiano. He was extradited from Switzerland two months ago to stand trial. </TEXT></DOC>