<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880325-0091 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors: Reagan Is Crying Wolf on Nicaragua </HL><AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM FREST </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   The agreement apparently struck in Nicaragua between the Sandinistas and the Contras considerably discredits the alarms set off a few days ago by the Reagan administration over the Nicaraguan &quot;invasion&quot; of Honduras. Indeed, the cynicism of the Reagan administration in conducting its Central American policy is surpassed only by the gullibility of those who continue to believe what our government tells them about Central America.    Why in the face of so much evidence to the contrary do we continue to suppose that official statements bear more than coincidental resemblance to the facts? On the very day that the administration set off its alarms, some of President Reagan's most famed appointees were indicted for deceiving Congress and the American people -- a development that should enjoin caution before believing this crowd again.    No one has less credibility than the man directly in charge of Central American policy, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Elliott Abrams. Some congressional committees refuse to hear him at all; others will listen only if he testifies under oath. Only last week the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee threw him out of a closed briefing on the alleged invasion. Why anyone should take seriously anything Mr. Abrams says about Central America defies comprehension.    Of course there was no Nicaraguan invasion of Honduras in the sense of an effort by the Nicaraguan government to annex Honduran territory or to overthrow the government of Honduras. There was, as there has been before, counterattack against an enemy that constantly crosses the border itself in hit-and-run raids against Nicaragua. This was not the first occasion when Sandinistas have pursued Contras across an ill-defined frontier and sought to destroy the Contra bases.    Nor is &quot;hot pursuit&quot; exactly an unknown doctrine. President Nixon invoked it with unction 18 years ago when he sent American troops into Cambodia to &quot;clean out major enemy sanctuaries&quot; and formulated the celebrated distinction between an &quot;invasion&quot; and an &quot;incursion.&quot;    Now that the incursion is a thing of the past, and the Sandinistas and Contras have come together on their own, this may be a good time to take a fresh look at President Reagan's Central American policy that, in the president's words, the government of Nicaragua posed &quot;an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States.&quot; How flattered Daniel Ortega and his associates must have been to receive this remarkable tribute from the president of the most powerful nation in the world! And how shaming it was for our president to proclaim himself to a wondering planet as so mortally scared of Nicaragua, a desperately poor country with a population of less than three million people, about 1/80th the size of the U.S.!    The administration never made it clear exactly what President Reagan was so scared of. Was he afraid that Nicaragua will become a Soviet base? Obviously, the Soviet Union will do all it can to keep the Central American pot boiling on a low-cost, low-risk basis. But Mr. Gorbachev knows that he cannot put nuclear weapons in Nicaragua in 1988 any more than Khrushchev could put them in Cuba in 1962. Moreover, foreign aid is about as popular in Moscow as it is in Washington, and Mr. Gorbachev's clear priority is the transfer of his resources to the modernization of the Soviet economy. The Soviet Union has already reduced its oil shipments to Nicaragua and rejected other Nicaraguan requests.    The Soviet bridgehead in Cuba is far more militarily secure than any bridgehead Moscow could possibly obtain in Nicaragua, and current indications are that Moscow is even cutting back on its aid to Cuba. Mr. Gorbachev will not make a major investment in Nicaragua. As the Latin American proverb has it, only a fool would feed a goat in the jaws of a tiger.    If not a Soviet base in Central America, what was President Reagan so scared of? An armed Nicaragua running amok in Central America? Nicaragua has a larger army than its neighbors, which is hardly surprising when it is under siege by the most powerful country on earth (though the 600,000-man army the administration tried to frighten us about a few weeks back turns out to be a proposed citizen militia -- and also a demonstration of confidence by the Sandinistas, who would hardly distribute arms to people likely to turn them against the regime). But any effort to use that army against other states, rather than against Nicaraguan guerrillas launching attacks from other states, would trigger the Rio Treaty and invite multilateral intervention.    Our strategists are still hypnotized by the &quot;falling-domino&quot; model. This model contends that weaker states will ineluctably fall under the sway of an aggressive state. It was the model that led to our intervention in Vietnam. But, as it has turned out, the dominoes in Southeast Asia have not fallen against us; they have fallen against North Vietnam. Far from dominating Southeast Asia, as the falling-domino model predicted, Vietnam is a rather beleaguered state surrounded by hostility -- the result the classical &quot;balance-of-power&quot; model would have predicted. The balance-of-power model contends that weaker states will combine to check the ambitions of an aggressive state. This is what has happened in Southeast Asia, and it's what is most likely to happen in Central America.    But maybe it was the infection of Marxist &quot;totalitarianism&quot; metastasizing out of Nicaragua that frightened our president. Now Nicaragua has a repressive regime, but it is plainly not a totalitarian state. By the distinction the Reaganites used to make so much of, it is authoritarian rather than totalitarian; and, judging by the bursts of comment and criticism in Managua, it is not very authoritarian at that -- not in a class with Chile or Paraguay or Cuba.    And is it even all that Marxist? The Nicaraguan Communist Party is vehemently anti-Sandinista and part of the opposition front. &quot;If they are Marxists,&quot; a Communist deputy has said of the Sandinistas, &quot;then I quit Marxism.&quot;    Of course, our president has alleged great concern over the fate of human rights in Nicaragua. But he expressed no such concern when the Somozas were trampling on human rights. Quite the contrary: He denounced the Carter administration in 1980 for insisting that Nicaragua respect human rights and thereby causing, he claimed, the overthrow of our great friends the Somozas. What a faker the old fellow is!    The irony is that the Reagan policy, designed in theory to stop the spread of Marxism in Central America, was in practice having quite the opposite result. Mr. Reagan's military remedies promoted, not impeded, the spread of Marxism. Radical ideas thrive in a culture of hatred, violence, bloodshed and destruction. That is why most Latin American leaders oppose aid to the Contras and seek a political rather than a military solution as the best security against communism. Why do we suppose we know better than they do where their interests lie? They want the demilitarization of Central America under effective safeguards, and that is what we should want, too.    Instead of more cries of wolf, and more half-baked schemes for keeping the Contras going, and more sabotage and more resistance, and deeper U.S. commitment to the overthrow of the Sandinistas, let us stand back for a moment and ask ourselves whether pathetic little Nicaragua really presents this &quot;unusual and extraordinary threat&quot; to the safety and survival of the U.S.    I note a tendency to define the issue in Central America as a test of readiness to use force in defense of U.S. interests abroad. It is a test rather of ability to distinguish between real and fake threats to those interests. A real threat, such as a Soviet attempt to introduce nuclear missiles into the hemisphere, would justify the use of force, if no other means availed to get the missiles out. But the use of force against a fake threat is a failure of statesmanship.    If we conclude that Nicaragua doesn't pose the &quot;unusual and extraordinary threat&quot; that haunts our president's sleep, how about letting the contending parties and their Latin American neighbors work out a settlement with Managua that protects democratic interests and then concentrating our own minds and energies on serious problems?    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>