<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880808-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Don't Weaken USIA: War on Words Continues </HL><AUTHOR> John Hughes </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT FREST </CO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   With extraordinarily bad timing, moves are under way that could have a damaging impact on American public diplomacy -- the U.S. government's information campaign abroad.    There is rumor in Congress that a plan sponsored by Sen. Claiborne Pell, Democratic chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, might seek to drastically restructure, and perhaps even demolish, the United States Information Agency. If such legislation were to be passed, key parts of the agency would be split off and assigned to other entities. Under some scenarios, the redistribution would be so far-reaching that there would be nothing left at the core and USIA would disappear.    The plan could hardly come at a worse time. It would throw the American information effort into confusion just when the Soviets are cranking up a sophisticated and professional public diplomacy effort to match that honed by USIA over the years. Summit amity in Moscow and cutbacks in Soviet weaponry do not mean any dilution in the Soviet effort to influence world opinion. In fact, those efforts are being intensified.    It remains to be seen whether Mikhail Gorbachev will permit the KGB to continue the crudities of its disinformation campaign-planting forged and untruthful stories about the U.S. in foreign newspapers. But the Soviets' more traditional public diplomacy campaign has been improved immensely, probably due to the skill of such public-relations practitioners as Anatoly Dobrynin, longtime Soviet ambassador to the U.S.    The Soviets now present spokesmen who have access to their own hierarchy, and who are accessible to foreign newsmen. They speak with authority and often with impressive linguistic skills. Also, the Soviets' public-relations initiatives are often imaginative -- for example, the Sakharov press conference during the summit in Moscow -- and their responses to American initiatives are swift. Despite all the newfound U.S.-Soviet bonhomie, the Soviets will remain formidable adversaries in the war of words and ideas.    USIA is charged with telling the American story abroad and articulating government policy. It is unknown to many Americans because it is barred by law from disseminating information inside the U.S. However, it spends millions of dollars -- its 1988 budget is about $820 million -- and uses a wide variety of communications instruments to achieve U.S. goals. For example, it played a key role in the early 1980s in combating the Soviet propaganda offensive against deployment of intermediate nuclear missiles in Western Europe. The Soviet campaign failed, the missiles were deployed, and their deployment is credited with pressuring the Soviets to negotiate on arms reduction. Similarly, it played an important role in dramatizing at the United Nations the tape-recording of Soviet combat pilots shooting down an unarmed Korean airliner in 1983.    Much of the time, however, the agency offers a routine, but effective American presence and viewpoint around the world. It does this through: broadcasts of the Voice of America; TV presentations over its own world satellite network; at libraries and cultural centers; foreign-language magazines; lectures, and cultural and scholarly exchanges; press and public-relations work by some 900 information officers around the world, and by other multifaceted activities.    Now there are moves to change the character of the USIA. Sen. Pell proposed reordering the agency at a public diplomacy conference in Washington last September. He suggested his committee would hold hearings on the matter and though none have been scheduled, they may come up this fall. It is believed drafting of legislation may be already under way.    Sen. Pell has long had a special interest in exchange programs. His concern is that the Fulbright and related programs are tainted when administered by an agency that has an informational and advocacy role. Thus he has suggested removing the exchange programs from USIA and turning them over to the Smithsonian Institution.    In fact, there is no evidence the Fulbright program has suffered under USIA's mantle. Its governing board is independent and only funded by USIA. Most non-Americans are unaware of its connection with USIA. Also, there is no guarantee that turning the program over to academics for administration would keep it free of political influence.    Sen. Pell also believes the Voice of America, which operates under USIA's wing, would have more credibility if it were detached and set up as an independent corporation.    It is true that VOA is perhaps the best equipped of USIA's various branches to stand alone. But the broadcasting division already has substantial independence and it is difficult to see how either its credibility or its quality would be enhanced by separation. It would remain a government short-wave radio service broadcasting news, features and expressions of government policy, all in pursuit of the national interest, and funded by American taxpayers. That role would be unchanged.    Finally, Sen. Pell believes USIA's information and advocacy role should be located within the State Department, which would thus run public diplomacy alongside traditional diplomacy.    Assigning these functions to the State Department raises formidable questions. Much of State's traditional diplomacy is discreet. Public diplomacy requires a different, outgoing technique, perhaps with different resources and personnel. Moreover State's slender existing public diplomacy resources are directed mainly at a domestic audience. If the department were to mingle domestic and foreign public-relations programs it would run foul of the congressional edict that existing USIA programs may not be directed to a domestic audience.    Any government agency can benefit from a reappraisal from time to time, and USIA is no exception. But it is difficult to see how fragmentation of the agency would enhance its support of American foreignpolicy goals.    Perhaps the biggest flaw in these proposals to break up USIA is the extent to which they would weaken the individual parts and lead to duplication and inefficiency. The agency's units currently share many resources, ranging from technical (such as shared satellite facilities) to personnel, (where language, journalistic and other skills are routinely transferred from unit to unit), to shared legal and congressional liaison services. If the agency were carved up, the separate parts would be competing for the same budget funds, personnel and influence, and would start constructing separate bureaucracies.    Also, who would serve each of them overseas? USIA officers in the field, particularly in smaller embassies, handle an array of functions: cultural events, press queries, distribution of literature, libraries, lectures, and VOA programming for local radio stations. If the State Department were to run information programs and, say, the Smithsonian cultural programs, two different sets of field representatives would be needed.    The challenge for the next American president is to see that USIA promotes American interests best, under either Republicans or Democrats. America's need for an external communications effort is unarguable. Can it be done better? Probably. But we should improve the form in which USIA has been doing the job, not dismantle it.    ---   Mr. Hughes, a columnist for the Christian Science Monitor, served successively as associate director of USIA, director of the Voice of America, and assistant secretary of state for public affairs, 1981-1984. </TEXT></DOC>