<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880708-0189 </DOCNO><HL> Dutch Say Boiler-Room Brokers' Fraud Declines After a Two-Year Campaign </HL><AUTHOR> Art Mooradian (WSJ Special) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP CANDA </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><DATELINE> THE HAGUE, the Netherlands  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Dutch authorities say that after a two-year campaign, they have reversed the proliferation of unlicensed boiler-room stockbrokers in the Netherlands.    Unscrupulous equities salesmen during the early to mid-1980s thrived in the largely unregulated securities market here and are estimated to have bilked investors world-wide out of hundreds of millions of dollars.    Dutch government officals made their claims about having cleaned up the local securities industry following news that authorities late last week raided and now are investigating a little-known Amsterdam-based firm, which allegedly had been touting shares in Canadian-listed companies through high-pressure telephone sales.    The classic investor rip-offs in the past by unlicensed stock salesmen operating in the Netherlands had revolved around Canadian stocks tipped as hot prospects by these brokers' newsletters and aggressive telephone sales representatives.    Government agents last week entered the offices of a brokerage called IPS Marketing and seized its files, after local investors sought information from a bank and from a Dutch newspaper about the firm and the stock it was hawking. It wasn't clear whether IPS was engaged in any sort of criminal activity, officials said.    News of the raid on IPS sparked some concern in Dutch investment circles about the possibility that bucket-shop operators might be trying to slip back into the Netherlands, after having been driven out just recently.    But getting back and staying in the Netherlands without government approval may be difficult for the bucket shops, the Dutch officials assert.    A Finance Ministry spokesman says that since 1986, when the Dutch for the first time required brokers to be licensed, the ministry has moved broadly to weed out unqualified brokerages. He says regulatory authorities have refused licenses or license waivers for about 40 applicants who couldn't meet minimum standards. Only five licenses have been granted to independent stockbrokers that aren't affiliated with recognized exchanges or brokerages, he said. Several applications are pending. &quot;The law works quite well,&quot; the official remarked.    Meantime, agents from the Economische Controledienst, or ECD, the investigative arm of the Dutch Economics Ministry, declined to give details about last week's raid on IPS Marketing, other than to confirm that the raid took place and that an investigation is under way.    But a spokesman for the agency said the brokerage is alleged to have violated the Dutch Securities Act, which among other things, requires brokerages to be approved by the Finance Ministry. The ECD official said papers seized in the raid, including computerized mailing lists, are being analyzed to see whether a criminal investigation should ensue.    Finance Ministry officials said they couldn't find any record of IPS Marketing's having been approved for business in the Netherlands. Officials at IPS couldn't be reached for comment.    Meanwhile, De Telegraf, the newspaper initially contacted by investors regarding IPS Marketing's activities, said people were encouraged to buy shares in two energy companies listed on the Vancouver exchange: Santa Rosa Minerals and Texas Petroleum.    While Texas Petroleum is listed in Vancouver, there isn't any record of a listing for Santa Rosa Minerals, Vancouver exchange officials say. An exchange spokesman says Texas Petroleum was first listed in 1985 and hasn't any record of suspension. He said that activity in the stock has been relatively active of late and that the company's shares have a bid-ask price range of around 18 to 21 Canadian cents.    The Vancouver exchange is a speculators' market. This &quot;penny-stock or venture-capital equities market,&quot; as the exchange spokesman terms it, has an average price for listed shares of about one Canadian dollar. &quot;Due to the nature of the exchange and the wide range of brokers and operators involved with it, we do have our share of that problem,&quot; he said when asked if fraudulent stock salesmen actively deal in shares quoted on his exchange. Shares on the Toronto bourse also have been a favorite of unscrupulous brokers and high-pressure telephone salesmen in the past.    A spokesman for Amsterdam-Rotterdam Bank confirmed that his company tipped off Dutch authorities to the sudden emergence of IPS Marketing after some queries from the bank's customers. &quot;We noticed a few of our clients were being approached with proposals that looked rather pushy,&quot; he said, adding that &quot;when it became clear this wasn't just with one investor, we notified the police.&quot;    Other Dutch banking officials say they are on the lookout for previously unknown brokerages dealing in telephone sales of foreign stocks and bonds. &quot;Our research departments follow this sort of thing and we have the data to quickly monitor&quot; the emergence of these brokers and the stocks they sell, a banking official says.    The Dutch investment community has been concerned about disclosures of widespread securities fraud by bucketshops just a couple of years ago. They are eager to retain investor confidence in the Dutch market in general, especially since the October 1987 bourse crash, when private Dutch investors were hurt badly.    But even with the help of the local investment community, eradicating securities fraud in the Netherlands over the long haul won't be easy and probably will require constant attention. Leo de Wit, spokesman for the Amsterdam public prosecutor's office, says tougher new Dutch laws and international cooperation among law enforcement agencies have helped bring down the incidence of securities fraud in the Netherlands substantially.    But his office still has several open cases and warrants outstanding against fraud suspects who had been operating in the Netherlands. Often these people disappear, frequently with the money, before the police can close in.    And the lack of extradition treaties with some countries makes apprehending suspects difficult and frustrating, officials say. As long as unscrupulous brokers are free, they can start up business in countries like Cyprus, Ireland, Panama and other offshore tax havens where securities regulations are relatively lax.    The spokesman for the Economische Controledienst said that although gains in the Netherlands aginst securities fraud have been substantial, complaints about stock salesmen continue to flow in. But the good news is that suspected irregularities now appear to be on a scale far smaller than in the past. </TEXT></DOC>