<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880829-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Venezuela's Bid to Be Aluminum Giant Imperiled by Issues of Cost, Corruption </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MIN MON </IN><DATELINE> CARACAS (AP)  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Venezuela's billion-dollar bid to become one of the world's largest suppliers of aluminum is in danger, as economists question the competitiveness and the government investigates the honesty of the public aluminum firms.    As lower-than-expected oil income has forced the government to choose between competing investment programs, the aluminum sector -- touted as Venezuela's alternative to petroleum and currently its second-largest export -- is being more closely scrutinized than it ever has been. The program, to more than double capacity to 1.2 million metric tons a year by 1992, at a cost of more than $2 billion, was started early in President Jaime Lusinchi's term.    Hundreds of millions of dollars of domestic and foreign loans and investment capital have been spent so far, primarily by the two public smelters, S.A. Venezolana de Aluminio, or Venalum, and Aluminio del Caroni S.A., or Alcasa, which are undertaking most of the expansion effort.    A government request for additional domestic loans of 24 billion bolivars ($1.8 billion) for Venalum, Alcasa, and Interamericana de Alumina, or Interalumina, the country's bauxite mining, processing, and marketing concern, was left in limbo as the national congress adjourned Thursday without approving the disbursements. The government has already borrowed about 12 billion bolivars (or about $800 million, at the official rate) domestically to finance the aluminum program.    President Lusinchi told the legislators at the closing ceremony that he would call for a special congressional session to approve the loans, which the companies claim are needed to cover higher investment, production and financing costs.    But his request would come after his party, Accion Democratica, was unable to muster its majority in both houses of congress to approve the loan package during the regular session. Legislators began to question the size of the package as reports surfaced last May of corrupt practices in many of the public aluminum sector's dealings abroad.    The comptroller general's office opened an investigation into six specific cases, five of which involve public aluminum firm executives who may have arranged millions of dollars in irregular deals with suppliers, overpriced imports, and charged commissions.    Although no official charges against him were filed, the president of Alcasa, Celestino Martinez, stepped down from his post in June and the boards of directors of both Venalum and Alcasa were replaced. The investigations are continuing.    In addition, doubts about the investments in aluminum also have been raised by central bank and private economists.    Venezuela's aluminum industry is fully integrated and enjoys energy costs that boost its competitiveness against higher cost producers in the U.S., Europe and Japan, industry officials say.    According to Alcasa, which attributes its figures to Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and Chase Econometrics, Venezuela produces aluminum at a cost of only 40 cents a pound, well below Japan's cost of 53 cents a pound and the U.S. cost of 52 cents a pound. Only Canada and Australia make the metal at lower cost. But only Canada beats Venezuela's energy cost of $6.21 per million kilowatt hours. The U.S. industry, in comparison, pays $21.53 for the same unit of energy, and Japan pays $53.26.    Nonetheless, some analysts are publicly raising questions about the amount of subsidies the sector actually receives to make it competitive in world markets.    They say the official cost structure is illusory, and that the aluminum gets subsidies at almost every stage of the production process, from underpriced energy used in the smelters to export rebates after the ingots are shipped.    A central bank study of the industry concluded that Venalum's and Alcasa's profits &quot;are highly sensitive to the fiscal export incentives.&quot;    It estimated the most profitable project, Venalum's aluminum reduction unit, was only half as profitable once the export incentives were discounted.    Other economists say that if the state electricity company, Edelca, which supplies Venalum and Alcasa, charged them the real cost of its energy, Venezuelan aluminum would have an energy cost advantage equivalent to only 3% of the current world market price.    &quot;The apparent profits generated by the aluminum industry reflect, principally, the distortions arising from subsidies on electricity, on the cost of capital and for exports, in addition to other exchange distortions,&quot; wrote economists Ana Julia Jatar and Ricardo Hausmann recently.    According to Ms. Jatar and Mr. Hausmann, both former planning ministry officials under President Lusinchi, the general expenses of the aluminum smelters are more than double the international average, and the Interalumina plant, which provides Alcasa and Venalum with alumina, was the most expensive in the world per ton of installed capacity. The two economists also question the government's assumption behind the investment drive that Venezuela will be filling a vacuum in raw aluminum output as higher-cost producers close smelters.    A bleak scenario could result, they say, as world energy costs remain relatively low and aluminum prices stay high.    The risks include taking on foreign debts that may be unserviceable in the future, and the opportunity cost of not investing in more profitable areas -- in addition to the draining of scarce public resources from education, hospitals and other social needs, they said.    &quot;The public arguments given by the aluminum industry don't justify the massive resources they have requested. The firms are acquiring debts from society and from new foreign creditors. This is a very risky bet,&quot; they said. </TEXT></DOC>