<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880628-0063 </DOCNO><HL> States: Making Government Work -- Can-Do Capitals: States Enlarge Roles As Congress Is Unable To Solve Problems --- Pragmatic Governors Offer Plans to Curb Pollution; Better Schools in Arkansas --- Showing Where the Taxes Go </HL><AUTHOR> David Wessel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>      {First of a Series}   In just nine months, the governors of Ohio and New York found what has eluded Congress for nearly a decade: a plan to reduce acid rain that satisfies both the states that launch the pollution and those that live with it.    It's becoming a familiar script. State governments, led by pragmatic governors, are fashioning innovative solutions to problems that Washington -- paralyzed by ideological disputes and budget deficits -- can't handle. As President Reagan fights bigger government and higher federal taxes, some governors are finding that voters will accept higher taxes to pay for new or better services.    &quot;Congressional debates are centered around cutting,&quot; says Larry J. Sabato, a University of Virginia political scientist. &quot;At the state level, the debate is about experimenting.&quot;    Michigan earmarks 5% of its state pension funds for local venture-capital investments. At a time when Washington can't make tough choices posed by medical technology, Oregon explicitly refuses to pay for organ transplants for a few poor children in order to free funds to provide basic care for many. Arkansas, in a program based on an Israeli model, gives low-income parents daily homework assignments to do with their preschool children to help them prepare for kindergarten.    &quot;A lot of Americans feel more comfortable with activism at the state level than at the federal level and feel that it works better,&quot; says Arkansas Gov. William Clinton. Asked in a survey by the federal Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations which level of government &quot;wastes the most of your tax money,&quot; only 14% chose state government. Two-thirds picked the federal government.    &quot;We're in a new and different period,&quot; Gov. Clinton says. &quot;It's a good time to be a governor.&quot;    In fact, governors such as Mr. Clinton of Arkansas, Thomas Kean of New Jersey, Neil Goldschmidt of Oregon and, yes, Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts are doing so much that the 1980s are often described as a repeat of the Progressive Era, the period early in this century when states experimented with programs that turned out to be forerunners of the New Deal.    &quot;The issues that have dominated state politics in the 1980s -- economic competitiveness and excellence in education -- are emerging as major themes in the 1988 presidential election,&quot; says David Osborne, the author of &quot;Laboratories of Democracy,&quot; a new book on state government.    Gov. Kean comments: &quot;Governor has become the office to run for. Congress has been stultified. Good people in the Senate are at the end of their rope. They just can't get anything done.&quot;    That wasn't always the case. In 1957, President Eisenhower warned that states were becoming &quot;powerless satellites of the national government.&quot; Five years later, New York Times columnist James Reston wrote that &quot;state capitols are over their heads in problems and up to their knees in midgets.&quot; Some states still seem overwhelmed, but many display creativity and resilience.    To a large extent, Washington forced the states to act. In the Reagan years, the federal government stepped aside, cutting aid to state and local government by a third (after inflation), pushing deregulation and halting creation of new domestic programs. &quot;It made you say, if you really want these problems solved, how are you going to do it?&quot; Gov. Kean says.    As the action shifted to the states, they attracted bright, creative people -- both elected officials and staffers -- who once would have preferred Washington to places such as Jackson, Miss.; Wilmington, Del.; or Trenton, N.J. Many states changed their constitutions to allow governors to stay in office longer, making progress easier and the jobs more attractive. &quot;People ask me whether I want to run for higher office,&quot; Gov. Michael Castle of Delaware says. &quot;I say, 'What office is higher?'&quot;    But as much as anything, state governments work because many governors demonstrate a knack for rallying voters and legislators to attempt solutions to long-festering problems such as poor schools, antiquated transportation systems, inequitable health-care systems, and pockets of economic despair.    &quot;It's much easier to deal with those issues at the state level than at the national level,&quot; says Roger Vaughan, a Maine economist and a frequent consultant to state governments. &quot;You can bring the players around the table. You can resolve the issue. At the national level, there are all these interest groups.&quot;    Gov. Kean isn't so quick to let Washington off the hook. &quot;I know it's easier&quot; to forge a consensus in a state capital, he says. &quot;But they don't try a lot in Washington.&quot;    The acid-rain proposal devised by Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York and Gov. Richard Celeste of Ohio illustrates his point. Washington was stalemated, unable to balance the environmental concerns of Eastern states suffering pollution and the economic interests of Midwestern states that mine and burn coal.    At a retreat for Democratic governors at Mackinac Island, Mich., last summer, Gov. Cuomo suggested that his colleagues could increase the party's chances of winning the White House by trying to resolve regional conflicts. Says Brad Johnson, the head of New York state's Washington office: &quot;I began to do memos to the governor on regional issues, and he started to focus on acid rain because that has been a deadlocked issue in Congress for 10 years. He felt the only way you could get an acid-rain bill approved would be to have costsharing.&quot;    Pending congressional legislation would force polluting states to pay the entire cost. That proposed change brought Gov. Celeste and his staff to the bargaining table. Late in May, the governors &quot;shook hands over the phone,&quot; Mr. Johnson says. Their compromise calls for gradual reduction in emissions in coal-burning states; for the first time, these states agreed to pick up some of the cost -- if the federal government agrees to pay about half of it (which it may or may not do).    &quot;These two governors seem to be willing to take leadership that none of the members of Congress seem willing to,&quot; says Richard Ayre of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group.    One big difference between states -- most of which must balance their budgets -- and Washington -- which can avoid hard choices by borrowing money -- is that governors have been selling tax increases to pay for more government.    Gov. Clinton insists that voters will accept tax increases &quot;if you can show them where the money will go. You can do it for education and you can probably do it for jobs, and maybe health care for elderly and kids.&quot; But, he adds, you can do it only if voters trust government.    Consider his own experience in Arkansas, one of the last places one would look for a state government to admire. The per-capita income of its two million people ranks 47th in the nation. More than a quarter of the adults can't read. The governor's salary -- $35,000 -- is the lowest in the nation, and the legislature is hobbled by an archaic state constitution. The oil and gas bust, closed factories and the farm depression reduced state revenues.    Yet Gov. Clinton, a Rhodes scholar first elected governor in 1978 at age 32, mounted a statewide campaign to improve public schools that is now a model for others. He wanted legislation to raise standards and teacher pay. That takes money. To build public support, he dispatched his wife -- a Yale Law School classmate whose popularity may exceed his own -- to hold hearings in each of the state's 75 counties. He says Mrs. Clinton heard the same message repeatedly: &quot;I don't mind your raising my taxes to raise teacher pay as long as you have competent teachers.&quot;    Gov. Clinton proposed mandatory teacher competence tests, along with higher salaries, broader curricula and tests that students had to pass before they could get out of the eighth grade. To pay for all this, he sought a one-cent rise in the sales tax, the first such increase in two decades. The opposition was led by the politically powerful Arkansas Education Association, which dislikes tests for teachers; after the bill passed, the association persuaded the state House of Representatives to vote to repeal it. But the Senate refused to go along with the repeal, and the governor, who is a Democrat, prevailed.    &quot;The Clintons pulled out all the stops,&quot; says Mr. Osborne, whose book on state governments cites Arkansas as a prime example. &quot;They raised money from the business community for ads in the media. They gave out thousands of blue ribbons, asking people to wear them to broadcast their theme: 'Our kids need a blue-ribbon education.' And they drummed home the message that education meant jobs.    &quot;More than perhaps any other governor of the 1980s,&quot; he adds, &quot;Clinton has demonstrated how to talk about issues such as education in ways that not only make sense to voters but move them.&quot;    From conception to legislative action, the education effort took nine months. Compare that with Washington, where Democratic Sen. Dale Bumpers, Gov. Clinton's predecessor in Little Rock, says, &quot;I got a bill passed last December, and it took me eight years.&quot; The law requires the federal government to use competitive bidding rather than a lottery to award oil and gas leases on federal land.    Gov. Clinton's success is matched in other states by very different governors who share his pragmatic, can-do approach. New Jersey's Gov. Kean is a Republican, but he says: &quot;Bill Clinton and I have yet to find a subject that we disagree on. Governors are looking for things that work. We're not looking for ideology.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>