<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870923-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Le Pen Gaffe Will Clarify French Political Debate---By Philip Revzin</HL><DD> 09/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Jean-Marie Le Pen last week told a radio interviewer that he, personally, had never seen any gas chambers during World War II, and that even if they had existed they were a &quot;minor detail&quot; in that war's history, he did more than commit a harmful campaign gaffe. He gave the rest of the French right an unexpected gift: the way out of a difficult political box.    Since his radio interview, the leader of France's extreme-right National Front Party, a declared candidate for the French presidency who gets around 10% in most opinion-poll soundings, has been lambasted by just about everybody anywhere on the French political spectrum. His opponents, ranging from Jewish groups to the Cardinal of Paris, from the French Communist Party to the governing center-right coalition, have declared Mr. Le Pen, who is by nature a big, bluff, often disarming man, unfit for office. Mr. Le Pen has declined to apologize, instead calling the uproar the work of the &quot;pro-immigration lobby.&quot;    That such statements about events 40 years ago can still incite powerful reactions reflects a lingering sensitivity in France about Nazism and the collaboration. But more important than the implicit declaration that he is unfit to be president, which the electorate would have made in any case next May, is the growing perception among the non-extremist right wing that Mr. Le Pen is not a fit man with whom to form a political alliance.    Before last week, a significant section of the French right was tempted to dally with Mr. Le Pen. With one eye on the opinion polls, it focused the other firmly on selected economic statements that some said showed him to be France's most fervent supply-sider, an advocate of tax cuts, small government, the maximum of economic freedom and the minimum of union and state interference. Mr. Le Pen reveled in what he thought would be his role as power-broker, even fantasizing that he could get the most votes in the first round of the presidential voting in a split field.    Perhaps the worst thing about what Mr. Le Pen said is that he really believes it. And, as was the case in the U.S. with Gary Hart, the problem is not so much what he would or wouldn't do as president as it is one of character. Mr. Le Pen, after all, did fight on the right side during the war, and he has, ironically, spent several years trying to reach out to Jews, including visits to Israel and to Jewish communities in the U.S. and Britain. His National Front Party even has a regional councilor who is Jewish, and who last week somewhat lamely tried to explain that while Mr. Le Pen had made a mistake about the gas chambers, he isn't really anti-Semitic.    What might be more revealing, however, is that he has once again demonstrated himself susceptible to wacky theories that play on prejudice, just as his political career has been based on opposition to North African immigrants. Not long ago Mr. Le Pen tackled the issue of AIDS, with similar success. He declared that anyone with the AIDS virus should be isolated into sanatoriums, and stated, on no evidence at all, that AIDS can be transmitted by spit or sweat. Whether or not Mr. Le Pen is at heart an anti-Semite, he certainly isn't much of a historian, or a doctor. In a country that at present is debating seriously a number of potentially divisive issues of race, unemployment and young vs. old, his tendency to make irresponsible statements hurt rather than help.    Last week's statements on the gas chambers appear to have been the last straw for many responsible Frenchmen. Significantly, some of the harshest criticisms of Mr. Le Pen's insensitivity came from members of the present French government, a mix of Gaullists and free-marketeers who have been fighting among themselves for the past six months about whether to try to steal Mr. Le Pen's extremist clothes during the coming presidential campaign, or to take the moral high-road and write off, for at least the primary round of the election, his 10% or so of the votes. Already last May, foreign trade minister Michel Noir suggested publicly that it would be better for the right to lose the election and save its soul than to have truck with Mr. Le Pen. Back then he was called on the carpet by Prime Minister Jacques Chirac and told to keep quiet. Last week Mr. Noir called Mr. Le Pen's concentration-camp statements &quot;monstrous.&quot; Nobody told him to keep quiet.    The real point that Mr. Noir was making then, and which the rest of the French right would do well to emphasize from here on, is that it's possible, and much better, to seek economic liberalism among those parties whose attraction doesn't also depend on appeals -- latent or otherwise -- to racism. Until his radio interview last week, Mr. Le Pen had cleverly begun to broaden his appeal beyond the National Front's hard-core supporters, whose &quot;patriotism&quot; masks an anti-Arab, anti-Jewish nationalism of the most virulent type. Mr. Le Pen's billboards, which sprang up all over the French countryside last spring, are a riot of blue, white and red, and show Mr. Le Pen and the slogan: &quot;The French in the Elysee,&quot; the president's house. His economic policy is also populist, and in a recent TV appearance the candidate painted himself as a level-headed man of the people, a success in business who represented the dreams of Jacques Q. Public and would defend them against all enemies, domestic and above all foreign.    Indeed, Mr. Le Pen had been on an electoral roll. The Chirac government had basically botched the introduction of a new law defining French citizenship, and will probably have to shelve it until after the presidential vote. Mr. Le Pen looked poised to capitalize among those voters who fear it's too easy for immigrants to become French citizens. With Mr. Chirac's government turning in a solid but unexciting economic performance, Mr. Le Pen's declarations that what the economy needed was even more economic freedom had been striking a chord.    But the gas-chambers incident has obscured all of this, and could give the center-rightists an opportunity to &quot;marginalize&quot; Mr. Le Pen without having to get their hands dirty. This is what Francois Mitterrand basically did to the French Communists, by taking them into the government, angering many of the Communists' traditional supporters, and then breaking with them and leaving them a spent political force. Mr. Chirac may not now have to do this: If he can tie all mentions of Mr. Le Pen to Nazism, Mr. Chirac can emerge as the presidential race's true liberal.    It may not be so easy, however. Mr. Le Pen, with fervent apologies and a period of not answering questions about concentration camps, could climb back into the presidential race. His appeal, though now unmasked as more visceral than intellectual, remains strong among a disturbingly large segment of the French population. What Mr. Le Pen's remarks, and the universal condemnation of them by the French left and right, should do, however, is clarify matters. From now on, if liberals, supply-siders and neo-conservatives still want to embrace Jean-Marie Le Pen, they'll have to do so on his terms, not pretend to do so on theirs. That means facing the probability that 90% of the electorate will remember Mr. Le Pen's ideas on the gas chambers, not his proposals for tax cuts.    ---   Mr. Revzin is the Journal's Paris bureau chief. </TEXT></DOC>