<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0153 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR UIS TXT ALD TEX AEG NWA PIEAIRLINES (AIR)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><DATELINE> WINSTON-SALEM, N.C.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   From the cockpit of a Piedmont passenger jet cruising through the early-evening sky, the lights twinkling in the distance appear harmless enough. But suddenly an amber light flashes in the cockpit, and a disembodied voice cautions, &quot;Traffic.&quot;    Fifteen seconds later, the amber light turns red, and the voice commands, &quot;Descend! Descend!&quot; As the plane dives, a DC-9 barrels just 400 feet over our heads at 280 miles an hour.    This near collision was staged in a flight simulator at Piedmont Aviation Inc.'s training center here to demonstrate a new collision-avoidance system. The system -- installed March 18 in a Piedmont Boeing 727-200, the first airliner in regular service to be so equipped -- &quot;offers a fundamental improvement in air safety,&quot; says Joseph Fee, the Federal Aviation Administration official overseeing government and industry efforts to develop the device.    Despite such support, however, the Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System, which regulators want to require in all jetliners, is entangled in controversy.    For years, critics have accused the FAA of delaying development of an on-board anti-collision device. Now, the Air Line Pilots Association, the union representing 39,000 commercial airline pilots, asserts that the agency is rushing ahead with a system that will prove severely inadequate and, on rare occasions, downright dangerous. The FAA should hold off until a more sophisticated and more accurate system is ready, the union contends.    The Piedmont pilots who have flown with the test system support the union's call for further development, but in the meantime they strongly endorse the installation of the current version. &quot;We need (the device) today because it enhances safety,&quot; says Samuel (Dick) Williard, a Piedmont captain. &quot;Pure and simple.&quot;    In the first month, the test system in the Piedmont plane issued 125 traffic alerts. In 15 of those cases, the system directed the pilot to take some sort of evasive action or urged against action that could result in a collision. The warnings don't necessarily indicate near-crashes, Mr. Fee says, because &quot;the system can't always tell that a guy will miss you by a couple of miles.&quot;    In coming months, seven warning systems made by Sperry Dalmo Victor Inc., jointly owned Unisys Corp. and Textron Inc., and seven by the Bendix/King unit of Allied-Signal Inc. will be tested in passenger jets flown by Piedmont, United Airlines and Northwest Airlines. This fall, the FAA is expected to propose requiring that all jetliners be equipped with the collision-avoidance device by 1992. Northwest says the cost will be about $125,000 for each jetliner, or as much as $500 million for the nation's entire fleet of 3,500. Whether the system will be required in commuter planes hasn't been decided.    Fueling the drive are public and congressional fears about the safety of increasingly crowded skies. According to the FAA, pilot reports of near midair collisions involving all types of planes rose 11% to 839 last year from 758 in 1985; such reports in the 1987 first quarter increased to 219 from 181 a year earlier. Near midair collisions involving at least one airliner surged to 340 in 1986 from 240 in 1985.    Jetliners currently have two safeguards against midair crashes: the air-traffic control system's ground-based radar and the pilots' own incessant scanning. Those safeguards seem to be weakening, however. In the first quarter, air controller errors increased 18%, and pilot deviations from designated flight courses rose 28%.    Supporters of the collision-avoidance device say it would provide a backup system, an extra set of eyes, in the cockpit. Generally, the system works like this: The device electronically &quot;interrogates&quot; nearby planes about their position and speed; it then calculates the threat of a collision based on the time it would take before a potential collision would occur.    At 40 seconds from a potential conflict with an &quot;intruder&quot; plane, the amber light goes on, and a recorded voice says &quot;traffic.&quot; The weather radar in the cockpit displays the other aircraft's position. If the collision course persists 15 to 20 seconds more, the warning light turns red, a siren goes off and a voice orders the plane to either climb or descend to avoid collision. In many cases, the maneuver ordered is actually a command not to do something, as in &quot;Don't descend.&quot;    For the system to work fully, the other aircraft must have a transponder that broadcasts its altitude. While all airliners have transponders that provide altitude information, only 40% of private planes do. But that percentage is much higher around busy airports and will increase further because of stiffer federal rules.    If the other plane's transponder doesn't provide altitude, the system can only issue a general alert that the planes are near one another. If the other plane doesn't have a transponder, the anti-collision device can't detect it at all; about a fourth of noncommercial planes don't have transponders, but they generally don't fly near the nation's busier airports.    The pilots union contends that the current warning device, known as TCAS II, is rife with technical shortcomings. John O'Brien, the union's safety director, contends that the gadget isn't accurate enough, resulting in too many nuisance alarms when planes actually are safely separated. If pilots lose confidence in the device because of false alarms, they may simply ignore the system, he says.    Even more serious, critics say, is that the system can only tell a pilot to go up or down, not right or left, to avert a collision. Because the typical horizontal distance between planes under radar control on the same altitude is five miles, while the vertical distance is 1,000 feet, it is often safer to make turns, rather than to climb or descend, the pilots union says.    Mr. O'Brien contends that the system could cause collisions because of a problem known as the &quot;vertical fake-out maneuver.&quot; This could occur, he says, if after the system issues a command, the intruder plane changes course, moving into the jetliner's path. The system has limited ability to change its assessment of the situation. The odds that the current system could lead to a collision, however, are far more remote than the possibility of two planes without the systems getting too close together, Mr. Fee says.    Nevertheless, the pilots union says these problems could be drastically reduced by using a more advanced device still being developed. Based on early tests, that version, the TCAS III, is expected to give fewer false alarms than its predecessor and will be able to provide pilots with horizontal as well as vertical commands.    The advanced system could be developed and installed in all airliners just as quickly as the current version &quot;if a proper priority were given to it by the FAA,&quot; Mr. O'Brien insists. But the airlines and the FAA say the advanced system has so many technical problems that it won't be ready for several years.    At the heart of the pilots union's arguments is the fear that once the current system is installed, the industry won't go to the advanced version and the FAA won't insist on the upgrading. Government and industry officials say the union is wrong. And the airlines testing the current system say they are committed to installing anti-collision devices that can be upgraded.    In the meantime, says Thomas Tripp, a spokesman for the Air Transport Association, the Washington-based trade group for the major carriers, the current system &quot;is such a clear-cut improvement that there's no reason to wait any longer.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>