<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0062 </DOCNO><HL> By the Numbers:Using Rote and Math,Wells Fargo SucceedsAs a Money Manager---Now the No. 1 Stock Investor,It Relies on Index Funds;Fears of More Volatility---Does the Leash Tug The Dog?---By George AndersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WFCFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> SAN FRANCISCO </DATELINE><TEXT>   On a recent morning, Thomas O'Brien bought $25 million of stock-index futures, 225,000 shares of Reebok International Ltd. -- and a bran muffin. Choosing the muffin was the hard part.    Practically everything else in Mr. O'Brien's job as chief equity trader at Wells Fargo Investment Advisors is part of a carefully guided process. A computer printout tells him what stocks to buy. A daily scratch sheet tells him when to buy and sell stock-index futures. &quot;This is great,&quot; says Mr. O'Brien, as he finishes up the futures purchase. &quot;You can be in and out of the market in five seconds.&quot;    In money management these days, much of the guesswork, and the glamour, are fading. Now, formulas and percentages, rather than clever hunches about investments, are what count. Largely behind the change are two innovations: stock-index futures markets, which enable traders to buy and sell a contract based on the general level of stock prices, and desk-top computers, which let money managers quickly size up the market according to mathematical models.    At the forefront of this trend toward sophisticated investing is Wells Fargo Investment Advisors.    WFIA's assets have leaped fivefold since 1984. Now managing more than $60 billion for clients, mainly big pension funds, the firm has become the biggest single investor in the stock market. It also is the largest stockholder in dozens of major companies; it owns, for example, more than 10 million shares of International Business Machines Corp., equal to 1.7% of the giant computer company.    The success of this Wells Fargo andamp; Co. investment unit is deceptively simple. WFIA seldom tries to choose between good and bad stocks; instead, it merely matches market benchmarks such as the Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index. &quot;They just buy a large cross section of stocks for you -- and hold it,&quot; explains Edward Safran, assistant treasurer of Polaroid Corp. and a major WFIA client.    Yet index funds such as WFIA's have out-performed 60% to 70% of conventional stock managers in recent years. &quot;Too many active managers pick the wrong stocks or incur high trading costs,&quot; says Alan Emkin, a pension consultant at Wilshire Associates. &quot;Index funds just keep tracking the market, and that's very appealing to clients.&quot;    A bull market such as the current one, of course, favors index funds because they are always fully invested. In contrast, conventional managers usually hold some cash reserves, which have hurt their performance recently. But reserves &quot;could be a help if the market turns down,&quot; Mr. Emkin says. &quot;You can't get out of a falling market if you're in an index fund.&quot;    At WFIA, there aren't any analysts trying to predict earnings, evaluate new products or forecast the economy. The firm's biggest section is its accounting department, which tracks portfolios, dividends and who owes what to whom. Stock selection is so automatic that WFIA's chief investment officer, 33-year-old Patricia Dunn, keeps a wind-up white robot near her desk. It is an impish present from a colleague, and on its chest is a label saying: &quot;Investment Manager, Index Variety.&quot;    Robot investing irks some observers. &quot;My biggest shareholders don't know who I am, let alone care whether we build a new mill in Alabama,&quot; complains Andrew Sigler, the chief executive officer of Champion International Corp. &quot;We're just a computerized stock symbol to them.&quot; Other critics fret that WFIA's huge use of futures-trading strategies could someday jolt the stock market.    But big clients rush to WFIA's defense. &quot;They're one of the best in the business,&quot; says Thomas E. Flanigan, the chief investment officer of the California State Teachers Retirement System. Mr. Flanigan oversees a $20 billion pension plan, which has moved more than $6 billion into the stock market the past few years. &quot;Indexing is the only approach that lets you move that much money that fast, without hurting yourself,&quot; he says.    In fact, the value of stock-index funds nationwide has tripled since 1984 to $150 billion, according to consultants. That makes index funds equal to 15% of institutional equity holdings, or about 7% of the entire stock market.    More generally, highly mathematical techniques are becoming crucial to big money managers such as Bankers Trust Co., Chase Manhattan Corp. and J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. Once in place, their computerized models can pick stocks for years, affected only indirectly by human judgment. Investing is changing from an art to &quot;a technology-driven, low-cost business,&quot; says John Casey, a pension consultant.    At WFIA, running the formula last Jan. 30 meant buying more than 200,000 shares of Reebok -- quickly. That's because WFIA likes to own all the stocks in the Sandamp;P 500 index, in amounts scaled to their market weight. Those holdings range from more than $1.4 billion of IBM to just $673,000 of Allis-Chalmers Corp.    But Reebok was added to the Sandamp;P index only in early January, and WFIA's main index fund needed to buy about $15 million of stock in the shoe company as fast as it could without driving up the price. Big brokers were glad to help. Mr. O'Brien snapped up 100,000 shares in one lot, 125,000 in another. By 10 a.m., he was done.    For all that buying, no one at WFIA really cares how Reebok does. &quot;There aren't that many mispriced securities anymore,&quot; Fred Grauer, WFIA's president, says. Each year, random luck brings Wells its share of winners -- and losers. In fact, Mr. Grauer argues that it is better to buy the whole stock market in a way that minimizes commissions and trading costs than to spend a lot of time and money in an often-futile search for &quot;cheap stocks.&quot;    Last year, when the Sandamp;P 500 index rose a bit more than 18%, with dividends reinvested, WFIA's big index funds were right in line-up 18.49%. &quot;We can track the index to within 0.01 percentage point,&quot; Ms. Dunn boasts.    Index funds are just part of WFIA's business, though, and its professionals would rather talk about new products. These include international index funds, a fund that uses computer models to pick promising areas of the stock market, and &quot;stock-index arbitrage.&quot;    This kind of arbitrage involves shuffling millions of dollars between stocks and futures, depending on which investment is cheaper at the moment. Last year, WFIA's stock-index arbitrage earned more than $20 million for clients.    Each morning, futures specialists give Mr. O'Brien, the trader, a scratch sheet with target prices for when to buy or sell futures. In late January, for example, he was ready to sell Sandamp;P futures any time they rose more than 1.10 points above the underlying stock index. If futures fell more than 0.20 point below the stocks, he would buy futures and sell stocks instead. His typical trade involved $30 million.    &quot;We did eight of these one day,&quot; Mr. O'Brien says. Traders joke that Sandamp;P arbitrage is such a sure moneymaker that only nuclear war could disrupt it. In fact, Mr. O'Brien's biggest concern the morning of Jan. 30 was that too many other institutions wanted to make the same trades. By the time he was ready to buy futures, three other buyers had jumped ahead of him in brokers' queues.    Traditional money managers shudder at this form of trading. &quot;This is turning the New York Stock Exchange into a commodities crapshoot,&quot; complains Charles Allmon, the publisher of the Growth Stock Outlook newsletter. &quot;It's adding volatility and instability to the market.&quot;    But Sandamp;P arbitrage &quot;simply provides liquidity,&quot; insists Jeremy Evnine, a WFIA futures specialist. When other traders push futures prices out of line, WFIA steps in to restore the balance, he says. &quot;To blame us for moving the market is like blaming a leash for tugging a dog. You have to look for the hand at the other end.&quot;    WFIA is even more active in another computer-driven investment strategy: portfolio insurance. This technique involves owning stocks while hedging the risk of a market drop with stock-index futures. The hedge is adjusted to increase protection in falling markets, while letting investors participate in a bull market.    WFIA invests now $9 billion this way, all from Nancy Feldkircher's terminal. The 26-year-old assistant vice president says: &quot;I try to think of all that money as just commas and zeros. Otherwise, I get nervous.&quot;    But Ms. Feldkircher doesn't really make the decisions; she just carries them out. Computer software licensed from Leland O'Brien Rubinstein Associates Inc., of Los Angeles, decides when to buy and sell. Ms. Feldkircher's biggest modification was to put an old Mercedes instrument gauge above her terminal. &quot;It makes it look more high-tech,&quot; she jokes.    Portfolio-insurance clients seem pleased with WFIA's results so far. &quot;It's being played just the way I would have expected,&quot; says Timothy R. Barron, a Virginia investment official.    Nonetheless, some critics worry that portfolio insurance, with its mechanical buying and selling of futures, could someday accelerate a plunge in stock prices. When portfolio insurers rush to sell stock-index futures, their huge sales can depress futures prices relative to stocks. At that point, arbitragers, trying to profit from discrepancies between the two markets, begin buying futures while selling the underlying stocks. These &quot;sell programs,&quot; often involving hundreds of different issues, can push stock prices even lower and set off a vicious circle.    The real test will come in a falling market, of course, and lately the market has been strong. However, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 86.61 points last Sept. 11, some arbitragers said they increased their selling that afternoon to get in ahead of portfolio insurers; they expected the insurers to need to sell more futures soon to implement their hedges.    Aware that such tactics could aggravate market plunges, WFIA is trying to use &quot;a little bit of judgment on portfolio-insurance trading,&quot; says Rolf Theisen, another WFIA futures specialist. Stock options and cash markets are being used as well as futures, he explains, and traders have discretion to execute an order gradually if futures seem badly mispriced relative to stocks. &quot;It isn't an emergency situation where people have to trade at all costs,&quot; he says.    WFIA's current market clout would have seemed unthinkable in the 1960s, when the notion of index funds arose. At that time, finance professors at the University of Chicago argued that individual stock prices moved so randomly that it made more sense to hold a diverse basket of stocks than to try to pick winners. In 1971, pension managers at Samsonite Corp. became convinced enough to ask Wells to set up the first working index fund.    Growth in such investing was slow in the 1970s. But it has taken off in the past few years, as studies going back as much as two decades began showing a clear performance edge for index funds. Previously stubborn pension managers decided that they might as well settle for indexing.    In a critical move in 1983, Wells Fargo hired Mr. Grauer away from Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. to run its investment unit. He replaced William Fouse, a pioneer in indexing, who left Wells to set up his own indexing firm for Mellon Bank Corp. At that point, says Mr. Casey, the consultant, &quot;The top management at Wells Fargo finally realized what a good business they had in indexing. That's when they really decided to let it grow.&quot;    For all its huge portfolios, WFIA itself is surprisingly puny. It employs just 110 people, ensconced on one floor of a San Francisco office tower. Its index-fund management fees are minuscule, ranging as low as 0.05% of assets annually; thus, WFIA's $60 billion of assets probably provides only $30 million to $50 million a year in fee revenue. Its pretax profits are believed to be less than half that and thus well under 5% of Wells Fargo andamp; Co.'s overall net income. (Officials won't discuss WFIA's revenue or earnings.)    Still, new money keeps pouring in. In January, for example, WFIA added 15 more clients with $2.6 billion in assets.    &quot;People keep asking us how big we can get, as if there were some upper limit,&quot; says Jeff Skelton, WFIA's director of business development. &quot;They don't realize that size is the friend of the indexer.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>