<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890728-0031 </DOCNO><DD> = 890728 </DD><AN> 890728-0031. </AN><HL> What's News --@  World-Wide </HL><DD> 07/28/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   SOVIET LAWMAKERS ADOPTED economic resolutions for the Baltics.    The Supreme Soviet overwhelmingly approved two resolutions paving the way for Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia to have greater control of their economies. One measure would allow the three Baltic states to trade independently with the 12 other Soviet republics. The other supports a draft law calling for economic independence by Jan. 1 for Estonia and Lithuania, which have declared themselves sovereign states.    The parliament's action was considered a major victory for Baltic activists, who have accused Moscow of sapping the republics' natural resources.    ---   House GOP leaders abandoned support of Bush administration efforts to kill production of Grumman Corp.'s F-14 jet fighters. The House, approving a $305 billion defense authorization bill, also rejected Bush's proposal for simultaneous development of the Midgetman and MX mobile-missile systems.    ---   A Korean Air DC-10 crashed about a mile short of a runway at Tripoli's airport while trying to land in fog. Officials in Libya said at least 82 people were killed, including four on the ground. The plane, with 199 people aboard, was en route from Seoul. The cause of the crash wasn't immediately known.    ---   A court in Sweden convicted Carl Gustav Christer Pettersson of murdering Prime Minister Olof Palme in Stockholm in February 1986. The court of two judges and six lay assessors sentenced Pettersson, a 42-year-old with a long criminal record, to life in prison. His lawyer said he would appeal.    ---   Poland's Jaruzelski plans to give up the Communist Party leadership tomorrow at a Central Committee meeting that could also produce a purge of Poland's ruling hierarchy, sources in Warsaw said. The government also is expected to unveil a plan to allow steep food price rises next week. A party official warned of possible riots.    ---   U.S. researchers reported encouraging results from a trial of the drug DDI in patients with AIDS and AIDS-related complex, without the toxicity of AZT, an antiviral drug approved for AIDS treatment. The National Institutes of Health scientists found evidence of improved immune function, as well as weight gain.    ---   Alaska has dropped its inquiry into possible criminal wrongdoing by Exxon and Alyeska Pipeline Service, which likely would have faced misdemeanor charges in connection with the March 24 oil spill in Prince William Sound. The companies remain under FBI investigation.    ---   The IRS commissioner said that he was convinced after three days of a House subcommittee's hearings into ethical conduct and standards at the agency that improvements need to be made. The official pledged to review how the agency investigates allegations of wrongdoing among employees.    ---   An immigration appeals panel ruled that leftist writer Margaret Randall is a U.S. citizen and can't be deported. In a 3-2 decision, the panel said the poet and author, an outspoken critic of U.S. policy, became a Mexican citizen in 1967 under economic duress.    ---   The National Research Council reported that despite economic gains made by blacks in the U.S. over the past 50 years, their progress has stagnated or worsened relative to whites since the early 1970s. The report said blacks have been hurt by persistent racial inequalities in housing and education.    ---   The House Judiciary panel cleared legislation making it a crime to desecrate the American flag as a political protest. The bill is aimed at circumventing a Supreme Court ruling that such acts are a protected form of free speech. GOP members of the committee had sought a constitutional amendment.    ---   Rafsanjani appeared set to win today's presidential election in Iran. The parliamentary speaker, who faces a lone challenger, reportedly already was assembling a cabinet to govern in the post-Khomeini era.    ---   Secretary of State Baker is expected to insist on a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in Cambodia during Sunday's international peace conference in Paris. The four warring Cambodian factions, meanwhile, settled a dispute over representation and will attend the 20-nation forum.    ---   A military tribunal in Burma sentenced to death three opposition members for a July 7 bombing that killed two people. The sentences were the first against scores of Rangoon's opponents detained under martial-law rules imposed last week.    ---   Philippine troops captured a prominent communist guerrilla leader in a Manila ambush. Officials said the arrest of Satur Ocampo on subversion charges was a major setback to the 20-year insurgency. ---    Khashoggi was released from federal custody in New York after his lawyer posted $10 million bail in an arrangement approved by an appeals judge over prosecutors' objections. The Saudi financier is charged with helping ousted Philippine leader Marcos in an alleged $100 million real-estate fraud. </TEXT></DOC>