<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870522-0157 </DOCNO><HL> Labor's Shift:Finding Strikes HarderTo Win, More UnionsTurn to Slowdowns---Workers Keep Getting PaidWhile Hurting the FirmBy Obeying Its Own Rules---Battle at McDonnell Douglas---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MD LABOR AMRAEROSPACE (ARO)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><DATELINE> LONG BEACH, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The union hall at the sprawling McDonnell Douglas Corp. plant here resembles an Army field office. Union officials plot strategy on three huge maps hanging on a wall, and lookouts on the roof keep score on the union's efforts by counting the airplanes rolling off the assembly line.    The United Auto Workers local here is orchestrating a work slowdown -- an increasingly popular weapon among labor unions. In a contract dispute, union employees are refusing to install parts without blueprints, and they are working to the minimums of their job requirements. The union also is weighing a plan to stage mass grievances by having hundreds of workers blow whistles whenever a member has a complaint against a foreman.    Although such tactics, viewed individually, might seem fairly mild, their cumulative effect has hurt the company and its earnings. Since the slowdown started, McDonnell Douglas has missed 10 delivery dates for MD-80 jets -- though the company partly blames its production problems on parts shortages and the training of new workers. The union's actions have been &quot;baffling and frustrating,&quot; says Sanford N. McDonnell, the company's chief executive, adding that he has fielded some phone calls from angry airline customers.    The fight at McDonnell Douglas suggests that the battleground between unions and management may be shifting to the assembly line from the picket line. As managements have become more adept at fighting strikes, labor unions are dredging up old-time alternatives such as the slowdown. If the strategy proves out, it could reshape union-management confrontations. It also could strengthen the battered labor movement, union experts say.    The scale may be &quot;tipping more back to labor's side,&quot; says Anthony McKeown, the president of Modern Management Inc., an employee-relations consulting firm. &quot;The weapon is there.&quot;    In the past, slowdowns were mostly spontaneous, angry reactions by workers. Now, they are being used systematically to pressure companies into more-favorable contracts -- at a time when automation, growing anti-union sentiment and a sizable pool of unemployed labor are helping employers beat down strikes.    So, union members, instead of marching off the job, are now staying at work and battling the company from within. Usually, companies must keep paying workers participating in a slowdown because they continue to do their jobs and adhere to the rules. Because certain forms of collective activity are protected under labor laws, workers also can bollix production by staging mass grievances.    One morning last fall, for instance, about 600 burly shipyard workers, singing union songs and waving the American flag, gathered outside the Portland, Ore., offices of the Dillingham Ship Repair subsidiary of Dillingham Corp. Confused and upset by a new wage scale, they virtually shut down the shipyard for the day until the company explained the new pay rates.    Such tactics are being taken up by unions as diverse as the flight attendants at AMR Corp.'s American Airlines and the Brotherhood of Boilermakers. The AFL-CIO's Industrial Union Department recently published a booklet teaching such techniques to its member groups. The manual, called &quot;The Inside Game: Winning With Workplace Strategies,&quot; has been so popular that the initial press run of 5,000 copies has been quadrupled.    &quot;If management is going to launch a broadside against us, then we're going to fight back. They won't know what to expect from one day to the next,&quot; says Joseph Uehlein, the department's director of special projects.    Management consultants also say more and more companies are asking for advice on how to respond to slowdowns. Some are fighting back by retaliating in kind, firing activist employees and, in some cases, locking out the entire work force. A National Labor Relations Board decision last summer, which permits companies to replace locked-out workers with temporary employees, has strengthened management's hand, some experts say.    Moreover, several factors hobbling strikes also may hobble slowdowns. In some cases, for instance, automation may limit the strategy's effectiveness. Swiss-owned Missouri Portland Cement Co. held out for three years against a union-organized slowdown. The union's campaign affected production very little because the two plants are highly automated, the company says. Last month, the union accepted a base wage rate about 13% lower than that before the slowdown began.    Nevertheless, unions cite some notable victories. At Babcock andamp; Wilcox Co.'s Barberton, Ohio, plant, in late 1985, workers employed a Gandhi-like tactic. When the company refused to reverse a disciplinary action against a union worker, a delegation of five people left their jobs to argue the case with the company. Management told them to get back to work or leave. Home they went. Another five workers went to management to argue the same grievance. This went on until the company had sent home 50 workers. With such tactics, the union says it eventually won a wage increase instead of granting concessions. The company declines comment.    At Boston's City Hospital a year and a half ago, 700 nurses adhered strictly to contract rules instead of striking. They turned down overtime and refused to answer phones, move beds or do other work outside their job classification. Within two weeks, administrators caved in and gave them a 23% pay raise over two years.    But the dispute attracting the most attention -- and most likely to determine whether slowdowns become a major new tactic -- is that at McDonnell Douglas.    It started last fall when management and the union couldn't agree on a new contract. The union is resisting a proposal for workers to share in the cost of health insurance as well as work-rule changes that, it charges, would undermine seniority rights. Ordinarily, the union probably would have struck over such issues, but its members, who had been badly beaten in a 17-week walkout three years ago, voted against that. But they also rejected the proposed contract.    The alternative they chose was a slowdown -- some of them call it a &quot;working sit-down.&quot; Under that strategy, the union hopes to persuade most of its 10,000 members at Long Beach to work strictly by company rules; so far, roughly a third of them have participated, the union says. It adds that a slowdown doesn't require anything like 100% participation to succeed.    Adherence to work rules makes a big difference because over the years many workers here, as in other factories, have found productivity-boosting short cuts, but now they work strictly according to company instructions. For example, experienced mechanics can drill precision holes with one drill bit instead of the specified four. But now, many are using drilling methods that can take twice as long.    &quot;We're having fun,&quot; says Carmen &quot;Ski&quot; Cibulskis, the vice president of the UAW local. &quot;What can the company say when we're in there stressing quality?&quot; To irritate management further, union leaders inside the plant wear buttons reading: &quot;Union Quality Control Coordinators.&quot;    In addition, workers are no longer sharing self-made tools. Mac McKinley, a 21-year McDonnell Douglas veteran, had to remove an electric motor from an airplane, but a co-worker refused to lend him his personally fitted socket wrench. So, Mr. McKinley spent an hour grinding down his own tool.    &quot;A lot of this stuff adds up,&quot; Mr. McKinley says. &quot;Everything we're doing is by their rules, by Douglas Process Standards. That's the bible.&quot;    Also helping the slowdown is the International Association of Machinists, which represents workers at McDonnell Douglas's nearby parts plant in Torrance. In February, more than three-fourths of the 5,000 workers there walked out for a day to protest their own contract impasse. As a result of such maneuvers, the main plant has experienced a parts shortage.    However, slowdowns have created some problems for unions, too. One that has turned up at McDonnell Douglas and elsewhere is the difficulty of keeping members from going too far. At Torrance, one worker is said to have damaged an airplane's skin by whacking it with a wrench. At the Long Beach facility, a worker is said to have slashed a new receptacle for hydraulic fluids. And some employees stand idle or &quot;rivet air,&quot; workers say, to appear to be hard at work.    &quot;I don't want people sitting there with their feet on the desk and then get fired. That's just stupid,&quot; says Mike Smith, the president of the machinists local. The union leadership says it condemns any form of sabotage.    The slowdown is rankling management. A company memo to supervisors at Torrance ordered them to report all employees not working up to snuff. The company also has introduced &quot;ship captains&quot; who push employees not working fast enough. (A company spokesman says their use isn't related to the union's activities.) And Mr. McDonnell has asked teams of managers to conduct &quot;boss talks&quot; with employees to explain that the slowdown may hurt future business.    In addition, the company recently sent employees a letter warning that its relations with customers are being jeopardized. If the slowdown continues, the company added, the number of missed delivery dates could grow to as many as 55.    The outcome of the company-union battle could be determined by a battle over control of the UAW local. If the current leaders win -- and they are favored to -- the slowdown campaign could intensify, and McDonnell Douglas may have to consider changing its tactics. If an anti-slowdown candidate wins, the union's current strategy would go down in defeat.    But meanwhile, other unions already are planning to copy the McDonnell Douglas workers. American Airlines' 10,000 flight attendants, unable to reach a contract settlement, are hoping to wreak havoc on the airline. Within two weeks, they plan to start reporting all safety violations, no matter how minor, to the Federal Aviation Administration. Moreover, no regulation will be too small to follow. For example, the attendants will refuse to carry more than two dinner trays at a time even if some passengers don't get their meals.    &quot;We can cause sufficient delays and disruptions that it will bring the company back to the bargaining table,&quot; says Patt Gibbs, the president of Association of Professional Flight Attendants.    American, in turn, has threatened to replace any flight attendants engaging in a slowdown. As a precaution, it has accelerated its training of new attendants.    Even when victories aren't clear-cut, unions argue that the in-plant strategy, which requires a high degree of organization, can help unify its members. When 90 phone-system installers at a Pacific Telesis Group unit came to a bargaining impasse in February, they reported to their jobs instead of walking out. At weekly meetings, they planned their slowdown, which included returning their repair trucks to the company each evening and demanding a time-consuming inventory of their equipment. Workers also refused overtime and filed mass grievances.    The campaign had a &quot;measurable&quot; effect on productivity, the company says. And late last month, the two sides reached a settlement. The Communications Workers agreed to a new union-representation election, which will also involve about 90 currently nonunion technicians, but the local was drawn together because of the extended battle with the company. That should help the union in the balloting.    Meanwhile, the union leadership at McDonnell Douglas is laying new plans to turn up the heat. It is planning lunch-time rallies in the plant that will be strategically located so that local television stations can film them. And there's even talk of holding a &quot;Solidarity Day,&quot; during which employees would work full throttle to show the company what it is missing.    &quot;Sooner or later, the company will have to come back to the {negotiating} table,&quot; Mr. Cibulskis says. He adds, &quot;The longer it takes, the better we'll get at it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>