<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0055 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Michael AllenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Moslem fanatics taught Merck andamp; Co. a valuable lesson.    The Rahway, N.J., pharmaceutical company heeded the 1979 takeover of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran and the captors' gleeful reconstruction of shredded documents. Thus, says Mary Lou Oliva, Merck's manager of office-information technology, Merck's shredding machines today produce strips that are too narrow to be pieced together, and some confidential material gets burned.    The increasing importance of the Tehran revelation to Merck is underscored by the fact that the company, according to Ms. Oliva, now destroys &quot;about three times as much&quot; documentation as it did 10 years ago. And in that, it has plenty of company: Shredding is spreading.    From defense contractors in Missouri to accounting firms in Miami, U.S. companies are destroying more documents than ever before, say lawyers, consultants and company records managers. Charles Hill, the president of Document Services Inc., a Michigan-based shredding concern, says his company recycled &quot;an area equivalent to the Blue Ridge National Forest&quot; for government and private corporations last year, or about twice the amount of a decade ago.    Consultants in &quot;document retention&quot; (they shudder at the term &quot;document destruction&quot;) are invading offices to warn of the dangers of keeping unnecessary records. And companies are creating room at the top for a new brand of executive, the &quot;chief information officer,&quot; whose duties include monitoring the &quot;life cycle&quot; of tons of company documents.    &quot;There's a sense of urgency, especially in the last few years&quot; to establish such programs, says Donald S. Skupsky, a Denver-based consultant. Ray Allegrezza, the editor of Office World News, a trade publication, agrees, noting that sales of paper shredders are booming: &quot;I think that since Watergate, and now with Ollie North, people are adopting a better-safe-than-sorry mind-set.&quot;    Many of the shredding programs hinge on the premise that in the event of a lawsuit nearly any corporate document -- including executives' diaries and seemingly innocent memorandums -- can become dynamite in the hands of an opposing counsel. Judah Best, a Washington, D.C., corporate litigator, puts it this way: &quot;Paper kills -- and more paper kills more.&quot;    A case in point was in the mid-1970s, when the Justice Department began a probe into allegations of price fixing in the folding-carton industry. After 18 months of investigations, prosecutors blew the case wide open with the discovery of two boxes of personal notes in the home of a retired Weyerhaeuser Co. administrative assistant. There, in beautiful handwriting, were details of years of illegal pricing agreements with officials from other companies. The material helped lead to price-fixing convictions of or no-contest pleas by 23 companies and 48 executives and to a huge $200 million civil settlement with customers.    &quot;It wasn't a smoking gun -- it was a nuclear warhead,&quot; says Donald G. Kempf Jr., a Chicago attorney who represented several of the defendants. He said a proper document-destruction program might have eliminated the incriminating evidence in the normal course of business.    The key to a successful destruction program, lawyers say, is that it eliminate whole classes of files -- all except those required by law or needed for business -- as they reach a certain age, to avoid the suggestion that any were selectively destroyed. Further, it must include safeguards to halt destruction of relevant material as soon as the company is presented with a lawsuit or is advised of a government investigation.    &quot;In order to pass judicial muster, it must be done in the ordinary course of business,&quot; says Daniel Hapke, assistant general counsel for General Dynamics Corp. in St. Louis, Mo., which recently drafted a 30-page records policy aimed at, among other things, encouraging engineers to destroy early drafts of projects. &quot;If you do it just because a U.S. marshal is in the elevator coming up to your lobby, it's too late,&quot; he adds.    In May, Dallas Corp., the nation's biggest manufacturer of garage doors, lost the liability phase of an antitrust lawsuit by default after engaging in what a Miami federal district judge called &quot;flagrant and willful destruction of records.&quot; The judge ruled that the company's corporate counsel ordered key sales documents destroyed in 1979, shortly after Telectron Inc., a small maker of radio controls for garage-door openers, filed suit.    Dallas Corp. denies it violated antitrust laws and says the destroyed documents &quot;were of very little importance to the case.&quot; It says further that the corporate counsel, who was dismissed in 1983, acted against company policy. Nevertheless, says William Dunaj, a Telectron attorney, the damage award could go as high as $69 million in a November trial; Dallas calls that figure &quot;grossly overstated.&quot; Whatever the amount, Mr. Dunaj says, &quot;I think the law is clarifying just how dangerous this tactic can be.&quot;    Meantime, the destruction proceeds apace, and potential litigation isn't the only explanation. Many companies say they are destroying more documents these days to cut back on paper-storage costs or to make it easier to retrieve information that is really needed. FPL Group Inc., a big utility holding company based in Juno Beach, Fla., says increased retention requirements by regulatory authorities mean there is less room each year for unnecessary memorandums or duplicate documents.    In 1986, as part of an aggressive new destruction policy, FPL shredded the equivalent of 782 filing cabinets full of documents, up sharply from about 340 in the prior year. Even so, says Jack Lewis, the acting manager of corporate-records services, the company is being forced to more than double its main storage facility, and documents are proliferating &quot;in excess of 15% per year.&quot;    Companies also shred to keep private documents private. Norman Rachlin, a Miami certified public accountant, says he bought a shredder for his office several years ago after he walked outside one day and noticed a garbage truck with some familiar-looking papers hanging out of it. &quot;There for all the world to see were our clients' confidential financial reports&quot; that had been thrown into the trash, he says.    Still, the rising risk of lawsuits is clearly a key factor in many corporate-records policies. Roger Taylor, a Chicago trial lawyer, says one financial-services client instituted an extremely aggressive destruction policy after losing a big suit in which shareholders charged company officials with mismanagement. Now, he says, opposing attorneys are amazed when their discovery requests yield nothing -- and the company doesn't lose many lawsuits anymore. &quot;There's just no reason to keep a lot of the garbage,&quot; he says.    Merck's Ms. Oliva says the company shortened its retention periods a few years ago after watching other corporations get hit with damaging product-liability cases, among other reasons. But John Doorley, a Merck spokesman, notes that the company's increased shredding also reflects the larger number of documents it creates now, as well as concerns that certain material not fall into competitors' hands.    &quot;We would never destroy any clinical information or anything we are required by law or regulations to keep, and we would never destroy anything that's the subject of litigation,&quot; Mr. Doorley adds.    Experts say a good document-destruction program can be most effective in defending against antitrust suits or in certain product-liability disputes. As was true in the Weyerhaeuser case, they say, these suits are often won or lost on the strength of incriminating documents ferreted out by a grand jury or a plaintiff's counsel.    Lawyers say Denver-based Manville Corp. could have reduced its exposure to lawsuits filed by people who claimed they were made ill by its asbestos products if it had thought to institute a sophisticated document-control policy years ago. Instead, it was forced to produce records dating back to the 1930s that suggested it knew of asbestos hazards. A Manville spokesman says, &quot;We believe we have had a sophisticated document-control program for a long time.&quot;    Many question the ethics of shredding programs that have the potential to conceal corporate culpability. But Geoffrey Hazard, a Yale Law School ethics professor who helped design an American Bar Association rule book on professional responsibility, says such programs also can save companies from suffering harm from innocent documents taken out of context in court. &quot;When you look through a correspondence file with a legal eye, you just die&quot; at some of the things that can be misconstrued, he says.    As important as teaching companies which documents to destroy, say lawyers, is teaching them which ones never to create in the first place. One of the hottest-selling corporate training films on the market today is a docudrama produced by Boston film maker Thomas McCann that traces the problems of a manufacturing concern after one of its products severely burns a user. Among the documents used to build a case against the company in court are a cocktail napkin that holds the first rough sketches of the product -- possible evidence that the company didn't take product design seriously -- and an executive's private diary that mentions his concern about fires.    &quot;Executives who keep little notebooks with scribbles in them are asking for trouble,&quot; says Lawrence Bemis, a Miami attorney. &quot;One of the first things a good litigator does is ask to see them -- and when you get them, it's always intriguing.&quot;    One of the major challenges of any program is to foil employees who keep secret files documenting mistakes by their superiors or who find it difficult to throw things away. Carl Liggio, the general counsel of Arthur Young andamp; Co., a New York accounting firm, remembers an antitrust investigation against a client in the early 1960s that caused big problems, despite the client's strict destruction policy. One key employee scrupulously complied with the instructions on documents marked &quot;for your eyes only&quot; and &quot;destroy after reading,&quot; says Mr. Liggio, &quot;with one hitch -- before he destroyed the documents he made a photocopy for a file he kept.&quot;    But even that problem can be solved with a new paper that can't be photocopied. Norman Gardner, the president of Nocopi International Inc., the Canadian company that developed the magenta-colored paper, says sales are skyrocketing.    However, the proliferation of computers in the workplace, as well as new paperless storage systems, such as optical disks, now can make it even more difficult to ensure that all copies of a document are expunged. At Rockwell International Corp., data processors had to revamp the company's electronic message system when they discovered that messages that were supposedly erased were, in fact, retained on computer disks, says Preston Shimer, the corporate records manager. (Col. North, who used the same electronic message system in the White House, ran into similar problems, allowing investigators to browse through key documents he thought he had purged from the computer.)    Such problems support the theories of a vocal minority of attorneys who advise companies to save most documents. They argue that it is impossible to destroy all copies of a record and that retained documents can often help a company in court.    William Killian, a Miami attorney, says one of his favorite such examples occurred when two large New York advertising firms got into a dispute over who first invented a popular advertising slogan. He said his client won the case when the company lyricist found a shoe box in his closet full of old scraps of paper. One of them contained the old jingle, which he had penned years earlier while commuting by train to work. Mr. Killian says the slip of paper, which included the lyricist's initials and the date it was produced, &quot;really made a critical difference.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>