<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870106-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan's Budget: Politics of Spending---Tactical Shift:The Pentagon, SeekingModest Rise in Budget,Is Trying Conciliation---It Is Avoiding Confrontation,Asks for $8 Billion LessThan Proposed Last Year---Goal: to Protect Prior Buildup---By Tim CarringtonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NOC GD LK BA TGT ML MD GE UTX GQ GM RTN LIT FMC GTE TCSFYECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As it embarks on another budget campaign, the Pentagon is trying conciliation rather than confrontation in an effort to push a deficit-wary Congress into even modest increases in arms spending.    The $312 billion being sought for the military is, like past budgets, a whopping sum. But the request for fiscal 1988 is $8 billion less than the budget the Pentagon proposed a year ago. By showing some restraint after years of seeking huge spending increases, the Pentagon hopes to prevent sharp budget cuts by Congress. No longer is the administration seeking to continue the vaunted buildup of the first term; the new challenge is to protect yesterday's buildup from further erosion.    After two years of defense-spending increases that lagged behind the rate of inflation, the realities of the budget squeeze -- and the growing congressional hostility to the Reagan rearmament program -- have sunk in. &quot;Because of severe fiscal constraints, we are proceeding at a slower pace than I originally planned,&quot; President Reagan conceded in his budget message. The proposed increase of only 3% after inflation will force the Pentagon to slow its purchases of tanks, planes and ships.    For Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, the conciliatory approach reverses his past insistence that defense budgets should remain immune from domestic political concerns such as deficit reduction. &quot;Congress has been more preoccupied with deficits than with national-security requirements,&quot; he says. &quot;What we're trying to do is devise a national-security program that meets these requirements.&quot;    Rep. Les Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, sees some merit in the new approach. &quot;The figures aren't so crazy as to be irrelevant,&quot; the Wisconsin Democrat says. In the past, he adds, the defense budget's &quot;very outlandishness invited deeper cuts.&quot;    However, the Pentagon's more modest proposal won't escape congressional cuts. Sen. Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is becoming the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, predicts that the best the Pentagon can do is to keep even with inflation. And Mr. Weinberger says he has encountered similar sentiments among other lawmakers. &quot;There are some people who even think these are too high and that we can only have zero growth each year,&quot; he says, terming this approach &quot;dangerous&quot; because of the continuing Soviet buildup.    Although the Pentagon has changed its political tactics because of the latest budget outlook, it hasn't changed its military strategy. It has canceled almost no major weapons and is dealing with the spending crunch by stretching out weapons projects over a longer period of time. As a result, Navy officials say the 600-ship Navy will be achieved in 1990 rather than 1989. The purchase of SSN-688 attack submarines has been slowed. Planned purchases of minesweepers have been postponed.    The Air Force won't build up its fleet of fighters as quickly as planned. The goal of 40 &quot;wings&quot; won't be reached by the end of the decade, and Air Force officials don't predict just when that objective will be reached. Still, the services haven't revised their goals. &quot;We're just taking a little longer to do the things we have to do,&quot; Mr. Weinberger says.    Still, the arms budget contains heaping increases for the administration's high-priority programs: the Strategic Defense Initiative, land- and sea-based nuclear missiles and space launchers. These proposals will face tough challenges in a Democratic Congress determined to cut the federal deficit and worried about the nuclear-arms race. Critics charge that the administration proposes utopian arms-control plans while pursuing a costly nuclear buildup.    The $312 billion request is in terms of obligational authority and covers money that the Pentagon will spend in fiscal 1988 as well as some spending in future years. Defense planners estimate that actual outlays in fiscal 1988 will total $289.3 billion. The fiscal 1988 budget includes about $9 billion for the Department of Energy's management of the nuclear arsenal as well as 2% pay raises for civilians and 4% for military personnel. Overall, the weapons-procurement budget actually declines 1.4% to $84 billion from $85.2 billion in the current fiscal year.    But by lowering its overall spending targets, the Pentagon may add stability to the budget process. For the first time, the administration has submitted a detailed two-year spending proposal as part of a five-year plan calling for steady annual increases of 3% after inflation through fiscal 1992, when the defense program would be financed at $396.9 billion. The gradual approach contrasts with the first Reagan term, when the military budget, adjusted for inflation, jumped 12.5% in fiscal 1981 and 11.6% in fiscal 1982.    The Pentagon's new tactics reflect more realistic budget arithmetic. Previously, Mr. Weinberger calculated financing increases as increases from the amounts that the administration had initially proposed, not the lower amounts that Congress had voted. A year ago, for example, the Pentagon budget for fiscal 1987, which began last Oct. 1, asked for a 3% increase from the fiscal 1986 request, but that request amounted to an inflation-adjusted increase of 8% from the budget approved by Congress.    In preparing the fiscal 1988 budget, White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan demanded more realistic targets from the Pentagon and insisted that the increases be calculated from actual financing levels rather than outdated wish-lists.    Senior military officials concede that the Pentagon hasn't fared well by demanding amounts Congress immediately rejected as too high. After inflation adjustments, Congress cut the military budget by 4.2% in fiscal 1986 and 2.5% in fiscal 1987. The slowdown in defense spending is one of the reasons analysts believe that the budget deficit, which widened to a record $220.7 billion in fiscal 1986, finally is turning down.    The widening gap between what the Pentagon sought and what Congress provided has caused havoc for military planners. Last year, Congress hacked about $30 billion from the defense budget, forcing the services to stretch out many procurement programs and even to rewrite contracts.    As much as the proposed spending levels, Congress will question the Pentagon's approach of stretching out programs rather than canceling those it considers less important. Sen. Nunn thinks that the Pentagon's money is spread too thin over too many weapons projects launched when budget projections were rosier. He is likely to grill Pentagon officials over the push toward two land-based nuclear missiles -- the 10-warhead MX and the single-warhead Midgetman. He also questions the need for a new short-range nuclear missile for the strategic-bomber fleet.    The Pentagon also faces hostility from some lawmakers to the proposed increases in its nuclear arsenal. Democrats who oppose Mr. Reagan's decision to break out of the SALT II warhead limits may use this portion of the budget to mount a larger referendum on the administration's arms-control policies. The Pentagon seeks spending increases for the MX, the Midgetman, the D-5 submarine-launched missile and the Tomahawk sea-launched cruise missile.    Asked how the proposed increases square with the President's recent proposal to eliminate all ballistic missiles, Mr. Weinberger says, &quot;We don't have any basis for assuming that such an agreement will be signed.&quot; He adds that the Defense Department still hopes that arms talks eventually will lead to &quot;deterrence at lower levels.&quot;    The military budget also reflects resolve to rebuild the space program in the wake of the 1986 shuttle explosion. The Pentagon seeks $1.1 billion for Titan rockets, medium-weight launch vehicles and support for the space shuttle. In addition, several hundred million dollars would be dedicated to space transport under the Star Wars program, which, under the budget plan, would be financed at $5.2 billion. The Pentagon is requesting $442.2 million to develop anti-satellite weapons.    In another area of concern, the administration seeks $416 million to build specially configured Combat Talon aircraft for the special-operations groups currently trained for counter-terrorist missions or low-level insurgencies. The Pentagon has been criticized in the past for underfinancing the airlift available to these groups.    The budget also includes unspecified billions for secret weapons projects. One such program, the Northrop Corp. Stealth bomber, is nearing the costly production phase and will probably put ever greater demands on taxpayer funds.    Here is a listing of major weapons systems in the proposed fiscal 1988 budget, with the amounts that the Defense Department is seeking to spend on them; the figures are expressed in total obligational authority. Most include money for research as well as procurement, but most exclude the cost of related military construction:    Strategic Defense Initiative: The administration seeks $5.2 billion for this accelerated research program into systems to track and destroy nuclear missiles. This year, the Pentagon hopes to get the Star Wars program back on schedule after deep cuts in administration requests for the past two years. The current year's allotment of $3.7 billion would be increased by $500 million under a supplemental budget request also sent to Congress yesterday.    Trident submarine: The Navy's Trident submarine and its Trident II, or D-5, missiles, constitute the most heavily funded weapons program in the budget. The Navy seeks $1.4 billion for construction of another submarine, plus $3.5 billion for 66 of the multiwarhead nuclear missiles. This year, the Navy is authorized to spend $1.7 billion on the submarine program, and $3 billion on the missile. General Dynamics Corp.'s Electric Boat division builds the submarines, while Lockheed Corp. produces the Trident II missiles.    Small Intercontinental Ballistic Missile: The Pentagon seeks a 94% increase, to $2.3 billion, in funding for the small ICBM, called the Midgetman. The nuclear weapons system, which would cost $45 billion over its lifetime, consists of a single-warhead missile that would avoid being targeted by enemy missiles by being carried on hardened trucks that would travel across government reservations. The vehicles are being developed by a team led by Boeing Co.    Aircraft carriers: The Navy seeks $659.8 million to begin work on two nuclear-powered aircraft carriers. Although the request breaks the usual pattern of beginning work on one new carrier each year, the Navy says it can save money by contracting for two at once. The carriers, to be constructed by the Newport News Shipbuilding unit of Tenneco Inc., would replace older ships in the fleet in the mid-1990s.    MX Missile: The administration would increase funding for this 10-warhead missile to $1.9 billion from $1.5 billion, chiefly to study a plan to base the missile on rail cars that would avoid a pre-emptive attack by traveling the nation's railroads during a crisis.    In 1985, Congress stipulated that it would only pay for deployment of 50 MX missiles, half the number the administration wants. The Pentagon hopes that the new railroad-basing plan will revive support for the weapons program. The missiles, which are currently being deployed in ground-based silos, are made by a team of contractors that includes Martin Marietta Corp., Boeing, and Northrop Corp.    Cruise Missiles: The Pentagon is asking for $1.2 billion for cruise missiles designed to be launched from the ground or from ships or aircraft. The most heavily funded of the low-flying missiles would be the Tomahawk sea-launched version, for which the Navy seeks $1.1 billion, up from $824 million in the current fiscal year. Cruise missiles are produced by General Dynamics, Boeing and several other contractors.    Advanced Tactical Fighter: The Air Force seeks to double the current year's spending to develop the next generation of fighter jets. The program would receive $536.8 million, up from $248.8 million in the current fiscal year. A contractor team consisting of Northrop and McDonnell Douglas Corp., and one consisting of Boeing, Lockheed and General Dynamics are competing for the production contract.    LHX helicopter: The Army seeks a jump in funding to $408 million from the current $142 million to continue developing a new, high-technology attack helicopter. The Army plans to select contractors to build prototypes of the aircraft in fiscal 1988, and plans to seek $616 million from Congress the following year.    C-17 cargo plane: The Air Force seeks $1.9 billion for the McDonnell Douglas cargo plane, which survived political challenges last year. Although the Air Force wants more than twice this year's $675.4 million funding level, it isn't seeking any funds for the current cargo plane, Lockheed's C-5B.    Fighter jets: The Air Force scaled back its funding requests for its two main fighter planes, the General Dynamics F-16 and the McDonnell Douglas F-15. It seeks $1.8 billion to buy 42 F-15s, down from $2 billion provided by Congress for the current year; and it is asking $2.9 billion to buy 180 F-16s, down from $3 billion this year.    Although the Air Force would be buying the same quantity of the two aircraft in each of the two years, it would be paying less of the research and development costs for the planes in fiscal 1988. And in the case of the F-16, the Air Force would buy fewer spare parts. Engines for both planes are made by General Electric Co. and Pratt andamp; Whitney, a division of United Technologies Corp.    Navy fighters: The Navy seeks $1 billion for 12 Grumman Corp. F-14 attack planes. The Navy is authorized to buy 15 of the carrier-based fighters this year. The fiscal 1988 request would provide more than the current budget for spare parts for the planes. In addition, the Navy is seeking an undisclosed amount of money for its new fighter, a secret program.    Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile: The Pentagon seeks $865.2 million to procure 630 Amraam missiles, up from $619.6 million for 180 of the missiles this year. The missiles, made by General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Aircraft Co. and Raytheon Co., passed a turning point last year when the Pentagon certified that they could be built within cost guidelines without sacrificing any combat capability. The missiles would be carried by both Navy and Air Force fighter planes.    Nuclear-powered attack submarine: The Navy shrunk its requests for two attack submarine programs. It seeks $1.8 billion for three SSN-688 attack submarines; for the current fiscal year, Congress provided $2.3 billion for four of the submarines, which are produced competitively by General Dynamics' Electric Boat division and the Newport News Shipbuilding unit of Tenneco.    The administration is requesting $470.8 million to continue developing the new SSN-21 high-speed attack submarine, down from $615.6 million. Next year, the Navy plans to seek $1.7 billion to procure the first of the SSN-21 fleet.    Arleigh Burke Destroyer: The Navy seeks $2.3 billion to build three of these DDG-51 guided-missile destroyers, which carry advanced radar systems and an array of missiles. This year, the Navy is authorized to spend $1.8 billion for two of the ships. Bath Iron Works, a unit of Congoleum Corp., produces the ships, but the Navy is opening up the contracts to competition this year.    Aegis Cruiser: The Navy requests $2.1 billion to buy two of these complex combat cruisers, down from this year's authorization of $2.8 billion for three. The ships are produced by Ingalls Shipbuilding, a unit of Litton Industries Inc., and Bath Iron Works.    Anti-satellite weapons: The Pentagon seeks $440.2 million to develop anti-satellite weapons, up from $189.3 in the current fiscal year. The budget request for these weapons will increase $750.3 million for fiscal 1989, which begins Oct. 1, 1988, unless a U.S.-Soviet treaty limits them.    Space launchers: The Pentagon seeks $721 million for nine Titan IV rockets to launch military satellites into orbit, and thus ease the crunch in space transport caused by the 1986 shuttle disaster. The Pentagon also is seeking $197.9 million for four launch vehicles for medium-weight satellites. Martin Marietta is contractor for the Titan rockets; the administration hasn't chosen a contractor for the medium-weight launchers.    Armored carriers: The Army seeks $785.1 million for 616 Bradley fighting vehicles, and $1.6 billion for 600 M-1 tanks. Both requests are below this year's budget levels. The M-1 is produced by General Dynamics, and the Bradley by FMC Corp.    Mobile Subscriber Equipment: The Army seeks $1 billion to continue building a new radio communications system for its forces in Europe. That's up from $903.7 million in the current fiscal year. The sophisticated system, which is portable and secure from most forms of interception, is being built by GTE Corp. and Paris-based Thomson CSF, which is 51%-owned by Thomson S.A. </TEXT></DOC>