<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881011-0021 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. May Accuse Aides of Bank In Luxembourg --- Charges Seen Against Firm In Inquiry of Laundering Said to Have Noriega Tie </HL><AUTHOR> Andy Pasztor and Peter Truell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM EUROP AFRIC MDEST FREST </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><G> JUS CNG </G><TEXT>   Federal criminal charges are expected to be filed soon against several officials of Bank of Credit andamp; Commerce International Holdings S.A. in connection with alleged international currency-reporting violations.    Marty Steinberg, a Miami attorney for the Luxembourg-based bank, said he expects certain officials, and perhaps the $20 billion bank itself, to be charged. &quot;We assume there is something coming,&quot; he said in an interview, suggesting that U.S. law enforcement officials may announce charges in the next day or two. &quot;If there is an indictment, it's sealed. And we're anxiously awaiting the government paperwork.&quot;    Congressional investigators have testimony alleging that the bank, which has offices in Miami, New York and San Francisco, was used by Panamanian Gen. Manuel Noriega and others to launder suspected drug-running profits, according to one government official. The Senate Foreign Affairs subcommittee on narcotics and terrorism, according to this official, also has evidence indicating that in one instance, Gen. Noriega allegedly recommended the use of the bank to a drug trafficker.    A government official familiar with the criminal investigation said the money-laundering probe -- involving branches in London, the Cayman Islands, Nigeria and several of the other 69 countries in which the bank has offices -- is one of the largest U.S. undercover inquiries into suspected international narcotics trafficking in recent years.    U.S. law enforcement officials declined to discuss the investigation.    Reports of impending charges caused turmoil in the bank's London headquarters. A bank executive there confirmed that senior officials of BCCI have been interviewed as part of a major U.S.-British investigation into suspected money laundering.    Meanwhile, Sharaf al-Hassan, manager of BCCI's Cayman Islands branch, confirmed that his bank recently had many requests from U.S. officials for information relating to various accounts held at the offshore tax haven by depositors from &quot;European countries, the U.S., Canada&quot; and elsewhere.    Major aspects of the grand jury inquiry in the U.S. were disclosed to members of the Senate subcommittee earlier this year. At that time, the Justice Department asked lawmakers to delay issuing subpoenas as part of a separate congressional investigation of the bank and its purported ties to Gen. Noriega and narcotics traffickers.    The subcommitee agreed to temporarily hold off issuing the subpoenas, according to one government source, after prosecutors asserted the subpoenas could interfere with a continuing federal undercover investigation.    The grand jury investigation has been closely supervised by Justice Department headquarters because of its international scope and what prosecutors believe are close financial ties between the bank and several wealthy, politically well-connected Middle Eastern businessmen. One U.S. government official said prosecutors believe that major shareholders and customers include a former chief of Saudi Arabian intelligence and investors associated with the ruling family of Dubai. It has also been reported that the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Zayed, and other rich investors from that emirate are also substantial shareholders in BCCI.    Mr. Steinberg, the bank's attorney, said it has approximately 14,000 employees world-wide, but he didn't identify any of the top officers or principals.    BCCI has a particularly strong market share among Pakistani and Indian expatriate communities in London, and federal officials said it is known for attracting U.S.-dollar deposits from Third World investors. The bank was linked to suspected drug trafficking in Latin America during testimony earlier this year before the Senate subcommittee chaired by Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.), but the issue received little public attention at the time.    The subcommittee, among other things, has been examining ties between major BCCI stockholders or customers and U.S. banking concerns.    In 1978, BCCI was sued by what was then Financial General Bankshares Inc., a bank holding company in Washington, D.C., for making large purchases of its stock on behalf of a group of wealthy Middle Eastern investors and BCCI customers without disclosing the purchases to the Securities and Exchange Commission. The suit accused BCCI of &quot;scheming&quot; to gain control of Financial General.    The investors, who were among BCCI's largest customers, include Sheik Kamal Adham, who is married to a member of the Saudi royal family; Faisal Saud Al Fulaij, the former chairman of Kuwait Airlines, and two members of the royal family of Abu Dhabi.    After a bitter, four-year takeover battle, the BCCI customers won control of Financial General. They renamed it First American Bankshares Inc. and designated their lawyer, former Defense Secretary Clark Clifford, as chairman and top manager of the concern, which now has more than $10 billion in assets.    In their effort to win approval of the transaction from the Federal Reserve Board and other government regulators, the Middle Eastern investors and Mr. Clifford played down their ties to BCCI and said there would be no formal connection between the two banks.    However, Mr. Clifford's law firm also represents BCCI in some matters, according to Mr. Steinberg. But Mr. Steinberg said he didn't believe Mr. Clifford's law firm represented the bank in the current criminal investigation.    Mr. Clifford couldn't be reached for comment.    Banking regulators in Luxembourg also have been investigating the bank's operations, according to one U.S. official.    ---   Jill Abramson contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>