<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870623-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Think Twice Before Defending the Dollar---By Herbert Stein</HL><DD> 06/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><TEXT>   I keep being puzzled by the metaphors used in economic discourse. My present puzzlement is over the phrase &quot;defending the dollar.&quot; I have difficulty with the idea of defending inanimate objects. I understand defending Americans. I even understand defending snail darters or sequoias, although I suppose what is really meant is defending the interest of those human beings who have a great affection for snail darters or sequoias.    But the dollar? Who are we defending when we &quot;defend the dollar&quot;?    When we talk about defending the dollar we are talking about keeping it from going down -- relative to the yen, the Dmark, etc. We didn't talk about defending the dollar when the dollar was going up. Paradoxically, most of the &quot;defense&quot; of the dollar these days is by the Japanese, Germans and other governments. Their central banks are buying dollars to keep the dollar from declining. They think that they are defending the interests of some of their citizens. They probably think -- rightly or wrongly -- they are defending the interests of their citizens as producers who would be hurt in competition with Americans if the dollar declined further.    But what about us? Do we want to defend the dollar in order to protect foreign manufacturers and farmers against U.S. competition? That would be a pretty story to tell Congress. Perhaps we are defending the dollar in order to defend those American tourists who used to get a cheap (or relatively cheap) meal in Paris when the franc was 10 cents. Is the object of the exercise to defend the interests of Americans as consumers against the interests of Americans as producers? Who was authorized to choose one American sector over another in this way?    When people feel the need to give an explicit reason for defending the dollar, which is seldom, they usually refer to the importance of preventing inflation. If the dollar declines, which means that the yen, the mark, etc., rise, the cost of imports rises, and the cost of imports is part of the U.S. price level. Therefore, it is argued, we must keep the dollar from falling in order to keep the U.S. price level from rising.    But this argument fails to distinguish between the national interest in the price level -- the average of all prices -- and the national interest in the prices of one sector, even a sector as large as total imports. If the dollar is tending to decline, to need defending, it is because U.S. prices, at the existing exchange rate, are &quot;too high&quot; relative to foreign prices. &quot;Too high&quot; means that they cause an excess of U.S. imports larger than the rest of the world is willing to finance by investing in the U.S.    If there is a bumper crop of apples the price of apples tends to decline, relative to other prices. The decline is needed in order to get the apples sold. No reasonable person thinks we need to defend the price of apples. Similarly, if our excess of imports generates more dollars than the rest of the world wants to hold, U.S. prices tend to decline relative to foreign prices, measured in dollars. That decline is needed to reduce our net imports to the amount the rest of the world is willing to finance.    There are three ways in which a decline of U.S. prices relative to foreign prices, measured in dollars, can occur:    a) U.S. domestic prices can decline, a result that does the U.S. as a whole no good and is unlikely to happen without a recession.    b) Foreign domestic prices can rise, or rise more steeply than they have been rising. This is a prescription for inflation abroad, which foreign governments are unwilling to accept and which we cannot in good conscience recommend.    c) The dollar can decline relative to other currencies. That is the least painful way to bring about the needed change in relative prices.    There are three ways in which to keep the dollar from falling if it is tending to fall -- that is, to defend the dollar:    a) The U.S. could have a recession while the rest of the world has an accelerated expansion. That seems to be what the &quot;international coordination of economic policy&quot; means. But no one is willing to breathe the recession part and the amount of real noninflationary expansion the rest of the world can support is not large enough to make a significant dent in America's net imports.    b) The U.S. could increase its budget deficit, raising interest rates here and attracting more foreign investment. This was at least part of the process by which the dollar was raised before 1985. But no one is willing to breathe this prescription either. On the contrary, the universal prescription for improving the world economy is that the U.S. should reduce its budget deficit. This may do many good things, but it will not strengthen the dollar.    c) The U.S. authorities -- The Treasury and the Federal Reserve -- and the similar authorities of other countries could &quot;intervene&quot; to defend the dollar. That is, they would all sell other currencies -- yen, Dmarks, etc. -- and buy dollars. (If it were to have any effect on exchange rates, the intervention would have to be non-sterilized -- that is, not offset by other monetary transactions.) This would increase the stock of other currencies in the world and reduce the stock of dollars. The demand for output in the rest of the world would be increased and the demand for output in the U.S. would be reduced. This brings us back to &quot;solutions&quot; already discussed -- deflation/recession in the U.S. and inflation/expansion in the rest of the world. These are either undesirable or inadequate.    The idea of defending the dollar is commonly discussed without reference to the means by which that is to be accomplished. But the government has few instruments and there are other claims upon them aside from defending the dollar. Basically, it has two instruments -- monetary policy and fiscal policy.    If monetary policy is used to maintain the desirable path of the price level or of nominal gross national product and fiscal policy is used to maintain the desirable level of national saving by determining the size of the budget deficit, neither instrument is available for defending the dollar. Then the question is whether defending the dollar is worth sacrificing these other objectives for. In order to defend the dollar do we want to have a tighter monetary policy than is consistent with non-inflationary domestic growth or a bigger budget deficit than we think is fair to our children and grandchildren? Probably few people would answer &quot;yes.&quot;    One reason that the phrase &quot;defend the dollar&quot; goes down so easily is that it has a patriotic ring like &quot;defend the flag&quot; or, perhaps, more appropriately, &quot;defend the Alamo.&quot; But the dollar does not stand for America, and a high price of the dollar, in exchange markets, is not a sign of America's strength. If the dollar is high or rising because investment opportunities are so good here that a lot of capital flows into America, that is a sign of America's strength. But if the dollar is kept up by having a recession in America or by increasing the budget deficit, or by appealing for the support of foreign central banks -- that does not signify strength.    President Nixon faced the problem of the symbolism of the dollar in August 1971 when he was considering ending the convertibility of the dollar into gold at a fixed price. He knew that the dollar would go down and he feared that would be taken as a sign of America's weakness. He agonized over this until he realized that the move was really a sign of American independence. We would no longer be forced to accommodate our economic policy to the vagaries of the exchange markets. He explained his actions in that way, to general approval, at least in the U.S.    The people who manage our economic policy certainly understand everything I have said here. The question is why they nonetheless talk so much about defending the dollar. Several reasons occur to me:    1.Once the government starts trying to manage the dollar and expressing opinions about what its level should be, it is hard to stop. Silence then becomes a statement of opinion and intention. After about 14 years of &quot;benign neglect&quot; of the exchange rate, the U.S. began in the fall of 1985 to manage and talk the dollar down. Thereafter the government could never escape the question of whether it wanted the dollar to decline further. Failure to answer would not be a &quot;neutral&quot; response. It would be a positive signal for a further decline.    2.The officials may not really mean anything by declaring an intention to defend the dollar. Their common position is that they want to control inflation and defend the dollar. They are not saying that they intend to follow a different and more restrictive policy than would be needed to control inflation.    3.Economic policy makers, especially in the Treasury and the Federal Reserve, tend to have the philosophy of the financial community, where &quot;confidence&quot; is everything. Financial institutions live on the belief that they can safely take on any liabilities and never be called to meet them as long as their creditors have confidence that they can meet them. Government money managers are similarly lured by the notion that if they sufficiently restate their determination to defend the dollar they will never be called to do it, because &quot;the markets&quot; will accept their assurance of the dollar's value.    4.Policy makers may believe that the exchange markets may not respond accurately to real economic conditions -- to the &quot;fundamentals&quot; -- but tend to &quot;overshoot,&quot; going too far in either direction once a movement starts. The policy makers believe that they can keep exchange rates in line with fundamentals and avoid unnecessary and disruptive overshooting. But there is no evidence that the policy makers are better judges of the fundamentals than the exchange markets are. The policy makers may be worse judges, because they have a bias against changes in the rates.    In fact, the dollar may need no defense. The forces of the market may turn out to sustain the value of the dollar at its present level. But no one can be sure of that. A commitment to defend the dollar is a commitment to pay some price to achieve that end. Countries have paid dearly for the &quot;defense&quot; of their currencies in the past -- the British in the 1920s, for example, and the Americans in the 1930s. We should look a little more before we lock ourselves into that commitment again.    ---   Mr. Stein, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under Presidents Nixon and Ford, is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>