<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880722-0151 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: A New Cuban Policy From an Experienced Cuban Hand </HL><AUTHOR> Jose Luis Llovio-Menendez </AUTHOR><SO>  </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   Thirty-five years ago next Tuesday, Fidel Castro Ruz led 111 men and two women in an attack on the Moncada Barracks in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba's second-largest city. Eight men were killed outright, and most of the rest of them hunted down within 72 hours. In a counterattack to Moncada and two other military actions, 53 rebels were tortured and executed until the indignant public and Catholic leaders of Santiago demanded a halt to the killing. On Aug. 1, Fidel himself and some of his men were taken by surprise in the mountains just east of the city. Any other army patrol most probably would have executed him on the spot. Instead his captors took Fidel into custody, thereby altering the course of Cuban history and -- consequently -- of Cuban-American relations.    The question of what to do with Fidel will weigh heavily on the new U.S. president, and will certainly become an important campaign issue in the key state of Florida. Seven American presidents have tried to influence or eliminate the author of the Cuban revolution -- by means as varied as economic blockade, invasion, sabotage, negotiations and assassination plots. Four have been Republicans, three Democrats. All have failed.    Conservatives and liberals understand only part of the problem. The conservatives understand the nature of the communist system in Cuba, but they do not know how to deal with it. Their &quot;cold-shoulder&quot; policy has neither led to liberalization within Cuba nor stopped Fidel's interventionism abroad. The liberals do not understand the nature of the system but are closer than the conservatives in understanding how to deal with Fidel. However, their political naivete in trusting Fidel's &quot;good will&quot; invariably causes them to fail. I believe the most effective policy for dealing with Fidel lies somewhere between these two positions.    If there is to be some opening toward Cuba, U.S. diplomats must proceed with extreme caution. A hurried push toward negotiations and normalization runs the risk of giving up the two most important bargaining chips the U.S. has to play: the economic embargo of Cuba and a change in U.S. immigration policy.    The U.S. embargo has left Fidel with a constant shortage of hard currency. The U.S.S.R. is not about to cut Cuba adrift by eliminating its subsidies, no matter how legitimate its complaints about Cuban mismanagement. However, there are limits to how much the Soviets will pay, particularly as they emphasize economic rationalization in the era of perestroika. And Cuba's current cash deficit is now so great that Fidel views the lifting of the embargo as the only way of avoiding disaster both at home and with its creditors abroad.    And this leads right into Fidel's second greatest objective: an easing of U.S. immigration quotas in order to release the internal pressure caused by too many mouths to feed and a growing dissident population. As one who was on the inside of Fidel's power structure for 16 years, I know that lifting the embargo and the adoption of a more open immigration policy are the two chips most urgently desired by Fidel. They should not be given up without getting back much in return.    A new diplomatic approach to Cuba should incorporate three steps, the first of which should be talks. This step should take a very long time. Deep mistrust on both sides precludes any kind of superficial approach. No agreement should be signed during this phase. No concession should be granted by either party. In the past, U.S. diplomats have understood Fidel's willingness to sign unimportant agreements as a gesture of good will. They were wrong. That is in reality one of Fidel's tactics based on his understanding of State Department diplomats. If Fidel proves unwilling to talk about significant changes in domestic or foreign policy, the talks should be terminated and the U.S. should return to the status quo.    If talks are successful, they should lead to negotiations. As with the talks, no agreements or concessions should be signed during this step. Fidel's primary tactic will be to give up as little as possible while making it appear that he is making great concessions. As an example, Fidel will say that his release of Cuban political prisoners and others who want to leave is a conciliatory gesture. But this is no concession. Fidel desperately needs to release these Cubans for the reasons mentioned above. The U.S. will be doing him a favor by accepting them. If the U.S. increases Cuban immigration, it should ask Fidel to counterbalance the concession by letting Cuban-Americans freely visit their families in Cuba, as well as allowing Cuban residents to visit their relatives in the U.S. That would be a fair trade.    As with talks, if negotiations are a failure, the U.S. should return to the status quo and it will have lost nothing. If they are successful, the third step can be reached. Normalization. In this stage, both parties will make their concessions and sign all the agreements discussed in the negotiation period. There is no doubt that Fidel stands to gain in the political and economic spheres by renewed ties. But he stands to lose, as well.    On the political side, Fidel's status as a head of state would be fully ratified. His role as a player in such regions as Central America and Africa -- where he is already playing a determinant role anyway -- could not be officially ignored. On the economic front, he would gain entry to the U.S. market, and he would be able to buy U.S. technological products directly. He would have access to banking and financial services, to international bank credits and to U.S. investments, and American tourism would become an instant source of much-needed hard currency.    However, he also would lose something very precious to him: his dearest enemy. The enemy who has, over the years, given shape to his vision, his rhetoric, his very political persona. And with the lifting of the embargo he would lose his most potent excuse for economic failure. He would be unable to repeatedly mobilize the Cuban population against the threat of a U.S. invasion, since foreign investments and tourism require stability to thrive.    To these disadvantages we can add one of the most powerful: ideological penetration from the north. In 1978, Fidel allowed visitation rights for Cuban-Americans who wanted to visit their families on the island. The visits disrupted the resigned rhythm of the country and shook the apparently strong &quot;revolutionary awareness&quot; of the people. Opening a small island to a cultural blast of tourism from its gigantic neighbor would be a risky business at best.    It would be naive to think that Fidel unilaterally would adopt a foreign policy more aligned with Washington if relations were established. But at least each act of foreign policy would carry with it a price tag of economic and diplomatic consequences. Fidel intervened in Angola in 1975 and in Ethiopia in 1978 because he had everything to gain and nothing to lose. Diplomacy, however, is a two-way street.    ---   Mr. Llovio-Menendez, a former chief adviser to the Cuban minister of finance, was granted political asylum by the U.S. in 1984. He is author of the just-released book, &quot;Insider: My Hidden Life as a Revolutionary in Cuba&quot; (Bantam). </TEXT></DOC>