<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0107 </DOCNO><HL> ---Case of the Mother's Day Brunch:Food Poisoning in a New York DinerLeads Health Detectives on a Grim Chase---By Jerry E. Bishop</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTFOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN><TEXT>   THE FIRST PHONE CALL came on Monday and seemed routine: A man had suffered fever and severe intestinal distress the evening before, about seven hours after eating in a restaurant in the Douglaston district of the New York City borough of Queens.    Ho hum. The Bureau of Technical Services of the city's Health Department gets five to eight calls a day like this, and the interviewer who handled this one logged in the details and filed a thoroughly unexceptional report. He knew that in a city of thousands of restaurants, errors are bound to occur, and that at any given moment there are, as a consequence, some patrons suffering the indignities of mild food poisoning -- in short, the trots. He also knew that some New York diners, miffed at anything from surly service to the size of the bill, attempt petty revenge by filing false health complaints.    Normally, an inspector would have gotten around to checking sanitation at the restaurant after a while. But the next day, the phone rang again, then again: more cases, all diners at that same restaurant. This was not routine. This could be something to get worried about.    Thus began, almost two years ago, the case of the Mother's Day Brunch. It is a case not yet entirely closed, and it may hint at broad developments that public health scientists would rather did not occur.    ---   Like its counterparts elsewhere, the New York City Health Department is a phlegmatic bureaucracy, its 4,000 employees dealing with mostly mundane aspects of public health and shuffling a lot of paper. But buried within that bureaucracy, and radiating from it into hospitals, doctors' treatment rooms, testing labs and federal offices, is a health-sentinel system invisible to and all but unknown by the public it guards. Within hours of a single triggering event, the epidemiologists who are the gumshoes of the system can be in the streets, armed with unusual legal powers to compel diagnostic tests, impose quarantines and close businesses, schools and other institutions.    A river of information flows continually into the system. Computers monitor hospital admissions and discharges, looking for patterns. Laboratory reports are scrutinized. The department itself does all the testing in the city for botulism, whooping cough, Legionnaire's disease and rabies.    Epidemiologists cultivate relationships with physicians at major hospitals, asking them to report unusual cases or clusters of cases in clinics and emergency rooms that might take days to detect through normal channels. Doctors citywide are required by law to report diagnosed cases of any of 37 diseases. Most of these reports are mailed, but physicians must phone in the information immediately if it involves one of 15 particularly worrisome diseases, from measles to yellow fever or cholera.    They also must report immediately if it even appears that any disease on the lists might have been contracted in such places as day-care centers, nursing homes or hospitals -- or from food served in an institution or restaurant.    On Wednesday morning after Mother's Day, with the phone still bringing word of new victims, the department dispatched sanitarian Chester McGiven and epidemiologists Dorothy Edwards and Patricia Bennett to the Queens restaurant. Mr. McGiven collected samples of all foods in the kitchen and began inspecting the place. The &quot;epis,&quot; using one of their legal powers, ordered all employees to submit stool samples by 10 a.m. the next day. They also seized copies of the menus and reservation lists for the previous six days, and they began interviewing restaurant workers.    Why the fuss? The victims seemed to be suffering only mild food poisoning. But New York takes reports of illness from restaurant meals seriously, for several reasons. They can indicate chronic unsanitary practices, or the presence in the kitchen of a disease carrier such as &quot;Typhoid Mary&quot; Mallon, who once spread that illness as a cook in the city.    Worse, such reports may be the first sign of contamination in a food processing plant, which could threaten thousands of people. Or they could be an early warning that the organism causing the disease has found a new ecological niche, changing itself in ways that confound the usual preventive measures.    Whatever its origins, even mild food poisoning can kill or debilitate people who are aged or ill. Any outbreak that might affect them &quot;calls for a full-court press,&quot; says Kenneth Spitalny, chief of special investigations for the department's Bureau of Preventable Diseases. Other food-borne diseases, including botulism and listeria, are extremely dangerous and can quickly kill even healthy, vigorous people.    Like other epidemiologists, Dr. Spitalny doesn't waste a lot of time worrying about sensational Hollywood-style outbreaks of exotic diseases such as yellow fever or bubonic plague. The mosquito that transmits yellow fever is no longer found near New York, and plague is pretty much limited to a few people annually who contract it via fleas that have fed on infected wild rodents in the Southwest.    Instead, &quot;We watch for diseases we can do something about,&quot; Dr. Spitalny says -- among them mumps, measles, tuberculosis, sexually transmitted diseases and food-borne disorders such as the one that felled the diners in Queens.    The epidemiologists on that case, however, first had to identify the organism, which for all they knew could have been caused by something other than food. They got lucky in a hurry: Though some of the complaining diners had gone to their doctors, only one of those physicians had taken a stool sample. It showed salmonella, a family of bacteria that is the most common cause of food-borne illness in the U.S. Fortunately, the fever and diarrhea that salmonella causes are generally over in a day or two.    Five of the restaurant employees, including the two who had done the cooking on Sunday, also tested positive for salmonella. Subsequent tests taken on other ill diners showed the same bacterium. The villain was identified.    ---   It isn't always that easy. On a Monday in April the year before, a Wall Street firm reported that a flu-like illness had suddenly struck 15 of its 76 employees. All were among 31 people who had been asked to work the previous weekend. As the day progressed, more employees, as well as Health Department technicians and epidemiologists who had descended on the office, showed symptoms -- suggesting that something in the environment, not person-to-person contact, was responsible. The epidemiologists closed the office and scratched their heads. What on earth was this?    Not toxic chemicals; the symptoms were wrong. Not the drinking water; it tested negative. Dr. Spitalny, however, had a suspicion: Pontiac fever, a disease that first popped up in the Michigan city of that name in the 1960s and baffled scientists for several years. It was ultimately found to be a rare but milder manifestation of the microbe &quot;Legionella pneumophilia&quot; that caused a fatal pneumonia among American Legionnaires at a Philadelphia convention in 1976.    Sure enough, water in the cooling tower of the brokerage firm's air conditioning system was full of &quot;Legionella,&quot; and vapor from the tower exhaust vent was being drawn into a nearby fresh-air intake. The system had been installed in November as part of a renovation. It had been turned on for the first time that April Saturday, the first warm day of the season.    ---   In Douglaston, the epidemiologists on the restaurant case had their microbe but still had to discover exactly where it came from. &quot;The next step was to zero in on the meal,&quot; says Eleanor Bell, their supervisor. Using the reservation lists, they called droves of diners and found that no dinner customers had become ill, only some of those who'd had the Sunday brunch. What did that small group have in common?    Of 37 brunch customers who consented to answer detailed questionnaires, 17 had been sick. All had had eggs Benedict.    This still wasn't good enough. Did the salmonella come from the English muffin, the poached egg, the Canadian bacon or the hollandaise sauce? And how did the contamination occur?    Salmonella can be transmitted by any of a number of foods, particularly those that aren't cooked sufficiently. But suspicion immediately fell upon the eggs. Their shells are often contaminated in the coop, and the salmonella may be transmitted to other foods in the kitchen. This probably happens every day in thousands of kitchens, but it's never noticed, because the microbes are destroyed when the food is cooked.    But hollandaise sauce is made with raw egg yolks.    Mr. McGiven, the sanitarian, learned that one of the cooks made the sauce by cracking eggs and allowing the whites to run through his fingers while he retained the yolks. Moreover, a batch of hollandaise had been prepared ahead of time that Sunday and, although it initially was stored in the refrigerator, it later was left sitting on a table under a skylight. It probably reached a temperature that allowed the salmonella to flourish. Mystery solved -- or so it seemed.    ---   The salmonella family is one of the most diverse of bacterial clans, with more than 2,000 subtypes. Some infect only turkeys, others only chickens, others only milk. One lives only in black pepper. The vast majority of all food poisoning from salmonella is caused by a subtype that thrives democratically in a wide range of foods, &quot;salmonella typherium.&quot; The microbe in the Queens restaurant, however, was &quot;salmonella enteritidis,&quot; a far less common cause of human illness. The significance of this would not be realized for months.    With the case wrapped up, the paperwork began crawling through the Health Department. It wasn't until November that a formal report reached the 18 officials to whom it was addressed, and it was later still when they sent it on to the federal government's Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta. The CDC filed it.    Then last spring, a year after the incident, local health departments started reporting food poisoning from frozen pasta dishes prepared at a single plant in the East. By June there were 166 cases.    The bacterium was &quot;enteritidis.&quot;    &quot;When we found a widely distributed commercial product contaminated with this, we really got involved,&quot; says Michael St. Louis, the epidemiological surveillance officer for the enteric (intestinal) disease branch of the CDC. The files were swept for other &quot;enteritidis&quot; cases. There had been scores -- in Connecticut (scrambled eggs), Pennsylvania (liquid protein diet supplement), Massachusetts (roast beef) and elsewhere. An analysis showed that infections by &quot;enteritidis&quot; had increased fivefold in 10 years in the New England and Middle Atlantic states.    There is a lot the CDC still needs to find out. Many of the frozen pasta consumers hadn't cooked the dish thoroughly; does the advent of the microwave oven have anything to do with this? Or changes in food-processing machines or techniques? Perhaps changing consumer preferences figure in.    &quot;If it became fashionable to eat, say, pink chicken meat instead of white or dark meat, you might get a lot of people sick on undercooked chicken,&quot; Dr. St. Louis says.    It is also possible, he says, that &quot;enteritidis&quot; has broken out of the boundaries that once confined it. Changing, adapting in ways still imperfectly understood to influences we cannot know, it may have gained new vigor or have moved into new niches in the animal world. It may now be a more formidable enemy than before, a microbe with muscle.    The CDC is treating it as such. After a meeting last summer with the Food and Drug Administration and the Agriculture Department, which regulate the processed-foods industry and food producers, respectively, &quot;enteritidis&quot; outbreaks were given top priority in the disease surveillance system. If it's about this bug, the CDC has told local health departments, don't mail it in. Get on the phone, pronto.    ---   Mr. Bishop reports on science and medicine from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>