<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880310-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Big Winner in Tuesday's Primaries Is Common Sense </HL><AUTHOR> Hodding Carter III </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   There were big losers on Super Tuesday, but George Bush, the Democratic Party and Super Tuesday itself were not among them. The first national primary in the nation's history did a remarkably effective job either of sorting out or defining the field.    It also highlighted the stark absurdity of allowing two small states to receive disproportionate media and candidate attention simply because they come first in the delegate-selection process. The inexorable logic of technology and common sense, combined with the practical effects of the multistate balloting two days ago, argue for more rather than fewer Super Tuesdays four years from now.    The credit for an almost unqualified success should be given to the recently maligned authors of the Super Tuesday idea. A lot of people, including me, had concluded publicly and prematurely that they miscalculated. Though they sold the regional primary as a way to increase Southern influence in the Democratic Party's delegate-selection process, it appeared that the results were going to come down on the opposite side. Prospective regional champions such as Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga) and former Gov. Charles Robb of Virginia having declined the honor, Super Tuesday seemed certain to produce winners who would not have a chance in November.    Wrong. Those who turned out for Super Tuesday in the South proved to be diverse enough to provide a boost to every kind of candidacy available. They made a significant winner out of the biggest gambler of all, Sen. Albert Gore, by proving that the national primary alone could propel a candidate into the thick of the nomination fight. The conventional wisdom is shattered, which, as always, is a good thing all by itself.    But conventional wisdom was battered by the other two Democratic winners as well. Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis emerged as a national candidate -- at this point clearly the leading national candidate -- whose message has resonance in every demographic sub-section except the Deep South. And Jesse Jackson proved that his appeal transcends race even as it mobilizes black voters. Both points guarantee him a prominent place at the national convention in Atlanta.    The rest of the Democratic candidates are history. The most notable loser was Rep. Richard Gephardt. He clings to the tattered remnants of hope, but it is hope built on pride rather than reason. His campaign has not traveled well outside the Midwest, and his native region doesn't have enough votes to make him a contender under the best of circumstances.    There are some who are disturbed because the Democratic race is still undecided. They shouldn't be. The contest is having the beneficial side effect of making relative unknowns such as Messrs. Gore and Dukakis familiar faces before the convention. It is forcing all the candidates to test and refine their themes under pressure, in the process creating battle-hardened staffs and strategies for the general election.    And, slowly but surely, the contest is beginning to attract the interest of the Democratic electorate. A case in point was Tuesday's relative turnouts. Before Super Tuesday, many Republicans were confidently predicting that crossover Democrats would swell their totals. Some even suggested that Republican primary totals might rival or surpass the Democrats' in several Southern states, including Texas.    It didn't happen. The closest the Republican Party came was in Virginia and Florida, which have been voting Republican since the 1950s. Elsewhere, the Democratic turnout was roughly twice as large as the Republicans'.    On the Republican side, George Bush has it all but wrapped up. He would have to break down and cry in front of the Washington Post in a snowstorm to blow it. Like Richard Nixon in 1960, the vice president has wrapped himself in the mantle of the popular president he serves and convinced his party that nominating George Bush is the only way to renominate Ronald Reagan.    The tactic has worked handsomely, but as with Mr. Nixon, the vice president's asset in the primaries could prove to be a drawback in November.    For reasons that have never been clear to me, Rep. Jack Kemp never caught on and is now gone. For reasons that are crystal clear, beginning with his remarkably nutty pronouncements on serious issues, Pat Robertson is also yesterday's phenomenon. He never really had a chance to win, of course, and all the media's excited deep breathing about his Iowa showing could not change the fact that his political base was fixed in amber and notably small. Only political analysts who hold born-again Christians in contempt could ever have believed they would fall into lockstep behind the eccentric Virginian.    That leaves Sen. Bob Dole, the man Democrats fear most. He isn't dead in the water only because he won't say quit, but he is listing badly because he apparently can't organize a picnic, let alone a national campaign.    To return to Super Tuesday itself, however, I'm willing to bet that it will point the way toward more clustering of primaries in 1992. That isn't the way a lot of people see it today. Complaints about the &quot;tarmac campaign&quot; and states that were ignored are quite visible.    But the truth is that the real anachronism in today's world is the retail politicking of the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. Reporters love both because they provide the chance to bore in close on the voters and candidates. The people of Iowa and New Hampshire love the undeserved political prominence their states receive. But the two contests have almost nothing to do with the way the nominees will have to compete in the fall and does nothing to test them against a diverse, as opposed to highly particularistic, electorate.    Super Tuesday, on the other hand, was a national test with national implications. Three or four such events, concentrated over a two- or three-month period, would be an infinitely more rational and politically more compelling way to choose the candidates than the Rube Goldberg contraption that time and circumstances have deposited on the parties' doorsteps. A reform aimed at that result might be the first one to make sense in a long time.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>