<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Governance and the Gridlock---By Paul W. McCracken</HL><DD> 09/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Gridlock. That is the current buzz word to describe the paralysis of economic policy currently afflicting the economy. And it is the state of affairs members of Congress will confront -- having spent a few weeks back home at such agreeable tasks as telling housewives they are right that milk prices are too high and dairy farmers they are right that milk prices are too low. Now the realities of tough policy choices must once again be confronted. (And they no doubt also heard back home that whatever Ollie North's derelictions, he was on target insisting that Washington figure out the process for developing and deploying a steady and clear-eyed foreign policy.)    Back to the gridlock. Economists are right that the troublesome trade deficit is fundamentally caused by the budget deficit. The Democratic leadership in Congress is probably right that in this imperfect world the budget deficit cannot be closed, or at least be reduced to a reasonable figure, unless there is a tax increase. And the president is probably right that thus putting more money in the federal till would mean yet more spending, with the whole budget moved to a yet higher level. We cannot stay where we are, and we cannot move from where we are. When government resumes after Labor Day, it will find itself confronting the California freeway problem in economic policy.    The trade problem is, of course, the budget deficit reflected in a mirror. For any nation the combination of capital formation plus government borrowing is equal to domestic savings plus the inflow of foreign funds. There are some inexorabilities in economic life, and this is one of them. This equality does not tend to be true; it is always true. And some things in this equation have moved in troublesome ways during the 1980s. The budget deficit, of course, is one. It increased quite steadily from the $75 billion zone as the decade opened to $221 billion last year. That might have been manageable if domestic saving had increased enough to accommodate the tripling of Treasury borrowing.    Savings and consumption trends, however, went the wrong way. In every year during this decade save 1984, personal consumption expenditures have increased more than production and income. The so-called personal savings rate started the decade in the 7%-to-7 1/2% zone, and this year it has been about 4%. Historically we have &quot;consumed&quot; about 80% of our total production if we also include the consumption we do through government. This year the figure will be about 85%.    Since we thus have insisted on living higher on the hog, two things had to happen. The share of output going to capital formation has been reduced. We have also sustained our high consumption by, in essence, borrowing heavily from abroad, and we have been using up, or &quot;consuming,&quot; about $150 billion more of goods and services per year than we have been producing. That is, of course, what a large excess of imports over exports means.    Suppose that by some sort of brute force (e.g., a really tough trade law) imports had been limited to what we were exporting. Obviously we would have lived less well, by about $150 billion per year. And our level of living would have been cut back because the Treasury's pre-emption of domestic savings would have sharply reduced funds available to finance new and better productive facilities, housing and the big-ticket items consumers buy.    Whatever other countries' derelictions of trade policies, and they are not trivial, they are not the basic cause of the huge expansion in U.S. imports during recent years. Our budget policy moved us toward a high-consumption society, and the surge in net imports has been supplementing domestic output to meet this demand.    The U.S. has been like an improvident family, liquidating its assets to finance living beyond its income. And the solution is a budget policy that reduces the gap between revenues and outlays to the 1% to 2% of gross national product that, history suggests, we can accommodate. This is the only way to get the total of private credit demands plus Treasury borrowing to be more in line with our flow of domestic saving.    Is there any orderly way to get there? It is possible that this question must be given a negative answer. The budget gridlock may keep us in an immobilized position. This fiscal &quot;immobilisme&quot; may hold until it is fractured loose by a crisis -- e.g., a refusal of foreign sources to continue to finance our improvident ways. The probability of this is low but not zero -- and in history the probability of such a development usually has been higher than even wise people assumed before the event.    Perhaps, in short, we will begin to pursue a more prudent fiscal path only when there is no alternative, but the price would be high. Demoralized financial markets and reduced asset values would certainly put pressure on the banking and thrift institutions, and testing the viability and strength of our financial system would not seem to be wise policy at this juncture in history. Historically, these have been antecedents of major depressions.    Perhaps, however, there is now a window of opportunity for achieving a better budget. And it may have been provided by &quot;l'affaires&quot; Iran. Neither the White House nor Congress emerged from the hearings with enhanced glory. If the executive branch made some mistakes of judgment and procedure, they were fully matched by the lurches and burps from the Hill that in any case make a steady and responsible foreign policy difficult to develop and manage. (The mental picture of the Iran-Contra Committee up on its throne being thrown into disarray by a lone citizen sitting down in the witness pit is not apt to be forgotten soon.)    What both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue could do with now is something perceived to be a solid accomplishment -- a &quot;win.&quot; The win, however, must be a solid achievement in getting on top of a major problem haunting the country. A partisan political scoring on the other side (or the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue) will not do. And it would obviously be good for the country if this win were to be a solid and credible job of putting the federal budget (and thus our trade) on a more prudent course.    A startling new program is always a temptation. It catches the headlines and will get good coverage on the evening news shows. And this approach is particularly attractive to those of us who consider ourselves to be intellectuals, since we would rather appear to be bright than right. Too often, however, these bold new views turn out to produce unforeseen problems of their own. &quot;Liberation&quot; from the always-balanced budget policy a half-century ago seemed like a great leap forward, but we are now struggling with the legacy of having thereby jettisoned fiscal discipline.    At this juncture another great leap forward is tempting -- going for the 50-yard touchdown pass. An obvious example would be beating the drums for a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget. The nation did operate with such a de facto rule for fiscal discipline until a half-century ago, and those who predicted that jettisoning this discipline would cause future trouble (and who were ridiculed for such troglodytic views) may yet have the last grim laugh. We could surely use that enforcement of fiscal discipline now.    But this touchdown bomb play is not the one to call in these waning months of this Congress and this administration. There is the problem of enforcement. If that amendment were law and spending exceeded receipts, what then? (One way of making fiscal rectitude look more attractive would be to make the deficit pro rata the personal obligation of members of Congress, the president, and his cabinet.)    Such a touchdown bomb play here would produce the kind of partisan wrangling that, whatever political brownie points were scored, would leave us on the present unsatisfactory budget and trade path. It would go into the annals as an incomplet pass.    What we do need now is the kind of wisdom and farsighted political leadership that can use our admittedly imperfect institutions of governance to get the budget back within the boundaries of the acceptable. Not a perfect budget, but an acceptable and credible one.    After the recess, the president and congressional leaders should sit down together and make a good-faith effort to get the budget on a track that would really achieve by, say, the end of this decade a deficit in the $50 billion to $75 billion range. History suggests that this might even be good politics for all sides.    A good way to mark our Constitution's 200th year would be to show that the institutions of government, which have served pretty well for two centuries, can be made to work today. An imaginary citizen representative could say to both Congress and the executive branch: &quot;All of you emerged from 1987's Iran preoccuption with some egg on your faces. The president showed poor judgment, and Congress demonstrated a remarkable imperceptivity about the requirements for a steady foreign policy. Draw the curtain on that episode, and show with some solid and credible budget action that you can once again govern.&quot;    ---   Mr. McCracken is Day distinguished professor emeritus of business administration, the University of Michigan. </TEXT></DOC>