<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890816-0027 </DOCNO><DD> = 890816 </DD><AN> 890816-0027. </AN><HL> Trading in Tokyo:@  U.S. Brokerage Firms@  Operating in Japan@  Have Mixed Results@  ---@  Salomon Brothers, Goldman,@  Morgan Stanley Thrive,@  But Chase Is Pulling Back@  ---@  Still, No Match for Nomura@  ----@  By Marcus W. Brauchli@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/16/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> JAPAN CMB BCS U.CJC BT F.CLC SB MS MER </CO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BANKS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Chase Manhattan Corp. started selling stocks here in the world's richest financial market, it put on a bash at Tokyo's ritziest hotel. Halfway through the evening, the food ran out.    That awkward episode could serve as a metaphor for the U.S. bank's troubled experience as a foreign stockbrokerage firm in Japan. Recently, only two years after the canape crisis spoiled its opening reception, Chase Manhattan's profit-starved securities unit all but gave up its high-stakes effort at dealing in shares for its own account and let go its last expatriate stockbroker. Trying a safer approach, the bank now just wants to sell stocks to big investors in Japan.    At a rival firm across town, the mood is far different. Deryck C. Maughan, chairman of Salomon Brothers Inc.'s Tokyo operation, can barely conceal his pride as he peruses a chart showing chronic losses at other foreign securities houses. &quot;There's a separation going on,&quot; Mr. Maughan declares. Pointing to his own firm's soaring profit figures, he avers: &quot;We're in a different business than they are.&quot;    Half a decade after foreign brokerage firms began expanding in earnest in Japan, winners and losers are emerging. While most are struggling to survive in this costly, ferociously competitive market, the burgeoning and often brazen Tokyo units of a few well-steered Wall Street houses have become key players -- and crucial to their parent companies' global success. Salomon best exemplifies the aggressive winners. Desks are crammed into offices to accommodate the constant flow of new employees. Urgently needed computers spill over into nearby office towers in Tokyo's expensive Akasaka district. The payoff is evident: In the six months ended March 31, pretax income was up 31% to $53 million, by far the best performance of any foreign securities house in Tokyo. That isn't bad for a remote unit of an inconsistent group that earned $280 million world-wide in 1988.    Salomon isn't the only Tokyo success story. While Morgan Stanley Japan Ltd. eked out only a thin $5.8 million pretax profit in the fiscal half-year to March 31, business is booming. In Tokyo, where rates are fixed, commission income now routinely outpaces that in New York, where deregulated commissions are shrinking. At rival Goldman Sachs andamp; Co., one official in New York estimates, nearly one in five trades executed world-wide now is somehow Japan-related.    &quot;The opportunities here are huge,&quot; observes John S. Wadsworth Jr., who presides over Morgan Stanley Group Inc.'s fast-growing Tokyo office just a block from the Imperial Palace. Last Dec. 7, Morgan Stanley showed what a talented foreign firm can do when it stunned Tokyo with the first instance of computer-driven program trading. Single-handedly, Morgan Stanley lifted the stock market to a record, leaving jaws agape at many bigger Japanese firms. (The risks in relatively uncharted waters can be huge, too; last year, a slippery speculator left Morgan Stanley holding the bag on a $7 million deal.)    On the whole, the foreign losers vastly outnumber the winners. For while the opportunities are huge, so are the obstacles. Though Japan's markets are vast and cash-swollen (the Tokyo Stock Exchange's total capitalization is nearly three times that of the New York exchange) foreign firms account for only about 7% of turnover. And the competition is daunting, with financial titan Nomura Securities Co. alone on some days controlling a quarter of all retail business. Worse, the overhead costs in Tokyo are the world's highest; expatriates' apartments rent for more than $10,000 a month and a secretary's salary easily can top $50,000.    Some of the 49 licensed foreign stockbrokerage firms in Tokyo already have all but closed down because of mounting losses. Most notable were the sweeping cutbacks last year at the securities units of banking powerhouses like Chase, Citicorp and Security Pacific Corp.    U.S. banks are relatively inexperienced in the securities business, having entered it after Britain three years ago allowed them to buy London-based brokerage firms. The inexperience showed after the October 1987 stock-market crash. In Japan, with costs sky-high and business skimpy, losses started piling up.    Instead of cutting costs and hanging on for better days, the banks decided to cut their losses. At Citicorp, a unit-by-unit insistance on profitability sank Scrimgeour Vickers International Inc., which once had been among the premier foreign firms in Tokyo. In 1987, Vickers spent months hiring Japanese staff for a 15-person team to sell stocks to Japanese corporations, then let most of them go only a few months after the crash. That decision, which Citicorp officials defend as necessary cost-cutting at a loss-making unit, crippled the firm's standing in the securities business in a land where long-term patience is prized over short-term profits.    &quot;It was crazy,&quot; says one former Vickers employee. &quot;They thought nothing of hiring somebody with 10 years of experience and the promise of lifetime employment at a Japanese firm, and then firing them. It ruined the name in the market.&quot; Today, the bank-owned firm's best salesmen and analysts are scattered among other upstart foreign firms.    Yet even those jobs may not be safe. Fueled by news that the combined net losses of the 36 biggest foreign firms topped 2.3 billion yen ($161.8 million at today's exchange rates) in the half year ended March 31, rumors are swirling that one or more of the 22 foreign members of the Tokyo Stock Exchange plan to give up their seats.    That would be embarrassing just now. The exchange is thinking about letting in more foreign members just four years after it finally agreed under international pressure to open up to foreign members. The candidates: Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd. and James Capel andamp; Co. of Britain, Bankers Trust Co. of the U.S. and a unit of French bank Credit Lyonnais. Not all the probable new entrants are excited about the prospect of winning seats, though. The annual cost of maintaining a seat is about a billion yen, or $7 million, current members say, and foreign firms worry privately about being able to generate enough business to pay the bill.    To make money in Japan, foreign firms need either breadth or a specialty. But few smaller firms have the kind of international operations and trading expertise that give the cornerstone U.S. firms an edge in the markets. Credit Lyonnais, for example, doesn't sell U.S. Treasury securities -- the major target of Japanese money -- while the stockbroker arms of West Germany's Dresdner Bank and Deutsche Bank hope to survive mainly as conduits for German money into Japan.    To big Japanese investors, a wide range of services and trading technology is invaluable. &quot;We want to use foreign firms to buy Japanese stocks as well as {U.S.} Treasurys, futures and options,&quot; says a fund manager at one of Japan's giant life insurers. Few Japanese firms offer such a wide range of services, so investors look to the foreigners. Yet the fund manager recalls trying to buy U.S. Treasurys and also arrange a hedge against currency risk, only to be told that the foreign firm he was talking to couldn't handle the order without calling in another broker. &quot;Why deal with that?&quot; the fund manager asks.    Experiences such as this drive customers into the arms of the big houses, one reason that the top five foreign firms in Japan all are Wall Street giants: Salomon, Morgan Stanley, Goldman, Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and CS First Boston Inc. Even the big Japanese firms need their U.S. counterparts: Many rely on the U.S. firms to execute large-lot orders for U.S. securities during the Tokyo day, when it is night in New York. That is because the risk-averse Japanese firms dislike carrying big positions on their books. &quot;You can get hammered to beat hell, but at least our people are comfortable with the possibility they can get hammered,&quot; says Henry James, a managing director at Goldman in Tokyo. &quot;The Japanese aren't.&quot;    For foreign securities firms, as with any business here, patience is a key to success. Most of those succeeding have stuck it out through deficits. Merrill Lynch was the first foreign firm to set up shop in Japan in 1961, and it says longevity pays big dividends. It is the foreign securities firm that is most widely recognized by Japanese investors. With retail offices in five Japanese cities, Merrill Lynch is the only foreign firm that earns significant profits from its retail and private-client business. &quot;It wasn't always easy, but it's worked out very well for us,&quot; says Randy Harris, the firm's president in Japan.    A dicier route to success is specialization. Baring Securities Ltd. of Britain and Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd. of Hong Kong both have big teams of experts trading warrants, popular investments that give purchasers the right to buy shares in a company at a set price. In recent years, Japanese companies almost routinely have offered warrants as an enhancement to bond issues in Europe.    Capitalizing on the warrant niche, Baring and Jardine daily quote prices on dozens more warrant issues than the giant Japanese securities houses, which are preoccupied with their large-scale retail businesses. Such small foreign firms often get lucrative orders from Japanese investment trusts that can't easily get the products they want from the big houses. The warrant market could eventually dry up, though. &quot;The market changes rapidly, and you have to adjust,&quot; explains Richard Greer, Baring's general manager in Tokyo.    Some specialized foreign firms also have made narrow inroads by hooking up with Tokyo's big securities houses in business areas where the Japanese firms are weak. Most prominent are U.S. investment banking boutiques, such as Wasserstein, Perella andamp; Co. and Blackstone Group, which are taking advantage of rising interest in mergers and acquisitions, and high-technology stock-analysis firms, such as Barra Inc. and Rosenberg Institutional Equity Management Inc.    Beyond specialization or breadth, successful outsiders find that it takes determination and cultural sensitivity to break into Japan's fortified securities business.    The paradigm even competitors point to is Salomon. What sets Salomon's Tokyo unit apart is its considerable autonomy and growing Japaneseness. A decision two years ago to increase capitalization of Salomon Brothers Asia Ltd. by $300 million made the operation Japan's fifth most-capitalized securities house, doing business like a magnet in size-conscious Japan. Thus, while the firm's once-powerful New York and London offices in recent years have been wracked by staff defections, management turmoil and even losses, Tokyo has grown steadily, from 65 employees three years ago to more than 550 today. The Tokyo operation's capitalization at the end of June was $443 million.    &quot;Some people say the best thing for this office is that there's no Concorde that flies from New York to Tokyo,&quot; says Jeffrey D. Hanna, a managing director who early this year endured the 14-hour commercial flight from New York when he moved to Tokyo as Salomon's head of research.    The distance isn't the only reason the U.S. influence at Salomon here is weak. The office's top manager, Mr. Maughan, is British, a former U.K. Treasury official who left Her Majesty's service a decade ago for a sabbatical in the private sector and never looked back. Mr. Maughan is a hands-on manager. One trader recalls Mr. Maughan walking up to a bond trader's desk recently, picking up a record of the day's trades and calculating instantly how much profit the trader had made. &quot;That never would happen in New York,&quot; says the trader. &quot;Most of our top people there wouldn't know how to do it.&quot;    Running the firm on a day-to-day basis is a constellation of Japanese managers. Over the past decade, Salomon succeeded in hiring away three of Japan's top securities professionals from rival Japanese firms. It has been careful to smooth things over afterward: When Salomon hired its top trader, Shigeru Myojin, from Yamaichi Securities Co. a decade ago, Salomon Inc.'s chief executive, John Gutfreund, flew to Tokyo to apologize to Yamaichi for stealing such a promising employee.    Using local talent in key positions offers foreign firms the benefit of strong connections with the big investors in Tokyo. Not only do the Japanese have extensive professional connections, but they had school or college connections with the people at the life-insurance or trust companies that manage most of Japan's investment money. They also infuse foreign firms with a Japanese spirit that makes it easier to hire and retain good Japanese staffers.    Still, because it takes something of a renegade in Tokyo to leave a big Japanese house, foreign firms end up battling over a handful of top Japanese. Some smaller foreign firms depend on only one Japanese manager -- a risky position in the piranha-infested Tokyo market.    Morgan Stanley lost a top Japanese equities manager, Toyoharu Tsutsui, to rival First Boston, but Mr. Tsutsui wasn't Morgan Stanley's whole franchise. James Walsh, First Boston's top managing director in Tokyo, says: &quot;If we took a comparable guy from any of another 30 foreign firms, it would put them out of business.&quot;    Even the successful foreign firms in Tokyo have to stay on their toes. Regulators in Tokyo are talking about deregulating commission rates and allowing banks into the securities industry. Both moves would erode margins at foreign firms. Firms, including Salomon, that don't have big fee-based businesses, could be hurt.    Yet Salomon, for one, is confident it can prosper in Tokyo's rich market. &quot;I don't know what the others are doing,&quot; says Mr. Maughan, the chairman. Then, trying to adopt an American accent, he adds: &quot;But we ain't messing around.&quot;    ---@ A Few U.S. Firms That Have Succeeded in Tokyo @ Revenue of Japanese operations (in millions of dollars)* @ 1986 1987 1988 1989 @ Salomon Bros. $100.9 $167.9 $157.3 $158.0 @ Morgan Stanley 54.3 99.5 125.6 93.1 @ Merrill Lynch 76.9 98.8 92.4 54.3 @ Goldman Sachs 36.0 67.0 84.7 67.8 @ First Boston 20.5 39.5 55.7 48.7 @ Pretax income (in millions of dollars)* @ Salomon Bros. $34.8 $47.5 $31.3 $53.6 @ Morgan Stanley 8.6 10.8 .4 5.4 @ Merrill Lynch 11.8 25.5 8.0 1.0 @ Goldman Sachs 1.1 9.3 3.7 12.8 @ First Boston 5.2 4.7 5.6 7.3 @ *Converted from yen at recent rates    Note: Fiscal years ended Sept. 30, except 1989 figure, which measures six months to March 31    Source: Nihon Keizai Shimbun </TEXT></DOC>