<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880302-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Sayang: Aquino's Embattled Democracy </HL><AUTHOR> Claudia Rosett </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>      {Last in a Series}   MANILA -- For the Philippines, Jaime Ongpin's suicide comes as a warning. Less than two years earlier, he'd joined President Corazon Aquino's first cabinet to reform the Philippine economy. When he shot himself last December, he felt he had failed. The task had overwhelmed him.    With or without Jimmy Ongpin, Mrs. Aquino's Philippines faces desperate problems. Its democracy is its proudest accomplishment, but it remains tenuous. Since Mrs. Aquino took office in 1986, there have been two serious cabinet shakeups and five increasingly violent coup attempts. A cabinet member was gunned down in the street last August; some 100 people died in violence related to the local elections this past January. After the initial Ongpin reforms, the Philippines has shown decent economic growth, but it still remains one of the poorest nations in noncommunist Asia. It is the only one to have had close to three straight years of sharp economic decline earlier this decade. Its per-capita income is less than $600 per year.    Most pressing of all, it faces a war. The communist Huk insurgency defeated by President Ramon Magsaysay in the 1950s was small-time compared with the communist New People's Army of today. According to former Defense Secretary Rafael Ileto, who has grappled with both in his time, the NPA has a much more sophisticated command structure and ranges far more freely through the archipelago. The NPA guerrilla force of more than 24,000 has made up for defections and casualties with fresh recruits, and is bringing its bombing and killing into the cities. The political apparatus of the Communist Party of the Philippines controls more than 20% of all rural villages, or &quot;barangays,&quot; and operates in almost every province.    In this maelstrom of troubles, Jimmy Ongpin offered a diagnosis and a prescription. When President Ferdinand Marcos was overthrown, he left behind a system in which the laws shortchanged most of the 55 million Filipinos in order to enrich a select few -- the famous Marcos &quot;cronies.&quot; Monopolies in the coconut and sugar industries brought vast wealth for those who controlled them, and hunger for those who could find no competing employers. Complex restrictions on trade, prices and capital markets made it hard for anyone not favored by the government to compete. And regulations had become part of the mechanism of corruption. What you bribed for, after all, was to have a state official bend the rules or make an arbitrary decision in your favor.    It was a setup that finally left most Filipinos not only poor, but without hope. In desperation, they began fighting to overthrow Mr. Marcos. Some turned to separatist movements, some to the communists. Then came the February 1986 snap election. By the end of the month there was hope: President Aquino.    As the president's economic spearhead, Mr. Ongpin posted impressive initial successes. In mid-1986, he deregulated the coconut and sugar monopolies, and decontrolled most prices. He cleaned up a tax system that had become little more than a reason to set up worthless companies. He simplified trade regulations, largely replacing quotas and licenses with a straightforward set of tariffs. The impact of these reforms is now bringing an annual rate of growth above 5%.    In 1987, the Ongpin program bogged down in the political jostling of the new administration, in infighting that ultimately led Mrs. Aquino to fire both Mr. Ongpin and her executive secretary, Joker Arroyo. But even in his last months in office, Jimmy Ongpin scored one more victory. Insisting that the Philippines honor its commitments, he negotiated a new deal on his country's large foreign debt. The savage outcry this brought probably set off his suicidal depression. But the debt deal shored up confidence enough so that investment is at last flowing back into the Philippines.    This progress helped buy Philippine democracy the breathing room it now enjoys. But Jimmy Ongpin, never allowed to complete his program, is dead by his own hand. Now there's the stark question of who will carry on his policies. Indeed, there is the question of whether the Philippines will experience the kind of backsliding he most feared: the re-establishment of the Marcos crony system -- without Mr. Marcos, but with a new set of cronies firmly entrenched at all the crossroads of economic power.    Mr. Ongpin feared that unless the apparatus of the Marcos state was dismantled, the Philippine people would again find themselves disenfranchised. The heavily interventionist state, with its big companies, big banks and myriad bureaucratic tollgates, would invite a new set of aspiring cronies to move in. Eventually, economic decline and political upheaval would start again.    Mr. Ongpin's answer was to get government out of the economy as much as possible. He believed that, given a fair chance to compete, Filipinos would acquit themselves as well as anyone in the tiger economies of Asia. But the laws Mr. Arroyo edited to water down Mr. Ongpin's reforms are still in place. Cabinet members say the new executive secretary, Catalino Macaraig, is far more efficient in handling paper work. But he faces no one with Mr. Ongpin's definite agenda and courage to speak out. Mrs. Aquino's advisers have seen the perils of Mr. Ongpin's bold approach. The new finance secretary, Vicente Jayme, is a respected manager for whom dramatic reform is something to be achieved &quot;with patience.&quot;    Meanwhile, the backsliding is beginning. In a speech last November, Mrs. Aquino urged privatization and said, &quot;I want 1987 to be the last of the years of excuses and delays, and 1988 to be the year of initiative, action and progress.&quot; But one government official says, &quot;We haven't seen any manifestation so far of that stirring speech.&quot; In the president's own office, Mr. Ongpin's plan to sell big state companies has been converted into an exercise in study and delay. Friends and political allies of the former executive secretary, Mr. Arroyo, now manage such large and vital companies as Philippine Airlines and Philippine National Oil Co.    In the politics of the Aquino democracy, family ties already seem to play a dangerously strong role. Mrs. Aquino's brother Jose &quot;Peping&quot; Cojuangco is a leading figure in the House of Representatives, where at least four more of her relatives also hold seats. Her brother-in-law Agapito &quot;Butz&quot; Aquino is a prominent member of the Senate. Vice President Salvador Laurel has a brother in the Senate; Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos, a sister.    Corruption is the target of a slew of investigative units and committees. But for a taste of what this can mean, there's last November's dictum of the customs commissioner, Gen. Salvador Mison. Don't take bribes anymore, Gen. Mison told his staff. Accept only &quot;tokens of appreciation.&quot;    Layers of regulation still make it attractive for impatient businessmen to grease the skids. One Australian mining executive in Manila describes in exasperated detail the process of importing any piece of equipment. It requires decisions by at least three government committees, taking at the very least a month, before anything can even be ordered. If the import is approved, it often sits in customs for an additional two months. His problems are reflected in a quip now making the rounds in Manila: At least in the Marcos days you knew whom to bribe.    Mr. Ongpin's policies are under fire in the Philippine legislature, where talk of debt repudiation is surfacing again. The secretary of the National Economic Development Authority, Solita Monsod, keeps suggesting that the Philippines negotiate a new foreign debt deal requiring pledges of fresh money. Meanwhile, at least $1 billion in foreign aid is caught in what a Western diplomat describes as the &quot;bureaucratic logjam.&quot;    A land reform decreed last year by Mrs. Aquino is hanging fire while the lawmakers debate the details. This was always a risky plan; most land reforms end up taking from the rich and giving to nobody. Mr. Ongpin, at least, had always insisted that landowners be compensated for the property, preferably with shares in privatized state companies. With the government so coy about unloading its industrial empire, that's now looking dubious.    Meanwhile, rural investment waits. And the New People's Army recruits. By the estimate of former Defense Secretary Ileto, 6,500 guerrillas have replaced those who died in combat or defected under the government amnesty program since Mrs. Aquino took office.    The early hopes that military reform led by Gen. Ramos might complement Mr. Ongpin's program are also fading. Two years after Mrs. Aquino took office, she has worked her way through two defense secretaries and there is still no coherent strategy for fighting the communists. Gen. Ramos, formerly armed forces chief of staff, took up the defense post in the cabinet last month, but here is no reason to believe that the president's office is handling the defense program with any more coherence and efficiency than it did Mr. Ongpin's economic program.    Meanwhile, the Soviet Union -- now being courted by the Philippine communists -- has wised up. The previous Soviet ambassador made the gaffe of congratulating Mr. Marcos on his self-declared win in the 1986 snap election. Now a new Soviet ambassador has arrived, suggesting that the Philippines kick out the two large U.S. military bases and make friends with Moscow. He is described by the Manila Chronicle as &quot;amiable, urbane, articulate in English, relaxed and accessible to the media for interviews.&quot;    Clearly Jimmy Ongpin's program is only part of what is needed to secure Philippine democracy against rot within and assault without. Economic reform is clearly indispensable in subduing the rebellion and consolidating democracy. And none of the daunting tasks before the Philippines are likely to be accomplished without reform of the kind of intrigue and palace politics that drove Jimmy Ongpin to his grave.    After the president got word of Mr. Ongpin's suicide, she praised him for the first time in many months. He was, said Mrs. Aquino, &quot;an outstanding Filipino who had the courage of his convictions.&quot; The question now is whether Mrs. Aquino and her colleagues will have the courage and vision to draw the lesson of his death. It will be harder now that Mr. Ongpin is gone. What the Filipinos say is &quot;sayang,&quot; the Tagalog word meaning &quot;lost opportunity.&quot; Sayang for Jimmy Ongpin, surely. And perhaps sayang for the republic he tried to serve.    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>