<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880428-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Did American Mules Persuade the Soviets To Quit Afghanistan? --- Hub Reese's Draftees Go, And They Won't Be Back Till It's Over Over There </HL><AUTHOR> John Helyar (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> GALLATIN, Tenn.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In a barnyard corral, in the wee hours of the morning, a draft induction begins. Able-bodied mules are herded in groups into a chute, where veterinarians give them a once-over and check off their numbers, which are stuck to their foreheads like Chiquita stickers. Some of the mules jostle in line, some try to bolt for freedom, but most quickly catch the old &quot;hurry up and wait&quot; draftee spirit, gazing about with big brown eyes and then readily boarding a stock trailer.    Before dawn has spread on the horizon, 114 mules will be off to Fort Campbell, Ky., to be loaded into the belly of a Flying Tigers jet. When they finally land 22 hours later, halfway around the world, they will be engulfed in a pungent odor but embraced with a hero's welcome. After all, heroes is what they are.    The mules are bound for Pakistan, the latest shipment in a major U.S. mulelift to the anti-Soviet guerrillas of Afghanistan. About 600 have been flown over since last September. They have carried tons of equipment, food, medical supplies and more over rugged mountains and long distances, from Pakistan into Afghanistan. They have also carried munitions into battle and continued the mule's long tradition of serving as a vital military operative. Since the mule shipments began, the guerrillas have gotten more supplies, and the Soviet Union has decided to remove its army.    Certainly geopolitical considerations have also played a role in the Soviet withdrawal, which is due to begin May 15 and continue over the next nine months. But, says U.S. Rep. Charles Wilson, a Texas Democrat and leading guerrilla-aid advocate, &quot;the mules have been absolutely vital. The limiting factor in supplying {the guerrillas} the last three years has been transportation. These mules can carry a lot more and can go a lot longer than anything they ever had before.&quot;    At first, the rebels tried to struggle along with their home-grown mules. But these animals were a scrawny lot by American standards, and when they weren't worked to death, they were gunned down by the Soviets. The Turks were nearby, but they also had inferior mules. The Chinese charged outlandish rates, fully $2,500 a mule. The Egyptians were quickly drained of their supply. The U.S. was the rebels' last, best hope.    Fortunately, mules fell into the humanitarian-assistance category that the U.S. was able to supply. And fortunately, when the State Department went looking for mules, the nation's biggest mule trader was willing to assist the freedom-loving peoples of Afghanistan. &quot;I'm in this business to make money,&quot; says Hub Reese Jr., whose per-mule price probably runs between $600 and $1,300. &quot;But this makes me feel real good.&quot;    In fact, all Americans can feel good that at least one U.S. product remains superior in world markets -- particularly because it's a product that traces its roots back to one of America's own freedom fighters. After the Revolutionary War, the king of Spain and the Marquis de Lafayette each sent George Washington large jackasses as gifts. Though that may sound like an insult, the presents were actually precious to Washington, who bred mules on the side. Mules are the offspring of jackasses, or male donkeys, and female horses, and Washington began the process of developing an American mule that was bigger and stronger than those of other lands.    Tennessee has long been prime mule country, and the 43-year-old Mr. Reese is a third-generation mule trader, who sold more than 2,200 of them last year. But Project Afghanistan has been one of the great challenges of his career. When he got the job last summer, he was given only 30 days to find 114 mules, the number that will fit into the belly of a Boeing 747. The specifications were strict. They had to be pack mules, which means they can be saddled up; they had to be in their prime, three to eight years old; and they had to be willing to be led around. But mules like that are in great demand for recreational use, so the Afghan guerrillas were competing with Colorado outfitters.    Once assembled, the army ate him out of house and home, consuming up to 10,000 pounds of hay and 700 pounds of corn a day. And Mr. Reese had to find mule handlers, who knew how to rap the mules' rears with a stick to get them moving and flap their arms and yell &quot;Hah! Hyah!&quot; when the mules needed to be headed off in another direction.    Along about 4 a.m., this is what Mr. Reese and several other men are doing. They have discovered that they are three mules short, and are rounding up the draft dodgers. The last animal requires a swift kick in the rear before finally agreeing to head up the ramp into the trailer.    But the mules are generally much better behaved. Their handlers defend them against their ornery image and seem to genuinely like the critters. (Mr. Reese's 79-year-old father may assault mules' rumps all night with a stick, but he has a flattering picture of one sewn onto his jacket breast pocket and a wealth of stories about their virtues.) &quot;A lot of times when you hear a mule is contrary, it's just because he's smarter than the person on his back,&quot; Hub Reese Jr. says. &quot;He won't go on if things aren't right.&quot;    It's that kind of unflappable judgment, together with strength and stamina, that made the mule invaluable to armies long before Afghanistan. The U.S. shipped Britain 150,000 mules to help fight in the Boer War. The Allies employed some 350,000 of them in World War I, and they were so vital that German soldiers were sometimes told to fire on them before they shot at soldiers. In World War II, the Allies used them on all fronts, most tellingly in the rugged mountains of Burma, where they were dropped in on gliders.    But mules were phased out of the U.S. military in the 1950s, as old soldiers faded away and new leaders got the mistaken impression that helicopters were a good substitute. &quot;America has never lost a war in which it used mules,&quot; says Howard Marshall, a University of Missouri professor and top mule expert. &quot;They're well suited to the clamor and noise of the battlefield. Horses thrash about and oxen are just too damned slow, though oxen make better eating after they die.&quot;    So far, U.S. mule casualties in Afghanistan are said to be light, partly because the Stinger anti-aircraft missiles that some of them carry discourage attacks. Under U.S. aid provisions, they are supposed to carry only non-military goods, but there's a wink-and-a-nod understanding that there's no telling what those guerrillas will do once they are left to their own devices.    The mules also benefit from a two-week boot camp at the start, where they learn valuable skills like swimming and the Afghans learn valuable lessons like not overloading, a practice that brings mules to a standstill. &quot;With the right care, we're expecting to get seven or eight good years out of them,&quot; says Rep. Wilson, who expects the mulelifts to continue as long as some Soviet troops remain.    The moment for the latest lift draws near shortly after dawn, as the truck convoy completes the two-hour drive to Fort Campbell and up to a Flying Tigers 747 jet. The mules are herded into a box on a lift, four at a time, and hoisted through the plane's open nose. They will spend the trip in makeshift stalls that hold three or four mules apiece. Most take to the loading fine, but one goes AWOL, galloping around the plane before returning.    By 8:30 a.m., the mules' journey to glory is set to begin. Only one question remains, and Major Randy Schoel, a Fort Campbell public affairs officer, asks it. &quot;It's a great thing,&quot; he says, &quot;but it's like Noah's Ark. Who's going to clean out that thing?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>