<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870728-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE NAVY DECIDED against a courtmartial for the captain of the USS Stark.    Capt. Glenn Brindel, skipper of the frigate when 37 of its crewmen were killed in a May 17 attack by an Iraqi warplane in the Persian Gulf, was censured with a letter of reprimand. The Stark's tactical action officer also was reprimanded. Both officers accepted responsibility for the vessel's failure to defend itself, and will leave the Navy. In the gulf, the U.S. has discovered additional mines, Pentagon officials said, and will likely send in divers to remove the explosives before proceeding with further oil-tanker escorts.    The U.S. was trying to determine whether the reflagged Kuwaiti oil tanker Bridgeton can carry cargo despite damage caused by a mine last week.    ---   Troops in Panama raided the home of retired Col. Roberto Diaz Herrera, who had accused defense chief Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega of murder and other crimes. The allegations sparked anti-government riots last month. Diaz reportedly was arrested after a brief shoot-out. The raid came as Panamanians began a 48-hour general strike.    ---   Meese prepared to testify today before the congressional Iran-Contra committees, meeting with top Justice Department aides. The attorney general is expected to encounter questions from panel members based on evidence that he was more deeply involved in the arms-for-hostages scandal than he has admitted.    ---   A White House spokesman confirmed that Reagan attempted to limit disclosure of details of the arms-to-Iran initiative last November, but said the president &quot;was trying to protect the lives&quot; of Americans held hostage rather than to mislead the public. The spokesman said Reagan's actions had been reviewed by the Tower Commission.    ---   Shultz held talks with Soviet envoy Yuri Dubinin to discuss a possible meeting this fall between the secretary of state and Moscow's foreign minister. The talks came as Reagan aides said the U.S. was ready to accept Gorbachev's latest arms-control offer, but would reject a demand for the destruction of U.S. warheads in West Germany.    ---   The Soviet Union has executed Fyodor Fedorenko, who was convicted of Nazi war crimes in 1986, the news agency Tass reported. Fedorenko was stripped of his U.S. citizenship and deported to the Soviet Union in 1984 after it was learned that he had attempted to hide his Nazi past. The date of his execution wasn't disclosed.    John Demjanjuk denied that he was a guard at the Treblinka concentration camp during World War II, and pleaded for his life in an Israeli court. Demjanjuk, a retired U.S. auto worker, has been identified by five survivors as the Ukranian guard at the camp where 850,000 people were killed.    ---   A group of Crimean Tatars met in Moscow with Soviet President Gromyko to press demands for the restoration of their homeland, from which they were expelled during World War II. The delegation expressed dissatisfaction with the meeting, which followed a weekend protest in Red Square.    ---   The House passed a measure prohibiting the sale of Toshiba Corp. products at U.S. military exchange stores. The bill, approved on a voice vote, was in retaliation for the Japanese company's sale to the Soviet Union of sensitive submarine technology.    ---   The U.S. will grant Social Security benefits to people who meet an expanded definition of AIDS. Under the decision, people suffering from AIDS-linked dementia and emaciation can get disability benefits. The move is expected to increase the number of AIDS victims eligible for benefits by 30%.    ---   Philippine President Aquino addressed the inaugural session of Manila's Congress, faulting foreign creditors for taking &quot;unfair advantage&quot; of the country's problems by demanding what she called an unfavorable debt pact. The opening session of the two congressional chambers was the first since Marcos declared martial law in 1972.    ---   Riot police in Sri Lanka fired tear gas to disperse about 3,500 Sinhalese Buddhists protesting a proposed peace plan aimed at ending a civil war by Tamil separatists. The Colombo government and India have agreed to sign the accord, but a Tamil rebel leader said the ethnic violence would continue.    ---   Israeli troops attacked pro-Syrian militiamen in southern Lebanon, killing as many as seven Moslem guerrillas and destroying two military vehicles. The skirmish near the port of Sidon was part of a se borne raid, the first by Israeli troops since their invasion of southern Lebanon in 1982.    ---   Record high temperatures continued across southern Europe. The number of heat-related deaths from the eight-day heat wave reached as many as 657 people in Greece, officials in Athens said. About 50 people have died in southern Italy.    ---   A tropical storm struck South Korea, killing at least 68 people in Seoul and leaving thousands of others homeless. It was the third major storm this month, and the combined death toll neared 330. In Iran, state-run radio reported that 113 people were killed in flash floods in Tehran. </TEXT></DOC>