<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Making Computers Count in Classrooms </HL><SO> </SO><CO> SUN </CO><IN> EDP </IN><TEXT>   Re your June 6 second-front-page article &quot;Computers Failing as Teaching Aids&quot;: As a consultant who has spent more than 10 years working in education, I have witnessed firsthand the frustration surrounding the &quot;computer revolution&quot; in the schools. While your article mentioned some of the reasons for the derailment of the revolution, I believe there is one key underlying problem facing schools in this regard -- lack of planning.    Computer hardware, software, staff development and support services are major investments for school districts that are being squeezed from cuts in government funding and defeated millages. Increasingly, these expenditures have to be cost-justified, their benefits clearly documented, and measurable objectives set to monitor their accomplishment.    We have found that proper planning can help maximize the use of existing computers, save money on new purchases, and provide appropriate methods for training teachers to use computers effectively in their teaching. Let's not conclude this chapter by lamenting the causes for the failure thus far of the computer as a teaching aid. Rather, we should focus our energies toward planning how to effectively integrate technology into the curriculum, thereby getting the revolution back on track.    Michael D. Waggoner   Director of Education   Katke Co.    Ann Arbor, Mich.   ---   The analysis of computers in education was, sadly, quite accurate. As the computer coordinator at an elementary school, I see great anxiety from both new and experienced teachers over the use of computers. Because of this problem -- being a certified elementary-school teacher as well as a certified computer teacher -- I was hired to help the teachers choose and integrate software appropriate to the curriculum. By having a teacher whose only job is computer education, I serve as a buffer against the unknown.    Another problem that needs to be looked at is how to teach keyboarding (typing) skills at a young age. Although there are several good programs available, finding the time in an already overcrowded curriculum and having enough machines to accommodate an entire class is rarely possible. Without keyboarding skills it is almost useless trying to teach word-processing and other utility programs.    I disagree on the limit of good software. I have found companies such as Minnesota Educational Computing Corp. produce material that is cost-effective, curriculum appropriate and has a high level of student appeal.    Computers do have a place in education. It is amazing how discipline problems magically disappear in the computer lab and it is rewarding to have students want to come in on their lunch hour to solve a problem. Is that not our job as educators to prepare others to be thinkers and problem solvers?    MaryLouise Wichmann   Computer Coordinator   Incarnate Word Academy   Cleveland   ---   Your article provides an interesting insight into the difficulties in adapting to the new technologies. A cooperative program started four years ago between the school district of Philadelphia and Sun Co. was initiated to accelerate the transfer of technology into the educational system. This program consists of Sun information-systems professionals organizing into volunteer teams to teach the teachers how to use information technology in their administrative and educational roles. To date, this program has been successful in exposing approximately 1,000 teachers to the practical application of information technology in the educational process.    This kind of public/private-sector cooperation is an excellent example of how industry can participate in assisting our educational system. Sun benefits in two ways: First, by having its employees learn how to be coaches, counselors and teachers, which supports the new role of the I/S professional; and second, it improves the quality of students graduating from the Philadelphia schools, which in the long term provides a more highly educated and, therefore, valuable source of future employees.    If every city followed this model, thousands and thousands of teachers (and students) would move into the information era and thus accelerate the transfer of technology into the educational system and ultimately to the students.    Dudley P. Cooke   General Manager   Information Systems Division   Sun Co.    Radnor, Pa.   ---   I am currently teaching computers to approximately 600 children in grades one through six. We have a lab set up in which there are eight computers and some carefully selected software. As one who has taught first grade and a gifted program, I have found this experience to be the most stimulating and exciting one in more than 25 years of teaching both for me and for the students.    How many times can you walk into a classroom and find students thoroughly absorbed in their task, brimming over with enthusiasm and working independently on a problem-solving task? As they test each idea, they discuss its success or failure and try another if necessary until an appropriate solution is reached. The immense satisfaction and pride in achievement when the problem is solved are a joy to behold.    This to me is what teaching is all about, and the computer is helping to make it happen.    Judy Glick   Charles E. Smith   Jewish Day School   Rockville, Md.</TEXT></DOC>