<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A FUND-RAISER PLEADED guilty to an Iran-Contra charge and implicated North.    Conservative activist Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell admitted to conspiring to defraud the government by funneling $2.1 million in tax-exempt donations to the Nicaraguan insurgents. He named fired White House aide North as a participant in the conspiracy to arm the rebels. Channell, the first figure in the Iran-Contra affair to have criminal charges brought against him, also agreed to cooperate in independent counsel Walsh's inquiry. The move comes less than a week before congressional panels are to open hearings on the affair.    Leaders of the congressional Iran-Contra panels said retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Secord would be the first public witness at hearings Tuesday.    ---   The Pentagon is investigating reports that a Japanese company and a Norwegian intermediary were involved in selling to the Soviet Union sophisticated metal-working machines that could be used to make submarines harder to detect. Senate aides identified the firms as Toshiba Corp. and arms-maker Kongsberg.    ---   Authorities in Buenos Aires said a former army officer who had been a fugitive since leading a rebellion in Cordoba two weeks ago surrendered to federal officials. Former Maj. Ernesto Barreiro's refusal to testify in a human-rights case led to the revolt at the Cordoba military camp, and sparked a similar uprising outside the capital.    ---   A Nicaraguan rebel leader acknowledged that the insurgents killed an American, Benjamin Linder, of Portland, Ore., but said the death was an accident of war. In Washington, while expressing regret over Linder's death Tuesday, the White House said Americans working in Nicaragua in support of the Sandinistas are &quot;in harm's way.&quot;    ---   The Bonn government warned the kidnappers of two West Germans in Beirut that it would extradite a Lebanese man to the U.S. unless the captives are released, the Hamburg-based Bild newspaper reported. The Lebanese, Mohammed Ali Hamadi, is wanted in the U.S. in connection with the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner.    ---   Massachusetts Gov. Dukakis announced his candidacy for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. In making his formal declaration in Manchester, N.H., Dukakis emphasized his plans to create &quot;vibrant and sustained economic growth that provides genuine opportunity for all Americans.&quot;    ---   A Senate panel recommended that the new U.S. Embassy in Moscow be razed and another structure erected. The Intelligence Committee also suggested that State Department security offices be reorganized into a single unit and that foreign national employees be replaced by Americans.    The State Department faulted a House subcommittee for subpoenaing allegedly withheld documents relating to the spy scandal involving former Marine guards at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. A spokesman said &quot;nothing has been denied to Congress.&quot;    ---   PTL officials have begun examining the holdings of evangelist Jim Bakker to determine which of his assets may have been acquired with ministry funds, a spokesman for the Rev. Jerry Falwell said. The assets include two homes and luxury cars.    ---   South African riot police surrounded a black union headquarters in Johannesburg while officers searched the building following the murders of four state railway workers. At least 11 people were detained after police entered the building, where members of the railway union were discussing their seven-week-old strike.    ---   The Senate Rules panel approved a bill that would establish spending limits on primary and general election campaigns for Senate candidates. The limits would be tied to partial public financing for general elections funded by an income-tax check-off system, similar to that already used for presidential campaigns.    ---   An Italian concert violinist bought a 271-year-old Stradivarius violin for the equivalent of about $726,000, the highest auction price ever paid for a musical instrument, Christie's auction house said. The violin, known as &quot;the Colossus,&quot; is one of between 600 and 700 surviving violins made by Antonio Stradivari of Cremona, Italy.    ---   Prime Minister Mulroney said Waldheim wouldn't be welcome in Canada, but a spokesman noted that Ottawa hasn't any plans to issue a formal ban against the Austrian president because of alleged Nazi war crimes. In Vienna, a dispute arose over whether Chancellor Vranitzky should cancel his visit to the U.S. next month.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres said several high-ranking Palestinians have &quot;tired&quot; of the PLO and would be willing to negotiate peace in the Mideast. In Paris, Israeli Premier Shamir said the question of an international forum on Mideast peace could prompt early elections, which he said might damage efforts to improve the economy.    ---   Communist and Moslem rebels said they were joining forces on Mindinao Island to fight the Philippine government. The announcement came as authorities in Manila reported that four people were killed in two separate attacks. Police also said that the bodies of three Aquino campaign workers, missing since Sunday, had been found.    ---   Pope John Paul II is scheduled to begin today a five-day trip to West Germany that includes the beatification of a Jewish-born nun who was killed by the Nazis at Auschwitz. The nun's beatification is opposed by some Jews, who contend that the Vatican would be honoring someone who deserted Judaism for Catholicism.    ---   Researchers in Atlanta said that a common, non-surgical procedure for opening clogged or narrowed arteries leading to the heart has produced encouraging results. They found that a majority of 169 patients who underwent the balloon angioplasty procedure were symptom-free five-to-eight years after receiving the treatment.    ---   A Pakistan air force jet was downed while chasing Afghan aircraft near the northwest border, Islamabad's official news agency reported. It said the plane was hit by a missile as it followed a formation of intruding Afghan aircraft. The plane reportedly was the first lost by Pakistan in numerous cross-border raids by both sides. </TEXT></DOC>