<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870330-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Fear of AIDS May Re-Create the Virtuous '50s---By Cheryl Russell</HL><DD> 03/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   AIDS will kill 14,000 Americans this year, according to projections by the Centers for Disease Control. Car accidents will kill three times that number.    Americans are more afraid of AIDS than they are of the many things more likely to kill them. Among the two million Americans who will die this year, AIDS will kill less than 1%.    In contrast, heart disease will kill nearly 800,000 Americans, and cancer will kill almost 500,000. Pneumonia, suicide and cirrhosis of the liver are far more important causes of death than AIDS. In numbers of deaths, AIDS ranks with emphysema, kidney failure and murder.    But AIDS has come a long way. Just four years ago, AIDS killed only one-tenth as many Americans as it will this year. Back then, it ranked with tuberculosis as a cause of death.    According to projections by the Centers for Disease Control, AIDS will kill 54,000 people in 1991. Even so, AIDS fatalities will account for less than 3% of all deaths. The Centers will not project AIDS cases or deaths beyond 1991 because no one knows how many people have been exposed to the virus, how the disease will progress or whether a cure will be found.    The impact of AIDS is most dramatic for one demographic segment of the population -- men aged 20 to 49 -- and in two geographic areas -- New York and San Francisco. For the nation as a whole, however, AIDS is an insignificant disease in absolute numbers of deaths.    AIDS has been likened to the plagues that struck Europe in the Middle Ages. Like the plague, AIDS is fatal, but, unlike the plague, it is much harder to catch. The Black Death that struck Europe between 1346 and 1350 killed one-fourth of the population in 1348 alone, mortally wounding feudal society. AIDS would have to kill 60 million Americans in a single year to have the same demographic impact. By 1991, AIDS will have killed about 180,000 Americans during its 10-year existence in the U.S. During those 10 years, more than 20 million Americans will have died -- AIDS will be no more than a blip in our mortality statistics.    While the numbers are trivial, the fear is not. The fear of AIDS -- not the disease -- will transform our society if a cure is not found soon. A disease that strikes the sex act with the deadly force of AIDS -- half of AIDS victims die within 12 months; all eventually die -- hits at the core of human society, because sex creates the family. Though AIDS deaths will not amount to much between now and 1991, the fear of AIDS will change the demographic structure of our population as it changes our lives. Unlike the plague, adults can control their exposure to AIDS. As people change their sexual behavior to avoid the disease, they will change the American family.    The fear of AIDS will end the sexual revolution. After a 25-year hiatus, once again there is good reason to say no: Fear of death is a cold shower for casual sex, a more effective deterrent than fear of pregnancy. This fact is likely to make marriage more popular, especially among the young. Today, 59% of women aged 20 to 24 have never married, up from 28% in 1960. For men aged 20 to 24, 76% are single today, up from 53% a few decades ago.    Young people might marry earlier if they decide that one-night stands are not worth dying for. As AIDS deaths increase, more young people will know an uncle, a brother or a friend who has died of AIDS. Knowing one person who dies of AIDS will do more to change the behavior of young adults than a year's worth of lectures by the Surgeon General or Phyllis Schlafly.    The fear of AIDS will bring sex education to the public schools and make condom ads commonplace. With fewer unmarried people in the population and less sexual experimentation among them, the number of teen pregnancies and abortions should fall. Today, 81% of all abortions are to unmarried women, and 61% are to women aged 15 to 24. As the abortion numbers drop, the heated debate over abortion is likely to cool.    The fear of contagion may do what the fear of God cannot -- bind husband and wife together till death do them part. AIDS is likely to make divorce a last resort for unhappy couples. Since the mid-1970s more than a million couples have divorced each year. Given current divorce rates, one-half of the marriages of today's young adults will end in divorce. AIDS may significantly reduce these odds. Why let go of a safe sexual partner when it's so dangerous to find another? Marriage counseling is likely to boom as couples struggle to stay together.    There are 45 million more households in the U.S. today than in 1950, but only 17 million more married couples. Married couples were 78% of all households in 1950; now they are only 58%. As the fear of AIDS forces people to cling together, American suburbs and cities could become increasingly populated by the married, many of whom will regard the unmarried with suspicion and alarm. The married will be the clean, the unmarried the unclean, especially if states require AIDS tests for couples planning to marry.    AIDS may even spur another baby boom. As people marry earlier and stay married longer, family size could increase because women will be at risk of becoming pregnant for many more years than they are today. Married women who find themselves unexpectedly pregnant are less likely to have an abortion than single women. The result could be more babies and larger families. Because most young couples cannot afford the luxury of a stay-at-home mother, however, they will need day-care services to help them raise their children.    Because of AIDS, America may begin to look a lot like it did in the 1950s. Virginity will be in, early marriage popular, divorce frowned upon, babies everywhere and family life back in vogue. One ingredient will be missing from this happy scene, however: The glue binding many husbands and wives together will not be love and faith in each other, but fear and distrust of everyone else.    ---   Ms. Russell is editor in chief of American Demographics. </TEXT></DOC>