<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870407-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Attorney General Meese Faces Rising CriticismOver His Legal Advice in Iran-Contra Scandal---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For much of the past 20 years, Edwin Meese's fortunes and reputation have been linked with those of one man: Ronald Reagan. Now, as President Reagan struggles with the continuing fallout of the Iran-Contra affair, his confidant and attorney general is under pressure as well.    The government's top lawyer faces increasing criticism for failing to adequately advise and protect his No. 1 client, Mr. Reagan. Congressional and criminal investigators, lawmakers and others contend that Mr. Meese didn't offer timely, carefully researched legal guidance during crucial points in the Iran-Contra affair. The result, these critics say, was an unpredictable, often ad hoc decision-making process that ended up seriously damaging Mr. Reagan and his policy.    &quot;I just wish he (Mr. Meese) had done things differently,&quot; says Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), vice chairman of the select Senate committee investigating the scandal, who has criticized the probe by Mr. Meese and his aides as &quot;sloppy.&quot;    Mr. Meese's handling of the Iran-Contra affair will get renewed attention this week. The Senate Intelligence Committee by tomorrow will release excerpts from the attorney general's confidential testimony before the panel last year. And the committee is expected to raise tough questions about Mr. Meese when hearings begin tomorrow on the nomination of William Webster, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to head the Central Intelligence Agency.    Lawmakers want to know what justifications Justice Department officials gave the FBI chief and the U.S. Customs Service for sidetracking inquiries into Southern Air Transport, the cargo line that hauled some of the U.S. weapons to Iran. Mr. Webster also will be asked about Mr. Meese's initial decision to keep the FBI out of the fact-finding effort into the Iran-Contra scandal, and why the bureau didn't crank up a full-scale criminal investigation until three days after evidence of possibly serious illegalities surfaced.    As an administration team player, Mr. Webster doesn't want to appear critical of his boss, Mr. Meese. But law-enforcement officials say the FBI chief wants to distance himself and the bureau somewhat from the decision on Southern Air Transport, and he is expected to criticize some of the procedures and legal advice that Mr. Meese relied on.    The attorney general has powerful defenders, however. &quot;Meese-bashing has been a constant activity on Capitol Hill&quot; starting long before the Iran-Contra scandal, complains Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah); Strom Thurmond (R., S.C.) is another supporter. Stephen Trott, the associate attorney general and one of Mr. Meese's closest advisers, maintains that &quot;Ed Meese deserves a medal&quot; for initially uncovering suspected diversion of funds to the Contras.    Mr. Meese's involvement in the affair stretches back to its very beginnings. When President Reagan wanted formally to authorize U.S. arms sales to Iran without notifying Congress in January 1986, it was the attorney general who, without research or consultation, provided an unwritten legal opinion justifying the initiative. Ten months later, he helped White House officials delay the probe of Southern Air Transport -- a delay that he told reporters yesterday was handled &quot;entirely properly.&quot; And when the botched policy toward Iran finally became public, Mr. Meese was called in to gather the facts and help control the damage.    The presidentially appointed Tower Commission, describing what it called a general &quot;insensitivity to legal issues&quot; at the highest levels of the Reagan administration, challenged some of Mr. Meese's legal conclusions and activities.    &quot;If he (Mr. Meese) had any doubts at all&quot; about the legality or propriety of certain dealings with Iran, &quot;he should have gotten a formal legal opinion&quot; from the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel, says former Attorney General Griffin Bell, a Democrat who served in the Carter administration.    But Mr. Meese, in an interview, dismisses such allegations about his conduct. He insists that he played only a limited role in reviewing arms-sales procedures, while providing appropriate legal advice whenever it was requested by the White House. &quot;I did the research, and the legal opinions are still correct,&quot; he declares. His opinions were provided orally, rather than in writing, he says, &quot;to keep the record clear. There is nothing wrong with that.&quot;    Moreover, he argues that until the later stages of his fact-finding, the evidence &quot;on its face&quot; didn't provide clear-cut indications of possible criminal violations. According to a report by the Senate Intelligence Committee, Mr. Meese testified last year that when he interviewed Vice Adm. John Poindexter, then the national security adviser, about possible diversion of funds to the Contras, he was trying to &quot;find out what happened from a respected member of the administration.&quot;    What Mr. Meese knew about the Iran-arms operation, and when, is expected to be a major topic at tomorrow's confirmation hearing on Mr. Webster's nomination to be CIA director. Congressional investigators say that Mr. Webster and one of his top aides, Oliver &quot;Buck&quot; Revell, knew more about the secret arms shipments to Iran -- and learned about them months earlier -- than previously disclosed.    Officials say that Mr. Revell found out about the Iranian initiative last July or early August, while serving on a super-secret federal anti-terrorism group with then-National Security Council aide Lt. Col. Oliver North. Mr. Revell informed the FBI director almost immediately, and investigators want to determine what Mr. Webster was told when he discussed the matter with Mr. Meese.    Investigators say that FBI officials repeatedly, but largely unsuccessfully, sought explanations and assurances from Justice Department superiors about the reasons for the nearly month-long delay of the Southern Air Transport inquiry. The original request for a delay came from Adm. Poindexter.    Meanwhile, lawmakers and the independent counsel looking into the Iran-Contra scandal also are investigating allegations that when Mr. Meese was counselor to President Reagan he helped steer potential contributors to the Nicaraguan Contras to Col. North's office. Mr. Meese maintains that he never provided any legal advice or violated any congressional bans related to Col. North's efforts to help ship weapons and other supplies to the Contras.    And investigators are also reviewing Mr. Meese's preliminary legal opinion that none of the money suspected of being diverted to the Contras belonged to the U.S. government. Since then, Mr. Meese has acknowledged, he and his aides have developed various legal theories under which such funds might be considered to be government monies; thus the diversion of those funds might result in prosecution for fraud or other criminal violations. </TEXT></DOC>