<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880415-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Airline Backfire: Texas Air Triggered Investigation of Itself With Shuttle Gambit --- Lorenzo Plan Led Regulators To Worry About Viability Of Remainder of Eastern --- Role of Pilots and Machinists --- The article was prepared by Wall Street Journal staff reporters Paulette Thomas, Bob Davis and John E. Yang </HL><SO> </SO><CO> TEX LABOR </CO><IN> AIR TNM </IN><G> TRN </G><TEXT>   Frank Lorenzo knows a money-maker when he sees it -- and the Eastern Shuttle is just that. Its 62 flights a day -- serving New York, Washington and Boston -- are often packed from front to back. Almost nobody checks luggage, and there's no costly reservation system. Eastern Airlines may have been teetering on the edge of bankruptcy proceedings, but Mr. Lorenzo bought it anyway, getting his hands on its crown jewel.    That apparently wasn't enough for the aggressive Mr. Lorenzo and his Texas Air Corp. So valuable is the shuttle that he set up a chain of five subsidiaries through which Texas Air would buy the shuttle from Eastern -- a transaction in which he and close associates would end up owning a piece of the operation themselves.    The federal government, as it turns out, is worried about that. &quot;As we looked into it, we became more and more concerned about what would be left of Eastern after the transaction,&quot; Wayne Vance, the Transportation Department's general counsel, said yesterday. The complexity of the idea also drew Mr. Vance's attention to Mr. Lorenzo's labyrinthine $8 billion-a-year airline empire, the largest in the free world. &quot;I kept looking at all those boxes and dotted lines,&quot; he recalled.    Today, the shuttle looks more like Mr. Lorenzo's crown of thorns. His planned asset shuffling triggered the Transportation Department's unprecedented, two-pronged investigation of Houston-based Texas Air. And just as threatening, it reflects a labor-management battle that now ranks with the most rancorous in recent history -- the mineworkers against the coal operators, the textile workers against J.P. Stevens, and others. In addition to the courts, their forums have included Capitol Hill and Democratic presidential politics.    Although the shuttle transaction was the catalyst of the wide-ranging, fast-track investigation announced Wednesday, it was hardly the only cause. The regulators' decision to probe the recesses of Mr. Lorenzo's empire -- including an inspection of every plane owned by Eastern -- follows a well-financed campaign by organized labor to bring the federal government down hard on Texas Air.    The department denies playing into the unions' hands, but they had a vital role in drawing its attention to the shuttle transaction. With a litigation war chest of $1 million in fresh cash, the militant machinists' union at Eastern had run to a federal judge in Washington, D.C. The judge shocked Texas Air with an order blocking the transaction -- and slapped the company with a contempt-of-court citation to boot. The decision, Mr. Vance says, raised questions about the company's &quot;compliance disposition&quot; -- regulatory jargon for whether a company listens to the government.    &quot;This is exactly what we've been after,&quot; says Robert Lavender, a former pilot at Texas Air's Continental Airlines and People Express units. Ever since going on strike when Mr. Lorenzo slashed pilot wages by 50% at Continental in 1983, Mr. Lavender has joined in a campaign of letter writing, litigation and lobbying -- all intended to draw regulatory attention to the labor practices, business dealings and safety practices of Texas Air.    Texas Air terms the unions' efforts to draw attention to financial transactions and safety an elaborate smokescreen. &quot;The union leaderships who refuse to deal with the very real economic issues facing Eastern Airlines have mounted a continuing campaign of distortion and lies,&quot; the company says. &quot;It is unfortunate that this campaign has swayed others into action.&quot; (On the American Stock Exchange yesterday, Texas Air's stock fell 62 1/2 cents to $10.25 a share on volume of 1,284,000 shares; on Wednesday, it fell 87 1/2 cents, for a two-day drop of 12.8%.)    The campaign against Texas Air began with little hope -- so little that desperate acts of violence were directed at it. In the aftermath of Mr. Lorenzo's cost cutting at Continental, a bloody elk head was thrown through the dining-room window of a pilot who had crossed picket lines during the Continental strike. Another pilot's barn was burned down. Two strikers were caught by police carrying pipe bombs and a map to the homes of strike-breaking pilots.    More recently, some Eastern pilots have employed such guerrilla tactics as flying faster to burn up more fuel-making this one of the few battles in which labor used a production-line speedup as a weapon against management. As Eastern's new owners began firing record numbers of employees and demanding wholesale wage reductions, some Eastern pilots have also refused to take off until backup safety-related systems were repaired -- a move that deepened Eastern's severe losses.    And with their eyes on Washington, the Eastern pilots have filled out four postcards identifying each maintenance-related problem -- postcards addressed to the chairmen of key congressional committees and to the Transportation Department and Federal Aviation Administration.    Barely a soul believed that the anti-Lorenzo campaign would amount to much; he was considered too smart and too powerful to leave himself open to an all-out federal investigation. &quot;The unions have to do something dramatic and possibly illegal to stop Lorenzo,&quot; Robert Callahan, former president of the flight attendants' union at Eastern, said last December. &quot;He is a superb tactician and strategist.&quot;    But others pressed on with religious fervor, viewing 1988 as a special opportunity. &quot;Who wants to have a complete disruption {of air travel} in the middle of a presidential-election year?&quot; Jack Bavis, the head of the Air Line Pilots Association at Eastern, asked rhetorically last December.    Indeed, Richard Gephardt, Jesse Jackson and Michael Dukakis have all made public appearances in support of Eastern's union -- sometimes sharply attacking Mr. Lorenzo. &quot;This is what I had high expectations for,&quot; says Charles Bryan, who leads the machinists union at Eastern. &quot;I can't imagine a politician wanting to be identified with Frank Lorenzo, I don't care which side of the aisle that he's from.&quot;    In recent weeks, in fact, employees have aroused support ranging from the AFL-CIO, which has organized rallies, to Rep. Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the usually conservative Republican whose district includes Atlanta's Hartsfield International Airport, a major hub for Eastern.    &quot;I run into gate employee after gate employee -- who are nonunion -- who are terrified,&quot; Mr. Gingrich says. &quot;They regard Mr. Lorenzo as the equivalent of a white shark swimming around.&quot; A former history professor, Mr. Gingrich likens Mr. Lorenzo's restructuring of Eastern's assets within Texas Air to the pyramid schemes of the 1920s and 1930s. &quot;Are we faced with a situation where deregulation leads some shortsighted people to manipulate the entire system, to pay more for lawyers than for mechanics, more for lobbyists than for pilots?&quot; he asked.    But Eastern employees -- from airplane cleaners to jumbo jet captains -- have been shelling out plenty themselves for hired guns. The machinists are charging members a special $10-a-month assessment just for litigation costs. The union has retained the renowned F. Lee Bailey for a suit seeking to unravel Texas Air's purchase of Eastern. In addition to their lawyers, the machinists have consultants who have collated and cross-indexed thousands of pages of public documents on Texas Air.    The pilots' union has retained the accounting firm of Touche, Ross andamp; Co. to plow through Texas Air's financial reports. Actor Ed Asner, who oftens lends his name to union causes, has appeared in videotaped, rally-round-the-case messages distributed by the hundreds to pilots.    The biggest victory -- one of the few -- was the injunction and contempt citation that the machinists won last month in federal court in Washington. As part of the shuttle-transfer transaction, 5% of the shuttle's operations were to be owned by Jet Capital, Mr. Lorenzo's private holding company, as payment for acting as investment banker in the $225 million shuttle sale. The court also ruled that Eastern was in contempt of an earlier order that blocked the carrier from forming a separate ground-service subsidiary -- in violation of its labor contracts. That union victory was followed by another in which Eastern was barred from training nonunion replacement workers in the event of a strike.    The company certainly hasn't been sitting still, either. In its efforts to negotiate wage reductions from baggage handlers and other machinist-union members, the company moved quickly to declare an impasse, involving federal mediators in the talks. Now, the company is lobbying Capitol Hill aggressively to step up pressure on the National Mediation Board to start a federally stipulated 30-day clock ticking -- after which the company will be free to impose its own contract on the machinists.    Texas Air's political action committee last year laid out $142,000 -- twice the amount of the next largest airline PAC, according to Aviation Daily, a trade newsletter. Bryce Chapin, Continental's chief management pilot, this week gave pilots in Houston sample letters to congressmen urging them to oppose a House resolution calling for an investigation of Texas Air.    But as of yesterday, the resolution continued gathering momentum, with 166 cosponsors. Eastern recently sent a letter to frequent fliers assuring them that the airline's difficulties were strictly temporary, but constituents continue deluging lawmakers with complaints about service at Texas Air. Rep. Gingrich, for one, had been meeting regularly with Phil Bakes, Eastern's president -- but recently rejected an overture in which Mr. Bakes sought to further explain the airline's position.    The outcome of the federal investigation can't be predicted; it could, in fact, result in a clean bill of health -- a positive &quot;fitness&quot; evaluation -- for Texas Air's planes and executives. Regardless, says the machinists' Mr. Bryan, the union will press forward in its long effort to transform Eastern into an employee-owned company.    &quot;It sounds kind of goody-goody,&quot; he says, &quot;but I honest to God don't have any mission to throw him&quot; -- Mr. Lorenzo, that is -- &quot;in jail. . . . If he can go away with his head high and boast that he made some money,&quot; Mr. Bryan adds, &quot;I don't care.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>