<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870311-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Keeping Control:Law That UndepinsSouth Africa ApartheidIs as Powerful as Ever---Officials Claim SegregationAccording to Race is Over,But Act Shows Otherwise---The Reason Tutu Can't Vote---By Roger ThurowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> JOHANNESBURG, South Africa  </DATELINE><TEXT>    The South African governmentsays the days of apartheid are past. But if they are, it'snews to Edward Moleko and his mother.   For 2 1/2 hours, they have been shunted from one room to another in the Department of Home Affairs building at 15 Market St., a stark concrete structure in the bad part of downtown. All they want is a birth certificate, but such things take time when you're black in South Africa.    Edward, just six months old, mostly sleeps and eats banana mush. His mother mostly sits in lines and watches Kung Fu and wildlife films on the four closed-circuit television screens in the dingy reception area. About 300 other black people who have come to register for one thing or another are also waiting and watching, and more are standing in an even longer line outside.    Finally, Edward and his mother are told to report to Room 12. There, from documents supplied by Mrs. Moleko, a clerk fills out Edward's birth certificate: name, date and place of birth, sex. The final space is for population group. In that spot, the clerk scribbles &quot;black.&quot;    Thus, Edward Moleko is branded by the most damning, and enduring, instrument of apartheid -- the Population Registration Act. It is a numbingly routine process; he doesn't even wake up. But he will awaken soon enough to the significance of what has happened this long and tedious morning at 15 Market St. For although his life is just beginning, it is already pretty well set.    Barring major political changes, Edward's education won't be nearly as good as it would be if he were classified white, or even colored (mixed race) or Indian or Asian. He will have to live in one of the country's underdeveloped black townships. He will work at a job that holds little promise of promotion or riches, if, indeed, he works at all. And he won't be able to choose the people who make the laws that so order his life.    &quot;I only wish that he can be happy,&quot; says his mother as she wraps him in a blanket, positions him on her back and heads to a bus stop for the ride back to Soweto, the huge black township near Johannesburg.    Over the years, though, the Population Registration Act of 1950, the cornerstone of apartheid, has made many people desperately unhappy. Some people have committed suicide because of the act's inflexibility. Others have been forcibly separated from family members with different skin tones. Still others have endured the humiliation of having the width of their noses or the thickness of their lips measured to establish their race. The unrest racking the nation's black townships can be blamed on the disfranchisement and hopelessness that stem from the act.    In recent years, the South African government has made some progress on reforming apartheid -- more progress, even liberal whites will admit, than was thought possible five or 10 years ago. The government has scrapped the Immorality and Mixed Marriages acts, which outlawed sleeping with or marrying someone of a different race. The influx-control laws -- under which thousands of blacks were prosecuted every month for being where they weren't supposed to be -- are gone, too. And authorities have, in many instances, stopped prosecuting violators of the Group Areas Act, which segregates housing areas according to race.    But the Population Registration Act is still on the books and is being fully enforced as the guarantor of white privilege. And many whites, including the ones in power, would rather scrap reform than scrap the act.    &quot;Apartheid is like a huge onion. Each time you peel off a layer you expose the one underneath it,&quot; says John Kane-Berman, the director of the Institute of Race Relations. &quot;Eventually you get to the core, the Population Registration Act. The only permanent way to protect the core is not to peel anything off.&quot;    The act itself is 32 pages of twisted double negatives and convoluted definitions. But it is the reason that Desmond Tutu, the Anglican archbishop and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, is classified as black and thus prevented from doing what any 18-year-old white can do: vote. It is also the reason that the Rev. Allan Hendrickse, who is classified as colored, can be a member of the cabinet but can't swim at a beach reserved for whites. And it is why Nkululeko &quot;Squeegee&quot; Skweyiya ran fast enough to qualify for a recent high-school track meet but was too black to run in it.    Such things happen so regularly in South Africa that they have come to be seen as normal. Thus, no one here is shocked by the fate of a 10-year-old girl, known only as Ingrid in the local press. Her mother, who is black, has left her father, who is white, and can no longer live in the expensive white area by herself. The girl, who is colored, was placed in the custody of her mother and thus must also leave a nice house in a white suburb to live a life of poverty in a black township.    It is a mess created out of the neatness of the Population Registration Act, which orders South African society according to a strict color scheme.    &quot;Black,&quot; according to the act, &quot;means a person who is, or is generally accepted as, a member of any aboriginal race or tribe of Africa.&quot;    &quot;Colored person means a person who is not a white person or a black.&quot;    &quot;White person means a person who a) in appearance obviously is a white person and who is not generally accepted as a colored person; or b) is generally accepted as a white person and is not in appearance obviously not a white person.&quot;    In case that isn't clear enough, the act gives further guidance on who is or isn't white: &quot;In deciding whether any person is in appearance obviously a white person or not a white person within the meaning of the definition of 'white person,' his habits, education and speech and deportment and demeanor in general shall be taken into account.&quot;    Furthermore, says the act, &quot;a person shall be deemed not to be generally accepted as a white person, unless he is so accepted in the area in which or at any place where he: is ordinarily resident, is employed or carries on business, mixes socially or takes part in other activities with other members of the public, and in his association with the members of his family; and any other persons with whom he lives.&quot;    But in South Africa, as elsewhere, things, or people, aren't always as they appear. Thus, a woman with fair skin, blond hair and blue eyes -- and the habits, speech and deportment of a white person -- can still be classified as colored if one of her parents wasn't white. That's what happened to Cynthia Freeman in a celebrated trial a couple of years ago when the Group Areas Act was still being vigorously enforced. She failed to prove that she was accepted as white in order to continue living in a white neighborhood. She was allowed to stay in her apartment after the case was appealed on other grounds, but her ordeal at the trial remains the classic apartheid nightmare.    Gilbert Marcus was Ms. Freeman's lawyer, and he shudders at the recollection of the trial, where her features were closely scrutinized by the court. One of his witnesses, an anthropologist, said her hair looked wavy, her skin was &quot;typical white&quot; and her eyes were a color blue that he had never seen in a colored person before. But the judge wasn't so sure that she was &quot;not in appearance obviously not a white person.&quot; While he conceded that her hair was light and her skin pale, he found that she had a flat nose and high cheekbones -- which, he figured, aren't typical of whites.    &quot;It was horrific,&quot; Mr. Marcus says, &quot;right out of Nazi Germany.&quot; As for Ms. Freeman, she said after the trial, &quot;They have hurt me so much I can't feel anymore.&quot;    The Population Registration Act comes straight out of the 1950s, when H.F. Verwoerd, the architect of apartheid, made it the foundation of his strategy of divide and rule. By splitting up the population by race and, through a host of other apartheid legislation, assigning nonwhites to lower positions in society, the white minority could continue in power. Over the years, the act has been amended 14 times to bring apartheid up to date, but no one at the head of the ruling National Party has ever considered discarding it.    Today, it is more vital than ever. In 1983, the act was entrenched in the new constitution, which established a tricameral parliament along racial lines, with separate chambers for whites, coloreds and Asians but none for blacks. And in the current National Party policy manifesto, prepared for the white election campaign, the act is the protector of the sacred notion of group rights. Some officials talk about eliminating individual discrimination based on race, but at the same time they insist on maintaining group identity through something called &quot;own affairs,&quot; which means, basically, segregated schools, residential areas and governments.    The Population Registration Act, says Con Botha, the National Party's information director, is &quot;part and parcel of the necessity to identify groups. It is an essential element in our whole philosophical approach to the racial mix in this country.&quot;    In this racial mix, there are also mixups. Some people, for example, can't identify with the group they are identified with. Thus, there is something called the race-reclassification procedure, which is akin to a leopard changing its spots.    Last year, according to statistics from the Home Affairs ministry, 1,624 people applied to change their race, and 1,102 succeeded. The applicants were 666 blacks who wanted to change to colored; 506 coloreds who wanted to change to white; 89 coloreds to Indian; 65 Indians to colored; 61 Indians to Malay; 50 Malays to Indian; 41 coloreds to black; 26 coloreds to Malay; 21 Malays to colored; 18 blacks to Griqua (ancestors of the Hottentots); 14 Malays to white; 12 coloreds to Chinese; 10 blacks to Indian; nine Indians to white; nine whites to colored; seven Chinese to white; five blacks to other Asian; four coloreds to Griqua; four Griquas to colored; two Griquas to black; two whites to Malay; two blacks to Malay; and one Griqua to white.    Patrick Blom is one of the statistics. He went from black to colored, a promotion since education, housing and political representation are generally a notch better for coloreds than for blacks. Mr. Blom, who can neither read nor write {&quot;I can only sign my name&quot;} because he never attended school, left his mother and went to stay with another family when he was about eight. Somewhere along the line, he was registered as black, even though he says his parents were colored. That classification never really mattered to him until he married a colored woman. Then he wanted to buy a house in a colored neighborhood near Cape Town without worrying about the Group Areas Act, and he wanted to ensure that his children would, without question, be classified colored.    Mr. Blom's lawyer, Essa Moosa, decribes reclassification as &quot;a humiliating and dehumanizing procedure.&quot; It used to be even worse, he says, in the days &quot;when they would put a pencil in your hair, and if it stayed in you were black, if it fell out, you were colored.&quot;    No one stuck a pencil in Mr. Blom's hair, but the reclassification officials did give him a close look. &quot;I was sitting there, talking to a man, when a lady would come in and look at me. She would leave and another lady would come in and look and go. They noticed the way I talked and acted.&quot;    The interview was supplemented by an affidavit, in which Mr. Blom swore that &quot;I am by appearance and association a member of the colored group.&quot; He also supplied a letter from his employer, who runs an auto dealership. Mr. Blom, wrote the employer, &quot;looks, speaks and lives as a colored and not for a moment did it dawn on me that he would be called a black. I must admit I was quite surprised. I am sure he was registered on either late Friday afternoon or on a Monday morning.&quot;    At 15 Market St. in downtown Johannesburg, where the Population Registration Act comes alive, every minute of every day seems to be a bad time. Some 6,500 people, almost all of them black, come through the doors each day to register one thing or another -- from births to marriages to deaths. These days, most of the people are coming for new identification documents issued under the latest twist to the Population Registration Act.    Last year, when the influx-control laws were officially phased out and passbooks were eliminated, the government introduced a nonracial identification book. Whites, blacks, coloreds and all the other races now have the same ID document, which lists a host of personal details but not race.    This innovation was heralded by the government as proof that apartheid had expired. But few of the people who are waiting to get IDs at 15 Market St. are convinced.    &quot;It's a different color and size,&quot; says a young man named Lawrence, comparing the new ID with the old passbook, &quot;but that's about it. Nothing is really changing.&quot;    He offers a personal example to explain what he means. In a few days, he says, he will be going to school at Fort Hare University, which is for blacks. He would rather be heading to Rhodes University, which is racially mixed but predominantly white. He wanted to study communications there. But his application never got past the education authorities. Communications, they said, could be studied at a black school.    Farther back in the waiting line, a woman named Paula begins filling out the application for a new ID. She hesitates at question No. 8, the one that asks for &quot;population group.&quot;    &quot;See,&quot; she says, &quot;even if it's not in the ID, it's still on the application and in the files.&quot; She prints the word &quot;black&quot; and moves on to question nine. </TEXT></DOC>