<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871006-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Robertson's Conversion From Rakishness to FaithCulminates in His Crusade for the White House---By David ShribmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   {This is the seventh in a series of personal profiles of the 1988 presidential candidates.}    LEXINGTON, Va. -- In this remote college town, where the portraits of Stonewall Jackson and Robert E. Lee hang even in the supermarket, Pat Robertson is remembered as a boy who wanted to make it big.    He was precocious, competitive, aggressive. A senator's son, he knew the pleasures of power and privilege. He wanted to date the leading debutantes, be in the best clubs, cut the widest swath. &quot;He always wanted to go first class,&quot; recalls Louise Moore, a childhood friend who practices law in this conservative county seat in western Virginia.    His early perspectives were formed in the gracious stucco house surrounded by giant elms at the corner of Highland Road and Jackson Street. The bedroom windows, some of them with 40 separate panes, looked out over the Allegheny Mountains. There Sen. A. Willis Robertson, a sometime disciple of the Harry Byrd machine, urged his pudgy son with the long brown curls to marry a rich girl -- he offered some specific suggestions -- and make a lot of money. There Gladys Robertson, a strikingly beautiful but reclusive woman who passed out religious tracts in the dormitories of Washington andamp; Lee University, urged her son to find God and enter the ministry.    In the end, Pat Robertson did all of that. As a young man, he had little interest in politics and religion, caring only for the diversions of the Southern fraternity man: drinking, cards, football pools, the women at Hollins and Sweet Briar and Randolph-Macon colleges. Then came a stunning religious conversion that prompted Mr. Robertson to forswear the bottle, build a religious broadcasting empire and now, as a declared candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, enter the political arena.    Today, Mr. Robertson, who resigned his ordination as a Southern Baptist minister last week, sees himself the heir to a tradition of American spiritual renewal dating to 18th century preachers Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield. Some of his detractors see him instead as a modern-day Elmer Gantry, a religious man with a &quot;polished mahogany voice,&quot; one who knew what Sinclair Lewis called &quot;the intoxication of holding an audience with his voice as with his closed hand, holding it, shaking it, lifting it.&quot;    Even his severest critics acknowledge that Mr. Robertson, who says he has an IQ of 137, is an unusually intelligent and complex figure. He is a man of whispery speech with a raging temper. He reads voraciously (besides the Bible, he calls &quot;Les Miserables&quot; the most important book he ever read) and yet watches two television movies (mostly action adventures or westerns) a week. He counted the late Rep. Allard Lowenstein, the liberal New York Democrat, along with Jim Bakker, the PTL religious broadcaster, among his friends.    Pat Robertson found Lexington, where he was reared and attended Washington andamp; Lee, somewhat tame, less exciting than Washington, where Sen. Robertson lived much of the year. He was born Marion Gordon Robertson, but almost everyone called him Pat, and he had a flair for life, so much so that it troubled his parents. Mrs. Robertson telephoned his friends and asked them to pray for Pat. One day Sen. Robertson, who could hit a spitoon from 15 feet and once splattered tobacco juice in Pat's eye, confronted his son with an empty 7-Up bottle he found in the family car. He told Pat nobody he knew drank that stuff straight.    And though Mr. Robertson was elected a member of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society his junior year, his college life revolved more around the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, housed in a massive white clapboard building with four huge columns on one of Lexington's main streets. He wrote his older brother complaining that the World War II veterans who were then streaming back to Washington andamp; Lee on the GI Bill were too serious, not sufficiently interested in drinking or poker. &quot;He was quite the party boy,&quot; says Charles Glasgow, who lived a block away from the Robertsons and attended Washington andamp; Lee with Pat.    His classmates at Yale Law School remember that his interests ran chiefly in the direction of poker and women. &quot;If you took the 10 guys I knew best and asked me which one was most likely to completely change his whole life and become an evangelist,&quot; says one law-school classmate, &quot;Pat would be toward the bottom of the list.&quot;    Today, Mr. Robertson openly admits he led a roguish life, even paraphrasing former Democratic Sen. Sam Ervin of North Carolina by saying that when it comes to the sins of his youth, either the Lord has forgiven him or the statute of limitations has run out. &quot;I had a dramatic change in my life 30 years ago,&quot; he says.    While in law school, Mr. Robertson attended a party and saw a young woman lean over some candles, catching her hair on fire. He put the fire out, winning his introduction to Adelia &quot;Dede&quot; Elmer, a Yale nursing student who wasn't Southern (she was from Columbus, Ohio) and who wasn't Baptist (she was Roman Catholic). They were married secretly on Aug. 27, 1954, in Elkton, Md., known as a venue for quick marriages. Their son was born 10 weeks later.    Mr. Robertson continued to live in an apartment above a law-school eating club with three other students, never telling his roommates he was married or had a child. &quot;We didn't really start our life together until we got to New York&quot; after law school, he says. Both describe their 33-year marriage as fulfilling. They have four children.    Pat Robertson was in emotional free fall for years. He flunked the bar exam and found no satisfaction in business. He told his wife he thought he'd like the ministry. She envisioned a &quot;nice church&quot; and a &quot;big old manse with rooms to spare&quot; and imagined herself behind an elegant silver tea service entertaining elegant women.    Mr. Robertson had something different in mind, the product of a dramatic religious experience he said he had over dinner in Philadelphia. &quot;I walked across a curtain to a whole new life,&quot; he says now. &quot;I understood why I was here, I understood my purpose, I even understood modern art.&quot;    Not everyone believed him. &quot;The only word that can express my reaction was that I was incredulous,&quot; says Willis Robertson Jr., his brother. &quot;I found it very hard to believe that he had done this.&quot;    The transition didn't come easily for the young couple, Pat Robertson says in his autobiography. He told her he was saved. She said he must be drunk. He said he'd met Jesus. She said she'd have dinner ready soon. Mrs. Robertson wanted her children to grow up in a &quot;normal&quot; home, and some of her husband's behavior didn't seem quite normal: He poured all the liquor down the drain, he sold the furniture and told his wife the Lord told him to do it, he abandoned his eight-months-pregnant wife and their child to go to a fellowship camp in a remote corner of Canada saying God would care for her.    He says he felt God's urgings not to assist his father in his unsuccessful 1966 primary fight. &quot;You cannot tie my eternal purposes,&quot; he quotes God in a passage of his autobiography that was eliminated in the latest printing, &quot;to the success of any political candidate.&quot;    Over the years, Mr. Robertson, who says he recalls &quot;very distinctly talking to God&quot; as a youngster, claims to have had several conversations with the Lord. He says, for example, that God told him to pay $37,000 for his first television station (when the owner told him the station had lost its federal broadcasting license, Mr. Robertson replied that God would renew it for him). He says God told him that Congress was going to pass legislation requiring all TV sets to have UHF antennas. He says God told him He wanted Mr. Robertson to have an RCA transmitter. &quot;If I worked for IBM for 30 years and never had any direction from my supervisor, that would be strange,&quot; Mr. Robertson explains. &quot;I'm employed by God.&quot;    Mr. Robertson says, moreover, that prayers saved the Christian Broadcasting Network from Hurricane Gloria's destruction. &quot;If I couldn't move a hurricane,&quot; he says, &quot;I could hardly move a nation.&quot;    In the past, he has used Biblical justifications to defend his views, citing the Scriptures to predict the destruction of the Soviet Union, to buttress his pro-Israel position and to oppose abortion. Now as a campaigner, he advocates a strict conservative platform: prayer in schools, hardline defense policies, an offensive to &quot;decolonize the fringes of the Russian empire by supporting freedom fighters&quot; and an end to &quot;central government under the religion of secular humanism.&quot; He says he isn't anti-black but seldom mentions civil rights.    Mr. Robertson pioneered religious broadcasting and watched his vision become CBN, the fifth-largest cable television network in the nation. Today he plays down healing services and speaking in tongues, calls himself a businessman rather than a preacher and points to accomplishments such as the founding of CBN University, broadcast operations with annual sales in excess of $30 million and relief centers in two dozen nations.    He still faces questions over former Rep. Paul McCloskey's charge that Mr. Robertson urged his father to use his influence to keep him out of combat in the Korean War. &quot;When I saw him on TV in 1981,&quot; says Mr. McCloskey, &quot;he was identical as he looked grinning on the dock, waving goodbye as he was going off to safe duty in Japan while we were going to combat in the middle of the winter.&quot; Mr. Robertson, who has initiated a libel suit over the charges, says there is &quot;not one word of truth&quot; to the McCloskey claims, arguing that it is &quot;based on hearsay of a couple of young guys.&quot;    Years later, Mr. Robertson says, he was struck by a passage in the memoirs of Charles Finney describing the 19th century American revivalist's &quot;baptism in the Holy Spirit,&quot; a religious experience leading to a deep belief in God and a commitment to evangelism. Now Mr. Robertson faces his baptism in politics. &quot;He's in the Finney tradition because of his belief that Christian beliefs must be expressed in political forms,&quot; says David Weddle, a specialist in American religious history at Cornell College in Iowa and a specialist on Finney's theology. &quot;But by running for office, he breaks with the Finney tradition. He's involving himself in a system that includes compromise and human power.&quot;    ---   IN BRIEF   Pat Robertson   -- 57 YEARS OLD   --MARRIED 33 YEARS, FOUR CHILDREN    -- WASHINGTON andamp; LEE UNIVERSITY, YALE LAW SCHOOL, NEW YORKTHEOLOGICAL SEMINARY   -- REPUBLICAN OF VIRGINIA   Southern Baptist minister 1961 to 1987; founder and president of Christian Broadcasting Network 1960 to 1986; founder and chancellor of CBN University 1977 to present.    Foreign leaders he most admires: Margaret Thatcher because she is a &quot;tough, no nonsense conservative&quot; and Mikhail Gorbachev because &quot;he has a masterful sense of timing and the ability to win public opinion among his enemies and his country's enemies.&quot;    Proudest accomplishment: Creation of a private sector relief agency, Operation Blessing, which he estimates has assisted 26 million people and taught 123,000 illiterates to read and write.    Economist he'd turn to for advice: Gary Schilling    Foreign-policy adviser he'd turn to: Edward Luttwak </TEXT></DOC>