<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880218-0160 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: The Race: Barren Messages, Fearful Voters </HL><AUTHOR> Hodding Carter III </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   What is now clear about the presidential selection process is that nothing is going to be clear for a long time. Despite daily tracking by the candidates and the news media, despite endless thumb-sucking by people like me in print and on the tube, and despite ingenious variations of negative advertising devised by the campaign geniuses deployed in the field, no one has a clue as to how the whole thing is going to come out in either party. But while that conclusion is widely shared, the cause lies not only with the clutch of candidates but also with the electorate.    First, a word about the candidates. The stridency of their TV ads and speeches cannot mask the extraordinarily barren nature of their messages. Eliminate Pat Robertson and Jesse Jackson from the equation, and what the voters are hearing mostly runs the gamut from A to B, with the soon-to-be lamented Bruce Babbitt all alone out there somewhere around G.    On both sides, Republican and Democratic, the most accurate way to describe the campaign is: Uninspiring. There is little fundamental disagreement on the major issues to match the sharp divergences in the way candidates Bush and Reagan viewed the world in 1980. Nor is there among the likely winners a single person offering a sense of purpose and vision to match Mr. Reagan's in that same election. What we have are counterpunchers and clinchers, men determined to avoid serious damage and seemingly incapable of offering a 15-round strategy.    To return to Messrs. Robertson and Jackson, that critique is not applicable. But while each -- and Mr. Jackson in particular -- has demonstrated a limited ability to appeal to voters outside his core constituency, neither is going to break out of the minority-candidate category without substantially changing his basic message. That in turn isn't going to happen because it has been each man's message, and the cadres it mobilizes, that has made and will make each man an increasingly significant factor in the conventions. The two of them might as well be living on separate planets when it comes to policies and programs, but their appeal to the politically dispossessed is remarkably similar.    But the central point remains the same. The Iowa &quot;bounce&quot; or the New Hampshire &quot;surge&quot; notwithstanding, there is no spirit, no inspiration in the campaign to date. It's being run by computers, polls, technicians, consultants and media events. So far, it is animated by . . . nothing.    The reason, or so it seems to me, is not that there is no wisdom or even vision among those now running. It is that whatever tendencies any of them might have to talk turkey to the voters is withered by the clear evidence that the voters are not yet ready to hear it. You can and should call that political cowardice. It is fair if not imperative that much more be demanded in the way of leadership. But the fact is that in this country, people don't get elected by talking about subjects the voters are not prepared to encounter.    For most Americans who are going to vote, the problems and the pain are somewhere over the horizon. For the moment, while they are disturbed by everything from the national debt to the quality of education, most are not directly affected.    They know the day of accountability is coming, but they are in no hurry to reach it. They now know that &quot;morning in America&quot; was phony-baloney, but it's hard to get out of bed and back to work.    Polls and focus groups alike illustrate the electorate's ambivalence about some of the most fundamental issues facing the country. But at least as telling as those highly self-conscious instruments for measuring public attitudes, our behavior tells its own story. For instance, we continue to pile up personal debt and draw down savings, with only an occasional blip in the opposite direction. We routinely reject new taxes but just as routinely demand more services. Having our cake and eating it too has become the national pastime.    About a year ago, one of the men who was then thinking of entering the race spent a lot of time trying to decide how to overcome this problem. How, he would often ask, can I govern effectively if the voters are not prepared in the campaign for what I must and will try to do in office? But how, he would go on to ask, can I or anyone get elected by telling hard truths to folks who prefer to think about them tomorrow, if at all?    That candidate, who later took the plunge, never adequately answered his own questions, and there is little evidence that most of those running now are even bothering to ask. As a result, in a world in which America has lost its economic hegemony and must redefine the meaning of leadership in a time of severely tightened budgets, those questions are barely addressed by those who have the best chance of being elected president. The grim challenge of the urban underclass isn't even on their campaign checklists.    And thus a campaign in which it is hard to decide why Candidate Jones is a better choice than Candidates Smith or Black. The undistinguished wrestle with the undistinguishable for tactical advantage and the voters make choices based on transient and largely artificial issues. It appears probable that both parties will stagger into their conventions with candidates who offer everything except a meaningful agenda for the nation's future. It is not a happy prospect. As it says in Proverbs, &quot;Where there is no vision, the people perish.&quot;    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>