<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881031-0160 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Where Was George? Reading This Book </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Unlikely as it may seem, intelligent things do occasionally happen on political campaigns.    While covering the 1988 presidential campaign, I discovered a good book. It even was recommended to me by one of the candidates, a particularly encouraging development.    The book is &quot;Flights of Passage: Reflections of a World War II Aviator&quot; (Naval Institute Press, 270 pages, $16.95), and it offers some insights into the makeup of Vice President George Bush, who enthusiastically lent me his copy. &quot;Flights of Passage&quot; is a charming, first-person account of the bittersweet experiences of Samuel Hynes, an 18-year-old naval aviator called to battle in the Pacific in World War II.    Mr. Bush, it happens, also was an 18-year-old naval aviator called to battle in the Pacific in World War II. Mr. Hynes's experiences closely paralleled the vice president's, and Mr. Bush says this tale of coming of age in those trying years rings true to him.    As a result, &quot;Flights of Passage&quot; goes some way toward explaining the formative experiences of the man who may be our next president. In particular, Mr. Hynes's account may help explain how Mr. Bush developed the improbable blend of innocence and worldliness that has always been one of the most perplexing features of his political persona.    Mr. Hynes, now Woodrow Wilson Professor of Literature at Princeton University, paints a vivid picture of an American youth called to war before his time. He was a college freshman from a working-class Minnesota family when, like Mr. Bush, he was escorted to the local railroad station by his loving but slightly aloof father and dispatched to become a man behind the controls of a Navy plane.    Young warrior-pilots of Mr. Bush's generation entered the adult world without entirely leaving their boyhood world behind. Their fraternities were their flight squadrons, and the girls who would have been their college sweethearts became their wartime child brides. Mr. Hynes likens the experience to playing adult. The dizzying intensity of growing up this way hit him one night as he stood on the California coast with his new 19-year-old bride, just before shipping out. &quot;A year ago I was in a barracks at Whiting Field, listening to the rain -- a cadet, a single, a kid. I hadn't even met Liz. Now I was married, and an officer. Where would I be in another year? Would I be alive?&quot;    Throughout training, Mr. Hynes and his classmates feared above all that they would wash out, or that the war would end, and that they'd miss their chance at fighting the good fight. Once in battle, the aviators, probably like all soldiers before and since, found war to be a series of brief horrors mixed in with long stretches of aimlessness. They found their Japanese enemy a faceless and impersonal foe only rarely seen from the lofty vantage of a cockpit.    There were a couple of significant differences between Mr. Hynes's experience and Mr. Bush's. Mr. Hynes chose to become a bomber pilot, while Mr. Bush opted for the more glamorous life of a fighter pilot. A more telling difference was that, when naval aviators finished training and had to choose between the Navy Air Corps or its sister Marine Air Corps, Mr. Hynes, the working-class Midwesterner, chose the Marines. Mr. Bush, the scion of an upperclass Eastern family, chose the more polished Navy.    Judging from Mr. Hynes's descriptions, those are the class lines along which that choice usually was made: &quot;Of my flight school friends, it was certainly true that the well-bred ones tended to take Navy commissions; and those like myself who felt provincial, or common, or underbred, chose the Marine Corps, where those qualities wouldn't show.&quot;    Otherwise, Mr. Bush's story is remarkably similar to Mr. Hynes's. He, too, married his young sweetheart during his aviator years. He developed a bond with his fellow pilots that continues to this day, as anyone who accompanies the vice president onto a U.S. Navy aircraft carrier can readily see.    He went to the Pacific, was shot down, rescued and sent back into battle. Like others of his generation, Mr. Bush has seemed to accept the unspoken notion that service in the war was a seminal experience, but wasn't to be dwelled upon. It took Mr. Hynes four decades to write his reminiscences, and it took Mr. Bush until this year to talk much about his war experience in public.    It may be modesty, or it may be smugness. More likely, it's simply the way those in the Bush generation chose to deal with an experience that, unlike the experience of a Vietnam generation, hardened them without disillusioning them.    That, anyway, is the picture that emerges from Mr. Hynes's description of the scene as he and another airman walked silently away from their last flight. &quot;I think we must have had the same feelings,&quot; he says. &quot;It was all over now, we were at the end of the adventure; we had become men with families and responsibilities and futures. The end of flying had made us mortal.&quot;    ---   Mr. Seib is a reporter in the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>