<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870121-0070 </DOCNO><HL> High Court to Review School Officials'Authority to Censor Student Newspapers---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES LABORPUBLISHING (PUB)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SUPREME COURT (SUP)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to review the authority of public school officials to censor student newspapers that are published through high school journalism classes.    The justices will hear an appeal by school officials in Hazelwood, Mo., a suburb of St. Louis. The case began with a lawsuit filed by three former students in 1983 after their high school principal deleted two pages from an issue of the student newspaper.    The high court's decision, which isn't expected until the spring of 1988, could affect hundreds of public high school and even public college newspapers nationwide that are published as part of journalism programs. Mark Goodman, director of the nonprofit Student Press Law Center in Washington, D.C., said at least half the public high school newspapers in the U.S. are produced through journalism classes.    The legal issue involves balancing the First Amendment guarantee of freedom of the press against the interests of education officials in planning a curriculum and running orderly schools.    A federal district court in St. Louis ruled for the school, saying that because the newspaper was published by a journalism class rather than as an extracurricular activity, it wasn't intended as a &quot;public forum&quot; for students and was subject to greater supervision by school authorities.    But a federal appeals court in St. Louis ruled that the student newspaper was still a public forum and that the First Amendment rights of the students were violated.    In the appeal, the school district asked the justices to decide whether newspapers produced by journalism classes are a public forum. If the high court says such publications aren't a public forum, that should end the case.    But when a high school provides a public forum, such as a newspaper, the Supreme Court has said that student expression may be curtailed only if it &quot;materially disrupts classwork or involves substantial disorder or invasion of the rights of others.&quot;    The Hazelwood principal, concerned about possible invasions of privacy, objected to two articles. One described student experiences with pregnancy, the other the impact of divorce on children.    The appeals court ruled that the articles presented no threat of disruption and no real threat of liability for invasion of privacy.    Withholding Taxes   The high court clarified a technical, but important question on Internal Revenue Service suits to collect back employment taxes from a bank that has loaned a company money to pay wages. The justices ruled 9-0 that in such suits, the IRS doesn't have to give the bank a copy of the tax bill within 60 days of issuing it to the employer.    By law, the IRS must notify a company within 60 days of an assessment for failure to pay taxes withheld from employees for income and Social Security taxes. If the IRS can't collect, it may sue a third party -- such as a bank -- that has lent the company money to pay wages.    The law aims to ensure that whoever provides the money for wages would be held liable for back taxes.    The issue in the case, and in a dozen similar lawsuits throughout the country, was whether the IRS must give the lender the same 60-day notice of an assessment that it was required to give the employer.    The case involved Jersey Shore State Bank, Jersey Shore, Pa., a unit of Penns Woods Bancorp Inc. Beginning in 1976, the bank lent money to Pennmount Industries Inc., a furniture manufacturer that failed to pay the IRS withheld taxes from late 1977 to early 1980. The IRS sued the bank in 1983 for about $72,000 plus interest for Pennmount's tax debt.    A federal district court in Scranton, Pa., ruled that the suit was invalid because the bank wasn't notified of the assessment within 60 days. A federal appeals court in Philadelphia reversed that decision and ruled for the IRS. In a ruling written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the high court affirmed the appeals court ruling.    Door-to-Door Soliciting   The justices, by a 6-3 vote, upheld a federal appeals court ruling that local governments can't restrict door-to-door solicitation to daytime business hours. Such a restriction violates the First Amendment free speech rights of groups that use home solicitation to ask for support or to enlist members.    The justices didn't issue an opinion, but in a brief order that does create a precedent, they affirmed the ruling by a federal appeals court in Chicago striking down a local rule in Watseka, Ill., about 75 miles south of Chicago. The rule restricted door-to-door soliciting to 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Saturday.    The local rule was challenged by Illinois Public Action Council, a non-profit group that represents low-income people on economic issues such as energy and taxes. The council, which uses door-to-door surveys to pinpoint supporters and enlist members, argued that many of its potential targets weren't home during the work day and the rule was too restrictive. The appeals court ruled that while a community may regulate solicitation to protect its residents, the Watseka rule was too restrictive.    Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Byron White and Sandra O'Connor dissented, suggesting in a brief opinion that they disagreed with the appeals court and would prefer to hear the case argued in the high court.    Montana Pregnancy Law   Without explanation, the Supreme Court ordered the Montana Supreme Court to reconsider its ruling upholding that state's law requiring employers to provide disability leave and to guarantee job reinstatement to women who can no longer work because of pregnancy. The justices said the Montana court should see whether its decision is consistent with the high court's ruling last week upholding, by a 6-3 vote, a similar California law.    The action was somewhat surprising because both the U.S. Supreme Court and the Montana court said that the state laws don't conflict with federal civil rights law. As a result, the Supreme Court could simply have dismissed the appeal, as Justices Harry Blackmun, John Stevens and Antonin Scalia suggested yesterday.    The appeal to the high court was filed by an employer, Miller-Wohl Co., a unit of Petrie Stores Corp. </TEXT></DOC>