<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0050 </DOCNO><HL> McFarlane Said to Tell Congress IsraelGave Him Names of 'Moderate' Iranians---By Robert S. Greenberger and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane privately told Congress Monday that Israel gave him a list of more than 800 &quot;moderate&quot; Iranian leaders -- notably including Hojatoleslam Hashemi Rafsanjani, the speaker of Iran's Parliament -- that Israel said could be cultivated by U.S. arms sales.    Mr. McFarlane told the House Foreign Affairs Committee during a closed-door session that David Kimche, Israel's former director general of the Foreign Ministry, in 1985 gave Mr. McFarlane a seven or eightpage, type-written list of the names of senior Iranian military or political officials making up a faction receptive to improved ties with the West, according to sources.    Mr. Kimche reportedly told Mr. McFarlane that the list had been thoroughly checked by Israeli intelligence and was proof that there was a large body of senior Iranian officials anxious to change U.S.-Iranian relations.    Mr. McFarlane said the Iranian officials wanted to improve relations with the U.S. because they wanted to bring to an end the bitter Iran-Iraq war, they had become alarmed about the continuing deterioration of Iran's economy, and they were concerned about the potential threat from the neighboring Soviet Union.    Mr. Rafsanjani has been named before as a leader of this faction, but, the sources noted, Mr. McFarlane confirmed this in sworn testimony before the panel during the closed-door session.    Mr. McFarlane's testimony came before three central figures in the Iran-Contra affair yesterday refused to testify before congressional committees, citing their rights against self-incrimination under the Fifth Amendment.    In an unusual House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing, Vice Adm. John Poindexter, who replaced Mr. McFarlane as President Reagan's National Security Adviser, appeared voluntarily, requested a postponement of his testimony, and then &quot;respectfully and regretfully&quot; declined to answer the lawmakers' questions.    Moments later, Lt. Col. Oliver North, who was fired last month from the National Security Council staff, entered the hearing room wearing his Marine Corps uniform and similarly declined to answer questions. He also subsequently refused to testify before the House Intelligence Committee.    Richard Secord, a retired Air Force general who has been linked to the secret plan to sell U.S. arms to Iran and funnel profits to the anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua, also refused to answer questions yesterday in a closed session of the Senate Intelligence Committee. He, too, cited his Fifth Amendment right.    Separately, William Webster, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, informally has been reviewing a &quot;short list&quot; of names believed to be under consideration by an Appeals Court panel for appointment as independent counsel to investigate the administration's arms shipments to Iran and the diversion of profits from the sales to the Nicaraguan rebels, according to one official familiar with the process. The list includes former Defense Secretary Clark Clifford, the official said. FBI and Justice Department spokesmen declined to comment. Mr. Clifford didn't return a telephone call seeking comment.    Justice Department attorneys yesterday continued negotiations with law-enforcement and banking officials in Switzerland to gain access to records of two secret Swiss bank accounts thought to have been used in the secret operation. Officials familiar with the investigation said one of the numbered accounts is believed to have been controlled by Lt. Col. North, and they suspect Mr. Secord or one of his associates controlled the other.    Messrs. Poindexter and North last week declined to answer questions in closed Senate Intelligence Committee hearings on the issue, also citing the Fifth Amendment. Pleading the Fifth Amendment legally can't be construed to imply guilt.    The Foreign Affairs panel had hoped that the two men would help answer the question of who authorized the plan to use profits from the Iran arms sales to pay for supplies for the Nicaraguan rebels, or Contras. The special prosecutor is expected to consider whether such a diversion violated U.S. law.    Attorneys for both witnesses told the committee that their clients weren't seeking immunity from prosecution that might arise from their testimony. However, whether to grant immunity to some witnesses is becoming a central issue in the Iran-Contra investigation. Several lawmakers involved in the investigations -- including Rep. Dante Fascell (D., Fla.), chairman of the Foreign Affairs committee -- said they didn't want to make decisions on granting immunity at least until an independent counsel is appointed.    In his closed-door session Monday with the House Foreign Affairs panel, Mr. McFarlane said that during a trip to Tehran last May, he met a senior aide to Mr. Rafsanjani, but didn't meet with the Iranian speaker as he had expected. By December 1985, when he was leaving government, Mr. McFarlane had become disappointed with the secret arms-sales initiative and recommended to President Reagan that the U.S. reconsider it because, rather than improve relations, it had become an arms-for-hostages arrangement.    Yet, in January 1986, the administration began making direct arms shipments to Iran. Earlier, the U.S. had approved Israeli shipments and replaced the weapons that Israel sold to Iran.    Justice Department officials said federal investigators formally requested that Credit Suisse freeze two numbered accounts at its Geneva branch and provide information about the flow of funds through them. Department officials have told the Swiss government they want to ensure that the accounts remain intact during what could be several days of negotiations to work out the details of obtaining access to the records.    Swiss and U.S. officials have said that one of the accounts they are investigating was set up under the name of Lake Resources Inc., a U.S. company.    Federal and congressional investigators are trying to determine whether Mr. Secord or others suspected of serving as middlemen in some of the covert U.S. arms shipments to Iran may have defrauded the government or profited illegally from the transactions.    Sen. David Durenberger (R., Minn.), chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, told reporters that while it isn't clear how much money raised from the arms sales was funneled to the Contras fighting the Nicaraguan government, the diversion wasn't &quot;as large an operation as those involved originally anticipated.&quot;    He said that some of the middlemen in the arms sales may have reaped much of the profit from the arms sales. Various interests shared in the &quot;mark up&quot; of the price of the weapons &quot;as payment for their services,&quot; he said. </TEXT></DOC>