<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870327-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Municipal Bondholders Need More Information---By Richard Ciccarone</HL><DD> 03/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND) </IN><TEXT>   In 1986, total holdings by individuals of municipal bonds increased a whopping $65 billion, while institutional participation declined. From 1978 to 1986, the share of this market held by individuals either directly or through mutual funds roughly doubled to 51%.    As a result, the average investor now has a greater stake than ever before in the fiscal health of the nation's cities and towns -- and in the willingness of local officials to open key financial data to public scrutiny. Unfortunately, the amount of credit information available about a bond seems to move in inverse proportion to the number of issues in the market. This lack of data is bad news for both buyers and sellers and may well lead to SEC-type regulation for the municipal-bond industry.    Unlike publicly held corporations, tax-exempt issuers were relieved of many disclosure requirements by the Securities Act of 1933. While stockholders can keep up with their holdings through the daily stock-market tables and quarterly and annual reports, muni bondholders are afforded no such convenience. The best source of information is the &quot;official statement,&quot; or OS in the parlance of the trade, which is somewhat analogous to the prospectus in a stock offering. Issued prior to the sale of the bonds, the OS is often a forbiddingly long and complex document.    This may be the last official communication bondholders receive from the issuer during the life of the bond.    The ratings agencies assign a rating to each issue they review when the issue is sold. Updated reviews are usually done at the time of the issuer's next sale. Though interim reviews may be done at any time, surveillance is likely to be uneven, particularly in the trillion-dollar secondary market. The problem is most frequently evident in tax-exempt &quot;private-activity&quot; bonds -- particularly those issued for local housing, health-care facilities, and small industrial projects -- which often account for some of the market's riskier credits. Between 1978 and 1987, private-activity bonds grew to constitute more than 60% of all new issues.    A similar problem is also apparent with regard to tax-exempt and taxable municipal securities issued under Section 103 of the Tax Code. These are linked with state and local government authorities, exempting them from registration and reporting. Since tax-exempt and taxable private-activity bond issuers frequently are shell financing corporations, having no defined constituencies or legislative bodies to which they must report their financial condition, investors must rely solely on the strength of the original indenture and the ability and willingness of a bond trustee to oversee their interests. If these same issues had been sold as corporate securities, they would have been subject to the stringent reporting requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission.    Even in today's booming mutual-fund environment, about 35% of all money invested by individuals in tax-exempt, fixed-income bonds goes toward direct purchase of the bonds. The rest finds its way into professionally managed mutual funds or unit investment trusts.    Theoretically, these mutual funds should have the resources to accurately evaluate the credit quality of a municipal issue. Unfortunately, professional analysts are often stymied by the same sort of obstructions that frustrate the individual investor. A 1985 survey by the National Federation of Municipal Analysts on disclosure of credit information for tax-exempt bonds revealed that more than 50% of all responding analysts found it frequently or extremely difficult to obtain secondary-market credit information on health-care and industrial-development bonds. And 42% found it similarly difficult to obtain reports from housing-bond issuers.    The original argument for exempting issuers from comprehensive reporting held that the vast majority of bond buyers were institutions such as banks and insurance companies, which Congress believed were able to fend for themselves. This may have been true in 1933, but today the numbers tell a different story. The New York City fiscal crisis provided the impetus for further examination of the prevailing requirements as stated in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. But Congress again rejected any tightening; it believed that the relatively low level of defaults made this unnecessary.    This wisdom was called into question shortly thereafter when the Washington Public Power Supply System (WPPSS) defaulted on some $2.25 billion of debt in what has been the largest such default to date. Much of that debt was held by individuals, who had little or no warning of financial problems. It now appears likely that the SEC will take action against the underwriters in this instance.    Although this combination of circumstances -- a higher risk of default coupled with increased market participation by small investors -- has altered the municipal-bond landscape, it has yet to make much of an impression on issuers. In the prevailing environment, abuses like the WPPSS default are a virtual invitation for the government to step in with increased oversight. Today, this likelihood has been compounded by the insider-trading scandal on Wall Street and the return of control over the Senate to the Democrats, whose zeal for regulating markets is generally believed to be stronger than that of their Republican counterparts.    What's to be done? I believe that the municipal-bond industry must take it upon itself to avoid federal regulation by improving ongoing disclosure. A few hopeful steps were taken in this direction a decade ago in the wake of New York City's near-default, when underwriters came under attack for not informing the public of the seriousness of the city's financial problems. Major national underwriters conditioned their underwritings on whether disclosure appeared adequate according to industry-stated guidelines. Unfortunately, the improvement in new-issue disclosure has not brought about a simultaneous improvement in annual reporting after the bonds are sold. This cannot continue.    The conditions that in 1934 allowed municipal bonds to be excluded from registration requirements no longer apply. If issuers continue to ignore the legitimate rights of bond investors, then the government is bound to intercede.    ---   Mr. Ciccarone is a vice president at American Portfolio Advisory Service Inc., the research arm of Van Kampen Merritt. He is a past national chairman of the National Federation of Municipal Analysts. </TEXT></DOC>