<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880309-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH WON nearly all of Super Tuesday's Republican presidential contests.    The vice president swept to victory in the Southern-dominated primaries and caucuses, with Dole finishing a distant second. Robertson came in third. Estimates indicated Bush had amassed more than half the 1,139 delegates needed to win the GOP nomination, leading Dole by a 3-to-1 margin. In the Democratic contests, Gore surged from behind in the South to topple Gephardt and join Dukakis and Jackson in major victories.    Kemp came in last in the Republican contests, and the New York congressman is expected to withdraw from the race for the nomination tomorrow.    ---   PANAMANIANS CLASHED with police and soldiers in Panama City.    As banks remained closed, hundreds of demonstrators protesting Noriega's rule battled with security forces, who fired tear gas and water cannons to disperse the rioters. The clashes were the first outbreak of violence since the military chief ousted President Delvalle last month. Meanwhile, Panama's foreign minister said U.S. military maneuvers along the Panama Canal were a &quot;prelude to an armed invasion.&quot;    The White House renewed threats of economic and trade sanctions against Noriega as Panama ordered emergency steps to avert food shortages.    ---   Palestinians killed a fellow Arab accused of collaborating with Israel as violence continued in the Israeli-occupied territories. Another Arab was killed by Israeli gunfire. In Washington, Shultz told a senior Israeli envoy that he would reject any attempt by Prime Minister Shamir to delay a response to a U.S. peace plan for the Mideast.    ---   The Reagan administration assured Austria of improved access to U.S. technology and moved cautiously toward giving similar privileges to China. Beijing's foreign minister met with Reagan, and indicated that China would support an arms embargo against Iran.    Iran and Iraq exchanged missile fire, and Baghdad said its jets bombed an Iranian oil tanker in the Persian Gulf. It was the first reported attack on gulf shipping in weeks.    ---   Senior U.S. and Soviet officials have held direct talks on U.N.-sponsored negotiations in Geneva aimed at securing the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. The talks formally include only Afghanistan and Pakistan. Meanwhile, the U.S. said it would continue supporting the Afghan rebels until Moscow ends military support for Kabul.    An Afghan rebel group withdrew from an anti-Soviet alliance, citing concern that an interim government in Afghanistan would be dominated by Moslem extremists. The alliance has demanded a new government in Kabul to oversee a Soviet troop pullout.    ---   The Kremlin has presented drafts of two provisions of a treaty to reduce U.S. and Soviet long-range nuclear arsenals. One of the documents submitted to U.S. negotiators in Geneva concerns verification procedures, and the other deals with methods for eliminating the strategic weapons.    ---   AIDS experts gathered in London for the start of a three-day international conference on the disease. At the opening session, the World Health Organization's chief AIDS researcher said sex experts William Masters and Virginia Johnson were &quot;irresponsible&quot; for suggesting that the disease could be transmitted by casual social contact.    ---   Contra leaders said the U.S.-backed rebels wouldn't attend cease-fire negotiations with the Sandinista government that were scheduled to begin today inside Nicaragua. The insurgents said Managua had called for the meeting &quot;at the last minute.&quot; Ortega proposed the talks last week.    ---   A Portuguese radio station reported that authorities in the West African island nation of Sao Tome e Principe foiled an attempted coup, killing two of the 40 insurgents who tried to seize police headquarters. Forces loyal to the Marxist government captured the other 38 men, apparently members of a Gabon-based opposition group.    ---   Spanish police found an explosives-laden car in Marbella believed abandoned by Irish Republican Army guerrillas killed Sunday in Gibraltar by British commandos, Madrid said. In Belfast, Roman Catholics rioted over the killing of the unarmed guerrillas.    ---   Polish youths clashed with police in the southern city of Krakow during rallies to mark the 20th anniversary of student protests against censorship and political repression. Thousands of students demanding more academic freedom rallied peacefully in Warsaw, site of the original demonstrations, which sparked a purge.    ---   Britain and the U.S. vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution to impose economic sanctions on South Africa in an effort to end apartheid. The resolution would have imposed mandatory international curbs, including an oil embargo, for a year.    ---   Chad's military announced that 20 Libyans were killed in a battle with Chadian troops near the border with Sudan. The casualties were believed to have been the first since a truce was reached in December. </TEXT></DOC>