<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Financial Rules: The Shadow Seeks Answers---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS) </IN><TEXT>   In the early 1970s, Karl Brunner of the University of Rochester and Allan Meltzer of Carnegie-Mellon University decided to set up the Shadow Open Market Committee. The group would ponder the questions faced by the real Open Market Committee, the Federal Reserve's main policy-making unit, and come up with its own answers.    Since the shadow group was composed mainly of monetarists, who felt that the Fed should keep its eye on the money supply and stop trying to fix interest rates, exchange rates or anything else, its answers differed from those of the official committee. But the money supply gets more attention than it did a decade and a half ago, and part of the credit (or blame, depending on your point of view) belongs to the shadow committee.    The approach was successful enough that Prof. Meltzer, together with several other economists and a few lawyers, decided to try it in another sphere. Last year they set up the Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee and quickly found it was a wholly different world. If you think the Fed has problems, you haven't looked at financial regulation lately.    The Shadow Open Market Committee had one big advantage: It wanted to simplify things. Instead of watching everything, the Fed should focus almost entirely on money, something it could control. As if to underline its streamlining aim, the SOMC meets only twice a year, compared with the real committee's eight formal sessions and occasional phone conferences. The public can relate to simplicity.    In financial regulation, the public thinks things have been pretty simple. A bank is a bank, a securities firm is a securities firm, an insurance company is an insurance company. True, things have been getting a little messy, as banks have found ways to putter around in the securities business, and securities firms have bought their own insurance companies. But if the SFRC, most federal regulators and many congressmen get their way, laws are going to be changed to permit the creation of large financial-services corporations with broad franchises. On the way from here to there, though, financial regulation probably will get messier than it is now.    When the SFRC met earlier this month at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the group clearly favored broader powers for commercial banks. Sen. William Proxmire has drafted a bill to permit banks to affiliate with securities firms, and most members of the shadow group probably favor it. The word &quot;probably&quot; is used advisedly, since the committee took no vote (it never does; decisions are based on consensus).    One point was especially clear. The Crash of 1987, which occurred three weeks before the Chapel Hill meeting, was certainly no reason to deny the banks broader powers. Edward J. O'Brien, president of the Securities Industry Association, not surprisingly believes otherwise. When Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan endorsed the Proxmire concept, Mr. O'Brien said, &quot;I am a little surprised, because I think it lacks common sense for a public official to call for broad security powers right after the decline of Oct. 19.&quot;    Franklin R. Edwards, a Columbia University economist and member of the committee, said that Oct. 19 reflected growing skepticism about the economy. The problems were there for all to see: the trade and budget deficits, the mounting foreign debt, the Third World debt to U.S. banks, the bankrupt federal thrift insurance system, to name some of them. Concern increased that recession or inflation or both could not be far away, he said.    &quot;But the rapidity of the stock decline,&quot; he continued, &quot;points to institutional problems as well. The volume of trading in both futures and equity markets has outpaced the trading technologies in place. Portfolio insurance is an example. On paper it works beautifully. In practice, on Oct. 19, it failed miserably.&quot;    It works when there are few sellers, but when everyone tries to sell at the same time, liquidity disappears. Prof. Edwards thinks that calling this strategy insurance &quot;is one of the great frauds of our time. That it has been supported and backed by some of our largest insurance companies is distressing.&quot;    Maybe an injection of fresh ideas and funds from banking is what the securities industry needs.    What the banks clearly need is the ability to compete. The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 set up the walls between financial institutions in the belief that speculative banking was a cause of the Depression. The walls have steadily crumbled; banks, for instance, now can underwrite municipal securities.    If the financial world hadn't changed so drastically, banks would be more willing to stay in their place. &quot;Repeal of Glass-Steagall,&quot; Mr. Greenspan recently told Congress, &quot;would respond effectively to the marked changes that have taken place in financial markets.&quot; Large corporate borrowers now often prefer to go directly to the securities market, and banks can't follow them there. A few banks have given up and dropped commercial lending. U.S. banks also face increased competition from foreign banks, which are subject to less regulation.    Since Congress has been so reluctant to act, federal regulators in some cases have taken the initiative to broaden bank powers. If Congress doesn't move soon, state legislatures can be expected to take action on their own. Over a period of years, financial regulation could become an incredible mishmash.    This prospect leaves the Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee in something of a quandary. Up to now the committee has dealt decisively with a score of regulatory matters, but none of them has been as allencompassing as the future shape of the financial-services industry. In September, for instance, the group issued a highly reasonable statement that it made little sense for the new Financing Corporation to sell bonds to bail out the federal savings and loan insurance system when the Treasury could sell such bonds at a lower interest cost -- $100 million a year lower. The taxpayer eventually is going to be hit with a large part of the cost of rescuing the industry, and every little $100 million saved would help.    The shadow committee eventually may endorse one specific proposal or another. But the committee, or somebody, should be doing more hard thinking about the shape of financial regulation. &quot;Who are we shadowing?&quot; one committee member asked. A Federal Reserve Board member several years ago suggested that all federal bank regulation should be vested in one agency (not the Fed), and he was almost blown out of the water.    Simplicity is a virtue, in financial regulation as in monetary policy. The SFRC puts it well in its statement of purpose when it calls for &quot;the minimum degree of government regulation consistent with efficiency and safety.&quot;    Maybe the congressmen won't listen, but someone has to talk to them. Glass-Steagall has lasted for a half-century, and it would be tragic to saddle the next half-century with something worse. </TEXT></DOC>