<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870805-0141 </DOCNO><HL> Let Students Drop Out -- and Back In---By Jackson Toby</HL><DD> 08/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In 1922 Yale Prof. George S. Counts published one of the first scholarly studies of youngsters who left high school without graduating. He referred to them as &quot;children of high school age not in school&quot; because the word &quot;dropout&quot; had not yet been coined.    Counts deplored the selectivity his statistical tables showed -- namely, that the children of middle-class and native-born parents had a higher probability of graduating from public high schools than did the majority of children. Most of the early school leavers were children of immigrants who left school to take low-paying jobs and help support their families. In that era, less than one-fifth of 18-year-olds graduated from high school.    Today, the bulk of American 18-year-olds graduate from high school. &quot;Dropouts&quot; constitute only one youngster in four, and half of these receive a diploma later. But high schools are still selective. Those who drop out are disproportionately likely to have been born to minority or poor parents. Boards of education, especially in central cities with large minority enrollments, are frantic about the dropout problem. They have mounted multimillion-dollar programs to prevent any student from leaving high school without graduating.    Will such programs succeed? In a superficial sense, yes. A higher proportion of students probably will remain in high school until graduation than is the case today. However, in the sense of giving more education to more students, dropout prevention is not only difficult to achieve but counterproductive.    American society is preoccupied with the dropout problem because of unrealistic assumptions about the reasons students withdraw from school. Blame is put on poverty, family problems, racism, unstimulating curricula, unsympathetic teachers. Hardly mentioned is the direct cause of dropping out: Some students develop a massive indifference to learning what the schools are designed to teach. &quot;Oho!&quot; exclaims the dropout preventer, &quot;Kids with drug or alcohol problems can't concentrate on English and algebra.&quot; Or maybe an appetite for education dwindles because of the danger of assault in the school building. Or because the low average daily attendance in the school forces teachers to proceed at a very slow pace.    The indirect causes have little bearing on the immediate problem. For whatever reason, some students develop an allergy to reading, writing, arithmetic, geography. As long as that hard and stubborn allergy remains, keeping such students in a building that looks and smells like a school does not mean they are receiving an education. They do not learn anything -- except how to survive as internal dropouts instead of external ones. They amuse themselves by making as much mischief as possible.    When a school contains a sufficient proportion of internal dropouts, it ceases to be an educational institution; it becomes a recreation center. The customary response to that is &quot;kindle a love of learning.&quot; Unfortunately, teachers, psychologists and social workers are far less successful in curing allergies to education by kindling a love of learning than dermatologists are in curing acne.    This being so, when an allergic student drops out of high school, it is not necessarily a catastrophe -- not for his teachers or classmates anyway. But is it a catastrophe for him? According to two careful studies conducted about 20 years ago, no. Dropping out of high school did not turn good kids into juvenile delinquents. Although dropouts did have higher delinquency rates than students who went on to graduate, they had higher rates long before they dropped out. As a matter of fact, these studies showed an increase in delinquency rates from the freshman to the senior years for graduates but no increase from the in-school to the out-of-school period for dropouts.    In short, choosing to leave school early is less important than what the youngster chooses to learn while he is enrolled. These are not necessarily rational choices, but they are not the programmed responses of computers either. Society can force prisoners to remain in a prison, but it cannot force students to choose to learn at school; it can only provide encouragement.    Instead of labeling a student who withdraws a &quot;dropout&quot; and predicting a bad end, society can regard withdrawal from school as an episode. If the school leaver comes to believe that education is more necessary than he thought, his readmission should be routine, even in midsemester. While waiting (and hoping) for dropouts to return to school, as some do now without much encouragement, schools should offer job placement and counseling services on a non-judgmental basis on the off chance that some can make it without a high-school diploma.    Most states have laws entitling residents to a free high-school education until they reach 21. And then? Why not raise the entitlement age to 100? It would send the message that American society is sincere enough about universal education to refuse to give up. Dropouts would benefit more from public acceptance of the legitimacy of leaving school and returning to it later than they will from organized programs seeking to prevent them from leaving in the first place.    ---   Mr. Toby is professor of sociology and director of the Institute for Criminological Research at Rutgers University. </TEXT></DOC>