<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0126 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Fighting Back---Fighting Cancer: The Food Cures --For Some of Us, a Change in DietMay Stop, or Even Reverse, the Disease---By Michael Waldholz</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN><TEXT>   YOU ARE what you eat was the crunchy-granola generation's recipe for promoting long life and good health through diet.    These days, though, the pseudo-science of macrobiotic disciples is giving way quickly to the hard science of highly regarded researchers. They're demonstrating certain foods and nutritional supplements indeed can prevent, perhaps even treat, diseases such as cancer.    Since 1980, the National Cancer Institute aggressively has supported research into whether diet and the use of drugs derived from natural nutrients can protect people from cancer. The government's arbiter of established cancer science, NCI has assembled a list of 550 substances believed to be potentially protective against cancer.    The NCI decided to throw its scientific weight behind the research because, it says, &quot;mounting evidence&quot; from laboratory studies and surveys of large groups of people found that &quot;various agents could halt or reverse cancer progression in animals or reduce the incidence or risk of cancer in humans.&quot;    Even though much of the new science is just emerging, and many of the NCI-backed studies won't be finished for several years, researchers already are drawing a picture of those individuals who may benefit most from dietary changes. Some studies may show that certain nutrients can stop or reverse cancers in people already exposed to known or suspected cancer-causing agents, or carcinogens. Other studies may find that drugs based on these nutrients can slow or block the onset of disease.    Vitamin A and Beta-Carotene   A major objective of the NCI-backed research is to clarify the benefits of vitamin A and beta-carotene, a natural substance the body converts into vitamin A. There is growing, although still undefinitive, proof that vitmain A can lower the risk of lung cancer, especially among men, and men who have smoked in particular. Meanwhile, very recent research indicates that vitamin A may help prevent cancer of the colon, stomach, prostate, cervix, and breast.    Vitamin A is found in liver, eggs and milk. An even more common source of the vitamin is beta-carotene in leafy green and yellow vegetables, such as carrots, winter squash, spinach, canteloupe and broccoli.    Scientists aren't certain how vitamin A and beta-carotene may act to forestall cancer, but some lab research suggests that the nutrients interfere with the proteins that cancer cells use in reproduction and growth. Other research indicates that beta-carotene that isn't converted into vitamin A deactivates oxygen molecules produced by carcinogens and believed to trigger malignant tissue growth.    In a study expected to end in 1990, scientists are giving vitamin A and two other nutrients, vitamin E and selenium, to tin miners at risk of developing lung cancer, to determine if the nutrients cut the incidence of disease. Other studies, some with tens of thousands of subjects, are researching whether certain levels of vitamin A consumption can prevent lung cancer in smokers and asbestos workers. One research team is trying to block the development of cervical cancer in women who have a pre-cancerous condition by administering a topical cream made of a vitamin A-like chemical.    High doses of pure vitamin A can be toxic, however. It can produce birth defects and other problems, and its intake should be limited to the normal amounts found in food, researchers say.    Vitamins C and E   Several years ago, scientists discovered that nitrates and nitrites, substances found in processed foods such as bacon and hot dogs, are transformed by the body into nitrosamines, a suspected carcinogen. New reserach has found that vitamins C and E block the formation of nitrosamines.    This finding may explain why certain populations whose diets are rich in fruits, vegetables and vegetable oils containing the vitamins have low incidence of cancer of the stomach and digestive tract, where the nitrosamines develop.    One study found that Japanese who migrated to Hawaii had a lower rate of stomach cancer than would have been expected if they stayed in Japan. The reason was that fresh fruits and vegetables are readily available in Hawaii, but not in Japan. A study at Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health in Baltimore also found that among a group of men who were smokers, those with low levels of vitamin E in their blood had a 2.5 times greater risk of developing lung cancer than those with higher levels of the vitamin.    Several studies are testing whether food containing vitamin C or E, or vitamin supplement pills, can inhibit the development of colon cancer in patients with a history of developing the type of polyps that are thought to be a precursor of the disease.    Selenium   The natural element selenium occurs in some foods, such as seafood, meats from certain organs, and grains grown in ground rich in the chemical. Although selenium in high doses can be very toxic, lab studies of cancer cells in test tubes and in animals show that certain forms of selenium can block cancer-cell growth. Population studies in the U.S., especially in the Northeast, suggest that people with low selenium in their diets have higher rates of colon, breast and prostate cancer.    Most research right now is trying to determine levels at which selenium consumption won't produce toxicity. The studies are following people who live in areas of the country, such as South Dakota, where selenium intake is high.    Fats andamp; Fibers   The U.S. National Research Council says the evidence indicting animal fat as a cause for cancer, especially of colon and breast cancer, is so damning that the council recommends that most Americans decrease their consumption of fats. Moreover, some populations demonstrate that high-fiber diets protect against the effects of eating fat. Fiber is found in fruits, vegetables and whole-grain products such as whole-grain cereals, breads and brown rice.    Scientists aren't certain which of these foods provide the greatest protection, nor how fiber works. It is believed, however, fiber more quickly rids the body of fat that may produce unwanted effects.    In one study of laboratory rats, scientists induced tumors of the colon in animals fed all-fat diets, while animals with diets of fat and fiber had a lower rate of cancer. One population study reported in 1983 found that people in England and Wales whose consumption of sugar, meat and fat were sharply reduced during World War II had a marked reduction of cancer of the breast and colon. After the war, the rates climbed back to pre-war levels.    The NCI also is supporting research looking at the combined effects in the diet of many nutrients. A researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York is testing whether a combination of beta-carotene and vitamins C and E can prevent the development of skin cancer lesions in people who previously had a tumor growth. </TEXT></DOC>