<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880202-0132 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: U.S.S.R.: The View From Goskomizdat </HL><AUTHOR> Raymond Sokolov </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> PUB </IN><DATELINE> Moscow  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For the inquiring American reporter, all doors are open here this winter. From high officials of ministerial rank to leaders of the Soviet Union's suddenly glasnosted cultural establishment, everyone is ready to make time for a chat with the capitalist press. So many visiting U.S. firemen have passed through the offices of Sergei Zalygin, the outspoken editor of the very influential &quot;thick&quot; monthly magazine Novy Mir (New World) that Mr. Zalygin now flies a miniature Stars and Stripes next to the red flag of the U.S.S.R. on his secretary's desk.    &quot;I can only give you one copy of our January issue,&quot; says the white-haired, red-cheeked novelist and veteran of Soviet literary politics. &quot;Every American I see wants one. I just gave one to Senator Bradley.&quot;    Everyone wants a souvenir copy of Novy Mir because this is the first of four issues that will print the full text of Boris Pasternak's formerly banned novel &quot;Dr. Zhivago.&quot; Mr. Zalygin himself doesn't seem too excited about the event. Like most Moscow intellectuals, he already has got used to the idea that just about anything non-pornographic that isn't an outright attack on established order can be safely printed in this country now.    Mr. Zalygin insists that even Alexander Solzhenitsyn's &quot;The Cancer Ward&quot; could appear here. And he is a proven judge of what will play under glasnost. Under his program of publishing writing once consigned to underground channels, Novy Mir has attracted an audience 10 times the size of its circulation under his predecessor. This past year, Novy Mir's circulation zoomed from 500,000 to 1.15 million.    The size of the expanded press run is itself a sign of official approval. Paper is scarce in this book-hungry country. And perestroika has not yet affected central control of paper production or the timber industry on which it rests. So when you meet almost anyone from the Soviet publishing industry today, they want to talk about paper. They've already adjusted to glasnost and their newly awarded right to decide, without prior consultation, on the titles they will print. Georgi Andjaparidze, director of the literary publishing firm Khudozhestvennaya Literatura, says: &quot;Practically everything that was in the drawer has been published. Pasternak and Bulgakov will be out in editions of several volumes in 1989. What we face now is not a problem of government but one of our own printing capacity.&quot;    Mikhail Nenashev made this same kind of argument to General Secretary Gorbachev at a seven-hour meeting of mass-media leaders two weeks ago. Mr. Nenashev is a minister, head of Gozkomizdat, the state publishing committee, and has seven separate telephones in three colors outside his office. He is, in effect, the czar of Soviet publishing, a former newspaper editor and a handpicked Gorbachevian young Turk. What did he tell his maximum leader at the meeting? &quot;I talked about paper. It's not right that we should be so backward. He supported me but said, 'You have to take into account the general situation.' I said, 'I'm not interested in the general situation.' I think we should increase paper production tenfold. The problem is an incorrect economic policy. By tradition we sell lumber, through the Ministry of the Wood and Paper Industry. Our need for paper production competes with our ambition to earn hard currency by selling lumber.&quot;    Translated to the level of the bookstore, this means that almost any book that anybody really wants is out of print. At Leningrad's multistory Dom Kniga, there was no copy of any title by Alexander Pushkin last week. Yet multimillion copy editions of classic authors such as Pushkin routinely sell out. Clearly, the marketing logic of Gorbachevian self-financing has not yet completely worked itself out in book publishing.    One reason is the sheer vastness of the market and its ability to absorb thousands of copies of books even by unknown authors. As Mr. Andjaparidze puts it, chain-smoking in his stenciled, wood-paneled office in a pre-revolutionary merchant's house: &quot;It doesn't matter what we publish. This book or that will sell.&quot;    This is hyperbole. Mr. Nenashev is on record saying, &quot;We will stop bringing out books nobody wants,&quot; which must mean that some titles go begging. And one of the results of self-financing, by all accounts, will be smaller editions and higher prices for slow-selling works of new poetry and literary criticism. So market forces are exerting themselves even in a market with virtually limitless and indiscriminate demand.    But the main effect of perestroika and the democratization of publishing is to give managers of publishing companies much greater control of their firms than they ever had before. At Sovremennik, a relatively young company that is based in a suburban housing block, director Leonid Frolov has already instituted incentive pay boosts that are revised every quarter. He reports that his staff is working much more efficiently than before, and he looks forward confidently to earning a substantial profit that will go to every member of the collective. &quot;The official policy,&quot; he says, &quot;is take what you can get.&quot;    As a policy, perestroika also gives almost complete intellectual and artistic control to publishers and other managers of arts enterprises. But this does not necessarily mean that publishers will always opt for titles that were previously banned. Mr. Andjaparidze, who speaks flawless BBC English and has translated Dashiell Hammett into Russian, refuses to consider publishing Solzhenitsyn. &quot;I wouldn't publish Hitler either,&quot; he said, lighting another cigarette with a throwaway lighter labeled glasnost. &quot;Solzhenitsyn is a Khomeini. He's the enemy. I don't want such freedom.&quot; Mr. Andjaparidze also thinks the Soviet public is not ready for Vladimir Nabokov's great emigre Russian novel, &quot;The Gift,&quot; because of its attack on that hero of Marxist orthodoxy, writer Nikolai Chernyshevsky. Mr. Andjaparidze also thinks it is too soon to bring out Nabokov's &quot;Lolita,&quot; because its kinky sexual theme, an old man lusting for a nymphet, would shock people raised in Soviet prudery.    Not long ago, under the now barely mentionable Leonid Brezhnev, some state censor or other shadowy thought policeman from the government would have kept such books out of reach. Now the responsibility has devolved on publishers themselves. Similarly, theaters can decide directly on what they will present. And since the beginning of the year, with the advent of self-financing in most sectors of the economy, individual enterprises will have much greater freedom to control their output and their personnel. But this may not always lead to enhanced freedom for the individual. In fact, democratization has already undermined the job prospects of Jewish students graduating from universities this year.    Previously, the monolithic Soviet state guaranteed them jobs in their specialty, somewhere. Then, the problem was to be assigned to a desirable post. Now, the state no longer compels employers to take people they don't want. So one hears about recent Jewish graduates who have been directly told in job interviews: &quot;We don't want your sort here.&quot;    The unaccustomed prospect of large-scale unemployment looms darkly over the brave new world of perestroika. There have already been firings on a limited basis and the news is openly reported. Indeed, Soviet television now devotes a regular time slot to such problems immediately after the evening news. This brief but pointed program is called &quot;Spotlight on Perestroika,&quot; and its reporters interrogate officials and managers with a persistence that would be noteworthy even in American television.    This is in direct contrast to the regular news broadcast, Vremya (Time), with its tedious opening minutes of Gorbachevolatry. Reports from the U.S., when they don't touch on U.S.-Soviet relations, fall into a pattern of Yank-bashing. On Vremya, there is always trouble in the U.S., homeless people and weather disasters, pictures of a dysfunctional society full of perils no socialist state would allow.    Glasnost or no glasnost, Soviet citizens without special clearance have no access to an alternative version of the news. U.S. newspapers are simply not sold at Soviet kiosks. And there is no plan to let them in. The orthodox explanation for this, as for so much else that isolates Soviet people from the rest of the world, is the hard-currency problem. If they let in the U.S. press, it would cost them hard currency. Ditto for U.S. books, U.S. films, U.S. products in general. As long as the ruble is a weak, artificially sheltered currency, most normal sorts of economic exchange between the U.S.S.R. and non-Comecon countries are impossible. And when they do occur, they will be negotiated by state agencies whose internal culture struck this visitor as hopelessly mired in the psychology of the bad old days of Brezhnevian &quot;stagnation.&quot;    At Mezhdunarodniya Kniga, the principal international trading company for books and records, the news this month was the first Soviet compact disk. Produced in England, it was a reissue of phonograph recordings of speeches made between 1919 and 1921 by V.I. Lenin himself. This is not an unrepresentative example of the marketing acumen of Mezh Kniga. Similarly, the Soviet copyright agency VAAP is a relic of pre-glasnost times, with no office in the U.S. and only the vaguest idea of how to conduct business in an American context from such a great distance, literally and culturally.    Despite these underlying impediments to real cultural exchange, individual artists from rock stars to film makers to authors of all stripes are shuttling from Moscow to New York and points west. Mr. Andjaparidze was headed with a group to the new-age Esalen Institute on the California coast to explore one co-publishing project and hoped to work out fictional details on a joint U.S.-Soviet anthology of contemporary short fiction with Knopf in New York. Moreover, as a result of last year's Moscow Book Fair, there is some possibility of a permanent exposition of U.S. books in Moscow open to the public.    This week marks the 30th anniversary of the U.S.-Soviet cultural agreement, under whose umbrella most previous traveling exhibitions, scholarly exchange programs, orchestral tours and rock concerts have been arranged. To celebrate, Soviet Culture Minister Vasily Zacharov is in the U.S. with a large delegation. In Moscow before he left he told me, in effect, that he foresees essentially no change in the way our two countries will experience each other's culture. Glasnost and perestroika will bring no new entrepreneurial spirit to an agreement hammered out in 1958. It must all still be tit for tat, cultural barter arranged between government agencies -- one Bolshoi tour for one Billy Joel concert series, 50 National Geographics for 50 Ogonyoks. But how could it be otherwise when the U.S.S.R. has no independent unsubsidized theaters, a state-run record label and no privately owned publishers? How could it be otherwise when there is no plan to make the ruble freely convertible? For the foreseeable future, glasnost and perestroika will mean candor and democratic restructuring in the Soviet Union but within an overwhelmingly centralized and isolated economy. Toward the rest of the world, there is less fear and more warmth, a readiness to talk and exchange ideas. But for the time being Mr. Gorbachev has more important things on his mind than spending hard currency so Soviet citizens can see &quot;Fatal Attraction&quot; on Japanese VCRs or fly to Miami to get a January tan. He's done the easy part already, letting the people who care read most of what they want and talk freely about the hideous Soviet past. Now he's got to tackle the hard problem, cleaning up the agricultural mess that Stalin left behind at a cost no one can calculate, in rubles or in dollars.    ---   This is the last in a series on life in the Soviet Union. </TEXT></DOC>