<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Fighting Back:Top Retail Brokers TryTo Win a Bigger RoleIn Investment Banking---If They Aren't Able to InvadeInstitutional Firms' Turf,They Stay in Second Tier---A Disco vs. a Trip to Antigua---By Ann MonroeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PA EFH PWJ S MER SHE AXPSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Try as they may, some of the nation's top retail brokerage firms still don't fit into the investment-banking world.    Consider the experience of a banker at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. His firm had won the coveted role of lead manager on a big offering, and he was flying to California to meet with the client. Accompanying him were officials of two prestigious investment banks that were assisting with the offering.    &quot;When we got on the plane,&quot; he recalls, &quot;they both turned left, and I turned right,&quot; to the economy cabin. Smith Barney officials aren't allowed to fly first class. &quot;It hurt,&quot; he says.    For the brokerage firms involved, hurt egos are the least of it. They can't afford to be shut out of lucrative areas like investment banking. Their traditional business -- selling stocks and bonds to individual investors -- is suffering because of competition from discount brokers and mutual funds. Meanwhile, after years in the retail firms' shadow, brokerage houses that sell securities to institutions are booming in terms of clout and capital.    Right now, the institutional firms -- including Goldman, Sachs and Co.; Salomon Brothers Inc.; First Boston Corp.; and Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. -- dominate investment banking, the prestigious and immensely profitable business of arranging and financing corporate offerings, mergers and other transactions. Because institutions buy and sell securities in huge blocks, the securities firms that cater to them have relatively low operating costs and are equipped to provide faster service than retail firms.    &quot;The retail firms have been left in the dust,&quot; concedes Theodore Fowler, a co-head of investment banking at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., one such firm.    That leaves retail brokerage firms with a stark choice. They can move onto the institutional firms' turf and fight for a top spot in investment banking. Or they can settle into the second rank of the securities business, perhaps forever.    Some retail firms are settling for second. E.F. Hutton Group Inc., for instance, won't fight for across-the-board success in investment banking, its chairman, Robert Rittereiser, says. Instead, Hutton will specialize in a few areas where it hopes to become a major player.    Smith Barney, recently acquired by Primerica Corp., is respected but distinctly second-tier in investment banking. While Primerica officials have hinted at big plans for the firm, they say that their strategy isn't yet settled. Smith Barney officials declined to be interviewed.    But three of the biggest retail firms -- PaineWebber Inc., Prudential-Bache and Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. -- are making what may be their final stab at the big time.    They face an uphill battle. They are overwhelmed in size, reputation and experience by their gigantic institutional rivals. And they don't have any models for success. Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., the only retail firms on a level with their big institutional rivals, have bought as much as built their investment-banking power by swallowing whole firms.    &quot;Merrill Lynch paid one hell of a price&quot; in time and capital to move into investment banking, says Hutton's Mr. Rittereiser, who previously worked for Merrill. &quot;It's not something that can very well be done now. Who has 15 years?&quot;    Executives who have spent their careers in retail brokerage have a hard time adjusting to the free-spending, image-conscious world of investment banking. Retail brokers are used to a production-oriented management style, while investment bankers are willing to spend a decade wooing a single client.    William Benedetto, who resigned in January as Dean Witter's investment-banking head, recalls when bonus time came around in his first year at the firm. His superiors expected him to credit each investment banker with a precise share of each Dean Witter transaction, just as compensation is usually figured in a retail firm. The problem, Mr. Benedetto says, was that &quot;investment banking is built around institutional competence.&quot; He ended up throwing out the retail-style compensation system, which he feared would encourage bankers to keep clients to themselves and would lose business for the firm as a whole.    A boom-or-bust mentality is hurting the retail firms as they try to build investment banking. Because investment bankers' productivity is hard to measure, they are usually laid off first when business weakens. The pattern became so pervasive at Dean Witter that at one meeting to discuss the problem, one of the firm's top investment-banking officials told the president, Philip J. Purcell, &quot;You can't build investment banking with temporary employees.&quot;    Even when retail firms want investment bankers, they often can't pay enough to hold them. PaineWebber's chairman, Donald Marron, says that the firm, which last year brought in $107 million in investment-banking fees, would have to increase its fee income to at least $200 million to compete fully on pay. One retail investment banker says that headhunters have told him that he could more than double his $200,000 annual compensation by moving to an institutional firm.    Retail firms are often reluctant to risk their own capital on transactions they arrange, something their institutional rivals do regularly. When Mr. Benedetto arranged to invest $110 million of Dean Witter's money in two transactions, his bosses seemed to be taken aback that he had gotten all the lower-level approvals himself first, presenting them with a fait accompli.    Lining up all the pieces of a transaction before going to top management &quot;would have been a 'no brainer' in an institutional firm,&quot; he says. But in this case, &quot;it started a whole review of the deals.&quot; Eventually, the firm approved the transactions and even made them the linchpin of an announced move into merchant banking. But some of Mr. Benedetto's former associates believe that the initiative he showed in making the arrangements was a factor in his demotion and resignation, which came soon after.    Retail firms often lose business to more prestigious firms, sometimes unfairly. A former PaineWebber banker tells of bringing a new idea to one of his oldest clients, who loved it. But after six months of study, the client told PaineWebber that the idea was &quot;too important&quot; not to talk to First Boston, which was eventually awarded the job.    Such episodes lead to poor morale. Kendrick R. Wilson III, who left Salomon Brothers Inc. last spring to head investment banking at Hutton, admits that by the end of his first day, &quot;I've never felt so low.&quot; Almost the moment he walked in, one of the best of his new employees quit. He was overwhelmed by a blizzard of paper work undreamed of at Salomon. And he discovered that the firm hadn't even given its investment bankers corporate credit cards. &quot;Things were very easy at an institutional firm,&quot; he says. &quot;Business comes to you.&quot;    Things have improved a bit since. Mr. Wilson has hired new heads of capital markets, technology and financial institutions. He has obtained credit cards for his staff, and he is trying to take advantage of the firm's retail orientation to develop new business and products. &quot;I'm having fun,&quot; he says.    PaineWebber, which seems to have halted its downward spiral in the investment-banking business, says that the struggle has been painful. &quot;We've certainly gone through a period of trial and error,&quot; says Mr. Marron, including an abrupt merger of the corporate and municipal finance departments, devised by a past investment-banking head and unwound as soon as he left.    The firm is aiming for top-tier profitability, Mr. Marron says, and it is emphasizing mergers and acquisitions and high-yield and leveraged financing. It has had some showy successes recently, including the $1.6 billion National Car Rental leveraged buy-out, in which it invested $132 million of its own funds.    PaineWebber has also gone on a hiring spree, grabbing a high-technology group from Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., a merger and acquisition group from Citibank, a Far Eastern leasing group from Chase Manhattan Corp. and a transportation group from Hutton. Since 1984 the firm has installed new heads of investment banking, private placements, junk bonds, fixed income and fixed-income research. &quot;It's been close to building from scratch,&quot; says Jack Perkowski, the head of investment banking.    The investment-banking arm of Prudential-Bache, which is owned by Prudential Insurance Co. of America, has reorganized even more drastically. Of the 50 investment bankers at the firm when Prudential Insurance bought it in 1981, only three are left.    The new management dealt drastically with the culture clash between the retail and the investment-banking arms. It split the firm down the middle. President George Ball says that he runs two companies, with different organizations, different compensation schemes and even different prizes. &quot;When I want to reward the retail side,&quot; Mr. Ball says, &quot;I send them to Antigua. When they're especially successful in investment banking, I rent a disco.&quot;    Prudential-Bache, which calls its plan for reaching the top &quot;Project '89,&quot; is pinning its hopes almost entirely on the heady, institution-oriented world of interest-rate swaps and global finance, where Prudential Insurance's reputation and triple-A rating give it a big edge. The firm has hired close to 300 professionals in a year. Its parent has put $100 million into Prudential-Bache's London office and has given the firm permission to use the famous rock in advertising.    At this point, PaineWebber and Prudential-Bache seem at least to have halted their slide. The situation of Dean Witter, which declines to discuss its strategy, is more puzzling. Since Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. bought it in 1981, the firm has had about half a dozen reorganizations and five heads each of capital markets and investment banking. Once ranked in the top 10 based on the value of its underwritings, it dropped to 14th last year.    Dean Witter officials have said previously that the firm is committed to becoming a major player in capital markets and investment banking. But after the firm's most recent reorganization, investment banking began reporting to the heads of Dean Witter Realty, which has made a profitable business of offering tax-sheltered investments to retail buyers.    Some former Dean Witter bankers believe that Sears should give up on investment banking and concentrate on what it knows best -- serving the customer. &quot;The typical consumer is very poorly served by financial services in general,&quot; says Mr. Benedetto. &quot;There's no reason to feel guilty&quot; about trying to fill that market niche.    But it is, he points out, a niche that doesn't need investment banking. &quot;They'd be much better off,&quot; he says, &quot;with a good family of mutual funds.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>