<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870908-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SOUTH KOREA'S PRESIDENT pledged &quot;a peaceful transfer of power.&quot;    Chun Doo Hwan, who has ruled for nearly a decade, is finding it harder to give up power peacefully than it was to seize it. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Chun acknowleged the dilemma but proclaimed guarded optimism. In recent days, Koreans have witnessed the announcement of direct presidential elections before Dec. 20. Yet many Koreans doubt the nation will achieve its first peaceful, modern transition of power.    Seven weeks of labor unrest showed signs of abating, following a government crackdown. Officials said 16 new strikes had begun, while 199 were resolved.    ---   EAST GERMANY'S LEADER ARRIVED in Bonn for an unprecedented visit.    Honecker, the first East German Communist Party chief to visit West Germany, was confronted on his country's human-rights record. Chancellor Kohl condemned the Berlin Wall and exhorted Honecker to lift the shoot-to-kill order for would-be escapers. Honecker, 75, supervised the wall's construction in 1961. West German politicians spoke of fundamental ties between the two countries, but Honecker evoked only mutuality of World War II experiences.    Kidnappers in Lebanon freed one of their two West German hostages from seven months of captivity after intervention by Iran and Syria, Bonn said.    ---   PERONISTS DEFEATED Argentina's ruling party in Sunday's election.    The setback for President Raul Alfonsin and his centrist Radical Civic Union, which has controlled the country since civilian rule was restored in 1983, stemmed from popular anger over the economy. The Radicals, already a minority in the Senate, lost their absolute majority in the legislature's lower house and a pivotal governorship to the left-leaning Peronists.    For Alfonsin, his reputation sullied by economic problems, the defeat made it less likely that he will be able to seek a second term in 1989.    ---   Chad downed a Libyan bomber near the N'Djamena airport, officials said. In a separate raid, Libyan jets dropped five bombs on Abeche, 450 miles east of the capital, killing two civilians. Libya acknowledged losing one plane. Chadian soldiers earlier seized a major Libyan base in the first such penetration of that country in the 14-year conflict.    ---   China plans radical economic changes under which peasants could assemble larger farms and the country would move away from the goal of self-sufficiency in grain production.    ---   Joseph Begun said Soviet officials told him and over a half-dozen other Jewish activists they can emigrate to Israel. Begun, 55, who first applied for an exit visa 16 years ago, was released from prison in February after serving over three years of a seven-year sentence for anti-Soviet agitation.    Moscow called &quot;humane&quot; the four-year, unappealable labor-camp sentence given Mathias Rust, 19, for an unauthorized flight in a private plane from Helsinki to Red Square May 28. The Communist newspaper Pravda also questioned the West German's sincerity about his stated peace mission. Rust had faced a 10-year term.    ---   Iran and Iraq were observing an apparent informal truce in the Persian Gulf tanker war. Arabs linked the lull to the U.N. secretary-general's planned peace mission this week to the two countries. Diplomat sources said Saturday a third missile in a week was fired on Kuwait. The Netherlands said it will send minesweepers to the gulf.    ---   Afghanistan and Pakistan resumed indirect talks on an Afghan peace settlement. The Geneva talks had deadlocked over a timetable for withdrawing an estimated 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan. A U.N. official acting as mediator met with each delegation. Both sides declined to comment. The talks are to run through tomorrow.    ---   Japan tightened controls on strategic exports to communist countries and increased penalties for violators, as the foreign-exchange and trade-control revision was written into law. Approval by parliament's upper house followed the disclosure this year that a Toshiba Corp. unit illegally sold sophisticated milling gear to the Soviets.    ---   Turkey's prime minister called a parliamentary election for November, a year ahead of schedule. Turgut Ozal made the announcement before final results were counted in a referendum, on lifting a ban on two former premiers, which cleared by a slim margin.    ---   Italian police arrested 32 people, including the top managers of a weapons maker half-owned by Fiat, for their alleged role in an international arms-dealing operation. Prosecutors said the network could involve Iran, Syria, international terrorist groups and the Sicilian Mafia.    ---   Doctors gave Siamese twins a 50% chance of survival after separating the 7-month-olds' skulls at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. They said it was too soon to tell whether Patrick and Benjamin Binder of West Germany escaped brain damage. The boys were in critical but stable condition. The 22-hour surgery ended Sunday.    ---   Britain's mineworkers union rejected changes proposed by British Coal, which runs the nationalized industry, in its new miners' disciplinary code. But union leaders agreed to wait two weeks before calling a national ban on overtime work. The company said it would agree to further talks.    ---   Angola freed a South African soldier in exchange for a French academic, a Dutch schoolteacher and 133 Angolan troops, state-run South African radio said. The exchange in Mozambique -- southern Africa's biggest prisoner swap -- was orchestrated by Pretoria to win freedom for an army major, captured 27 months by pro-Western rebels.    ---   Died: Edward F. Whittemore, 64, former chairman and chief executive of American Brands Inc., Saturday, in Stamford, Conn. </TEXT></DOC>