<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871009-0064 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Expropriation at Home</HL><DD> 10/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   As the Founders were meeting in Philadelphia in 1787, commerce in the port of New York harbor was imperiled by a dispute between New York and New Jersey. New York owned a lighthouse located in Sandy Hook, N.J., and passed a law imposing entrance and clearance fees on vessels landing in New Jersey; New Jersey retaliated by imposing a tax on New York's lighthouse. Watching parochial disputes disrupt trade and shipping, the Founders prohibited states from levying taxes on imports or exports and gave Congress the power to &quot;regulate commerce among the several States.&quot;    The Supreme Court turned its back on the basic wisdom of the Commerce Clause last April, in the case of CTS Corp. v. Dynamics Corp. This was the case that upheld Indiana's law regulating corporate takeovers, which went much further than federal law to protect targets at the expense of bidders. The result is a crush of anti-takeover laws, in a dozen states so far.    It is to the point where corporate managers can get protection at the drop of a hat, by having their lawyers write up legislation for instant enactment in the state capitals:    --When Asher Edelman made a bid for Burlington Industries, North Carolina manned the trenches for the incumbent managers. Legislators in Raleigh passed bills to require that any outside bidder get the permission of 95% of the shareholders for a merger. The textile firm's managers among themselves controlled more than 5%, and so they could block any deal regardless of how much other shareholders wanted to sell at a premium.    --The day after Dayton Hudson of Minneapolis became a target of the Dart Group, Dayton Hudson managers got Minnesota to hold a special legislative session. Within hours, the state had a new anti-takeover bill. Its provision prohibiting acquirers from selling any target assets for five years was carefully crafted to stop the smaller Dart Group from using leverage to buy the much larger Minnesota firm. The Legislature also complied with the firm's request for a delay of an anti-greenmail provision.    --Some unusual trading activity caused Phoenix-based Greyhound Corp. to panic. Managers demanded an emergency legislative session. Arizona immediately passed an anti-takeover bill similar to Minnesota's.    Several states have expressly rejected the most basic assumption about the legal entity known as corporations -- that they are owned by shareholders. These states legally direct boards to consider the long-term effect on the &quot;affected communities,&quot; including workers, local suppliers, perhaps even a corporation's local charitable giving.    Even those who think a corporation management has other constituencies need to recognize that shareholders nowadays often are the ones who need protection. The eagerness of states to protect &quot;their&quot; businesses shows that the anti-takeover movement easily becomes anti-shareholder. Often, for example, the shareholder's interest will lie in moving or closing uneconomic operations.    Interestingly, the state with the most experience in corporate law, Delaware, decided not to follow the Indiana example. Lawmakers there understand that capital flows most easily to firms that remain subject to possible takeover if they fall into the hands of poor managers. Delaware recognizes, of course, that there can be many forms of corporate organization. Just about any anti-takeover provision can be put to the vote of shareholders, but that is quite another matter than putting it to the vote of legislators with other agendas.    Before CTS it was thought that the Williams Act pre-empted state regulation of takeovers, though the waiting periods in the act itself are a basic reason for the risk arbitrage practices so often complained about. Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman David Ruder wants Congress to empower the agency to pre-empt state anti-takeover laws. Some congressmen are proposing legislation to replace the patchwork of state laws. The worry is that any new federal law might go further than the Williams Act to favor target firms.    Whatever the remedy, the proliferation of state laws is not a solution but a problem. The practical effect of CTS is to encourage every state to protect its managers and its jobs and its factories, at the expense of shareholders who probably live in other states. This is what the Commerce Clause was written to prevent.    The market for corporate shares and the access to capital it represents are a great national asset. It can only erode if, in a throwback to the days when New York and New Jersey fought over lighthouses, we let states expropriate businesses from shareholders. </TEXT></DOC>