<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880713-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: Manila's Refuge Makes It Pearl of the Orient </HL><AUTHOR> William Applegate </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>   &quot;Pearl of the Orient&quot; has been and is a much-coveted title for a number of Southeast Asian capitals, including Bangkok, Manila and, at one time, Saigon. It conjures up images of an alluring and mystifying haven bathed in balmy sea breezes, its boulevards lined with palm trees, its streets graced by majestic temples, its air charged with the special electricity of a thriving market -- and peopled, of course, by a charming and friendly citizenry.    War-torn Vietnam can no longer claim the Saigon &quot;pearl,&quot; as more and more wealth escapes the country daily because of a grossly mismanaged socialist economy and a constant outflow of desperate refugees seeking new lives in free countries. Thailand does indeed have a pearl in Bangkok, not to mention a booming economy and an ever-smiling and pleasant people. But, at the same time the ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations have just concluded a meeting that dealt with the pressing problems of Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and the growing number of Vietnamese refugees, another nation has proved to be the true &quot;Pearl of the Orient&quot;: the Philippines.    Certainly the Philippines has the palm trees and the friendly people, and its newfound democracy is striving to restore the luster to the pearl Manila once was. But its real claim to the title has nothing to do with its enchanting physical beauty. Rather, its real claim has to do with that special human spirit -- President Corazon Aquino called it &quot;People Power&quot; -- that has seen the Philippines, though not as well-off as its neighbors, time and again rise above tragedy to an oft-unsung greatness. Certainly this is most evident in the Philippine policy toward the Vietnamese refugees.    When the flood tide of boat people surged out of Vietnam in tens of thousands in 1978 and 1979, many of these desperate people found themselves pushed off by countries where they sought asylum, and, as a result, large numbers were drowned or lost at sea. Yet at a World Refugee Conference in Geneva in July 1979, a great humanitarian and highly respected statesman, Carlos P. Romulo, representing the Philippines as its foreign minister, made a uniquely generous offer of temporary safe haven in his country to these refugees in order to prevent further loss of life.    With contributions from the United Nations, the Philippines then built a well-planned and well-administered center on the Bataan Peninsula large enough to hold up to 17,500 refugees. Since it was opened in January 1980, the Philippine Refugee Processing Center has seen more than 220,000 refugees from all over Indochina pass through its gates to undergo language training and cultural orientation in preparation for resettlement in the U.S., Norway and Germany. They are the lucky ones, the survivors, who, in spite of the trauma of years in communist re-education camps, killing fields, forced labor in new economic zones, dangerous escapes, unbearable family separations, rape and plunder by pirates, are going on to rebuild their lives. The warm hospitality and genuine concern shown by foreigners and Filipinos alike at the processing center has certainly made the initial phase of the refugees' transition a positive experience. Refugees in the Philippines, moreover, have known firsthand the selfless generosity of Filipino hospitality when, on numerous occasions, local good Samaritans have risked their own lives to rescue new arrivals from their foundering craft, even at the height of typhoons, and then gave them food and shelter until they could be transferred to a transit center. Countless letters and thankyous sent by resettled refugees to friends, teachers and social workers in the Philippines attest to their immense gratitude for the compassion and concern shown them by Filipinos.    In an inspiring address on the eighth anniversary of the Bataan Center, Philippine Secretary of Foreign Affairs Raul S. Manglapus cited the common experience that today's boat people share with Filipinos whose ancestors were once boat people themselves, having arrived on this archipelago's shores in their &quot;barangay&quot; -- a word that comes from the Malay for &quot;large boat&quot; and which means a &quot;municipal subdivision&quot; in modern Filipino -- more than 1,000 years ago in search of a better life and a new nation. A refugee once himself, Secretary Manglapus identified strongly with the refugees at Bataan. He recognized their quest for freedom, gave them hope for their new lives and held out an even greater hope and vision that their homelands might once again be returned to democracy, just as the Philippines recently was. Such a positive development would be most welcome, and -- as anyone talking to refugees immediately has impressed on him -- it would bring the wave of people taking to the boats to a virtual halt.    In the meantime, boat people continue to flee Vietnam's miserable socioeconomic conditions in search of a better life -- and the basic freedoms and rights that go with it. And what are their chances of making a 300- to 800-mile ocean crossing in relatively fragile craft? Given hasty departures, the distances involved, bad sailing conditions and pirate attacks, which are on the rise again, some say there's a 50% chance of survival. Some say 70%. As the reader ponders these lines, at least three out of 10 boat people just setting out to sea will most probably not make landfall. Only two weeks ago, Philippine fishermen rescued 52 Vietnamese refugees who arrived offshore near Bolinao, northern Luzon, after 39 grueling days at sea. The refugees, all suffering from dehydration, malnutrition and exposure, were the survivors of 110 men, women and children who had made their escape from Truoc Giang in southern Vietnam in late May.    Why do they take such risks? For better jobs, as is glibly claimed by some authorities? Please, let's not keep human beings at the same undignified level the communist state does by conveniently labeling them as mere economic consumption/production units.    At the moment, first-asylum countries in the region are contemplating policies of pushing boats off or coaxing refugees to &quot;sail on&quot; in risky search of hospitable landfall, along with other screening policies. As the world's foreign ministers in Bangkok end their meeting with a call for an international conference on the Indochinese refugees, it might be worth their while to take a second look at the Philippines, a perhaps less prosperous but very good neighbor all the same. By accommodating with genuine care, patience and faith those seen by many as irritants, the Philippines has offered Indochinese refugees a precious opportunity to begin rebuilding their shattered lives and to regain their human freedom and dignity . . . pearls of great price indeed.    ---   Mr. Applegate has spent nine years doing refugee assistance work with the International Catholic Migration Commission in the Philippines. </TEXT></DOC>