<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890823-0110 </DOCNO><DD> = 890823 </DD><AN> 890823-0110. </AN><HL> The Accused:@  Child-Abuse Charges@  Ensnare Some Parents@  In Baseless Proceedings@  ---@  Anonymous Call Can Launch@  Inquiries, Custody Fights,@  Horrors in Family Court@  ---@  Motives for False Reports@  ----@  By Martha Brannigan@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/23/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW) </IN><TEXT>   When Joseph Maccaquano rushed his 21-month-old son, Joseph, to a Secaucus, N.J., hospital in March, he never dreamed he would have to fight to get his only child back.    But after physicians had tended to a broken leg, a state social worker arrived to tell Mr. Maccaquano and his wife, Kathryn, that their little boy might not be allowed to go home.    The social worker told Mr. Maccaquano he was suspected of abusing the child. He said &quot;the injury couldn't have happened the way I said,&quot; recalls Mr. Maccaquano, a warehouse worker who says the child apparently fell in the kitchen just a few feet from him.    Two private physicians -- a pediatrician and an orthopedic surgeon -- swore in affidavits filed in Superior Court in Jersey City that they saw no evidence of abuse and that the family seemed to be a loving one. But a third physician -- a state employee -- was suspicious. He said the boy's injury was a spiral fracture, a type caused by twisting and thus often associated with abuse.    After two weeks in the hospital, the child was allowed to go home, but only after Mr. Maccaquano agreed to move out of his house temporarily, and only after he and his wife had agreed to undergo psychological testing intended to establish their fitness as parents.    Mr. Maccaquano, a 33-year-old former high-school football coach, lost 18 pounds during the period and had trouble sleeping. He took a leave of absence from his job because of anxiety over the ordeal. &quot;They make you feel like you did something wrong, even though I know I didn't,&quot; he says. Mrs. Maccaquano, a legal secretary who sought help from her boss, attorney Richard Seltzer, believes the boy might have been taken away if the couple hadn't aggressively fought the agency.    For three months after Mr. Maccaquano moved back home, a social worker from the New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services made unannounced visits. Then, last month, the agency closed the case. In a letter to the court, it said the child &quot;appears well cared for and happy with his parents, and there have been no further reported incidents of physical abuse.&quot; The agency won't comment, and it isn't clear whether it reached an opinion about the boy's injury.    It is clear, however, that the child-protection system throughout the country has come to wield tremendous power over families. All it takes to launch an investigation in most states is an anonymous phone call. Teachers, physicians and other child-care professionals are required by law in every state to report suspected abuse. And evidence that wouldn't hold up in a criminal court can, in family court, cost parents custody of a child.    Many children have been taken away from their parents in civil proceedings where no parallel criminal case was ever brought. In an investigation, &quot;the individual is hurled into a legal system that is ponderous, slow-moving and largely insensitive to the accused,&quot; says Paul Birzon, a New York family lawyer.    Family-law attorneys often are exasperated that the rules of evidence are so much looser in family court than in criminal cases. &quot;If you are the defense, you've got everybody working against you,&quot; says Alan Hoffenberg, a Chicago family-law attorney. &quot;Chances are the judge will admit every piece of evidence for safety's sake and then decide a case on evidence that shouldn't have been allowed.&quot;    Moreover, child-dependency cases are civil matters in which the outcome is contingent on a &quot;preponderance of the evidence&quot; -- a lesser burden than in criminal cases, which require proof &quot;beyond a reasonable doubt.&quot;    Such a system is necessary, authorities say, to protect children from abuses that are hard to detect and harder still to prove. &quot;There is absolutely a sacrifice of civil liberties,&quot; says Howard Davidson, the director of the American Bar Association's Center on Children and the Law. &quot;The alternative is we sacrifice the ability to protect children.&quot; Adds Donald Bross, legal counsel for the C. Henry Kempe National Center for the Prevention and Treatment of Child Abuse and Neglect, in Denver: &quot;We've never had a child die of an investigation.&quot;    Children do still die, however, and the system operates unevenly. In many instances -- such as the publicized case of Lisa Steinberg, killed by her adoptive father in New York -- even repeated reports of abuse have been inadequately pursued by overburdened authorities. A phone call from a concerned neighbor can avert tragedy. Yet some families claim to have been subjected to unwarranted and excessive intrusions into their privacy by abuse investigators, based on scant evidence, suspicious circumstances, or unsubstantiated allegations of neighbors or acquaintances.    While statistics aren't available on the frequency of false accusations, a growing number of parents and lawyers are complaining that officials, in their zeal to minimize child abuse, are trampling the rights of parents and ensnaring innocent people in investigations. Florida and several other states, reflecting such concerns, have recently passed laws against making deliberately false accusations of child abuse.    Angry parents are pushing for other changes in the child-protection laws. Some want agencies to discuss their investigations and open some of their files; they are currently prohibited by law from doing so. Others want attorneys to be provided for accused parents who can't afford representation. Parents' rights groups, such as Victims of Child Abuse Laws, are getting bigger and better organized.    The Maccaquanos are among those suing child-protection agencies. The Maccaquanos' suit, in New Jersey Superior Court, alleges the state Division of Youth and Family Services violated their constitutional right to privacy, liberty and due process of law. They seek $1 million in compensatory damages and a like amount in punitive damages.    The interest government takes in the welfare of children represents a gradual but dramatic turnabout from the days when parents were considered autonomous in disciplining their children and the public was largely oblivious to child abuse. &quot;A hundred years ago, there really weren't child-protection agencies; the assumption was children belonged to their parents, and they would make the decisions about their welfare,&quot; says Nancy Thoennes, a researcher at the Association of Family and Conciliatory Courts in Denver. &quot;We've come a very long way from that in deciding what rights children have.&quot;    The first child-abuse case of record was investigated in New York in 1874 by the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, according to the American Humane Association. A year later -- as a direct result of that case -- the first law was passed to protect children, and the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children was formed.    Today, most any corporal punishment might be construed by some as abuse. And government is regarded by law as the child's ultimate protector, with a mandate to intercede for children who are reported to be in danger.    Now, some judges readily admit that, if anything, they are biased against parents. Dade County Circuit Court Judge William Gladstone, who has handled hundreds of abuse cases in Miami, reflects the attitude of many judges. &quot;I'm much more worried about the rights of children than the rights of parents,&quot; says the jurist. &quot;In my view, children have all the rights. Parents have obligations.&quot;    And in many instances, parents are treated as if they are guilty of crimes against their children merely because of an anonymous phone call or other evidence too flimsy to hold up in a criminal proceeding where defendants have the right to confront their accusers. Such was the case with Margaret and Steven Gran, a Minneapolis-area couple. Mrs. Gran was sitting her children down to dinner four days before Christmas six years ago when police knocked on the door. They presented Mrs. Gran with a warrant issued by a Minnesota district court for the emergency removal of the children. Police picked up one tiny daughter, waited as the mother coaxed a sobbing child out from under the bed, and took them both away to a facility called the &quot;Home Away for Tots.&quot; The children were away from home for 16 days altogether, part of which time they were in the custody of relatives.    The court order, it turned out, was issued on the basis of a tip that Mr. Gran had sexually abused one of the children, a tip the Grans ascribe to a vengeful neighbor. Subsequently, a social worker interviewed the family and concluded that suspicions were unfounded. On his recommendation, the children were returned to their parents and the investigation was dropped. The Grans nevertheless had to agree to seek counseling. And by the time the youngsters were returned home, &quot;they weren't the same children,&quot; says Mrs. Gran. &quot;They were traumatized.&quot;    The Grans sued the Hennepin County, Minn., child-protection division, but lost. A federal judge ruled that the agency enjoyed qualified immunity from lawsuits. Although it had violated state regulations, it had acted reasonably and hadn't, in any event, violated the Grans' constitutional rights, the court ruled. The U.S. Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal of the case.    As awareness of child abuse increases, many wonder how well the child-protection system will hold up. For one thing, it casts a very wide net. Teachers and school administrators in Atlanta were stunned by the arrests in May of three teachers -- two for failing to report child abuse and one for making a false statement to a police officer in connection with a teacher's failure to report abuse. Under the statutes that require teachers, health-care workers, day-care operators and other caretakers of children to report &quot;reasonable suspicions&quot; of child abuse, failing to report is a misdemeanor punishable by up to a year in prison and a $1,000 fine.    Charges have been dropped against two of the Atlanta teachers. The third, however, is charged with failing to report that a child had confided to her that she had been molested by her father. School officials say they are particularly distressed that the charges were lodged even though the state apparently hasn't established that the abuse actually occurred.    Now, Atlanta educators predict an epidemic of spurious abuse complaints from teachers trying to protect themselves. &quot;If your kid comes in and says 'Daddy popped me one,' you may have a social worker on your doorstep,&quot; says Warren Fortson, attorney for the Atlanta Board of Education. &quot;Teachers are in a panic. They will be reporting anything and everything.&quot;    Another danger lies, many believe, in the increasing reliance on the testimony of children. &quot;It is very unusual for a court to find that a child is not competent to testify,&quot; says Mr. Hoffenberg, the family-law attorney, even where it has been shown that the child isn't mature enough to recount events.    Moreover, lawyers and psychologists say it is tougher than ever to determine whether a child is telling the truth. &quot;Ten years ago, we could be 99% sure if children said they were sexually abused, that they were,&quot; says Kathryn Kuehnle, a Tampa psychologist. But children today are more precocious, she says. They are more aware of child abuse, more likely to fabricate stories. Their testimony, coached perhaps, can be potent ammunition in a divorce case, or a malicious weapon against disliked teachers or adults.    Steven Blackford, a firefighter and paramedic, faced a mandatory minimum sentence of 25 years in prison on felony charges of sex abuse based on allegations made by his seven-year-old daughter after a bitter divorce.    Mr. Blackford, who passed a polygraph test, ultimately was acquitted in 1986 of sexual battery and indecent assault in Broward County Circuit Court in Fort Lauderdale. But not before he had spent $25,000 defending himself and had been temporarily suspended from his job. &quot;I was chronically depressed and drinking too much,&quot; recalls Mr. Blackford, who sought counseling during his ordeal.    Most child-abuse investigations and allegations extract a high price on children, families and the accused. William Waldman, director of the New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services, acknowledges that &quot;even discreet investigations can cause scars. We train our workers as best we can, but these cases are very difficult to get to the bottom of.&quot;    Even today, Mrs. Gran worries about her parenthood skills and blames the stress of her ordeal six years ago for her current separation from her husband. She says her children are afraid of police and fearful of losing their parents.    Some experts despair of the effects of child-abuse hysteria on parenthood. Domeena C. Renshaw, a psychiatrist who runs a sexual dysfunction clinic at Loyola University of Chicago, says the national preoccupation with child abuse has made many parents afraid to touch their own children. She says she sees a critical need &quot;to salvage healthy touching.&quot;    Many professionals worry that poor families -- who are more likely to come under the scrutiny of social-service agencies and who lack the wherewithal to hire good lawyers and the sophistication to fight the system -- may suffer particularly from its excesses.    &quot;When you have sufficient resources to litigate the hell out of a case, you can win, but many times that's not the case,&quot; says Alan Dershowitz, a Harvard Law School professor and authority on civil liberties.    Some families with the ability to fight back have achieved at least symbolic victories over agencies they claim have violated their rights. But agencies remain generally immune to lawsuits, except in extreme circumstances.    Palm Beach County, Fla., Judge Robert M. Gross and his former wife, Cynthia, recently obtained an out-of-court settlement from state abuse investigators and others who wrongly accused Mrs. Gross of child abuse.    Their infant son was admitted to a hospital, critically ill, and was misdiagnosed as an abuse victim. He died, and the grieving parents were subjected to a criminal investigation. An autopsy eventually ascribed the baby's death to sudden infant death syndrome.    The Grosses sued in 1986 in Palm Beach County Circuit Court, alleging that officials had falsely accused Mrs. Gross of abuse and that they illegally took custody of the baby -- thereby preventing the parents from helping to make decisions about his medical care. In agreeing to the settlement, officials did not admit to any wrongdoing. The Grosses donated the settlement money to the SIDS Foundation. </TEXT></DOC>