<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870520-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Ironic Eclipse of the Right in Utah---By Bob Gottlieb and Peter Wiley</HL><DD> 05/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Six years of Reaganism have produced a startling legacy in Utah, the likeliest candidate for the most conservative of Republican states. As the result of a prolonged struggle within the Republican Party, some of the state's staunchest conservatives -- and key Reagan supporters -- have gone down to defeat while the Republican Party is growing more moderate.    Much of the decline of Utah's peculiar form of ultraconservatism is the story of W. Cleon Skousen. He has been one of Utah's most colorful figures and a key power broker -- that is, until he left the state for the world of Washington think tanks. Mr. Skousen's organization, formerly the Freemen Institute, now the National Center for Constitutional Studies, gained notoriety when it played an important role in the first election of U.S. Sen. Orrin Hatch in 1976, both before and during the campaign.    By the early 1980s the Freeman Institute could claim a bloc of 25 or more loyal members in the Utah House of Representatives, where its greatest achievement was to pass a bill calling for a constitutional convention to repeal the 17th Amendment (the popular election of U.S. senators). Today, the NCCS is based in Washington, and Mr. Skousen is more absorbed with building alliances around his constitutionalist ideas with groups like the Unification Church and Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority while Utah is governed by moderate Republican Norman Bangerter. And the legislature, once loyal to President Reagan's belief in no new taxes, has passed, and the governor has signed, the largest tax increase in Utah history, $150 million for the state's schools and colleges.    Mr. Skousen, who didn't respond to two requests for an interview, calls himself a strict constitutionalist. In a program of traveling seminars, he teaches that the Constitution, inspired by God, is close to perfect. Since its origins, he says, the Constitution has been subverted by the socialistic welfare state. Mr. Skousen would like to see the Constitution amended so that it more closely resembles the original document. This would mean, he points out, no federal aid to farmers, education and transit, no national parks, no Indian reservations, and no regulatory agencies.    Mr. Skousen once wrote a book, &quot;The Naked Capitalist,&quot; about &quot;The World's Secret Power Structure,&quot; in which he claimed that &quot;the world hierarchy of the dynastic super-rich is out to take over the entire planet, doing it with socialistic legislation where possible, but having no reluctance to use Communist revolution where necessary.&quot; Meanwhile, according to a Skousen pamphlet, this country is beset by &quot;Mental Health Research and Training,&quot; &quot;Neighborhood Social Centers&quot; and &quot;Sewage Disposal Facility Grants.&quot;    Mr. Skousen is a benign, grandfatherly man, and the key to his influence, says former Utah Republican chairman Charles Akerlow, is that his supporters follow him almost as they would a prophet.    After 18 years with the FBI, Mr. Skousen became an administrator at Brigham Young University. He later was police chief of Salt Lake City, where he clashed with Mayor J. Bracken Lee, a libertarian sort from a wide-open mining town. Mr. Skousen's officers were known to arrest for smoking on the street. Mr. Skousen even caught the mayor playing cards during a raid on an elite social club.    In the 1970s, Mr. Skousen began attracting conservative Mormons with his seminars on the Constitution. There is a Mormon belief, thought to have originated with the prophet Joseph Smith, that the church will one day save the country when the Constitution &quot;hangs by a thread.&quot;    About this time, Mr. Skousen introduced a little known Salt Lake lawyer to Utah's electorate by circulating tape recordings by Orrin Hatch addressed to &quot;Fellow Constitutionalists.&quot; Mr. Hatch has been a favorite speaker at NCCS events since. (Another political offspring is Arizona's new GOP governor, Evan Mecham.)    The key to Mr. Skousen's influence in the GOP, according to Mr. Akerlow, was his ability to mobilize followers to control the poorly attended meetings that elect delegates for the state party convention.    In the early 1980s, moderate Republicans began to call attention to the vulnerability of the &quot;mass meetings&quot; to minority control. As the moderates mobilized their followers to participate in the sessions, the Utah Education Association also got more involved in grass-roots politics. Teachers were particularly concerned about the &quot;anti-tax and spend&quot; attitudes of the Skousen-influenced legislature.    The moderate resurgence led to the defeat of a number of powerful conservative Republicans in the 1986 elections. Stan Parrish, a former Hatch administrative assistant, and state Sen. Douglas Bischoff, President Reagan's 1976 state campaign chairman, were eliminated at the caucus and convention levels in their campaigns for a congressional seat that was finally won by Democrat Wayne Owens. Also, Mr. Hatch's sister, Frances Hatch Merrill, known for her campaign against subliminal advertising, was defeated for reelection to the Utah House.    The immediate result of the election was a massive tax increase that provided funds for education. &quot;It's a much more moderate and workable legislature, less flamboyant, less radical,&quot; says Blaze Wharton, Democratic minority whip.    Meanwhile, in this year of the Constitution, Cleon Skousen has been busy on the national scene. His book on the Constitution, &quot;The Making of America,&quot; was the center of a controversy in California where it was being sold by the state's Bicentennial Commission. The book quotes neutrally from a 1931 history textbook that referred to blacks as &quot;pickaninnies&quot; and described slaveholders as more oppressed than their slaves.    As Mr. Skousen entered the national arena, he established close working relations with a number of leaders and organizations on the religious right, most especially with the Rev. Sung Myung Moon's Unification Church. Mr. Skousen worked with the Moonies to establish the Association for the Unity of Latin America, an effort aimed at uniting anti-communist forces on that continent and drafting a model constitution for Latin America.    By the mid 1980s the Skousen-Moonie alliance had been cemented. At a March 1985 meeting of Causa, a Moonie-sponsored organization, Mr. Skousen described the Rev. Moon as &quot;a beautiful person,&quot; who &quot;spreads a beautiful spirit wherever he goes,&quot; according to the Unification News.    &quot;Moon came to America to refuel the spiritual fires of our churches,&quot; Mr. Skousen went on. &quot;He came to save America so that we could save the world, and that inspiration came directly from God.&quot;    Mr. Skousen obviously saw the Reagan years as a propitious time to take his message to a national audience. But his departure, unfortunately for his Utah followers, came just at a time when moderate Republicans were mobilizing to undermine his influence in the Utah GOP. The result is a decline in the fortunes of the ultraconservatives and a weakening of the Reagan legacy. Among those vulnerable is Sen. Hatch, who faces the increasing likelihood of a 1988 challenge from the popular former Democratic Gov. Scott Matheson.    ---   Messrs. Gottlieb and Wiley, based in California, write often about the West. </TEXT></DOC>