<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880104-0087 </DOCNO><HL> In Poor Health: Small Rural Hospitals Struggle for Survival Under Medicare Setup --- Payment System Exacerbates Their Passel of Problems; Gambling on the Patients --- Alabama Hospital Hangs On </HL><AUTHOR> Ed Bean (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> FIN INS PHA </IN><DATELINE> MOULTON, Ala.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   There used to be a waiting list to get a bed at Lawrence County Hospital. When one expansion was finished, the hospital started planning another. And if occupancy ran low, the administrator would just let the doctors know and the beds would fill up.    Today, 80 out of 99 beds are usually empty. Some hallways are used so little that the lights aren't turned on. The medical staff has no specialists. In the brave new world of medicine, this hospital is a relic, struggling to survive.    It has plenty of company. About 700 of the 5,700 hospitals in the U.S. will close by 1995, according to a recent report by Arthur Andersen andamp; Co., the accounting firm, and the American College of Healthcare Executives. The most endangered species: small, rural, county-owned hospitals like this one.    The nation is &quot;wringing excess capacity out of the system,&quot; says William Roper, the head of the U.S. Health Care Financing Administration, which administers Medicare, the federal health-insurance program for the elderly. &quot;Medicare isn't able to assure the survival of every hospital,&quot; Dr. Roper says. &quot;Our objective ought to be to have an efficient health-care system.&quot;    It was largely Medicare, by changing its rules, that changed the economics of hospitals. For years, hospitals submitted their Medicare bills to the government and the government dutifully paid them. That system rewarded all hospitals, especially inefficient ones. But in 1983, Medicare switched to paying according to the diagnosis.    The agency sets a flat rate for 470 medical conditions, or &quot;diagnosis related groups,&quot; and a hospital makes or loses money depending on whether the treatment ends up costing it less or more. The rates vary slightly from region to region and are slightly lower for rural hospitals than for urban ones. At the hospital here, the rate is $1,441 for pneumonia, for example, and $2,415 for a heart attack.    Now every Medicare patient represents a gamble, and it would be hard to find a hospital in the country that doesn't think the cards are stacked against it.    &quot;It's natural for hospitals to argue that we pay too little,&quot; Dr. Roper says, but he points to a national oversupply of hospital beds. &quot;It's a buyers' market,&quot; he says, &quot;so we pay less. That's what is happening.&quot; From a cost standpoint, Dr. Roper says, the new system is successful. Although general medical inflation is running at about 10% a year, he says, increases in Medicare hospital costs have slowed to 5% a year.    At an institution like Lawrence County Hospital, an otherwise profitable month can be sent skidding into the red by one Medicare patient who has to stay in the hospital several days longer than is usual for his condition.    Rural hospitals tend, in any case, to have a higher percentage of Medicare patients. But they have fewer patients overall and therefore fewer economies of scale. They also have a hard time recruiting doctors to their areas, and they often cling to an admirable but unbusinesslike policy of giving free treatment to needy patients not covered by any insurer.    Such problems feed on themselves. As the community senses a hospital's plight, younger people with insurance --the customers most sought after --tend to grow uneasy about the quality of care and avoid the facility, speeding the death march. And while the big chains have marketing experts to mull over strategy, the administrator here can't even afford a secretary. Ronald Sparkman opens his own mail and answers his own telephone.    Here, then, is how one rural hospital in this northern Alabama town of 3,000 people went from the robust and carefree days of the '50s, '60s and '70s to a fiscal deathwatch in the '80s.    When Willard Irwin set up practice here in 1937, morning rounds were door-to-door at $1 a call and he might get paid in chickens and hams. He and his father delivered 400 babies that year, all at home.    Then, in 1946, Congress passed the Hill-Burton Act, which would eventually pay more than $4 billion to build hospitals all over the U.S. Moulton --and Lawrence County --got its first hospital in 1954, and a stay there immediately became a status symbol. Women who had given birth to two children at home now stayed a week in the hospital for their third. Elderly people whose children wanted to go on vacation would check in for a workup. Minor surgery required a three-day &quot;buildup&quot; in a hospital bed.    &quot;Nobody questioned you then,&quot; says Dr. Irwin, who is still seeing a full load of patients at age 75. &quot;They gave you a free hand to treat the way you wanted to.&quot;    If those were the good old days, then it must have seemed like the millennium in 1965 when President Lyndon Johnson signed Medicare into law. In the beginning, Medicare asked few questions, not even requiring the doctor to turn in a diagnosis the first 20 days a patient was in the hospital. By 1969, Lawrence County Hospital had an occupancy rate of 98.8% and was getting more federal money to build another wing. &quot;If you built a hospital bed, a doctor would fill it for you,&quot; says Mr. Sparkman, who wasn't in Moulton then but has spent his career at rural Southern hospitals.    In the first few months of 1983, the hospital still was rebuffing more than one inquiry a month from acquisition-minded chains. But that summer, a Congress concerned with spiraling health costs passed the Medicare Reform Act, the legislation that required the flat-rate system.    &quot;If a person dies in 13 hours, you get paid the same as if they'd stayed 13 weeks,&quot; says Garland Hall, a family-practice physician here. &quot;Death has become the most cost-effective treatment.&quot;    The system isn't easy to beat. The Medicare charts of doctors here are scrutinized randomly in Birmingham, 80 miles away, and if, in hindsight, vital signs and other criteria don't seem to justify a hospital admission, the hospital won't get paid and the doctor risks a reprimand or medical audit. Similarly, penalties would be imposed if Birmingham found that the hospital sent a patient home before seeing the treatment through.    About one in 20 Medicare patients here has a condition that was originally diagnosed as something more minor. That causes bills to substantially exceed what the government will pay. As far as Medicare is concerned, the hospital is stuck with the original diagnosis unless it can manage to check the patient out for 24 hours and check him back in again under the corrected diagnosis.    Underdiagnoses are made at big-city hospitals, too, but a small hospital, like any small business, finds it harder to absorb cost overruns. It was mainly unpaid Medicare bills that caused Lawrence County Hospital to lose $500,000 last year on revenue of $5 million. More than half of Alabama's other 118 hospitals also ran deficits.    Medicare patients account for more than 60% of this hospital's patients. Moulton and surrounding communities have become disproportionately elderly as younger people leave to seek jobs in the cities. &quot;Some of these older people would die before they'd go to a hospital in Huntsville or Decatur,&quot; says Tony Williams. Huntsville is 50 miles away, Decatur 25.    Dr. Williams has just crushed his second empty pack of Kents and is looking for a cup of coffee. He has seen death today at the nursing home and ministered to the usual parade of children with earaches and hobbled high-school football players. He made an early-morning house call and, after a day at the office punctuated by a quick drive home to catch a stray horse, worked an 18-hour shift in the emergency room because another doctor couldn't make it.    &quot;I work 14-hour days. I like being a country doctor,&quot; he says. &quot;But it's hard to sell a young doctor on that.&quot; The grind, especially the burden of dealing with governmental and insurance bureaucracies, has taken its toll on the 45-year-old Dr. Williams, too.    As a resident, Dr. Williams delivered several hundred babies and looked forward to more. But the cost of malpractice insurance and the expense of running an obstetric unit pushed the hospital and local doctors out of the baby business a few years ago. Twenty-seven of this mostly rural state's 67 counties don't have a hospital that delivers babies --and when young families go elsewhere for obstetric care, they get in the habit of going away for all their medical care.    Dr. Williams has been trying for years to get a partner and hasn't been successful despite what many view as a national surplus of doctors. &quot;It doesn't matter to a doctor where he practices medicine,&quot; reflects Dr. Williams. &quot;But it makes a big difference to his family.&quot; There isn't much to recommend Moulton, where the biggest excitement is a Friday-night high-school football game.    It can also get lonely away from the big medical centers. &quot;At a big hospital, I'd talk to a neurologist every day at lunch and learn things,&quot; says Dr. Williams. Here he consults by telephone with doctors in Birmingham.    And then there is the money. In 1986 the hospital tried to persuade a young doctor to come to the community but was spurned at the last minute when a walk-in clinic in Decatur offered him $80,000 to work three 12-hour shifts a week, three weeks a month.    In Moulton, by contrast, Dr. Williams gets $20 for an office visit. He drives a four-year-old Ford and jokes about a fictitious Mercedes. The hospital can offer no salary guarantees, just a chance to practice medicine in an area where a doctor knows he will be appreciated. Ultimately that wasn't enough to hold on to Dr. Williams, who now is leaving to work for a public-health clinic that serves the area. Administrator Sparkman expects to persuade two new doctors to practice here in 1988.    Meanwhile, he fights to hold down costs. Recently he eliminated a tradition: free cafeteria meals for employees. This year he will take a hard look at the hospital's ambulance service, the only one in the county. It lost $150,000 in 1986, and he wonders whether a private firm with part-time employees could do better.    In some respects, though, Mr. Sparkman is hamstrung in trying to stanch the financial bleeding. The hospital's charity and bad debts total about 15% of billings, and at a for-profit hospital he would be looking for another job if they exceeded 5%. About half of the hospital's emergency-room charges are never collected.    But Lawrence County Hospital hangs on, nibbling at costs, doing the best it can and hoping it can keep its doors open for at least a few more years. Higher property taxes might buy it a little time, but that isn't talked about much in a county that is one of the poorest in Alabama. The hospital's best hope, if it can just keep going, is to emerge as a survivor in the region as others drop out.    And if it doesn't? The truth is that, for most people, the longer drive to another hospital would probably be only a small inconvenience. A walk-in clinic could probably be set up in the community for minor emergencies; helicopters from hospitals in Huntsville and Birmingham could swoop into Moulton for major ones.    But without a hospital, an area that already has few enough attractions could go into economic shock. Recruiting industry might get harder, and the draining of Lawrence County's population and vitality might quicken. &quot;This county will get poorer,&quot; says Mr. Sparkman, &quot;but society will save some money.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>