<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880325-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Wire: A Special Weekly Report From The Wall Street Journal's Capital Bureau --- Compiled by Rich Jaroslovsky </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM MDEST </CO><IN> ECO ARO NUK </IN><G> EXE CNG DEF IRS </G><TEXT>   REAGAN'S POLICIES are left in tatters by Central American developments.    The protracted effort to oust Panamanian strong man Noriega will make it expensive for the U.S. to rebuild Panama's economy: U.S. officials worry that the country could be permanently crippled if bankers seek a new safe haven. Even if Noriega leaves, there's no strong and clean civilian leader to take over; American-backed President Delvalle himself attained office under dubious circumstances and lacks a political base.    El Salvador's elections are another blow to Reagan policy; there is already talk in Congress about cutting aid if right-wing violence resumes. U.S. policy makers haven't given up on beleaguered President Duarte but hope that moderate businessman Alfredo Cristiani, rather than the death-squad-linked Roberto d'Aubuisson, emerges dominant in the victorious Arena party.    Reaganites react bitterly to the Nicaraguan cease-fire, claiming that the Contras could have cut a better deal if Congress hadn't halted aid.    INFLATION WORRIES aren't assuaged by this week's favorable CPI figures.    Long-term interest rates, though still below pre-crash levels, inch upward as fears of recession dissipate on Wall Street. Commodity prices are also up. Factories operate closer to full capacity than at any time since 1980, sparking higher prices for plastic resins, fertilizers and industrial materials.    &quot;As the year progresses we will see some upward pressure,&quot; says economist Richard Rippe of Dean Witter. Some analysts -- and GOP politicians -- worry that higher prices may force the Fed to raise interest rates. But the Fed's policy committee, which meets next week, seems unlikely to tighten credit soon. And administration officials continue to scoff at inflation fears.    DARK-HORSE POSSIBILITIES lure Senate campaign strategists.    With hot races already under way in California, Ohio, New Jersey and elsewhere, both parties quietly identify potential upset sites. Democrats say Sen. Danforth's surprise vote to sustain Reagan's civil-rights veto gives challenger Jay Nixon an opening in Missouri. They also give Wyoming public-schools chief Lynn Simons a long-shot chance against Sen. Wallop.    Republicans say Conrad Burns, a veteran Montana farm broadcaster, will give Sen. Melcher a run. Presidential politics could play a role in some races: Democrats say that Dukakis at the top of the ticket could help Rhode Island neighbor Richard Licht against vulnerable Sen. Chafee.    But a GOP strategist counters that Dukakis would be a drag on Democrats in the South, particularly Mississippi.    DUKAKIS LOOKS to tomorrow's Michigan caucus to finally start generating momentum. A win in Connecticut next week seems certain, and more endorsements are likely to follow Bill Bradley's earlier this week. But a loss in Michigan would derail any momentum and make getting other endorsements, like Cuomo's, much tougher.    OUT OF THE WOODS? An Air Force review, triggered by Rockwell International Corp.'s indictment last year in a double-billing fraud case, recommends against suspending the company from getting new contracts. Air Force brass aren't expected to overturn the review board's recommendation, much to the displeasure of federal prosecutors and Pentagon investigators.    GORE'S SUPPORT for Shamir's rejection of Reagan's Middle East peace plan represents a coup for pro-Israel political activists in New York, whose pivotal primary is less than a month off. Their next target: Dukakis, who has said he agrees with a letter signed by 30 senators expressing dismay at the Israeli premier's stand.    STAR WARRIORS split over Sen. Nunn's proposal for a scaled-down version of the Strategic Defense Initiative designed to protect against accidental or limited nuclear strikes. Some SDI backers, including defense contractors, say the program could be a foot in the door toward a broader system. But others say it would drain resources and attention away from Reagan's plan.    CONGRESS TIPTOES around tough action on financial markets.    Lawmakers in both chambers shy away from far-reaching proposals, recalling that some critics blamed provisions in a tax bill for sparking the October crash. But legislators also want to avoid blame for inaction if the market plunges again. The likely result: a non-controversial package making a few technical changes in the markets and calling for more regulatory coordination.    The White House thinks its new interagency working group, to be headed by the Treasury Department, will further damp calls for more action. Only another stock slide would change the picture. &quot;If the market does take a tumble, the action will be all that more drastic,&quot; a Senate aide says. Likely targets would be takeovers, futures margins and futures regulators.    Meanwhile, conservative Reagan aides Sprinkel, Miller and Meese complain that even the new interagency panel is too pro-regulation.    MINOR MEMOS: It's a miracle: Robertson, nearing the legal campaign spending ceiling, discovers he spent $897,000 less last year than he previously reported. . . . After catching flak for using a tax service last year, IRS Commissioner Gibbs this year prepares his own tax return and those of his two children. . . . Boldly going where no congressman has gone before, California Rep. Brown proposes &quot;The Space Settlement Act of 1988&quot; to colonize outer space. </TEXT></DOC>