<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870504-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Contras to Pick Leadership This Week,With Credibility of Movement at Stake---By Clifford Krauss and Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM GOVMTEXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The Contras' revolving-door leadership will take another spin this week, with political credibility on the line in Washington and among the Nicaraguan people.    The Contras' legislative assembly is meeting in Miami to elect a directorate of new leaders, which will probably have seven members and be chosen by Thursday, and to pick delegates to the assembly. Most, if not all, of the most moderate Contra reformers -- the people who win swing votes for Contra aid on Capitol Hill -- won't remain in a restructured civilian leadership. But at the same time, new rebel coalitions may be arising in the back rooms of Miami and Honduras to cushion the political fallout in Washington of the downfall of Contra leader Arturo Cruz and his liberal followers. The current political crisis was sparked by Mr. Cruz's resignation in March.    While exiled political groups caucused around Miami to choose delegates for a new Contra legislative assembly, the top leadership of the main-line rebel movement met with directors of the independent liberal Southern Opposition Bloc, known by the Spanish acronym BOS, in talks designed to merge forces in &quot;a national army.&quot; BOS, which has won respect in Europe and in Washington, is demanding what Mr. Cruz tried and failed to forge: effective civilian control over a Contra military leadership that is dominated by former officers of the previous dictatorship's National Guard.    BOS director Alvaro Jerez, long a critic of the dominant Nicaraguan Democratic Force, or FDN, says negotiations that include FDN commander and former National Guard Col. Enrique Bermudez &quot;are going well. Everyone is taking a constructive attitude.&quot; He says it is possible the FDN will agree to discard its insignia to join a national effort that includes BOS dominated by a civilian leadership.    Meanwhile, dissident Miskito Indian rebel Brooklyn Rivera, who is popular among moderates in the U.S. Congress, is reported to be in Honduras for talks with FDN-aligned Indian leaders who have been traditional competitors with Mr. Rivera for power. Contras hope the fractious Miskitos can put their personal and ideological differences aside long enough to elect a representative for the new anti-Sandinista directorate.    Still, critics in the U.S. Congress and other observers point out that Contra reformers have engaged in such negotiations before, and have gotten nowhere.    A senior Reagan administration official hopes that a mixed group will emerge in the new directorate, one that will respond to the political needs of both Washington and Nicaragua. He said this would mean giving the FDN, the dominant fighting force, and its leader, Adolfo Calero, who is well known among the fighters, their place in the umbrella organization. But he said the insurgents also must show a democratic face to the U.S. Congress.    &quot;A directorate totally controlled by the FDN will do great damage to political prospects for the resistance, both here and in Nicaragua,&quot; the senior administration official warns.    Administration officials also are keenly aware that events in Miami this week will be played out against the backdrop of the beginning of televised congressional hearings into the Iran-Contra scandal. The disclosures that some profits from secret arms sales to Iran were funneled to the Contras at a time when Congress prohibited such aid has added to the Contras' woes by further souring lawmakers on the rebels' cause.    On Capitol Hill, the Miami meeting is viewed as yet another effort to pour old wine into new bottles. &quot;The people up here have seen very little in the reorganization effort that will really change the horizon. It's mostly cosmetic,&quot; says an aide to Rep. Dave McCurdy (D., Okla.), who has played a key role among House moderates in the Contra aid debates and opposed President Reagan's $100 million aid package last year.    Washington moderates contend that the Contras must be reorganized in a way that sends a political message to Nicaragua along with the military message. &quot;We don't see any elements down there (in Miami) that would favor any reform or change from what's going on. It's just a reorganization among the right-wing clique,&quot; adds the aide to Rep. McCurdy.    The administration is expected to ask Congress for at least $105 million in Contra aid for next year, and Congress could begin debate on that issue by early fall. Much will depend on how the rebels have conducted the battle against Managua in the intervening months. U.S. officials are painfully aware that incidents like last week's killing by the Contras of a young American working in Nicaragua further tarnish the Contras' image in Washington.    Yesterday, President Reagan launched an impassioned effort to gain additional funding for the Contras from Congress. &quot;The choice remains the same: Democracy or communism, elections or dictatorship, freedom or tyranny,&quot; the president told the American Newspaper Publishers Association on Ellis Island in New York.    White House aides said they intended the speech to recast the Contra fight as a battle for diplomatic, rather than primarily military, goals. But the president has on several other occasions stressed the diplomatic side of the administration's so-called two-track policy toward the Contras, without vigorously following up on those pursuits.    In his speech Mr. Reagan praised a peace plan proposed by the president of Costa Rica, which is now the focus of attention in the region. Yet privately, U.S. officials are skeptical about some provisions and are urging El Salvador and Honduras, the U.S.'s chief allies in the region, to raise those concerns in June at a Guatemala meeting of Central American heads of state.    The fighting among Contra factions reflects a parallel bureaucratic struggle in Washington. When Mr. Calero resigned from the leadership of the Contras' main political umbrella group, the United Nicaraguan Opposition, or UNO, and Mr. Cruz temporarily agreed to stay in the leadership last year, it appeared that the State Department faction of so-called moderates had won a round from the hard-liners at the Central Intelligence Agency who favor Mr. Calero's forces. Frank Carlucci, the National Security Council adviser, is more sensitive to the question of gaining congressional support than was his hard-line predecessor, John Poindexter, who was forced to resign because of the Iran-Contra scandal.    It is understood that the State Department and the NSC have worked behind the scenes to try to persuade the Contras to produce a leadership mix that will be acceptable to Congress. Although these agencies haven't sent officials to the Miami meeting, officials say they assume the CIA will have agents on the scene. </TEXT></DOC>