<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Primary Targets:New Hampshire FocusIs on Political ActivistsA Year Before Election---Democrats Hart and BabbittCourt the Town LeadersIn Person and Not on TV---GOP Is on Same Tack in Iowa---By David ShribmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> RUMNEY VILLAGE, N.H.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   More than a year before the 1988 New Hampshire primary, political professionals are targeting an old farmhouse just down the street from the Grange Hall and across from the library, the church and the common.    It is the home of Wayne King, a real-estate salesman and Democratic state legislator whose name is barely known beyond the ice-fishing huts of Stinson Lake, where the search for trout continues even on the most forbidding winter days.    In Manchester, more than an hour to the south, is another strategic target: a brick building with dark green shutters that once housed workers from the old Amoskeag Mill. It is the law office of Judy Reardon, another Democratic legislator, the daughter of a Boston andamp; Maine Railroad engineer.    Long before the presidential candidates begin to court this state's voters, they are courting Miss Reardon and Mr. King, two Democratic activists who, like a handful of others with time on their hands and politics in their blood, have become the objects of struggle between Democratic presidential candidates.    For all the talk about gigantic regional primaries and television politics, the nation's first presidential primary is still conducted in living rooms rather than recording studios. This high-stakes quadrennial ritual begins with an effort to win the hand and hearts of people like Miss Reardon and Mr. King. They are the unknown foot soldiers of New Hampshire politics, who offer their good will, their organizational acumen -- and their time.    Former Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt and former Sen. Gary Hart of Colorado are the candidates pursuing them. The courtship is progressing at small meetings and at pancake breakfasts; earlier, the sites included summertime picnic lunches, hiking trails on Mount Washington and a local swimming hole under an iron railroad bridge. The appeal is face to face, the discussion heart to heart.    &quot;The person who can motivate these people is the person who wins a contest like the New Hampshire primary,&quot; says Mr. Hart, whose insurgent 1984 campaign in this state produced a stunning upset. &quot;I want the indigenous activists. They are the people who make the difference.&quot;    Mr. Hart and Mr. Babbitt are only two of more than a dozen presidential contenders who are engaged in such early-campaign maneuvers here. A similar political mating dance is occurring in Iowa, the site of the first presidential caucuses. There, Camille Hogan, who runs a travel agency in Waterloo, is being sought by both Vice President George Bush and Senate Republican Leader Robert Dole of Kansas.    &quot;We don't have party bosses&quot; in Iowa, says George Wittgraf, a Cherokee, Iowa, attorney, who will run Mr. Bush's campaign in the state. &quot;We're looking for people who can get us the support of Republicans one voter at a time.&quot;    Activists like New Hampshire's Miss Reardon and Mr. King know the unwritten code of politics in their state, where primary voters are as likely to hand candidates position papers as the other way around. They understand the impulse that has led the voters of the seacoast towns and the faraway mountains and hollows to take a peculiar Yankee pride in toppling the conventional political wisdom. Once on board, they contribute their advice in the high councils of the campaign and involve their friends in the less glamorous side of politics: stuffing envelopes, making phone calls and hurdling snowbanks in the cold dusk to deliver campaign brochures.    &quot;They have contacts and they have lists,&quot; says Shirley Girouard, a city councilor in Lebanon, an old mill community on the Connecticut River. &quot;Every four years people like that instantly become valuable.&quot;    Now, with the campaigns only beginning, the time has come for Mr. King, 31 years old, and Miss Reardon, 29.    &quot;These two are newcomers, about to fall in love politically,&quot; says Dudley Dudley, a Durham woman and longtime Democratic activist who formerly was elected to the Governor's Council. &quot;There's nothing like a first love. I envy them that moment.&quot;    But the forces that contribute to decisions like these aren't only ideological. Politics in New Hampshire defies all known political-science models. It is ruled by friendships and myriad informal ties. The chief Babbitt organizer in New Hampshire, Carolyn Rauch, lives in a room in Miss Reardon's house. The chief Hart organizer, Susan Caligari, also is a close friend. Moreover, Ms. Caligari, who is a justice of the peace, presided at Mr. King's wedding in December.    &quot;The number of Democratic activists in this state is very small, and we can't go anywhere without running into each other,&quot; says Mr. King, an eighth-generation New Hampshirite who has represented this heavily Republican part of the state for three terms. &quot;There aren't enough of us.&quot;    That explains why presidential candidates, who are using this pre-election year to shape their campaign messages, are devoting so much of their own time to two young political activists who have no experience in national politics.    &quot;I've spent hours with Judy Reardon and days -- literally, days -- with Wayne King,&quot; says Mr. Babbitt. Miss Reardon estimates that she has met Mr. Babbitt a dozen times in the past eight months and has talked with Mr. Hart twice in Manchester and once in Concord, the state capital.    &quot;These people expect to be wooed,&quot; says Richard Winters, a specialist in state politics at Dartmouth College in Hanover. &quot;They're waiting for someone to reach out and touch them and come back again and again and again.&quot;    The wooing of Wayne King began above the timberline in the White Mountains National Forest, where he and Mr. Babbitt climbed the Tuckerman Ravine Trail to the top of Mount Washington. On the rocky trail and along the switchbacks, they swapped tales about Toni Matt and Dick Durrance, pioneers of the storied Inferno ski race on the mountain's snow bowls. (Mr. Babbitt proved himself well versed in ski lore.) They talked about the geology of the region. They exchanged views on the environment and the trade deficit.    Mr. King was impressed with Mr. Babbitt's views on trade but was more impressed with the Arizonan's determination to press on with the hike down the Lion Head Trail in a driving rain.    &quot;Babbitt's a thinker,&quot; says Mr. King, a burly former mountain guide and graduate of the University of New Hampshire. &quot;He's not tied to the old line of the Democratic Party, but he's not a Republican masquerading as a Democrat. He takes a long-term view, especially where short-term solutions produce long-term problems.&quot;    Mr. King toyed with supporting Sen. Joseph Biden of Delaware, who is expected to run, but saw little evidence of activity in his behalf here. Mr. King also met with Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri, who announced his candidacy yesterday, but dismissed him as too protectionist. Yet Mr. Hart still retains some appeal for him.    &quot;There was a lot of substance to what Gary Hart was saying in 1984,&quot; says Mr. King, who nonetheless voted for Sen. Alan Cranston of California, primarily because his first wife worked for him. &quot;There still is. We have to outthink, not outspend or ignore, our problems, and Hart is equipped to do that.&quot;    But Mr. King believes Mr. Hart's campaign faces peril in New Hampshire in 1988. &quot;He has to regain the fire and enthusiasm of the last campaign,&quot; Mr. King says. &quot;He doesn't have it now. He was bucking the Establishment last time, and this time there's a possibility he could be perceived as the Establishment.&quot;    That worries Mr. Hart, too. One reason he prevailed here in 1984 was that he attracted many activists who didn't feel they could have an impact in Walter Mondale's campaign; he wants to make sure people like Mr. King and Miss Reardon don't drift off to other candidates in the belief that they can't play a big role in his camp.    &quot;I want to get the idea out that our campaign hasn't changed,&quot; Mr. Hart says. &quot;We're going to be almost totally dependent on local people rather than political heavies from outside.&quot;    Mr. Hart is stressing that in his effort to win Miss Reardon, who recently was appointed Democratic whip in the legislature. She is from a political family: Her mother, a member of the school board in Manchester for 13 years, worked in the presidential campaigns of Wilbur Mills and Lyndon Johnson here, and Miss Reardon remembers licking envelopes for a Democratic gubernatorial candidate at age four.    &quot;From the grubby, 'what-do-I-get-out-of-it?' view of politics, there's a long line of people who are ahead of me in the Hart campaign,&quot; says Miss Reardon, who is interested in arms-control issues, troubled by the deficit and opposed to operation of the nuclear power plant at Seabrook.    But she likes the fact that the Hart campaign has a New Hampshire tint to it. &quot;It's run by New Hampshire people who have a stake in our state, not just people popping in for a while,&quot; she says. &quot;They aren't people who think that the only reason the state exists is to hold the New Hampshire primary.&quot;    The two-term state legislator is also buffeted by personal factors. Partners in her law firm include devout backers of these two candidates. And the fact that Miss Rauch, Mr. Babbitt's chief organizer in the state, lives in the two-story white shingle row house she owns in Manchester will, she says, affect her decision.    &quot;It won't hurt our cause that I'm living with her,&quot; says Miss Rauch. &quot;I don't want to use friendship as a weapon, but I suppose Judy will think twice about Bruce Babbitt.&quot;    Mr. Babbitt is using an aggressive approach with Mr. King but is more cautious with the comparatively restrained Miss Reardon. &quot;I sensed from the first time I met her that she would deliberate and that there was no point putting on the big rush,&quot; he says.    Indeed, neither activist is rushing to a decision. Both believe that presidential candidates should earn their support in New Hampshire.    &quot;Forcing candidates to sit down one-on-one is a very important thing,&quot; says Jeanne Shaheen, who was one of a dozen at the first organizational meeting here for Jimmy Carter in 1975, was the Georgian's state coordinator in 1980 and was Mr. Hart's campaign director here in 1984. &quot;It forces candidates to take positions on questions they might otherwise avoid. And it shows that every one of us can get involved, make a difference.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>