<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0106 </DOCNO><HL> And Weather Woes Loom---By John ValentineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD) </IN><TEXT>   Cotton prices, rising for months amid strong demand and dwindling supplies, could get another boost from looming weather problems in several major producing countries.    Prices have more than doubled from a year ago and are approaching highs. Meanwhile, cotton consumption is threatening to outstrip the ability of producing countries to grow it. If the present consumption rate continues throughout the current season ending July 31, it would leave cotton supplies at their lowest level in almost a decade.    Hovering over the market is the prospect of bad weather that could hurt crops and tighten the supply squeeze even more, analysts say. Adverse weather already has struck to some degree in the U.S., India and possibly China, and it could become a factor in the Soviet Union.    These concerns are making for an extremely sensitive market that reacts strongly to developments, analysts say. One sign of this surfaced on Thursday after a news service reported that China, the world's leading producer and consumer, had suspended cotton exports to assure it had enough of the fiber for its own mills. The report sent cotton futures prices up as much as their daily limit of two cents a pound. At the New York Cotton Exchange, cotton for October delivery rose its limit to 80.35 cents a pound. On Friday it settled at 79.77, down 0.58 cents.    &quot;This market is being driven by the best set of economic circumstances in the memory of most traders,&quot; says Herman S. Kohlmeyer Jr., cotton analyst in New Orleans at Thomas McKinnon Securities Inc.    Demand for cotton started increasing several years ago because of low world prices. At first the growth in demand lifted prices, but they tumbled again after Congress passed legislation in December 1985 to remove government price supports, allowing U.S. cotton prices to fall while propping farmer income in other ways. By the time the complex program took effect Aug. 1, 1986, the world cotton price was around 37 cents a pound and demand was surging.    The increased interest in cotton eventually turned into a fashion wave, says Tom Beddows, president of Beddows Commodities Inc. in Jupiter, Fla. &quot;Cotton is the fabric of the 1980s,&quot; he says.    U.S. cotton exports in the year ended July 31 more than tripled to 6.7 million bales from the previous 12 months, and the Agriculture Department just increased its projection of this year's total exports 500,000 bales, to seven million bales. World demand reached a record 82.9 million bales in the year just ended, far outpacing world output of 69 million bales.    As production has lagged demand in recent years, the world supply has shrunk. It plunged to 32.1 million bales last season from 45.6 million in 1985-86 and is expected to total just 25.9 million when the current season ends. That would represent just about 31.5% of annual usage at the present rate of consumption, or less than four months' supply, says Russell Barlowe, a fibers analyst at the Agriculture Department's World Agricultural Outlook Board.    &quot;This is the lowest stocks-to-consumption ratio since the 1979-80 and 1980-81 seasons, when it was about 32%,&quot; Mr. Barlowe says. The average price during those two seasons was about 90 cents, he says.    With world production this season expected to rise only about 8.2 million bales from last season, to 77.2 million bales, Mr. Barlowe says, &quot;there is some question whether it will be enough to meet the explosive demand.&quot;    If weather problems in the three biggest producing nations continue or worsen, they could exacerbate the situation, analysts say.    China is a particularly difficult riddle. Information about crops there is difficult to obtain, analysts say. And while it has had rain, and flooding in some farm areas as well as drought in others, it is hard to tell how cotton crops specifically have been affected, analysts say.    The Agriculture Department expects Chinese production this season to total 18 million bales, down from its earlier estimate of 18.8 million but up from last season's &quot;poor&quot; output of 16.3 million, Mr. Barlowe says. Other analysts' estimates are as low as 16.6 million bales.    Lower production and markedly increased usage are expected to cut Chinese supplies to around 5.6 million bales by the end of this season, compared with a peak of 19.4 million bales at the end of 1984-85, Mr. Barlowe says. And &quot;many people believe some of the stocks, in storage for years, may not be of exportable quality.&quot;    The Agriculture Department expects this year's crop in the U.S., the second-largest producer, to total 12.9 million bales, or 900,000 bales more than the preliminary estimate. Last season 9.7 million were produced.    Some analysts and traders believe the latest figure is on the high side -- in light of adverse weather in the important Texas cotton-growing region recently -- and is likely to be reduced in subsequent reports, to reflect damage. The figure reflects conditions as of Aug. 1, Mr. Barlowe says.    Demand has been so strong, though, that U.S. supplies at the end of the current season are expected to total 3.8 million bales, or 200,000 bales more than the government's previous estimate. At the end of the past season, 5.1 million bales were on hand, according to the latest estimate.    While the Soviet Union, the world's third-largest producer had its cotton plantings delayed by cool, wet weather, it has made good progress since, Mr. Barlowe says. The question, he says, is whether the cotton can be harvested before the October frosts.    India, the fourth-largest producer, has a real problem, which could aggravate the world's headache if it worsens. The province of Gujarat, which accounts for one-fifth of India's cotton output, has had weak rains, hampering crop development.    The Agriculture department has cut its estimate of India's production this season to 7.7 million bales, compared with eight million in 1986-87.    &quot;We may have to reduce it further if there isn't more rain in the area,&quot; Mr. Barlowe says. </TEXT></DOC>