<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0150 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:The Philippines: Dirty Harry vs. Ramsey Clark---By Araceli Z. Lorayes</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MANILA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Over the past several months, Philippine democracy has been caught in the cross fire of a propaganda war over the existence of anti-communist vigilante groups. On the offensive are the various human-rights advocates, who have tirelessly sought to portray all vigilantes, without exception, as right-wing death squads or murderous fanatics. On the defensive are the Philippine military forces and the government, whose most outspoken anti-communist minister, Jaime Ferrer, was assassinated over the weekend. As local governments secretary, Mr. Ferrer had endorsed the formation of unarmed self-defense units.    The human-rights groups have not limited themselves to the parties that should be most concerned about the issue -- the government and the Philippine public -- but have gone international in their campaign. Thus, the same folks who routinely denounce foreign interference as an affront to Philippine sovereignty have seen no inconsistency in enlisting in their cause former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark to meddle in the Philippines' internal affairs and harangue the Philippine government on how to defend its citizens.    Mr. Clark did not disappoint. In a blaze of publicity, all in the best traditions of the instant expert, Mr. Clark and his team swept through the country on a whirlwind 10-day tour in search of human-rights violations, specifically those committed by the military and the vigilantes. Naturally, he found what he was looking for. Also naturally, since his hosts and tour guides are not particularly interested in the human rights of any groups other than the Communist Party of the Philippines, the National Democratic Front and the New People's Army, his group did not unduly concern itself with violations committed against the human rights of the civilian population, or even those of hapless NPA members who had the misfortune of coming under suspicion of being government deep-penetration agents. Indeed, the sight of mass graves did not elicit any condemnation of NPA brutality, but rather the disparaging observation that &quot;the military offered little evidence that the bodies were NPA victims.&quot; The combined evidence of the graves, the testimonies of witnesses to the executions or burials, the survivors and friends of the victims was not considered sufficient.    In fairness to Mr. Clark and his team they made no hypocritical claims that they would deal evenhandedly with the issue. They came to the Philippines to look for evidence to support predetermined conclusions and they found it. Among the many questionable conclusions, probably the most grotesque is the one stating that the primary factor in the escalation of vigilante violence is the protection of U.S. interests. This ignores the fact that many Filipinos feel threatened by insurgency in the countryside and terrorism in the city streets, and have come to realize that passivity no longer is tenable.    The Clark report is ostensibly meant for the U.S. Congress, but its actual audience is far wider: the American public. It preys on the American citizen's aversion to having his government allied with unjust regimes, his fear of being sucked into another war in Asia, his residual guilt feelings over Vietnam. Predictably, the Clark report recommends the cessation of all military aid to the Philippines and the withdrawal of the U.S. bases here.    One of the more famous precepts of Mao Tse-tung is that in a guerrilla war the peasantry is the sea in which the insurgents are the fish that swim and feed. But suppose the sea voluntarily rejects the fish? This is what happens when a vigilante movement is supported by a significant portion of the community, which was the case in Davao City and in the province of Davao del Sur. The image that human-rights advocates want to project of the groups is one of rogue killers, but the most successful have been those whose membership is composed overwhelmingly of civilian volunteers and that emphasize peacekeeping, intelligence gathering and noncooperation with NPA demands, rather than armed confrontation with the rebels. Taking a leaf from the NPA these groups have adopted some of the NPA's most successful methods: education campaigns, neighborhood patrols, lookouts to monitor the arrival of strangers and the movements of large groups, a warning and courier system. The vigilantes provide the military with the intelligence necessary for army operations and, equally important, they deprive the insurgents of their safe houses, their revolutionary taxes and the support systems needed to sustain the struggle.    Community-based vigilante groups also provide a safety net for rebel defectors. The first vigilante group was formed in Davao by a former NPA tax collector in self-defense, and many returnees now make up vigilante groups for self-protection against reprisals from their former comrades. Without a solidarity group ready to provide aid and protection, one defects from the NPA at real risk.    The grave danger to the left from the vigilante phenomenon is that it is a strategy that works. So far it has proved more successful in isolating the insurgents from their mass base than the government's former strategies. This is the real reason why what one Manila columnist calls the &quot;smear-sneer campaign&quot; to disband the vigilantes is only incidental to correct human-rights abuses -- after all, the NPA has proved its ability to repay perpetrators in the same brutal coin. Its primary aim is to cripple the government's anti-insurgency efforts. Why else would the Clark report recommend a termination of all U.S. military aid to the Philippines?    Still, to state that all vigilante groups are good and wondrous creations would be as false and sweeping a generalization as the opposite view being promoted by the human-rights people that the vigilantes are all murderous fanatics. It is also true that the vigilante movement can develop in dangerous directions, given the preponderance of loose firearms and the tensions prevailing in Philippine society. It goes without saying that violations of human rights must be investigated and punished, but the government must do more. While recognizing the right of individuals and communities to defend themselves, the government nevertheless cannot abdicate its responsibility to control and direct these groups. A recent presidential exhortation to wage a people's war against extremists of the right and the left -- but cautioning civilians to leave fighting to the military -- is so vague that anyone can interpret it as he sees fit. It is essential for the government to fix authority over and responsibility for these groups. Guidelines for the recruitment, training, supervision and discipline of members must be set and, what's more, followed. Loose firearms must be collected.    The vast majority of Filipinos now perceive their interests and that of the state to be one and the same where the insurgency is concerned -- unlike the Marcos days -- hence the enthusiasm of ordinary civilians for vigilante groups. But any time force is outside the hands, and thus control, of the government, there is a great chance that the cure can become as bad as the disease. But, pace Mr. Clark and his team, the way to solve this problem is to make the vigilantes unnecessary by providing the government forces with the resources and training that will finally make them able to provide security for their citizens.    ---   Miss Lorayes is a free-lance writer in the Philippines. </TEXT></DOC>