<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870220-0162 </DOCNO><HL> Weaker Dollar Isn't the Boon That Caterpillar Expected---Firm Had Moved Some OperationsOverseas, Now Faces High Costs---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CATFARM EQUIPMENT (FAR) </IN><DATELINE> The old saying, &quot;Be careful what you wish for  </DATELINE><TEXT>    you mightget it,&quot; has proven at least partly true for Caterpillar Inc.   Among the dozens of American companies clamoring for a weaker dollar in the early 1980s, the big construction-equipment maker was by far the noisiest. Its chairman then, Lee L. Morgan, became a frequent visitor to Washington, lobbying President Reagan, then-Treasury Secretary Donald Regan and others to derail the dollar's record rise.    But Caterpillar's dollar-bashing campaign may have backfired, at least in the short run. The Peoria, Ill.-based company got everything it wanted and more: The dollar has fallen well below most expectations, theoretically benefiting U.S. exporters by reducing the effective cost of their products to many overseas buyers. But instead of improving, Caterpillar's fortunes have darkened, and the company posted losses in the two most recent quarters.    &quot;They kept saying all they wanted is a level playing field. Now they still can't seem to make a buck of it,&quot; says Frank Manfredi, publisher of Machinery Outlook, an industry newsletter.    Caterpillar's situation illustrates some reasons why the dollar's tumble hasn't been a bonanza for U.S. industry. All during the company's public lobbying against the strong dollar, it was quietly taking steps to adapt by moving part of its production overseas. That left Caterpillar vulnerable to rising costs when the U.S. dollar began falling against foreign currencies.    At the same time, the company may have underestimated the competition. Its chief rival, Komatsu Ltd. of Japan, has kept its prices competitive despite the yen's sharp rise. Worse yet, the market for construction equipment has all but dried up in many Third World countries, once huge buyers of Caterpillar machinery.    &quot;Something obviously has gone wrong,&quot; says Charles Yengst, an industry consultant.    Caterpillar still expects to see benefits from the dollar's decline. Company executives argue that Komatsu will soon raise prices, giving Caterpillar a competitive edge. Also, the company has begun to adjust some of its sourcing to trends in currency markets: In recent months, for example, Caterpillar began buying bearings for its diesel engines from a domestic supplier rather than a foreign one.    &quot;Certainly we didn't go through all this effort to get the dollar at a more equitable exchange rate thinking it would hurt us,&quot; says Donald V. Fites, a Caterpillar executive vice president. &quot;People need to be a little patient.&quot;    A few years ago, it was Caterpillar that seemed impatient. As the dollar surged roughly 50% between 1980 and 1985, Komatsu bulldozed its way into the lucrative U.S. market. It boosted its market share to 25% in 1984 from 15% in 1980, mostly at the expense of Caterpillar, says Mitchell Quain, an analyst at Wertheim Shroder andamp; Co.    At the same time, the &quot;gray market&quot; flourished. Independent distributors bought construction equipment abroad, taking advantage of the dollar's strength against the currencies in which the equipment was priced. The distributors in turn sold the equipment in the U.S. at cutthroat rates. At the peak of gray-market activity in 1984, as many as 20% of the excavators sold in the U.S. were merchandized by gray marketers, an industry source estimates.    With missionary zeal, Caterpillar attacked what it saw as the enemy: the strong dollar. Mr. Morgan became a leading spokesman on the issue. He was such a central figure in the debate that then-Sen. Charles Percy of Illinois held hearings on the yen-dollar relationship, partly at the urgings of Mr. Morgan.    The company cut such a wide swath on the issue that some of its blue-collar workers became students of international currency markets. It's not unusual, Peoria-area brokerage offices say, for Caterpillar's factory workers to call and ask how the dollar is faring in foreign-exchange trading.    But as it crusaded, Caterpillar was mounting another, quieter campaign: The company was moving some production and sourcing overseas to cash in on lower production costs. Caterpillar's overseas production jumped from 19% of total sales in 1982 to 25% today. Caterpillar expects that to remain about the same this year. Also, its sourcing of parts overseas jumped more than fourfold between 1981 and 1986.    That in turn caused some of Caterpillar's current problems, say analysts and industry executives. One analyst estimates that the depreciating dollar cost Caterpillar an additional $200 million in 1986 overhead costs at its expanded overseas facilities; the company itself cites the impact of the weaker dollar on overseas manufacturing costs as a factor in its $148 million loss for the fourth quarter. Those higher costs have helped offset any gains on the dollar's tumble.    Consider the case of Caterpillar's tractor loader, one of its biggest-selling items. In December 1985, the company shifted production of the machine from its Davenport, Iowa, plant to its factory in Grenoble, France, where it already was producing the same product.    Caterpillar won't discuss the financial impact of the move, which the company says was done to reduce labor and parts costs. But the dollar's 20% decline against the French franc since December 1985 could have inflated the company's effective production costs by about the same percentage. Caterpillar says it has hedged against risk from foreign-exchange fluctuations on the interbank market, helping to ease the falling dollar's negative impact.    Making matters worse, Caterpillar's production shift overseas has particularly hurt its efforts to compete in the industry's hottest market, small construction equipment. While Caterpillar's main competitors in that area, Deere andamp; Co. and Tenneco Inc.'s J.I. Case unit, make most of their small construction equipment in the U.S., Caterpillar's operations are centered almost exclusively overseas. Thus, the falling dollar has put Caterpillar at an immediate disadvantage against competitors in the liveliest arena.    John A. Borden, a J.I. Case executive vice president, estimates that Caterpillar's profit margins on its Leicester, England-produced loader backhoes have narrowed 30% to 40% because of the falling dollar. Caterpillar's Mr. Fites, however, says that's &quot;grossly misstated.&quot; He says the weaker dollar has only hurt margins on that implement by about 5%.    Weakness in its crucial Third World markets has dealt Caterpillar another blow. Despite industry hopes that a lower dollar would lift U.S. exports, many Third World nations have curtailed construction. Mr. Fites estimates that Caterpillar's exports this year will be about the same as 1986's $2 billion. That's down from a record high in 1981 of $3.5 billion.    At this point, part of Caterpillar's strategy apparently is to wait for its chief rival, Komatsu, to respond to exchange-rate trends by raising prices in the U.S. But that may not happen for a while. Although the Japanese construction-equipment maker has raised list prices an estimated 18% to 20% over the past year, it has been discounting those quotes heavily, leaving its actual selling prices little changed in order to hold onto market share, industry sources say. Komatsu executives declined to be interviewed.    &quot;People are loath to lose market share until they start hurting,&quot; admits Caterpillar's Mr. Fites. Caterpillar raised prices in October about 2.5%.    Caterpillar expects to see benefits from the weaker dollar sometime later this year, Mr. Fites says. Also, the once-threatening gray market is no longer much of a competitive factor, industry sources say.    Meanwhile, the company has continued its extensive cost-cutting efforts. Just last month, Caterpillar announced the planned closing of three factories, including its Glasgow, Scotland, plant where only three months earlier it had unveiled plans to invest $90 million. The about-face came after an internal company report projected weak industry growth -- at a rate of just half that of the gross national product.    Regardless of the course of the dollar, Caterpillar and others in the industry will continue to face weakness in their markets. Analysts expect 1987 sales in the $8 billion-a-year construction equipment market to remain about flat or even shrink slightly. And Caterpillar expects a loss for its first quarter.    Eventually, though, the company should show improved results, both from the dollar's tumble and its own cost-cutting efforts. Earnings should improve throughout the rest of the year -- particularly if Komatsu raises prices, analysts say.    Says Steven E. Cerier, an economist at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co.: &quot;The dollar's decline has proven not to be the panacea that a lot of companies expected.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>