<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870925-0091 </DOCNO><HL> This Is the Army, Herr Jones---By Amity Shlaes</HL><DD> 09/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK) </IN><DATELINE> WITH ALLIED FORCES, Schwarmstedt, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Armiesaren't the best guests. Take the case of the local baker whohit the autobahn with a breakfast delivery last week andfound himself stuck in the most complex NATO maneuvers inWestern Europe since World War II. Tanks and jeeps blockedthe road for miles. Three hundred fresh rolls and 80jelly-stuffed pastries started getting stale. The bakerclimbed from his van to complain -- and ended up selling hisentire stock to a company of American tank gunners.   The jelly rolls were hostages to &quot;Certain Strike,&quot; a 78,000-man war game held this month near the East German border. &quot;Accord Express&quot; and &quot;Bold Sparrow,&quot; two other maneuvers, have been wreaking similar confusion in Danish, French and other West German communities.    Such maneuvers are being closely observed not only by Soviet officials entitled to view them under international law, but also by West European leaders eager to monitor civilian reaction in the wake of the expected agreement between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that would remove medium-range nuclear missiles from European soil.    Over the past decade, even left-leaning citizens of Western European countries generally have lived amicably with conventional forces, concentrating their energy on fighting the deployment of intermediate-range nuclear missiles. But now the expected pact between the Soviet Union and the U.S. to remove SS-20s, Pershing IIs and Cruise missiles means domestic political debate on Western European defense will shift to the conventional forces. Western European leaders realize that any conventional reinforcement that approaches the missiles' deterrent capability will likely be far more intrusive -- and more expensive -- than the economical missiles, and they want to know how accepting their citizens will be of a conventional-arms buildup.    &quot;The important thing here is the local population,&quot; Manfred Woerner, West Germany's defense minister, tells reporters as he visits NATO maneuvers near the East German border. The exercise, called Reforger -- for &quot;Return of Forces to Germany&quot; -- is going smoothly and Mr. Woerner notes that &quot;my thanks go to the people -- their (acceptance) is something I don't take for granted.&quot;    To tour NATO maneuvers in West Germany and Denmark is to see how Germans and Danes handle armies' occupations of their back yards. Reforger has dumped 35,000 U.S. troops into West Germany, the largest number of GIs to arrive at once since America fought the Germans. In a Reforger exercise north of Hanover, 2,200 tracked vehicles and 383 helicopters clamber and roar across farm land. Jeeps block the main road to Hamburg and Bremen. Some 20,000 French troops roll over the border near Strasbourg for a joint practice session.    Despite this display of military might, the maneuvers draw little protest -- this in the country that in 1983 mustered hundreds of thousands to march against missile deployment. The only complaints come from civilians whose routines are disrupted -- and even those are rare thanks to the sensitivity the military shows toward civilians. An angry woman whose telephone number mistakenly had been given out as a military number is mollified when U.S. officers appear at her door with flowers. Farther south, the French troops are received amicably -- perhaps because Germans know the French have been warned not to poach German snails.    Similar equanimity shows up in Denmark. Members of the ACE Mobile Force, a NATO command designed to protect Europe's vulnerable flanks, motor in with deafening C-130 Hercules planes and Puma helicopters. A supermarket owner takes things in stride when a British infantryman runs a rifle nose right through the impatiens in the store's flowerpots. When German soldiers swing cranes and show off anti-tank vehicles in a town square near a statue of King Christian, who led his countrymen during German occupation in World War II, no one blinks.    Western Europeans' routine acceptance of these standing armies, however, doesn't mean they are ready to budget new military expenditures. Countries such as Belgium and the Netherlands would be particularly vulnerable after a missile withdrawal. And, unlike southern neighbors such as Greece or Turkey, many Northern European countries for years have been reducing their defense expenditures in real terms. Proposed spending packages for next year reflect the assumption that the U.S. will provide the bulk of the protection with the intermediate-range missiles -- an assumption now likely to become outdated.    &quot;After the missile deal, reinforcement at NATO's flanks is particularly important,&quot; says Lt. Gen. Guenther Rauff of the German Air Force. &quot;To defend ourselves we need more reserves and we need them earlier.&quot;    Take Denmark, which lies within 10 minutes' flight of Warsaw Pact fighter planes. The same week Danes politely hosted the ACE Mobile Force earlier this month, they dealt a blow to conservative Prime Minister Poul Schlueter's four-party coalition in national elections. Although Mr. Schlueter's government still has some chance of surviving, its hopes of getting its defense platform through in a crucial spring vote look slim. The Social Democrats, who will have more say in the government, want a zero increase in defense spending.    Mr. Schlueter's target budget for 1988 --a minor increase of $59 million from the 1987 budget of $1.9 billion -- would merely sustain Danish forces at present standards, standards so low that the nation can afford to call up only about a quarter of its conscripts. A Danish air force officer at the Tirstrup air base complains about his unit's fighter planes, which have outdated, radarless, equipment. He is even more concerned about manning the cockpits; the group is supposed to have 21 pilots but only has 14 because many fliers leave to work for better-paying commercial airlines. Says the officer: &quot;They've gone to SAS.&quot;    Part of the problem is a time lag. A missile deal might be completed by the end of this year, but it will take Western European political parties longer than several months to shift from their old focus of defending themselves in the context of INF missiles. Although conservative parties originally argued for the missiles' deployment to counter Warsaw Pact SS-20s -- and so should be seen as vindicated by the accord -- they are often perceived as &quot;the missile parties.&quot; Parties more ardently advocating arms control, such as the Social Democrats in Germany, also feel vindicated in the deal but are at a loss as to what to push for next.    Another problem is that domestic political alignments are flip-flopping. Helmut Kohl, for example, was elected as President Reagan's supporter and as an opponent of missile withdrawal. But his coalition partner, the Free Democratic Party, and the opposition Social Democrats, were the ones who were backing missile withdrawal when the Reagan administration began moving toward a zero-zero agreement. Mr. Kohl has turned around, but not without losing substantial credibility with the electorate. A similar irony exists in Britain. The kind of conventional buildup advocated by Labor leader Neil Kinnock in last spring's national election campaign is what Europe can look forward to, not the nuclear focus that helped win Mrs. Thatcher's Conservatives the election.    As American and German tanks pointed guns at each other last week, NATO's departing secretary general, Lord Carrington, worried about the West's ability to mount a real defense. He warned in a London speech that &quot;immediately upon an INF treaty's entry into force we shall confront the need to maintain stability in Europe during treaty implementation. . . . Temporary vulnerability and imbalances may arise.&quot; Others, such as the just retired supreme allied commander, U.S. Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, have been more blunt.    The seven-nation Warsaw Pact holds about a 2.5-to-1 edge in conventional firepower in Europe, counting troops, planes, tanks and personnel carriers. The East Bloc also has the advantage in chemical weapons. With the missiles gone, Western Europeans will bear more responsibility than they have had in decades in determining the fate of their continent.    For now, these citizens' position on this issue can at best be called ambivalent. One example of such indecision popped up in a small Hanover-area daily. The paper waxed nostalgically about armies and the War when it reported how German citizens thrilled to Glenn Miller tunes courtesy of an American Army band. The same day, though, the paper carried another story with a distinctly anti-military slant. The story told of a British truck that had crashed and spilled 12,000 liters of fuel onto village streets. Its headline: &quot;On the Edge of Catastrophe.&quot;    ---   Miss Shlaes is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>