<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880615-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan and the Courts -- Asserting Rights: State Supreme Courts Are Feeling Their Oats About Civil Liberties --- New Jersey, for One, Grants Freedoms Highest Court Hasn't Given Its Sanction --- Interpreting 51 Constitutions </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> SUP EXE JUS </G><TEXT>      {Last of a Series}   TRENTON, N.J. -- Ottavio Novembrino is glad that judges in New Jersey have minds of their own. Relieved, too, are the Jesse Jackson campaign workers who recently handed out leaflets at a shopping mall in Montclair.    Felony charges against Mr. Novembrino were dropped when the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that the drugs police found at his Bayonne service station were illegally seized evidence under the state's constitution. The Jackson people were able to pass out their campaign material at the Lackawanna Plaza before the New Jersey primary this month because state courts have said the New Jersey constitution's guarantee of free speech applies to shopping centers.    Oddly enough, both rulings run counter to decisions rendered by the United States Supreme Court. Increasingly, state supreme courts are interpreting state constitutions to protect civil liberties more broadly than the U.S. Constitution seems to do. The trend contrasts sharply with President Reagan's efforts to reshape the Supreme Court and federal appeals and district courts by appointing conservative judges. And Mr. Reagan's appointments have had some paradoxical results.    &quot;The irony of the Reagan era,&quot; says Ronald Collins, a visiting professor at American University's Washington College of Law, &quot;is that, through the state courts, it has produced a stronger system of American justice geared toward protecting individual rights.&quot; Mr. Collins has counted more than 450 cases in which the states' highest courts have interpreted state constitutions as going beyond federal guarantees; more than two-thirds of those cases have been decided since 1980.    In New York, New Jersey and Florida, state courts have struck down wide-scale drug testing of public employees, although the Supreme Court has yet to rule on the issue. In California, Massachusetts and New Jersey, state courts have ruled that their constitutions require public financing of some abortions for poor women, although the Supreme Court said no such federal spending is required. Going far beyond the high court, state courts in Oregon and Hawaii have ruled that local pornography laws violate state constitutional rights. And a Texas court ruled that privacy rights preclude mandatory lie-detector tests for state employees.    Many lawyers now are taking more of their cases to state courts, hoping for more favorable rulings than they might get from federal judges. Conservatives, while disagreeing with certain rulings, see the cases as promoting the quality and independence of state courts. There are critics of the trend, including law-enforcement officials and some law professors, who worry that rulings sometimes reflect ideology more than legalities. &quot;This is about liberalism, not federalism,&quot; says Earl Maltz, a professor at Rutgers Law School in Camden, N.J.    New Jersey illustrates how state courts go their own way as the nation's highest court moves to the right politically. &quot;The New Jersey Supreme Court,&quot; says Eric Neisser, the legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, &quot;has been a leader in utilizing its state constitution to expand rights beyond those the U.S. Supreme Court finds in the federal Constitution.&quot;    The New Jersey court ruled that cocaine and marijuana seized in 1983 at Mr. Novembrino's service station couldn't be used against him because the search warrant, which police thought was valid, wasn't based on probable cause; it didn't include enough facts to explain to a magistrate the reasons for police suspicion of Mr. Novembrino.    Under the Supreme Court's 1984 interpretation of the federal Constitution, the search probably would have been valid despite the Fourth Amendment's protection against &quot;unreasonable searches and seizures&quot; because the police acted in good faith. Wording in the New Jersey Constitution is virtually identical to the Fourth Amendment. But as the New Jersey Supreme Court said in a 6-1 ruling last year: &quot;We see no need in New Jersey to experiment with fundamental rights protected by the Fourth Amendment counterpart of our state constitution.&quot;    The New Jersey courts' expansive view of civil liberties is by no means limited to the rights of people accused of crimes. Last year, a New Jersey appeals court, citing the state constitution, struck down Newark's plan for twice-a-year urine tests of all police narcotics officers.    The New Jersey Supreme Court was ahead of the federal judiciary in finding that the press and the public have a right to attend pretrial hearings in criminal cases. And, in 1982, stepping around a 1980 Supreme Court decision, the New Jersey court ruled that the state constitution's guarantee of &quot;equal protection of the laws&quot; requires the state to pay for abortions that are necessary to preserve the life or health of impoverished women.    It isn't accidental that New Jersey courts are facing important questions of individual liberties that once were directed at federal judges. &quot;We are in an era in which federal courts have been reluctant to expand rights for the poor or for voiceless minorities,&quot; says Richard Shapiro, the director of public-interest lawsuits for New Jersey's taxpayer-financed public advocate. &quot;We certainly view state courts as a much more receptive forum for opening up constitutional rights to these groups.&quot;    Although the Supreme Court said in 1972 that the U.S. Constitution doesn't guarantee a right to housing for everyone, lawyers under Mr. Shapiro have been trying to convince the New Jersey courts that the state constitution guarantees shelter for the homeless. So far, they haven't succeeded. But &quot;in another era,&quot; he says, &quot;we'd have thought about going to federal court to try and get around the 1972 precedent.&quot;    Other lawyers have taken expansive New Jersey court decisions and built upon them. In 1980, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment doesn't require Princeton University to allow a member of the U.S. Labor Party to distribute political literature on campus. But the court said Princeton violated the man's state constitutional rights; a private property owner who allows public use of his property must have express standards for excluding some activities while allowing others.    Mr. Neisser of the ACLU says New Jersey courts in recent years have used the Princeton ruling to open up shopping centers, such as the Bergen Mall in Paramus, to groups and candidates. The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that shopping-center owners aren't required to allow First Amendment expression on their premises.    Times have changed. In the 1960s, things tended to go the other way. As a liberal U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren broadly expanded the rights of the accused, the New Jersey Supreme Court looked for ways to circumvent high-court decisions, seeing the facts of cases differently, according to G. Alan Tarr, a political-science professor at Rutgers University.    The potential for expanded rights under state constitutions first gained national attention in 1977 in a Harvard Law Review article hailing the development. The article was written by Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan, who had been a New Jersey justice in the early 1950s.    But even at the time of Justice Brennan's article, the idea of interpreting state constitutions to broaden rights was little more than an experiment in such states as California, Oregon and New Jersey. In recent years, other states have joined in. And now the trend has become so pronounced that the National Association of Attorneys General, an organization of state officials, recently started a newsletter on state constitutional-law developments.    The principle behind the expansion of state constitutional rights is that what the Supreme Court determines is required by the Constitution is just a minimum. The states can't provide less protection, but they can provide more.    Among the many conservatives who welcome what is happening in state courts, Gary McDowell, a former Justice Department aide, says, &quot;However much I may dislike the results politically, it's a healthy trend any time the states exercise their sovereignty.&quot;    Robert Williams, a law professor at Rutgers-Camden and a longtime student of the courts, says conservatives are beginning to catch on to the idea of pursuing goals in state courts. &quot;The right is picking this up,&quot; he says.    Still, some people are worried. In criminal cases, courts and prosecutors warn of confusion for police that may result from different standards on the federal and state levels.    And while more state courts are moving beyond the Constitution in affording rights to their citizens, the pendulum is swinging the other way elsewhere. The California Supreme Court is an example of that. Once a leading liberal force, the California court has changed tone and direction since Chief Justice Rose Bird and two liberal colleagues were recalled by voters in 1986. Under the leadership of new Chief Justice Malcolm Lucas, the California court is retrenching, particularly in criminal cases.    Even in New Jersey, there is some controversy over how the state's constitution has been used by judges. On the New Jersey Supreme Court itself, Justices Stewart Pollock and Alan Handler and Chief Justice Robert Wilentz all have written decisions and given speeches in support of interpreting the state constitution in ways that broaden freedoms. But Jose Fernandez, a New Jersey lawyer and former law clerk to Justice Wilentz, says the court isn't consistent enough. &quot;State constitutional analysis continues being irregularly applied,&quot; he says, noting that it is hard to predict when the New Jersey court will rely on the U.S. Constitution first and when it will turn to the state constitution.    But other lawyers take a practical approach to the uncertainty. &quot;I consider it at this point almost malpractice not to include claims under the state constitution in lawsuits,&quot; says the ACLU's Mr. Neisser. </TEXT></DOC>