<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880616-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Burning Issue: Energy From Garbage Loses Some of Promise As Wave of the Future --- Incineration Reminds Critics Of Nuclear-Power Fiasco; Recycling Again in Vogue --- In Tuscaloosa, the 'Turkey' </HL><AUTHOR> Bill Richards (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ENV </IN><DATELINE> POMPANO BEACH, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Towering over the sand and scrub pine at this city's outskirts is South Florida's tallest landform -- Broward County's last legal dump. Lines of trucks snake up its sides, adding more than a thousand tons of trash daily. &quot;Right now,&quot; says county waste official Thomas Henderson, &quot;we are being pressed right up against the wall.&quot; Broward's solution: replace its mountain of trash with a mound of debt.    The county plans to spend nearly $700 million on a pair of &quot;resource recovery&quot; plants -- a giant new breed of incinerators that gobble garbage and turn it into salable steam and electricity. This, for many American communities, is the latest alternative to drowning in garbage.    Yes, say incineration's opponents, a panacea -- just as nuclear power was. The waste-to-energy camp responds: The critics, not incineration, are the problem.    The 131,000 residents of Pompano Beach and two other Broward communities will take no part in the big project. They're building a recycling and composting plant instead. &quot;Mass incineration is astronomically expensive and environmentally hazardous,&quot; says Pompano Beach City Commissioner Michael N. Gomes.    &quot;Broward County has been sold a bill of goods, just like municipalities all over the country,&quot; says Frank Kreidler, an attorney for South Broward Citizens for a Better Environment. This group and the state of Florida have challenged Broward's project in the state supreme court.    The garbage crisis has promoted the construction of 73 waste-to-energy plants around the country, with hundreds more planned at a combined cost of more than $18 billion. Critics profess to feel an eerie sense of &quot;deja vu&quot; in the trend toward burning. In the 1990s, they say, this could become for municipalities what the nuclear-plant building binge was to electric utilities in the 1970s. It plunged many into an economic and environmental swamp in which a few are still mired, their huge cost overruns unrecoverable from customers, their shareholder dividends shrunken or ended.    Robert A. Epler, the head of resource recovery for San Diego, says public officials today are repeating the utilities' mistakes in moving toward bigger and costlier projects instead of alternatives, mainly recycling. &quot;These incinerators are the most expensive investment a lot of these communities will ever make,&quot; says Eric Goldstein, an attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council, a New York environmental group opposing mass incineration. &quot;A lot of them are just coming to realize the cost of a mistake could be very high.&quot;    The critics have a point. Already, the new incinerators are proving far more expensive than many communities dreamed. Some have spent millions of dollars to cover debt costs after revenues from electricity sales failed to meet expectations. More millions have gone into the tricky business of applying European garbage-burning technology to U.S. trash, loaded with abrasive plastics, glass and aluminum. Pinellas County, Fla., engineers were startled when the boiler on their new incinerator, which was supposed to last 20 years, began disintegrating in less than a year. The retrofit cost: $5 million.    Perhaps more worrisome, the incinerators are burdening communities with thousands of tons of ash so laden with toxic heavy metals that it can be legally dumped in only a few places. Environmentalists are pressing for tough enforcement of federal dumping laws, which so far have been ignored, but industry officials warn that could be economically ruinous.    Such concerns have skittish local officials backing off in droves. More than $3 billion in projects have been scrapped in the past 18 months, and new orders have slowed to a trickle. In Collier County, Fla., officials dropped plans for an incinerator last year after issuing $88 million in bonds for it. &quot;We took another look at the risks and decided to pull out and protect ourselves,&quot; says Arnold Lee Glass, the head of the board of commissioners.    For those still committed to waste-to-energy plants, unresolved problems threaten costly litigation and environmental headaches. &quot;I see a number of quagmires we could fall into,&quot; says Arthur C. Sprenkle, the head of the Washington State's legislative committee on solid-waste-management priorities. His state is revising plans to build 13 incinerators. Says Dayton Cook, who oversees the new incinerator in Alexandria, Va.: &quot;After you've spent $100 million on a plant, you don't want to find out you've got to spend another $50 million to retrofit before you even start paying off your bonds.&quot;    Supporters of the plants assert that most start-up glitches have been corrected. &quot;We made the necessary adjustments, and in recent years the plants I'm aware of have come in under budget, ahead of schedule and are operating as anticipated,&quot; says Jack Lyman, an official with the National Solid Wastes Management Association, a trade group. He and others insist that the real culprits in resource recovery's recent setbacks are scrappy opponents they call &quot;Nimbys&quot; (for Not in My Back Yard). Says Kevin Stickney, a spokesman for Wheelabrator Technologies Inc., the nation's largest incinerator builder: &quot;Technology can solve most of the problems, but it's hard to demonstrate that a 15-story incinerator won't be noticed in the neighborhood.&quot;    Wheelabrator, a unit of Henley Group Inc., announced an agreement with Waste Management Inc. in April that could permit construction of future waste-to-energy plants at Waste Management's 110 landfill sites around the U.S., presumably muting some Nimby criticism.    Nimbys have scored impressive victories. They helped kill waste-to-energy plants in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle recently. In San Diego, they pushed through a referendum limiting the location of a planned 2,250-ton-a-day incinerator to a national monument, the city's zoo or a strip of land next to the city's most expensive residential area. &quot;Waste to energy is no longer one of the options available to San Diego,&quot; says Mr. Epler, the recovery official.    Incineration problems go beyond Nimbys. Power sales have been disappointing, but many places are counting heavily on the sales to help pay the plants' big bond debts. In Tampa, Deputy Auditor Alan Nicks dismisses promoters' revenue projections as &quot;just guesses&quot; after his city was forced to make up a two-year, $7 million revenue shortfall at its new incinerator. Tuscaloosa, Ala., critics nicknamed their incinerator the &quot;Tuscaloosa Turkey&quot; and local officials sued the manufacturer, Consumat Systems Inc., for $20 million after the plant lost money during its first 34 months of operation.    Broward County could fare worse. Officials expect electricity sales from their two incinerators to cover about 40% of the project's bond payments. But the county's contract with Florida Power andamp; Light Co. would cancel the incinerators' electricity revenues unless they operate at 70% of capacity or more.    Perhaps the most critical concern is the concentration of toxic heavy metals such as cadmium, lead and chromium left over after incineration, especially in the fly ash traveling up the plants' smokestacks. But for incinerator operators, there's a catch: The better their air-pollution control equipment, the more toxic ash they must get rid of on the ground.    Environmentalists -- many of whom once praised new incinerator technology as superior to landfills -- now worry that metals leaching from dumps will pollute nearby water supplies. Tests last November by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency found that a quarter of the ash collected from energy incinerators in Tennessee, Ohio and Pennsylvania was polluted by toxic metal. Broward County's two plants alone will churn out 14,000 tons of polluted fly ash a year.    Both the garbage industry and the environmentalists say the future of waste-to-energy plants could hinge on the ash-disposal issue. The Environmental Defense Fund is suing for stricter enforcement of federal ash-dumping laws at Wheelabrator's Peekskill, N.Y., incinerator and another operated by the city of Chicago. Industry officials say such enforcement could raise the operating costs at some incinerators as much as a hundredfold.    The ash issue is especially critical here in Broward County. The nearest licensed hazardous-waste dump is 500 miles away in Alabama, and Broward's water table lies just a few feet beneath ground level, making it especially vulnerable. County officials hope to avoid pollution by building two monofills at a total cost of $38 million. Each is a specially designed ash dump with seven feet of rock, three feet of sand, and two polyethylene liners to keep the ash out of the water table.    Will the monofill satisfy federal regulators? Broward's Mr. Henderson, who directs the county's resource-recovery project, sidesteps the question as he leads a visitor over the sunbaked landfill site. &quot;Garbage disposal is as critical to us as lights and water,&quot; he says. &quot;The fact of the matter is, we just don't have any other choice.&quot;    As resource recovery's problems have multiplied, recycling has enjoyed a renaissance. Boston's and New York's ports now export more recycled paper and scrap metal than any other commodity. Los Angeles, which dropped plans for three large incinerators after Mayor Tom Bradley withdrew his support last year, plans to recycle and compost as much as half of its trash. &quot;We made a mistake,&quot; says Michael M. Miller, the manager of Los Angeles' solid-waste task force. &quot;Reducing the waste stream first makes a lot more sense.&quot;    Federal officials say as much as 25% of the 150 million tons of trash produced each year in the U.S. will be recycled five years from now. The current figure is about 10%. Garbage specialists say federal officials may be stretching their estimates a bit, however. Only one state, New Jersey, has begun to require recycling in all households; by the end of the year, all 567 of the state's communities must comply. Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York and Oregon are imposing less sweeping requirements. Some large cities, among them New York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia and Chicago, are planning major voluntary recycling efforts.    Recycling is no panacea. It is more expensive than either landfilling or incineration, although that could change as industries gear up to handle large volumes of recycled material. Not everyone cooperates; San Jose, Calif., which boasts the largest voluntary recycling program in the U.S., still has only 60% participation. Because some trash can't be recycled, a disposal problem remains. Some communities experimenting with recycling also plan to augment it with incineration.    The biggest problem could be to keep raw-materials markets from collapsing under all the recycled material. &quot;You're talking about enough material right here in the Northeast to make us one of the world's major producers of aluminum and iron,&quot; says Robert L. Bendick Jr., the director of environmental management for Rhode Island.    Mr. Bendick says Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Connecticut jointly plan to study the changes that raw-materials producers and users must make to handle the surge. &quot;This is no garden club collecting a few bottles and cans,&quot; he says. &quot;We are going to have to restructure fairly large pieces of the national and international economy to digest what we're going to feed them.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>