<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870204-0081 </DOCNO><HL> GOP Realignment Isn't Dead Yet---By Michael Lyons</HL><DD> 02/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Since the Democratic recapture of the Senate and the unraveling of the Reagan mystique in the Iranian arms scandal, the prospects for a Republican realignment seem much diminished. Former White House political director Edward Rollins has conceded that realignment efforts have failed so far. Journalists Jack Germond and Jules Witcover call talk of realignment &quot;exceedingly premature.&quot; And Kevin Phillips, author of &quot;The Emerging Republican Majority,&quot; has already written a realignment obituary.    But the recent experience of the Rocky Mountain states suggests a narrow focus on the events of last year distorts perspective. In that area, a Republican realignment has already occurred and its nature suggests that a national realignment may be in progress. More Democratic during the New Deal than any region but the South, the Mountain West -- Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming, Montana and Nevada -- is today the only region in which registered Republicans constitute a majority.    No Democratic presidential candidate has carried a single state in the region since 1964. Democratic majorities of the 1960s in the regional House and Senate delegations are now Republican majorities, with a tally of 15-9 and 10-6. And even though Democrats still hold five of the eight regional governorships (they held all eight three years ago), Republicans control six of the state legislatures, five by decisive margins; Democrats control only one, and the remaining one is split.    Spanning nearly 40 years and lacking any clear social or political imperative, the Mountain West realignment is unlike any realignments of the past, regional or national. The unusual character of this one calls into question realignment theories based on the precedents of the Democratic realignment of the 1930s and the Republican one of the 1890s: Republicans did not establish their current majority in the Mountain West by mobilizing a new coalition; socially, their coalition changed little. Nor do Republicans owe their gains to President Reagan's enormous popularity in the region or to a realigning issue. Indeed, the realignment was largely complete before the &quot;Sagebrush Rebellion&quot; (an attempt to get ownership of federal lands transferred to the Western states), the Iranian hostage crisis and Mr. Reagan's 1980 presidential candidacy.    Republicans became the majority in the Mountain West by effectively fighting a war of attrition. Their gains result almost entirely from the death or retirement of Democratic incumbents and the creation of new, open House seats by reapportionment. With the exception of a few key senators targeted by conservative interest groups, Democratic incumbents who chose to stay in office were nearly always able to do so, often surviving what otherwise were statewide Republican landslides.    Thus, the realignment proceeded very gradually. And because incumbents elsewhere are no less resilient than those in the Mountain West, it should be expected that a national realignment also would proceed gradually, perhaps so gradually as to be perceptible only in retrospect.    All this suggests that realignments now follow new rules and unlike those of the past, modern realignments may not reveal themselves in one, two or even a decade of elections.    What appears to have changed realignment is the quiet transformation of the underlying electoral process. Past realignments all occurred in eras of party-centered elections, in which most voting depended on affiliation with a socially and ideologically coherent party. The populist Democratic realignment of the 1930s, rooted in social and economic distress and led by the charismatic Franklin Roosevelt, suddenly and dramatically redefined party coalitions around new issues and perceptions of national interests.    Such parties did not adjust readily to the emergence of new voter groups or demands. Change in the party system required what amounted to an electoral revolution. Thus, realignments typically pivoted on &quot;critical elections,&quot; in which a new majority-party coalition would form around a new political agenda, supplanting the old. It was this kind of realignment the GOP had come to expect in 1984.    But the 1980s are an era of candidate-centered elections. Voting on the basis of &quot;leadership,&quot; &quot;responsiveness&quot; or other personal attributes of candidates rather than affinity with a party has become the rule. Increasingly, voters claim no party affiliation, and among the 60% or so who continue to be Democrats or Republicans, loyalty does not run deep. A series of questions in a 1980 election study illustrates this point nicely. When asked what they liked or disliked about the Republican and Democratic parties, more than one-third of respondents said &quot;nothing.&quot;    One obvious reason for the rise of the candidate-centered election is television. Less obvious but probably more important are the perquisites granted to congressional incumbents, such as the right to distribute to constituents at taxpayer expense self-laudatory newsletters, U.S. flags flown at the Capitol, and government-published pamphlets on child care, vegetable gardening and similar topics essential to the daily operation of government. Though it is unclear how much these perquisites matter, it is worth noting that in 1986, 98% of the House incumbents seeking reelection won it, including every Democrat but one.    Candidate-centered elections resist the forces that create critical realigning periods. Rather than swimming or sinking with their party in these elections, candidates build independent, personal bases of voter support. This sharply reduces the potential that a single issue or grass-roots movement can dominate a national or even local election.    President Reagan's inability to salvage several Republican Senate seats in 1986 is simply one case in point. Though on election night it was repeatedly noted that the &quot;Teflon&quot; president appeared also to have Teflon coattails, the fact is that in the candidate-centered era, Teflon coattails are the rule, and elections in which a president does help to carry a ticket, such as in 1980, are the exception.    As elections have been transformed in the candidate-centered era, so, too, has realignment. Party coalitions have become so fluid and party ideologies so muddled that the party system now accommodates changing circumstances far more readily than in the past. Weak parties have resulted in a more durable party system, a system able to withstand great stresses, such as Vietnam and Watergate, without major fracture. This kind of party system changes on an evolutionary basis, not a revolutionary one.    The Republicans expected too much too soon in 1984, but they should not be seriously discouraged by what has happened in 1986. They were wrong to pin their hopes for realignment on Ronald Reagan, and they have clearly underestimated residual public support for Democratic incumbents and many Democratic programs. But even though they were mistaken about how and when it would come, they may yet be proved right in predicting a realignment. What matters is the trend over a very long period -- two to three decades. There are many reasons -- demographic, attitudinal and strategic -- to believe this trend remains favorable to Republicans.    ---   Mr. Lyons is an assistant professor of political science at Utah State University. He also co-edited &quot;The Politics of Realignment: Party Change in the Mountain West&quot; (Westview Press, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>