<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Many Companies' Capital Spending Prospects Brighten---Investment Upturn May AccelerateBy Year's End, Last Through 1989---By Ralph E. WinterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)PETROLEUM (PET)COMPUTERS (EDP)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><TEXT>   Business is beginning to invest more aggressively again.    With last year's big psychological negative -- tax uncertainty -- behind them and with the declining dollar aiding them, many U.S. companies say their capital spending prospects have brightened considerably.    While the 1986 tax law reduced investment incentives, executives appear to be willing to gamble that purchases of efficient equipment will pay off, now that they know the rules. And the cheaper dollar is starting to curb imports, allow some price increases and make it easier for U.S. companies to export.    The pace of capital spending isn't expected to give the economy any real push for the next quarter or two. But higher corporate profits are expected to accelerate the investment upturn by year's end and propel it through 1989, says Richard T. Lindgren, president and chief executive officer of Cross andamp; Trecker Corp., a Bloomfield Hills, Mich.-based machine tool producer.    Economists, however, are mixed about whether the 1987 upturn will pick up speed early enough to result in a higher total for the year. Though a recent survey by the U.S. Conference Board, an industry-suported, non-profit business research concern, indicates the nation's 1,000 largest manufacturers expect a 10% domestic capital spending boost this year, to $103.4 billion from $93.9 million, few economists believe overall investment will rise by that much in 1987. Some economists, such as Richard D. Rippe of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., believe investment may decline again this year before rising in 1988. He contends higher corporate taxes and loss of investment incentives under the 1986 tax law will more than offset the plus from world trade, producing a 1.9% decline in facilities investment.    The Conference Board survey indicated that the big manufacturers are scheduling a 22% jump in appropriations for future capital investment, to $106.8 billion from $87.6 billion in 1986.    For all U.S. companies, spending for non-residential fixed investment -- a broad measure of business spending on buildings and equipment -- totaled $456.7 billion in 1986, down 1% from 1985. This spending had peaked in the 1985 fourth quarter at an annual rate of $476.9 billion in 1982 dollars. It dropped 4% in the first quarter of 1986, largely because of concern about the tax law and a drop in oil patch investment, and remained practically flat for the next three quarters.    The improving outlook for capital spending comes at an opportune time for the economy. With consumer spending rising slowly and government outlays nearly holding their own, a sizable improvement in the trade balance has been about the only hope for a brisker economic growth. By next year, some economists say, capital spending could be a major engine propelling the economic expansion for another year or two.    &quot;The sources of economic strength will change for the remainder of the decade,&quot; maintains Adrian T. Dillon, chief economist for Eaton Corp., a Cleveland-based maker of truck parts and electronic and electrical products. &quot;All of the trends favoring the consumer made the first part of the decade hell for capital goods producers,&quot; he says, citing particularly the availability of low-priced imports. &quot;However, we will see a better outlook for capital goods producers a year from now.&quot;    For one thing, Mr. Dillon notes, U.S. capital goods production for the first time in the four-year-long business recovery is rising faster than equipment purchases by domestic companies. Previously, imports -- aided by a high-valued dollar -- grabbed an ever-larger share of the U.S. capital goods market. Last year, more than 30% of capital goods bought by U.S. companies was imported, up from 13% back in 1980, he says. At the same time, U.S.-made equipment was having rough going in foreign markets.    Early beneficiaries of the dollar's decline already are boosting capital spending. For example, Mead Corp., a Dayton, Ohio-based paper and packaging concern that reported a hefty 68% rise in first-quarter profit, says its 1987 capital spending will rise by about half, reflecting the forest products industry's brighter outlook. Mead's outlays will total between $250 million and $275 million, up from $177 million in 1986. And Weyerhaeuser Co., a Tacoma, Wash.-based forest products concern, says its capital spending will approximate the $605 million of 1986 -- even though last year's total included $171 million for a sizable acquisition.    U.S. prices for pulp, paper and paperboard have risen sharply in the past year, largely because of the weaker dollar. Imports dropped and exports jumped as U.S. producers suddenly found themselves competitive in world markets again.    Foreign companies are boosting investment in the U.S., too. Japanese auto and electronics companies, European appliance makers and a wide range of other companies want to build a production base in the U.S., now that the weak dollar makes this country a lower-cost place to operate.    Another factor in the anticipated capital spending upturn is a determination by many U.S. companies to cut costs and become more competitive. Emhart Corp., for example, says it will boost investment this year about 10% to $88.5 million. The Hartford, Conn.-based hardware, fastener and information systems concern restructured last year and eliminated much of its old capacity, an official says. Much of this year's spending is to increase productivity of remaining facilities.    The brighter prospects for U.S. capital goods makers are stimulating investment as well. Eaton recently raised its 1987 capital spending plans to $190 million from the $170 million planned earlier; last year's outlays totaled $145 million.    The 1986 tax law has tended to cloud the capital spending picture for economists because they have had difficulties assessing effects of the new measure. The law eliminated the investment tax credit for most equipment purchased after Jan. 1, 1986. The law also lengthened the period over which assets must be depreciated, particularly for buildings. Many economists say the legislation's greatest impact actually struck last year, as companies anticipated its effects, but Dean Witter's Mr. Rippe and some others expect a significant drag on outlays again in 1987.    Still, industrial companies that are reducing capital spending this year haven't been blaming the tax law. Detroit-based General Motors Corp., which plans to cut 1987 capital spending 23%, and Fairfield, Conn.-based General Electric Co., which forecasts a 15% drop, say their reductions were planned before the tax law was passed. In fact, only 10% of the companies responding to the Conference Board survey said the tax changes altered their capital spending plans. And some of those said that, in anticipation of the investment tax credit cancellation, they moved up equipment purchases into 1985 that they otherwise would have made in 1986.    Nevertheless, many economists agree the tax law will slow construction of office buildings, warehouses and stores, which previously were attractive tax shelters. The resulting overbuilding triggered a high vacancy rate in office buildings. And factory building remains weak because capacity is adequate to produce most goods.    Spending for structures is expected to decline 7% to 10% this year, following last year's 12% drop. This year's drop reflects the soft market for new office buildings, while last year's slide was propelled by the precipitous oil-price declines. Oil and gas wells, pipelines and related facilities are considered to be structures.    The Conference Board survey indicates a 2% rise in 1987 outlays by leading oil companies, after a 35% drop last year.    Spending for equipment, on the other hand, will rise. And business invests more than twice as much each year in equipment than in structures. Eaton's Mr. Dillon estimates that equipment spending will rise about 5% from 1986, and the less optimistic Mr. Rippe of Dean Witter forecasts a 1.4% increase. Equipment spending last year rose 4.2% from 1985.    That equipment spending could rise -- despite simultaneous cutbacks by the likes of GM and GE and despite a steep drop in machine tool orders -- tells much about the changing nature of corporate investment.    Nowadays factory equipment makes up only about 22% of the nation's equipment purchases, down from 36% in 1970, Mr. Rippe says.    Meanwhile, computers and other electronic and communications equipment have grown to about 36% of total equipment spending from 14%. Rising outlays for this information-handling equipment this year will more than offset any weakness in factory machinery, many economists say.    Auto industry capital spending isn't likely to rebound for a while, mainly because of GM's more cautious attitude. GM says the $10.6 billion it spent on its auto plants last year was unusually high; a number of plants were being overhauled at the same time. GM's spending on automotive facilities will slip to $7.9 billion this year, and will slide further to $5.8 billion by 1989, GM says.    Some companies that have undergone radical restructuring, such as Akron, Ohio-based Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co., will be forced to retard spending for several years as they repay debt. </TEXT></DOC>