<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Commodity Prices Are Driven DownBy Doubts About U.S. Economic Health---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   The stock market's plunge yesterday infected commodity markets, depressing prices for copper, cotton, energy, cattle and other futures contracts that had been rallying recently.    The Commodity Research Bureau's closely watched futures-price index of 21 commodities fell for the first time in seven trading days, to 234.55, down 2.53 from the high for the year set Friday.    Analysts blamed much of the fall in commodity prices on doubts about the economic health of the U.S., which were rekindled as the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell almost 110 points at one point before recovering some of its losses.    Cattle, hog and pork-belly futures prices all tumbled. Memories of losses after the October market collapse were fresh in the minds of traders in these consumer-driven markets, analysts said.    Analysts and traders fear that a recession would dry up consumer demand for high-priced meats. The cattle contract for December delivery closed at 64.85 cents a pound, down by the permissible daily limit of 1.5 cents a pound. The hog contract for December settlement closed down 1.45 cents at 43.27 a pound.    Most grain markets were hurt by the stock-market losses. The sharp losses take away any strong foreign-currency gains and &quot;put . . . (the grain market) back in the deflation-recession mode,&quot; said Richard Loewy, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. November-delivery soybean contracts finished at $5.8425 a bushel, down 9.75 cents.    Copper prices, which had been skyrocketing, fluctuated widely before closing down sharply. On the New York Commodity Exchange, the December copper contract closed at $1.148 a pound, down 3.3 cents. An analyst said, &quot;It . . . (fell) Black Monday too, because a decline in the stock market shows a recessionary environment,&quot; eclipsing the primary factor that has been moving the market, a tightness in copper supply.    Analysts blamed some of the price drop to the fact that London Metal Exchange warehouse stocks fell less than anticipated in yesterday's weekly report. The stocks fell 500 tons, against the 4,000 tons expected. The Comex board of governors, meeting after the close of trading to review the December copper contract, took no action, an exchange spokesman said.    Cotton prices, always sensitive to economic news, likewise took a tumble. On the Cotton Exchange, the March contract fell its daily two-cent limit, to 69.62 cents a pound. Analysts noted that cotton prices have gyrated all month. Any indication that the economy might be weak generally hurts cotton prices because it means demand for cotton products might ebb.    Traders said they were disappointed that an Agriculture Department report released Friday didn't show an expected increase in cotton exports to Eastern-bloc countries. There had been reports that the Soviet cotton crop was in trouble because of weather and harvesting difficulties.    Orange-juice futures fell 3.2 cents a pound to end at $1.683 for January delivery, interrupting a rise of almost 30 cents a pound since the end of October.    Prices have risen because of concern that Brazil will raise its export prices, said one analyst. Brazilian output will be larger than last year despite being trimmed somewhat by drought, the analyst said. However, that country's carry-over of juice from the previous crop is relatively low, which has reduced total availability of juice from Brazil.    With the market entering the potential frost period in Florida, there is concern that if a freeze occurs, supplies may not be enough to meet demand, particularly in view of strong demand for Brazilian juice in Europe, the analyst said. However, she added, rising prices may limit demand for the commodity.    Not all commodities took a hit. Sugar-futures prices climbed above eight cents a pound on the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange for the first time since May. Nauman Barakat, an analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., attributed the rise to the weakness in the U.S. dollar against the British pound, because of the large amount of trading between the New York and London markets.    Judy Weissman Ganes, a Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. analyst, said sugar was buoyed by rumors that the Soviets were entering the market as buyers. Those rumors petered out, however.    Wheat futures soared, following Friday's announcement that the Agriculture Department had offered the Soviet Union an additional 2.4 million metric tons of subsidized wheat.    Many traders had expected another offer this calendar year, but they thought it might be for the 1989 crop year -- from June 1988 through May 1989 -- said Ted Mao, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., New York. The offer makes a total of three million metric tons of wheat available to the Soviets under the export-enhancement program, which compensates U.S. grain merchants for selling higher-priced American wheat at lower world prices.    Gold and platinum gains were below the day's highs after an early surge couldn't be sustained. December-delivery gold on the Commodity Exchange rose as high as $497 an ounce before settling at $491, up $4.90. January platinum fell from a high of $534.50 to end at $519.20 an ounce, up $8.60.    &quot;The strong rise in the Commodity Research Bureau Index Friday was seen as a portent of inflation and helped to trigger early buying of gold, as did the sharp drop in the dollar,&quot; said Bette Raptopoulos, a metals analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. The CRB is a unit of Knight-Ridder Inc., Miami.    Silver, which is widely used as an industrial metal, fell 9.8 cents, in reaction to stock-market weakness. December-delivery silver posted a high of $7.33 an ounce, but closed at $7.037. The drop in silver helped turn gold around from its highs, despite the fact that stock traders tend to buy gold as a haven when the stock market falls, Ms. Raptopoulos said.    Energy futures also ended lower after posting early advances, as technical selling combined with some selling in sympathy with the stock decline. January-delivery crude-oil futures ended 11 cents a barrel lower at $18.51. At one point the January contract was as high as $18.74, where it encountered resistance.    A statement by the Kuwaiti oil minister that world consumption might rise to 18.4 million barrels a day, which may allow the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise its daily-production quota from the limit of 16.6 million barrels, prompted selling of contracts, one analyst said.    Peter Cardillo, futures-trading adviser for Josephthal andamp; Co., said energy futures tended to follow other commodities when they turned soft later in the day.    &quot;Also, oil traders are reluctant at the moment to take positions prior to the OPEC meeting in Vienna on Dec. 9,&quot; he said, leading to an uncertain trend in the energy market. </TEXT></DOC>