<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880316-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Victory by Bush in Illinois All but Eliminates Dole; Simon Turns Back Jackson in the Democratic Race --- No Front-Runner for Party As Dukakis Fails in Bid To Break Out of Pack </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman and David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Vice President George Bush all but ended Sen. Robert Dole's slim hopes for the Republican presidential nomination, while Illinois voters left the Democratic race muddled and without an established front-runner.    Favorite-son candidate Sen. Paul Simon, with the backing of most of the state's organization Democrats, narrowly defeated a challenge from the Rev. Jesse Jackson and set back efforts by Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis to break out of the Democratic pack.    NBC News projections showed Mr. Simon edging out Mr. Jackson in the non-binding presidential preference poll, and the senator was positioned to win well over 100 of the 173 convention delegates at stake yesterday. Mr. Jackson, whose support was concentrated in the state's three predominantly black congressional districts, seemed assured of winning 37 delegates -- enough to place him in a virtual tie in overall delegates with Mr. Dukakis.    The governor was winning about one-fifth of the popular vote and seemed unlikely to capture any convention delegates from Illinois. Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore, a big Super Tuesday winner only last week, placed far back in single-digit percentage figures.    These results virtually assure a short race for the Republicans but a longer struggle for the Democrats, who now face the likelihood that no candidate will have the nomination in hand at the end of the primary season in June.    The uncertainty strengthens the position of Mr. Jackson, but the black preacher was frustrated in Illinois, where he failed to win his first northern industrial state or attract a sizable portion of the white vote in a place that has been his home.    By comparison, Mr. Bush, who won all but one of the Super Tuesday states last week, ran strongly throughout the state, crushing Mr. Dole's hopes of salvaging his candidacy. The Kansas senator has indicated he will continue his fight in primary contests in Connecticut and Wisconsin. But there remained questions over whether Mr. Dole, who returned to Washington last night, could remain a credible challenger. Former religious broadcaster Pat Robertson finished far behind.    As the Senate GOP leader, Mr. Dole can't afford to savage the party's likely nominee, but hopes Mr. Bush might stumble if there are disclosures regarding his role in the Iran-Contra affair. Special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh plans to seek indictments, perhaps as early as today, against major figures in the affair, including Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North and former National Security Adviser John Poindexter.    Mr. Bush has denied any wrongdoing in the affair, and his campaign style in Illinois had the character of a party leader seeking to heal internal division and reach out to independents in preparation for the general election.    In the Democratic race, Mr. Dukakis failed to broaden his base, particularly among working-class voters who will be critical to his prospects in the industrial North. The governor's showing in Illinois only elevates the importance of the March 26 caucuses in Michigan, where Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri is hoping to build his comeback on a strong showing among those voters.    Mr. Dukakis maintains a big advantage in finances, but this lead could narrow as he approaches federal campaign-spending limits. His showing in Illinois greatly complicates his delegate mathematics as well. It means he must win more than half the remaining delegates simply to establish a 40% plurality and place him within striking distance -- but still about 400 delegates shy -- of the 2,082 needed for the nomination.    The Dukakis campaign's political dilemma was symbolized by the governor's conflicting television strategies in Illinois. He began with advertisements aimed at blue-collar voters, but shifted to a commercial designed to appeal to more-upscale &quot;reformers&quot; worried about the power of Chicago party bosses behind Mr. Simon in a brokered convention.    &quot;It was the wrong ad,&quot; said Peter Hart, a Democratic pollster who conducted surveys for the Chicago Tribune. &quot;People vote people. People vote ideas. People don't vote process.&quot;    In Boston last night, the governor portrayed Illinois as an &quot;uphill race from the beginning&quot; and called his performance &quot;respectable.&quot;    After Gov. Dukakis, Sen. Gore spent the most among Democrats on television, but the investment paid little return. The results show that Mr. Gore, who this week marched in the first St. Patrick's Day parade his aides can remember him joining, still is an outsider in the more ethnic North. &quot;It is a further indication that nobody in this campaign can generate any momentum except Rev. Jackson,&quot; said Bill Carrick, the Gephardt campaign manager.    One question for Sen. Gore will be how much effort to put into Michigan. By staying out, he could not only save his resources for battles in Wisconsin and New York but also give Mr. Gephardt a better chance to bloody Mr. Dukakis.    The divisions among the Democrats are mirrored in the internal politics of Michigan's powerful labor establishment. The United Auto Workers were an important element of Mr. Gephardt's victory in the Iowa caucuses last month, but appear more divided now, particularly after his poor showing on Super Tuesday.    Owen Bieber, president of the auto workers union, is regarded as a Gephardt partisan, but his predecessor Douglas Fraser and Donald Ephlin, vice president, a potential Bieber rival with longstanding New England ties, are friendlier to Mr. Dukakis.    Mr. Simon's victory in his home state makes it possible for him to continue in the race -- he talked yesterday of taking his campaign to neighboring Wisconsin -- but he acknowledges that he can't win the nomination. He has little support outside his state and no money. His best hope is to husband his delegates and use them to win a place in the negotiations that he believes will shape the party ticket this summer.    One product of the confusion is that Mr. Dukakis's white rivals are picking states in which to ambush him. But none is likely to ignore New York, which holds its primary April 19 and could become a showdown.    Waiting and watching is Gov. Mario Cuomo, who insists he's not interested in the presidency but who can't seem to stay away from the fray. In an interview this week, he dismissed suggestions he was leaning toward backing Mr. Dukakis and said his fellow governor hadn't made a convincing case for his election. </TEXT></DOC>