<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880527-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE NEARED a vote on ratification of a superpower arms treaty.    The chamber resolved one of the last remaining issues after voting overwhelmingly to restrict any future reinterpretation of the U.S.-Soviet pact, which eliminates all intermediate-range nuclear missiles. A final vote on the treaty could come as early as today. In Moscow, the Kremlin canceled one of Reagan's summit sessions with Gorbachev. The Monday meeting was to have been their second working session of the Moscow summit, which begins Sunday. The Soviets also objected to the makeup of a religious delegation that is scheduled to meet with Reagan.    Soviet authorities allowed an unusually large pre-summit demonstration in Moscow by Soviet Jews who have been denied permission to emigrate.    ---   Communist Party leaders published proposals for an overhaul of the Soviet Union's political system that would limit the terms of state and party officials and strengthen the legal rights of individuals. The proposals, including changes in the country's constitution, will form the agenda of a party conference in June.    The Supreme Soviet adopted a law giving more freedom to private business cooperatives. The unanimous vote came after a debate of tax rates and bureaucratic rules. Part of the parliamentary discussion was broadcast on Soviet television.    ---   Noriega accused the U.S. of &quot;political, economic and military aggression&quot; against Panama. Speaking to the National Assembly, he said he wouldn't relinquish power until the extra U.S. troops sent to Panama were withdrawn and he demanded that the position of the president he installed, Manuel Solis Palma, be guaranteed.    U.S. diplomats held consultations with Latin American officials to search for new ways of encouraging Noriega to leave Panama, but aren't optimistic. Shultz said Wednesday that the military chief rejected a U.S.-negotiated offer to relinquish power. A State Department official refused to rule out any option.    ---   The judge in the Iran-Contra case said that the congressional immunity granted to North, Poindexter and Hakim could make trying them on conspiracy charges a &quot;practical impossibility.&quot; U.S. Judge Gesell, however, didn't rule on the question of proceeding with the trial, saying he expected to decide pretrial issues by late next month.    ---   Sandinista and Contra delegations opened a new round of talks in Managua aimed at ending Nicaragua's civil war. The rebel negotiators, including military commander Enrique Bermudez, proposed sweeping political changes in return for extending a two-month cease-fire that expires Monday. Managua rejected the demands as &quot;absurd.&quot;    ---   GOP Rep. Gingrich of Georgia filed a formal complaint with the House ethics committee asking for an investigation to determine if Speaker Wright, a Democrat, violated House rules. Gingrich's complaint, signed by 71 House Republicans, seeks an inquiry into royalties Wright received from the publication of a paperback book.    ---   A South African court sentenced two white police officers to hang for the 1986 murder of a black in eastern Cape Province. In Pretoria, two bombs exploded as the National Party marked 40 years in power. Meanwhile, anti-apartheid Afrikaners defied a government ban and met with African National Congress leaders in Frankfurt.    ---   NATO defense ministers postponed a decision on how to share the $500 million burden of moving a U.S. fighter wing from Spain to Italy. The delay means the cost of the move and construction of a new base for the 72 F-16s will come from a joint $11 billion fund designed to finance NATO construction projects between 1985 and 1990.    ---   Syria announced a truce in fighting in the slums of southern Beirut between a Syrian-backed Shiite Moslem militia and the pro-Iranian Hezbollah. Damascus also said it would send its troops into the area to restore order to the Lebanese capital. The deployment, delayed for two weeks, followed an agreement between Syria and Iran.    ---   A Jewish student was stabbed and wounded in Jerusalem's walled old city, and police detained 27 Arab suspects, authorities said. In the occupied territories, Israel's army lifted curfews on eight Palestinian villages and refugee camps. Israeli-backed militiamen, meanwhile, searched for Moslem guerrillas in southern Lebanon.    ---   South Korean farmers clashed with riot police outside the National Assembly in Seoul during demonstrations protesting U.S. agricultural imports. As the country's prime minister ordered a crackdown on violent protests, about 30 students hurled rocks and firebombs at an American bank.    ---   Indian forces attacked Tamil rebel camps in northern Sri Lanka, killing as many as 30 insurgents and 10 soldiers, officials in Colombo said. About 3,000 troops backed by helicopter gunships were involved in the offensive, which began Tuesday about 170 miles northeast of the capital.    ---   Died: Leon Shimkin, 81, former chairman of Simon andamp; Schuster, Wednesday, in New Rochelle, N.Y. </TEXT></DOC>