<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880622-0037 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan Says Fraud in Pentagon Buying 'Understandable,' Asks Credit for Probe </HL><AUTHOR> Edward T. Pound and Andy Pasztor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MD UTX ML BDM GD FEN HPC </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> EXE JUS DEF CNG </G><TEXT>   President Reagan said it is &quot;understandable&quot; that fraud can occur in the Pentagon's big purchasing programs, and argued that his administration should be given more credit for investigating evidence of misconduct in weapons buying.    Mr. Reagan was pressed repeatedly about the growing Pentagon fraud investigation in a news conference in Toronto at the close of an economic summit meeting, and he gave his most extensive reaction so far to the scandal. The president confirmed that he wasn't told of the investigation while it was under way during the past two years, and he implied that top-level government and corporate officials aren't suspected of wrongdoing.    &quot;I think it should be understandable how such things can happen in something as big as our government is,&quot; Mr. Reagan said. He said he is &quot;disappointed and upset&quot; at the evidence of wrongdoing in weapons contracting, but also argued that the administration should be given credit because the initial tip leading to the disclosures of possible abuses was pursued by the Pentagon's own naval investigative service.    &quot;I'm not taking this lightly at all,&quot; Mr. Reagan said. &quot;But I do think that you all ought to pay attention to the fact that it wasn't an outside investigation.&quot;    During his news conference, Mr. Reagan strongly implied that neither top-ranking Pentagon nor corporate officials would be implicated, saying: &quot;I don't think this is a case apparently at high levels.&quot;    The president bristled at suggestions that his hands-off management style may have been responsible for the alleged abuses at the Pentagon. He also staunchly defended former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who he said saved the national security system from &quot;chaos&quot; left by the Carter administration. And he said the longtime secretary couldn't have been expected to know of evidence of wrongdoing at lower levels.    &quot;Corporate heads probably are surprised at what they're learning also,&quot; Mr. Reagan said.    Meanwhile, in Washington, law enforcement officials said their sweeping probe into bribery and corruption in defense procurement is homing in on ties between former assistant Navy Secretary Melvyn Paisley and James Gaines, currently a civilian administrator with the Navy.    Responding to allegations that Defense Department employees sold proprietary information to defense consultants, Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci reassigned Mr. Gaines, and at least four other department officials under investigation, to new jobs that don't involve access to sensitive contractor information.    The department, which declined to say exactly how many officials had been reassigned, explained that the action was a way &quot;of ensuring that the ongoing procurements of the department are free from question.&quot; The Pentagon emphasized that the action doesn't &quot;reflect any judgment about the guilt or innocence of individuals.&quot;    Separately, some law enforcement officials said the government is intensifying efforts to gain the cooperation of central figures in the scandal. One official said prosecutors sent &quot;feelers&quot; to Mr. Paisley. It previously has been reported that Mr. Gaines may be cooperating. And discussions continued yesterday between the Justice Department and attorneys representing a number of potential targets, law enforcement officials said.    Before coming to the Navy in 1985, Mr. Gaines worked at Boeing Co., where Mr. Paisley was a senior executive. In the 1970s, the two worked together in international marketing for Boeing's aerospace unit. At the Navy, where until yesterday Mr. Gaines served as deputy assistant secretary for acquisition management, the two were close colleagues.    &quot;Gaines was Paisley's alter ego,&quot; said one Navy procurement specialist. &quot;If it was okay with Gaines, it was okay with Paisley.&quot; Investigators are trying to determine whether Mr. Gaines furnished his former boss privileged information after Mr. Paisley left the Navy and became a paid consultant for McDonnell Douglas Corp., United Technologies Corp., Martin Marietta Co., and BDM Corp.    Prosecutors are also reviewing any possible financial ties between Messrs. Paisley and Gaines, who have known one another for more than two decades.    Mr. Gaines couldn't be reached for comment. Mr. Paisley's lawyer, Lawrence Barcella, charged that government agents are &quot;selectively leaking&quot; information damaging to his client. &quot;Right now, there is a hemorrhage of selective information and opinion from various branches of the government,&quot; he added. &quot;Probably, the most knowledgeable people are doing the least amount of talking. Beyond that, it is too early to comment on anything.&quot;    Besides Mr. Gaines, other Pentagon officials who were reassigned include Victor Cohen, a deputy assistant Air Force secretary in charge of communications equipment for tactical aircraft; Jack Sherman, who oversaw certain equipment purchases for the Marine Corps; Stuart Berlin, an official with naval air systems command; and George Stone, an official with Navy's space and naval warfare systems command.    Meanwhile, officials said there may be pressure to reopen contracts awarded as a result of questionable practices. Among the procurement actions under review is the award last year of the contract for developing and building the Navy's advanced tactical aircraft to McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics Corp. The job is expected eventually to be valued at $35 billion or more.    &quot;If there's been improprieties in the contracting procedures, then contracts ought to be reviewed and relet,&quot; said Rep. Bill Chappell (D., Fla.). Mr. Chappell made the remarks at a news conference called to end speculation that he wasn't under investigation for links in the scandal. &quot;I have no evidence that any member (of Congress) is targeted,&quot; he said, stressing that his office hasn't been searched or served subpoenas.    Armtec Inc., based in Palatka, Fla., in Mr. Chappell's district, is one of the companies that was searched under federal warrant last week. Mr. Chappell said he spoke with the company's management after reading about the searches. &quot;I have no reason to think the probe is directed at this company,&quot; he said.    In addition, law enforcement officials said they're delving into Mr. Paisley's connections to another Washington consultant, William Galvin, and Mr. Galvin's ties to Fairchild Republic Co., a unit of Fairchild Industries Inc. Mr. Galvin couldn't be reached, and his attorney, Austin Mittler, declined to comment.    Investigators and industry officials said Mr. Galvin in the past operated through two Northern Virginia-based companies, Upshur Corp. and the Athena Group. More recently, Mr. Galvin worked out of the same Washington office building from which Mr. Paisley ran his extensive contracting business.    During the mid-1980s, the Air Force was growing increasingly dissatisfied with Fairchild's T-46 trainer plane. It ultimately dropped the aircraft because of budget pressures and operational problems.    Mr. Galvin couldn't be reached for comment and one of his lawyers, Austin Mittler, declined to comment.    Chantilly, Va.-based Fairchild Industries, which changed its name after Fairchild Republic ceased certain manufacturing operations at the end of 1987, said it was trying to determine whether Fairchild Republic had employed Mr. Galvin as a consultant. A company spokeswoman yesterday said internal records going back to the early and mid-1980s weren't immediately available. Fairchild said it hasn't received any subpoenas or any requests for information from federal prosecutors conducting the current grand jury investigation.    On Capitol Hill, Sen. David Pryor (D., Ark.) accused the Pentagon of reporting only a small fraction of the total amount the military services spend on private consultants each year. The Pentagon reported spending $155 million on consultant contracts in the year ended Sept. 30. But Sen. Pryor released figures, compiled at his request by the General Accounting Office, that overall Defense Department consulting costs amounted to at least $2.8 billion and perhaps as much as $18.8 billion for the same period.    &quot;Some people seem interested in keeping a shadow government under wraps,&quot; Sen. Pryor asserted on the Senate floor, adding that a government operations subcomittee he heads is looking into the issue.    Subcommittee investigators said that contractors often wrap consulting costs into proposals and bids submitted to the Pentagon as a way to hide such items from scrutiny by Congress or the Defense Department inspector general's office.    The investigation into possible Pentagon fraud and bribery began two years ago, according to a senior government official, after a private consultant offered to sell confidential bid-related information to a former Navy employee who worked for a defense contractor. The ex-Navy man reported the offer to the Naval Investigative Service, and agreed to secretly tape his conversations with the consultant.    When confronted with the taped evidence, the consultant agreed in turn to tape conversations with still others, and the probe was off and running, with most of the evidence coming from wiretaps on the telephones of Defense Department employees and consultants.    The scope of the government's investigation emerged last week when federal investigators served search warrants on 15 major defense contractors, Defense Department employees, and several consultants. During the searches last week, according to a lawyer who represents defense concerns, investigators played tape excerpts to senior employees at many of the companies in the hope they could force their cooperation.    Federal prosecutors in Alexandria, Va., where the inquiry is based, want to determine whether senior executives of the defense contractors under investigation knew about, or conspired in, illicit activity.    Meanwhile, Wilmington, Del.-based Hercules Inc. said it was subpoenaed for information about its ties with Messrs. Galvin and Paisley. The company had retained Mr. Galvin to advise it on marketing and manufacturing strategy for defense products. The subpoena seeks all agreements and contracts, purchase orders, proposals and statements of work, invoices, reports, checks issued, correspondence and memoranda.    ---   Tim Carrington, Gerald F. Seib and Mary Lu Carnevale contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>