<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870113-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Family Feud:IBM Dissidents HopeFor Increased SupportAs Work Force Is Cut---Although Unionizing Is StillUnlikely, Worker GroupsSeek Access to Pay Scales---Feeling Big Blue Turning Red---By Hank GilmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> IBM LABORCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> ENDICOTT, N.Y.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Lee Conrad works on a job isolated from most other employees in a room with frosted windows. He believes this is because he has been openly discussing workers' problems.    The 37-year-old assembler of printing devices also says that he is unfairly scrutinized and that his coffee breaks are closely timed by his bosses. His performance rating was lowered recently, he adds, and he could lose his job if his appraisal is dropped again. Speaking out, Mr. Conrad laments, &quot;is like putting a red flag on your chest, because the bull comes right at you.&quot;    Mr. Conrad's employer is International Business Machines Corp., considered a model of exemplary employee relations. IBM, in fact, is known for its good benefits and its tradition of not laying off workers -- practices that have helped to keep workers happy and keep the company free of unions.    But IBM, dealing with an extended downturn in its business, is now faced with a determined group of dissident workers. Like Mr. Conrad, they insist that many of the company's 238,000 U.S. employees could be better off protecting their interests rather than trusting IBM to do it. While the dissidents are few in number, they keep in close contact, publish newsletters from their homes, and even travel to meetings with IBM workers in other countries. In some countries, IBM is required by law to work with unions.    A look at two of these dissident groups -- Mr. Conrad's IBM Workers United and the Black Workers Alliance -- discloses another side of Big Blue: IBM isn't always the happy family it appears to outsiders, and it can be a harsh parent to mavericks in the family.    At least four dissident groups have formed. Mr. Conrad's group has almost 40 members in Endicott and maintains contacts with workers in six other IBM plants. The Black Workers Alliance, based in Washington, D.C., claims about 300 members. The International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers says the union is holding talks with 40 disgruntled IBM field technicians in the Philadelphia area. A group called &quot;The Workers Voice&quot; has been formed at IBM's San Jose facility.    The groups' complaints are strikingly similar. They claim workers are kept in the dark by IBM's concealing of job openings and salary scales. The dissidents also charge that IBM's no-layoff practice is a facade. The company cuts its work force by firings and forced transfers, they say.    The dissident groups' affinity for traditional labor unions varies, however. IBM Workers United wants an independent workers' group that maintains ties with organized labor. The group last year signed a &quot;letter of understanding&quot; under which the Communications Workers of America agreed to provide it with financial and legal aid. The Black Workers Alliance eschews unions now, but it has contacts with the Communications Workers and embraces such union practices as using independent arbitrators for grievances.    The dissidents' chances of organizing IBM's employees in any form are remote. But as the company takes uncharacteristic cost-cutting measures during the industry's protracted slump, they hope other workers will heed their complaints.    Whether IBM's workers are thinking union or not, &quot;they're thinking that they can't depend on IBM to protect their interests any longer,&quot; contends Lawrence Cohen, the organizing director of the Communications Workers. The union is meeting with other unions in London this week to discuss plans to organize IBM.    Still, the dissidents insist they are loyal IBM employees who don't plan on quitting to work elsewhere. &quot;We consider IBM a good company, there's no doubt about it,&quot; says Mr. Conrad. &quot;But you'll never get managers to represent workers' interests anywhere.&quot;    IBM executives declined to be interviewed. A spokeswoman says IBM respects &quot;the right of employees to organize or not to organize.&quot; She adds: &quot;We don't want to debate employees in the press.&quot;    With an attrition rate of less than 3%, IBM can rightfully claim that workers there are quite happy. Since 1914, the company has successfully used management practices to treat workers like family. IBM is a top-paying employer in the computer industry. The company provides country clubs for some employees and nurtures the family spirit at picnics and intramural sports events. Employees who disagree with their managers' appraisals of their work can appeal to the chairman and be heard in a grievance process known as &quot;Open Door.&quot;    But any form of organized labor is an anathema to IBM. &quot;IBM is a total-control company,&quot; says Ulric Weil, a stock analyst and a former IBM employee. &quot;IBM's management style is from the top down. It's quasi-military. That management style doesn't want to get involved with a union, because it's contradictory.&quot;    IBM is careful not to violate laws protecting workers' rights to organize, and it instructs managers on labor law during annual training sessions. But the company also carefully monitors its work force for any hint of labor activity. IBM has told its information-services staff managers to &quot;report all sensitive employee-relations incidents immediately.&quot; In a memo, which provided round-the-clock phone contacts, sensitive episodes were described as &quot;any indication of group activity, even without apparent organized influence, when the group's purpose appears to be to improve compensation or any aspect of working conditions.&quot;    Under IBM's strict policies, employees aren't allowed, for instance, to sell Girl Scout cookies at work. &quot;If you allow that to happen, you set a precedent,&quot; explains a former manager now in IBM's sales force. &quot;If we allow them to solicit, anyone can solicit, i.e., unions.&quot;    In one case last spring, an employee left magazines like Newsweek for visitors in the lobby of an IBM building in Kingston, N.Y. &quot;You wouldn't believe the grief that went on,&quot; the former manager says. A security manager called employee-relations staffers, he says, &quot;and they came in like a SWAT team and cleaned out the magazines.&quot;    If employees do such things without approval, he adds, &quot;it leaves the door open for any other kind of literature to be left there,&quot; possibly by union organizers.    IBM would neither confirm nor deny that its rules prohibiting solicitation are designed to thwart labor unions.    IBM's vigilance hasn't dissuaded its renegades, in any case. The Black Workers Alliance, or BWA, was organized in 1969 at a secret meeting in the basement of a Washington home by 30 salesmen and systems engineers from IBM's data-processing division. The black workers realized they may have been risking their jobs by organizing. &quot;I can recall a black in a relatively high-level position saying, 'You ought to go home, this will never work.' He was booed and left the meeting,&quot; recalls Kenneth Branch, BWA's president.    What initially emerged was a support group for black workers that frequently met for &quot;bitching sessions,&quot; says Mr. Branch, 46, a salesman with IBM in Gaithersburg, Md. &quot;For many of us, including myself,&quot; he says, &quot;we were not only the first of our families to work in IBM but the first to work in corporate administrative or professional jobs. We were the foundation, so there was a need for blacks to get together.&quot;    The group became bolder, however, as its membership soared fivefold to about 1,700 people from 1978 to 1980. In its newsletters, the BWA frequently assailed IBM for doing business in South Africa, warned workers that the company planned to cut costs by firing employees, and held grievance meetings to recruit other workers. (IBM is currently selling its unit in South Africa to an employee trust; IBM computers will continue to be sold there.)    Eventually, within about a one-year span, IBM fired four of the BWA's eight top officers, one of whom distributed confidential IBM salary scales in early 1980. Mr. Branch recalls, &quot;I looked around, and I was alone. It was like a domino game, and I was the only domino left.&quot; He says the group's membership plunged by the end of 1980. &quot;Once the purges came, that was it. There was more fear out there than we anticipated.&quot; Mr. Branch says he was also threatened with dismissal.    The firings were &quot;a strong message&quot; from IBM to the BWA and the company's black workers, says Johnnie Landon, the BWA's lawyer: &quot;If you get out of line, we'll come down on you and this is the way we'll come down.&quot; The BWA says IBM in the firings used such reasons as insubordination and refusals of transfers.    The BWA's charges are &quot;absolutely wrong,&quot; an IBM spokeswoman says. She adds that the four BWA members who were fired later unsuccessfully filed charges against IBM with regulators. In one case a lawsuit was filed, which was later settled.    Although the group has dwindled to about 300 workers, Mr. Branch shows no signs of backing down. He says he was warned by an IBM manager that attending a meeting of overseas IBM union members might conflict with his job in the company's federal systems division. &quot;They said there were going to be Communists at the meeting. I said, 'If that's the case, why are they working for IBM?'&quot; Mr. Branch recalls. &quot;What surprised me was the guy was able to pull out a dossier of people at the meeting he thought were Communists.&quot; But in any case, Mr. Branch says he eventually received permission from IBM to attend the meeting. The IBM spokeswoman wouldn't comment except to say that Mr. Branch &quot;didn't need permission from IBM to go&quot; to the Athens meeting.    These days, BWA officials spend most of their time advising employees on the rigors of navigating IBM's grievance system. In a newsletter, the group also takes IBM to task for policies it believes stifle many of the company's 21,000 black workers. &quot;Most of the problems black employees have, the whites have,&quot; says Henry Armstrong, an IBM engineer who is the group's vice president. &quot;But it's less extreme as a group.&quot;    He cites IBM's refusal to post job openings. Black workers aren't &quot;in the right circles to know what jobs are available,&quot; he contends. &quot;If there are 500 jobs open, I have no idea what they are,&quot; he says, but a white employee &quot;might belong to the same golf club as the manager with that information. By the time I get to that job, it's gone.&quot;    Mr. Branch and Mr. Armstrong realize the risks in speaking out about what they see as inequitable treatment of black employees at IBM, but they say it is almost second nature for them to take such risks. &quot;I grew up in the state of Mississippi, where protesting was a way of life to get anything that was a reasonable facsimile of civil rights,&quot; Mr. Armstrong explains.    Mr. Conrad of IBM Workers United wonders whether he will have a job at all in a few years. He believes that IBM officials are working overtime to fire him because of his group's activities. &quot;They're watching me real close,&quot; he says. &quot;Joe Blow can take 17 minutes on his {15-minute} break. I take 17 minutes and I get in trouble.&quot;    Mr. Conrad has had the same job for almost seven years, assembling and testing printing devices. &quot;I'm isolated.&quot; he says. &quot;I'm in an area with about six workers, and the windows are frosted.&quot; He adds, &quot;It seems a perfect place to keep me. People walking by can't see me.&quot; IBM replies that Mr. Conrad is treated fairly.    Mr. Conrad says he became serious about organizing workers at Endicott only after he was almost fired as a machine operator for refusing to work on Palm Sunday eight years ago. His refusal won him a job taking apart old computers, a task that also entailed &quot;scraping out rats and dead birds,&quot; Mr. Conrad says. On his first day at work, he was approached by another employee. &quot;He said, 'Welcome! What did you do wrong?'&quot; Mr. Conrad recalls. &quot;That pushed me over the edge. It was two years' hard labor.&quot;    Mr. Conrad began organizing openly after meeting with IBM's international union leaders in 1984 in Japan, an event partly financed by money paid by IBM to a Japanese union to settle a dispute over wage and promotion discrimination.    Although Mr. Conrad concedes the short-term prospects for organizing IBM are dim, he and other dissidents say the company's current slump could help their cause. IBM is expected to report that earnings fell in 1986 for the second consecutive year. Under pressure to cut costs, the company has already taken steps that affect thousands of employees, including the unusual move to close a parts-distribution facility in Greencastle, Ind.    Mr. Conrad has been reprinting news reports of IBM's troubles and cost-cutting measures. He and other dissidents contend that such moves are tantamount to IBM's abandoning its so-called no-layoff tradition. They say transfers offered to workers at Greencastle and administrative personnel elsewhere are partly designed to force workers to leave the company.    The black workers' group, in a newsletter last summer, charged that one way IBM plans to cut its work force is by lowering employees' appraisals. Using as an example IBM's &quot;back to the field&quot; plan of sending administrative and headquarters workers into IBM's marketing force, the BWA said that if computer sales are hurt because of the sluggish economy, &quot;an increase in the sales force will not increase the sale of equipment.&quot; It added, &quot;This fact ensures that many of the employees on the sales force will be terminated because of unsatisfactory performance.&quot;    Mr. Branch, the BWA president, concedes that his group hasn't picked up additional members during the company's slump. Nonetheless, the group is raising more money than it did in its heyday. Because workers fear for their jobs, he adds, &quot;People send you money you never heard from before.&quot;    Organized labor also seems to be paying more attention to IBM. In addition to the Communications Workers' interest, the electrical workers' union has held talks with a group of about 40 IBM field technicians, says Michael Lucas, the union's chief organizer. &quot;Let's face it, these guys aren't a majority,&quot; he says. But, he adds, &quot;they've gone shopping. They've gotten together to seek a union.&quot;    Dissidents and union officials say IBM may provide the opening they need if the company is forced by the industry's slump to abandon its no-layoff tradition. &quot;That would take the veil right off,&quot; Mr. Conrad says. &quot;We'd get more people than we'd know what to do with.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>