<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0038 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)INITIAL STOCK OFFERINGS (INI) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Just a few years after going private, swarms of companies are coming back to public ownership again -- at far higher prices and at huge profits to the controlling interests.    Harley-Davidson Inc., for example, sold shares to the public last summer at $11 apiece. That price greatly exceeded the 25 cents a share that the motorcycle maker's top executives and investment bankers paid to take it private in 1981.    As in most such transactions, the controlling group's profit was greatly amplified by its initial use of a leveraged buyout. These people put up only about $1 million of their own money and borrowed most of the rest -- totaling about $84 million -- with Harley-Davidson's own assets serving as the collateral.    Most companies involved in such leveraged buyouts strive to increase their profitability by cutting costs, closing factories and getting rid of frills such as corporate jets. &quot;They have made brutally difficult decisions to survive,&quot; says Brian Wruble, an LBO expert at Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S. &quot;Now, they are being rewarded for it.&quot;    Many such companies cite strong business reasons for seeking public ownership again. The money raised by stock offerings is used to pay down debt, finance acquisitions and repair balance sheets. &quot;It lets us grow again,&quot; explains Harley-Davidson's chief executive officer, Vaughn Beals.    But when LBO companies sell stock, the big winners usually are a tight circle of executives and investment bankers who earlier bought control. Profits often exceed 10 times these investors' original stake. These giant, concentrated payoffs from LBOs are starting to anger mainstream investors and worry academics.    &quot;I don't see how these round trips add anything to America's wealth,&quot; complains a major Boston portfolio manager. And David Dreman, a New York investment manager, says he refuses on principle to buy stock in a recycled LBO. &quot;It's like a markup in an art gallery,&quot; Mr. Dreman says. &quot;You're asked to pay double what the last guy paid.&quot;    James van Horne, a finance professor at Stanford University, sees &quot;an element of luck in many successful LBOs.&quot; Market conditions have been going their way since 1982, he explains, as stock prices keep rising amid falling interest rates. Prof. van Horne wonders whether profits from recycling LBOs &quot;are excessive or not.&quot;    The buoyant financial markets have recently produced a blizzard of stock offerings by one-time LBOs. Martin Sikora, the editor of Mergers andamp; Acquisitions, counts more than 20 LBO companies that have come full cycle this way. These include Harley-Davidson, Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc., Motel 6 L.P. and Fred Meyer Inc., a Northwestern retailer.    Many such offerings involve midsized manufacturers of products such as sweat shirts, beer bottles or garden supplies -- far from glamorous businesses. But the profits for the controlling groups have been much bigger than those from almost any other type of investment.    In just three years, for example, former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon raked in more than 100 times his original outlay in Anchor Glass Containers Inc. As a controlling partner in Wesray Capital Corp., Mr. Simon helped arrange a leveraged buyout of Anchor Glass in June 1983, buying 1.6 million shares in the bottle maker himself. Then, in June 1986, Anchor went public at $20.50 a share. Mr. Simon was among the sellers, unloading shares that had cost him just 19 cents each.    Mr. Simon defends his big gain, saying his buying and selling prices just reflected market conditions. &quot;I don't believe in the notion of a windfall from buying something so cheaply,&quot; he says. Instead, he credits Anchor's managers with turning around the company. Mr. Simon adds that during a stint as company chairman, &quot;I helped with introductions to friends of mine who were major glass consumers.&quot;    In Anchor's case, the LBO was accompanied by major gains in the company's operating efficiency. Managers slashed the work force 30%, cut costs on everything from overhead to cardboard-packing inserts, and made a successful acquisition in 1984. Net income climbed ninefold in 1985 to $7.7 million from the depressed 1984 level and is continuing to rise.    &quot;These guys have done a great job,&quot; says Art Winston of Glickenhaus andamp; Co., a New York investment firm that bought a big stake in Anchor Glass in 1986. &quot;As long as the company keeps doing well, {the controlling executives} are privileged to do what they want.&quot;    Often, gains from better securities markets are so big that a profound change in the underlying business isn't needed. A frequently cited example is Beatrice Cos., which went private in April 1986 in a $6.2 billion LBO and was renamed BCI Holdings Corp. At that time, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was at 1790, and short-term interest rates were about 7%.    Since then, BCI has sold some units to pay down debt but hasn't changed its basic operations. Chairman Donald Kelly recently told securities analysts that he wants a classic holding-company structure, in which the lack of direct involvement with operations contributes to maintaining objectivity. By one sensitive benchmark -- advertising spending -- the remaining BCI units are keeping to the same course they were on in 1985.    However, the Dow Jones industrials have climbed more than 100 points since the LBO, and short-term interest rates have fallen below 6%. Beatrice has dropped hints about taking at least part of its business public this year, and investment bankers figure that if current market conditions prevail, Mr. Kelly and his LBO group will earn several times their initial outlays.    &quot;It tends to amaze me that Beatrice can be purchased, then sold in pieces and taken public again at such a tremendous excess,&quot; says Leif Maes, the head of LBO investments at Prudential Insurance Co. &quot;It makes you wonder whether the original selling shareholders got the right price.&quot;    Some shareholders wonder, too. Martin Sass, a New York money manager, owned nearly 500,000 Beatrice shares before the LBO. &quot;We think we got a fair price,&quot; he says, &quot;but there's a risk that the public might miss the value of some hidden assets. The typical shareholder doesn't get to see the company's detailed books, while the LBO financiers do.&quot;    In reply, LBO enthusiasts say companies often take on new life after going private. At Harley-Davidson, for example, executives say LBO status made them much more vigilant in cutting inventory costs. Dozens of managers were sent to a three-week training course in 1983, even though that briefly hurt output.    &quot;Because we'd borrowed so much to finance the LBO, we had much greater pressure to perform,&quot; Mr. Beals says. He says the inventory program brought big payoffs; so did an expansion into a side business, making missile casings. But Mr. Beals says bureaucratic snarls probably would have killed both programs during Harley-Davidson's pre-LBO existence as a division of publicly traded AMF Inc.    Since going public, the motorcycle maker has tried to put its new equity to work. In November, it agreed to buy Holiday Rambler Corp., a maker of recreational vehicles, for $155 million. Harley-Davidson officials contend that this sort of move will get the company growing again after years of belt-tightening.    In the shoe-retailing industry, J. Baker Inc. went public last June, less than a year after its ailing predecessor company was acquired in an LBO. J. Baker says it needed to raise $30 million to help finance new shoe stores -- but the chance to sell stock at $14 a share didn't hurt, either. When the company's top managers and LBO experts bought J. Baker in 1985, the stock was valued at just $1 a share.    On a larger scale, Fred Meyer Inc. raised more than $70 million in an October stock offering. The retailer, based in Portland, Ore., had gone private in 1981, in an LBO arranged by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts andamp; Co. Other LBOs that came full cycle in 1986 by making stock offerings include Avis Europe, Pannill Knitting Co. and Sterling Inc., a jewelry retailer.    &quot;I view the LBO as a phase in a company's life,&quot; says Carl Ferenbach, a partner in Berkshire Partners. Of the financing firm's 15 LBO investments, he expects two or three to be acquired this year, and another couple to go public.    Finance specialists say LBO companies usually seek new capital and new expansion routes after about five years of operating privately. &quot;In the majority of cases, these companies are hungry, efficient and well-managed,&quot; says Stanford's Prof. van Horne. But he warns against corporate anorexia when companies cut back too deeply. &quot;Investors have to be careful that the company isn't just going on the momentum of the past,&quot; he says, &quot;with old plant and equipment and no new products.&quot;    And unless the stock market keeps soaring, it may become a lot tougher to turn LBOs into successful stock offerings. Privately held Farley Apparel, for example, thought that it could raise at least $400 million in a stock offering last fall. Farley is a successor company to Northwest Industries Inc., making Dingo cowboy boots, Fruit of the Loom underwear and other well-known brands of clothing.    Despite the brand-name appeal, potential investors were more concerned about Farley's $11.4 million loss for the 1986 first half. They also found its debt burden worrisome. In fact, the market reception to the planned offering was so chilly that underwriters last November had to postpone the stock sale indefinitely.    (Revised WSJ Jan. 8, 1987)</TEXT></DOC>