<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880620-0030 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAEL'S CABINET MOVED to enforce direct emigration for Soviet Jews.    The ministers said Israel would force Soviet Jews emigrating with Israeli visas to travel directly from the Eastern bloc to the Jewish state to prevent them from settling elsewhere. Israeli officials said the decision was aimed at boosting Jewish immigration. In May, for example, 90% of Soviet Jews with Israeli visas decided to settle in the U.S. or elsewhere. Under the decision, emigrants must order a Bucharest-Tel Aviv air ticket. The U.S. Embassy said the move appeared to contradict a U.S. position supporting freedom of travel for Soviet Jews.    Israeli Defense Minister Rabin has met with Palestinian leaders in an effort to resolve the uprising in the occupied territories, a spokesman said.    ---   House Speaker Wright sought the ouster of the chief examiner of the Texas Sandamp;L industry in 1986, according to Edwin Gray, the former chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. The Texas Democrat, under investigation by the House ethics panel, has denied applying undue pressure on thrift regulators.    ---   Haiti's president ordered the retirement of the Port-au-Prince police chief and transferred about two dozen military officers as part of changes in the armed forces. Former military leader Namphy, dismissed Friday by President Manigat in a move apparently aimed at subordinating the military, remained under house arrest.    ---   Turkey's Ozal said a group opposed to improved ties with Greece may have been responsible for Saturday's assassination attempt. The Turkish premier's hand was wounded in the incident at a party convention in Ankara. Security sources said the gunman, who was wounded by police, is a member of an ultra-rightist group.    ---   Czechoslovakia ordered the expulsion of 32 Western human-rights activists for attending an unofficial East-West seminar in Prague organized by Czech peace groups, participants said. Vienna-based emigre sources said 10 Czech rights campaigners attending the meeting were arrested.    ---   Poles voted in local and provincial elections that the government called a widening of democracy. Protesters in three cities demonstrated against the balloting, which the opposition called a farce. Turnout for the elections, the first under a new law requiring secret-ballot choices of two or more candidates for every seat, was low.    ---   Nicaragua's Ortega called for another round of peace talks this month with the Contra rebels in an effort to reach a permanent truce in the country's civil war. The Sandinista president warned that approval of renewed U.S. military aid to the insurgents would be &quot;totally unacceptable.&quot;    Shultz labeled Nicaragua a &quot;rotten apple in the barrel&quot; of emerging Central American democracies. The secretary of state, speaking on NBC-TV, is to visit El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Costa Rica next week to assess Nicaraguan peace prospects following the failure of talks.    ---   Brazil's President Sarney dismissed the country's armed forces chief of staff, who criticized the country's economic officials. Friday's move by Sarney, the president's first open break with the military, strengthened the position of Finance Minister Nobrega.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that local governments must limit their regulation of newspaper vending machines. The justices, voting 4-3, ruled that a Cleveland suburb gave its mayor too much discretion to deny or impose conditions on permits to locate such vending machines on public property.    ---   A bomb exploded in India's northern Haryana state, killing at least 15 people and wounding about 25 others. Police blamed the blast on Sikh extremists. In neighboring Punjab, Sikh militants assassinated the leader of an extremist Hindu group.    ---   The main Afghan rebel alliance named a 14-member &quot;transitional government&quot; that it wants to replace the Soviet-backed government of President Najibullah. The guerrillas have refused Kabul's offers to join a coalition. Separately, the Afghan army said more than 1,200 guerrillas have been killed or wounded in the last month.    ---   Anti-Khomeini forces said they had captured the Iranian border town of Mehran. The Iraq-based National Liberation Army said the town, about 100 miles east of Baghdad, was taken in an offensive launched Saturday. Iran claimed Iraqi army units attacked the town using chemical weapons.    ---   Pope John Paul II canonized 117 martyrs from Vietnam in a ceremony that was attended by thousands of Vietnamese refugees. It was denounced by the Hanoi government as a political provocation. The Vatican Mass for the 18th century and 19th century martyrs was believed to be the largest canonization in Roman Catholic history. </TEXT></DOC>