<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880224-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Distant Deals: More U.S. Companies Are Selling Operations To Foreign Concerns --- Dollar's Fall Gives Foreigners Added Purchasing Power; Some Call Trend Perilous --- Betty Crocker's German Link </HL><AUTHOR> Robert Johnson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN </CO><IN> TNM </IN><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like many other managers, Donald Trauscht has decided to peddle big pieces of his company to foreigners.    It galls Mr. Trauscht. He is vice president of finance and strategy for Borg-Warner Corp., which once had a manufacturing empire spanning six continents. &quot;As a citizen and a patriot, I'm concerned. I don't want this country to be owned by foreigners,&quot; he says.    But he is trying to find overseas buyers anyway. Foreign concerns, aided by the decline of the dollar, will pay top price, and Mr. Trauscht can't wait for U.S. buyers to rebound from the stock-market crash. &quot;There's sadness in my heart,&quot; he says, stuffing financial reports into a briefcase before flying off to meet prospects. &quot;But I'm a realist. I know where we're at.&quot;    More and more U.S. companies are selling themselves or big parts of their operations to foreigners. Foreign purchases of U.S. companies grew by more than 50% last year, to $38 billion, according to W.T. Grimm andamp; Co., a Chicago research firm that tracks merger activity. Some investment bankers estimate that foreign buyers could account for as much as 20% of U.S. acquisitions this year, up sharply from 5% last year.    Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co., which this month reached a preliminary agreement to sell most of its tire operations to Japan's Bridgestone Corp., is only the latest and one of the largest companies to find a foreign buyer. In recent months, the list of those aggressively seeking such buyers has included Beatrice Co., which is still looking, and Mark Controls Corp. and Cablec Corp., both of which found buyers. General Mills Inc. has even sold a piece of Betty Crocker to foreigners.    &quot;A lot of the country is up for sale right now,&quot; says Douglas Lamont, an international-business specialist at Northwestern University, &quot;and the price is right if you're a buyer with a stack of yen or marks.&quot;    The reasons vary. Some sellers are companies that went private in the leveraged buy-out craze of the early '80s and are under pressure to sell the company again so that investors can get their cash out. Some, like highly diversified Borg-Warner -- which itself went private only last year -- piled up crushing short-term debt to avoid hostile takeovers and have to sell part of the company to pay off the debt.    Still others, needing cash to expand, find the U.S. pool of capital drying up as investors lose their appetite for junk bonds and public offerings in the wake of the Oct. 19 stock-market crash. At the same time, the falling dollar has given foreign companies more buying power.    Critics point out that the sales put more U.S. assets under foreign control. That funnels more profits overseas. In the first nine months of 1987, says the Commerce Department, profit from U.S. affiliates of foreign companies rose 98%, to $10.9 billion from $5.5 billion a year earlier.    The critics also worry that the trend will cost U.S. jobs. That worries some government officials, too. When Firestone announced that it was selling most of its tire operations to Japan's Bridgestone, Ohio officials decided to investigate. Foreign companies &quot;aren't as likely to be concerned about displacing workers,&quot; says Mark Barbash, deputy director of Ohio's Development Department.    &quot;Sooner or later, the people who own large parts of the industrial machinery of this country will influence our trade, monetary and foreign policies,&quot; says Sen. Richard Shelby, an Alabama Democrat. &quot;If you pay the piper, you call the tune.&quot;    Sen. James Exon, a Nebraska Democrat, is more blunt: &quot;Is this the beginning of the end of the U.S. as a world economic power? I'm fearful.&quot;    On the other hand, some observers welcome foreign ownership as an improvement. Management consultants point to the Japanese as proven innovators with their quality circles and just-in-time inventory control. What's wrong, they ask, with having smart people with a fresh approach run things? In addition, say some consultants, many foreign concerns are likely to be too proud to admit defeat by laying off people, except as a last resort. &quot;And they'll be scared of looking insensitive by the way they treat employees,&quot; says Dennis Encarnation, a Harvard Business School professor.    Overseas buyers are also likely to be sensitive to political backlash. An Ohio law passed earlier this month seeks to prevent takeovers by foreign companies until state officials have assessed the potential economic impact and approved the transaction. And members of the House and Senate have proposed a variety of measures designed to keep an eye on foreign buying.    One such measure, sponsored by Rep. John Bryant, a Texas Democrat, would require additional disclosure by foreign companies of their U.S. investments. &quot;We don't want to wake up one day and find that OPEC controls our domestic oil reserves, too,&quot; says Carlton Carl, an aide to Mr. Bryant.    The sales to foreign buyers are being pushed by investment bankers. &quot;You follow the money,&quot; says William Rifkin, a managing director at Salomon Brothers Inc. His advice is being taken all over Wall Street, and the trend is starting to breathe new life into merger-and-acquisition departments stalled by the recent collapse of junk-bond financing.    Donald J. Gogel, managing director at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., says his investment-banking concern is chasing foreign buyers for about 20 companies, twice the number that it sought foreign buyers for a year ago. He says that each of his merger-and-acquisition specialists is typically on the phone daily tracking potential foreign buyers. A year ago, these specialists might have been checking overseas once a week.    Not that foreign buyers are throwing money around. &quot;Their tongues aren't hanging out. Selling to them still tends to be tedious and slow,&quot; says Leonard Green, a partner in a New York leveraged buy-out concern that wants to sell some companies it controls.    Firestone, for example, first approached Bridgestone about its tire business in 1984. Firestone executives argued that Bridgestone needed to have manufacturing closer to U.S. automotive customers. But it took Bridgestone four years to make up its mind, and it did so only after considerable strengthening of the yen against the dollar. Sources say that Beatrice has had such premium food lines as Hunt tomato products and Swift meats on the block in Europe for a year, with no takers.    Potential foreign buyers say there is good reason for caution. &quot;Even though there are a lot of U.S. companies for sale cheap, a lot of them are junk,&quot; says Robert Holmes, managing director of Onex Investment Corp., the New York arm of Toronto-based Onex Corp., an industrial concern intent on expansion in the U.S.    U.S. managers are sometimes far more willing to sell companies to foreigners than to U.S. corporate raiders. Borg-Warner's Mr. Trauscht is being forced to sell the company's crown jewels -- including its highly profitable chemical business -- because Borg-Warner must pay its lenders $1.7 billion this year, part of the debt the company took on to avoid a hostile takeover. The company is still being broken up, but Mr. Trauscht believes he is finding buyers who care more about the businesses.    &quot;We're trying to find buyers in the same industries who want reliable U.S. management teams in place, who will invest expansion capital and share technology.&quot; Selling to a U.S. corporate raider, he says, &quot;would be playing to the worst of American business.&quot;    But especially for a company like Borg-Warner, there is enormous irony in selling to foreigners. For most of the decades since World War II, the $4 billion company has been expanding overseas, not selling. Now as Mr. Trauscht courts potential buyers, he finds mostly companies that he once planned to acquire -- giving him an unusual advantage. &quot;I have learned who can afford these deals and who can't,&quot; he says.    Companies often say that if they can't be independent, it is more autonomous to be owned by someone across the ocean than to be owned by a U.S. concern: Less interference and fewer visits are likely when the boss is an ocean away.    So when Minneapolis-based General Mills decided last fall to sell its Pioneer Products unit, which makes Betty Crocker cake decorations, the subsidiary's management suggested West Germany's Schwartauer Werke G.m.b.H. as the buyer. Ray Brunswig, the president of Pioneer, based in Ocala, Fla., says he had befriended officials of Schwartauer -- which makes similar products -- at food-industry trade shows. The deal was made, and now Mr. Brunswig's boss is farther away than ever.    Peddling your company overseas risks leading your foreign competitors to expand in the U.S. on their own. When John Mahoney, president of Denver-based TransLogic Corp., met with two European competitors recently, he described the growth prospects that foreign capital would help him tap. The Europeans said that if things were that rosy, maybe they should start U.S. branches. The chagrined Mr. Mahoney left them financial information anyway about his concern, which makes conveyor systems.    Some U.S. sellers reap big profits from foreigners. Harry Schell, the president of Cablec Corp., recently sold 80% of his New City, N.Y., company to BICC PLC in London for $96 million. That is a profit of more than 400% for investors who took the growing maker of power cables private five years ago in a leveraged buy-out.    Mr. Schell, who fought for his independence from Cablec's previous parent, Phelps Dodge Corp., says he sold out mainly to obtain expansion capital. He says that Phelps Dodge stymied Cablec's growth but that BICC promises large cash infusions.    Sir William Barlow, BICC's chairman, quickly eased Mr. Schell's doubts about adjusting to foreign control and the staid British image. The American found that Sir William is, like himself, an engineer by training. Mr. Schell was delighted that the Londoner took time to shake hands with all 1,100 Cablec plant workers when the acquisition agreement was signed.    Says John Drexel, a factory worker at Cablec for 36 years: &quot;I just want them to keep the company going.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>