<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880224-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID Moscow made a &quot;very clear&quot; commitment to leave Afghanistan.    The secretary of state, who briefed NATO allies in Brussels about his two days of talks with Soviet officials, said Moscow was &quot;unequivocal&quot; about its intentions to withdraw an estimated 115,000 troops from Afghanistan. Though Shultz didn't mention a specific timetable, U.S. sources said the Red Army already had begun preparations to leave. Shultz also reported progress on arms control. In an address broadcast to Europe, Reagan sought to reassure the allies that the U.S. would keep its NATO forces strong as it pursues arms accords with the Kremlin.    Shevardnadze, who informed the Warsaw Pact on his talks with Shultz, said there were &quot;real chances&quot; to conclude a pact on long-range missiles.    ---   PROTESTERS MARCHED in Soviet Armenia in a territorial dispute.    As many as 200,000 Armenians reportedly participated in the demonstrations in Yerevan, capital of the southern republic, to demand control of a territory assigned to a neighboring Soviet state in the 1920s. The protest, which followed a similar rally in the disputed area in the mountains just north of Turkey, is considered to be one of the largest unofficial gatherings ever disclosed by Moscow. Violence wasn't reported.    The Kremlin called the &quot;breaching of public order&quot; in Armenia &quot;a result of irresponsible calls by extremist individuals,&quot; the Tass news agency said.    ---   Dole won the South Dakota primary and Minnesota caucus, easily defeating Bush. Robertson and Bush were locked in a tight battle for second place in South Dakota, but Bush trailed far behind in Minnesota. On the Democratic side, Gephardt defeated Dukakis in South Dakota, while Dukakis won in Minnesota.    ---   Israeli police detained a Jewish settler accused of killing an Arab in the occupied West Bank. A second Palestinian also was reported killed in continuing unrest in the occupied territories. While Israeli leaders deny a link between the unrest and the PLO, residents of the area said the PLO's influence is evident.    Lebanon's Shiite Amal militia said it had arrested three men involved in the kidnapping last week of U.S. Marine Col. William Higgins, a member of a U.N. peacekeeping force. The militiamen were searching for the leader of the abductors, who have demanded Israel's withdrawal from a &quot;security zone&quot; in southern Lebanon.    ---   House Democrats reached agreement on a $30 million package of nonmilitary aid to Nicaragua's rebels, and aimed for a vote in the chamber tomorrow. The plan, to provide food and medicine, comes three weeks after congressional rejection of arms for the rebels. In Managua, President Ortega urged renewed peace talks with the Contras.    ---   A U.S. judge in Washington ruled the FBI illegally obtained a suspected terrorist's confession that he led a 1985 hijacking of a Jordanian airliner from Beirut. The Lebanese, lured aboard a yacht near Cyprus and arrested last September, is to stand trial next month. The judge found that &quot;relentless interrogation&quot; violated his rights.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that a criminal suspect's rights aren't violated when a witness who is unable to identify the accused in court testifies about an earlier identification of the suspect. The justices ordered the reinstatement of a California inmate's conviction in the beating of a guard who sustained memory loss because of the attack.    ---   Reagan nominated William Ball III to succeed Navy Secretary Webb, who resigned Monday after faulting cuts in the military budget. Ball, a Reagan aide, has been an administration lobbyist on Capitol Hill.    ---   An FBI official admitted that some agents came &quot;very close&quot; to conducting a political investigation of anti-Reagan activists, but denied receiving instructions from the White House. The remarks came at Senate Intelligence panel hearings into the agency's investigation of a group opposed to U.S. policy in Central America.    ---   Japan is preparing a mechanism for protecting the secrecy of militarily valuable U.S. patents. Procedures being discussed with the White House call for the Japan Defense Agency to be the confidential repository of such U.S. patents filed in Japan to protect the owners' commercial rights.    ---   The Marine Corps charged two women officers with &quot;fraternization and indecent acts&quot; at a base in Parris Island, S.C. While a U.S. appeals court earlier this month ruled that the Army's ban on homosexuals was unconstitutional, a Marine spokesman said the charges aren't for lesbianism.    ---   The Army will dispose of its aging stockpile of chemical weapons by burning them in closed incinerators to be built at eight sites where the chemicals currently are stored, a Pentagon official said. He said the Army rejected for safety reasons suggestions that the weapons be transported to one or two large sites for destruction.    ---   Two South Korean dissidents agreed to resume talks on merging their opposition parties. The move by Kim Young Sam and Kim Dae Jung is aimed at mounting a challenge to the government in April's parliamentary elections, and came as police clashed with about 1,500 students during protests against President-elect Roh.    ---   Federal drug enforcement agents said Honduras has become a major conduit for Colombian cocaine bound for the U.S. A Honduran spokesman said Tegucigalpa considers the charges speculative until the U.S. presents evidence to support them.    ---   Indian troops in Sri Lanka killed 20 Tamil civilians after four soldiers died in an ambush by Tamil rebels, officials in Colombo said. Authorities imposed a curfew on the northern area after the violence. </TEXT></DOC>