<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880718-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: The Time Bomb in Romania's War on Its Hungarians </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Keresztes </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><TEXT>   Hungarian Premier Karoly Grosz met with the Soviet general secretary, Mikhail Gorbachev, in Moscow early this month, and will visit President Reagan in Washington on July 27. What may be the most critical topic in the talks -- the recent flare-up between Hungary and Romania -- will probably stay confidential. The controversy should not, however, be allowed to be buried in some superficial compromise, which, according to sources in Budapest, the Hungarians and Soviets are seeking. For the public manifestation of this long-simmering problem holds the potential for explosive consequences -- but also for an open and fundamental solution.    The current dispute is over the revival of an old Romanian plan to raze more than half of the country's 13,000 villages. Morally repugnant and economically absurd, the scheme would knock over homes and churches, plow up cemeteries and herd the residents into &quot;urban agro-industrial complexes.&quot; Hungary's interest is that many of the villages are in Transylvania, where most of the country's more than two million ethnic Hungarians live. A few weeks ago an estimated 100,000 people demonstrated in Budapest against Romania's village-destruction plan. Bucharest retaliated not only with a vicious verbal attack but with the unprecedented act of closing the Hungarian Consulate in Kolozsvar/Cluj-Napoca and turning away Hungarian tourists. Romania has even threatened to sever diplomatic ties with its Warsaw Pact ally. Refugees from Romania have been flooding into Hungary by the thousands.    This is a major test for Hungary's new premier, who has been trying to reassure Nicolae Ceausescu that Mr. Gorbachev won't intercede and the Romanian leader can compromise with Mr. Grosz on carrying out &quot;nationality policies consistently according to Leninist principles.&quot; Before his trip he declared, &quot;It's a bilateral issue and not an affair of the Soviet Union.&quot;    A deal could take the form of relaxing the arbitrary restrictions at the border where normally 800,000 Hungarians cross annually, or delaying the September implementation of the village destruction or at least beginning it in pure Romanian areas. It's conceivable that Mr. Grosz will suggest to Mr. Reagan that a compromise with Romania could be facilitated if the U.S. were to restore trade preferences Bucharest renounced this year in a feud over Romanian human-rights abuses.    Such a compromise would be unconscionable and change little, for although it might resolve Romania's feud with the Hungarian regime, it would not end persecution of Romania's Hungarian minority. Romanian leaders have consistently felt that only the creation of an ethnically homogeneous Romanian state can make Transylvania secure as part of Romania. Thus denationalization has been part and parcel of the country's major domestic and foreign policies. This policy has gained in intensity at times of perceived threats, such as Hungary's strike for independence in 1956 and the current period of ethnic and political ferment in the Soviet bloc.    Some rulers during Hungary's historical domination of Transylvania, it's true, also practiced harsh nationalization on their Romanian subjects, but the effect of these activities never equaled what is happening under the current totalitarian system. The nearly 70 years of assimilation policy has effectively dispersed Hungarian communities, eroded their political voice, radically curtailed their educational and cultural lives, and has imposed severe linguistic bans. The denationalization drive has been accompanied by chauvinistic propaganda branding Hungarians as &quot;quarrelsome,&quot; &quot;untrustworthy,&quot; &quot;bad Romanians,&quot; endangering the state with their &quot;fascist&quot; and &quot;revisionist&quot; tendencies. Open threats and assaults on ethnic Hungarians have been all too frequent. Minority and religious activists have been incarcerated, savagely beaten, forced into emigration and even murdered by the secret police.    Hungary's Communist regimes disclaimed having anything to do with Hungarians living outside their borders. While diplomats point to behind-the-scenes representations and subtleties, such as former party chief Janos Kadar sending greetings to the Romanian &quot;peoples&quot; -- in plural, it was only this year that Central Committee member Matyas Szuros unambiguously referred to Romania's Hungarian minority and outlined a few elements of an emerging Hungarian position on the issue.    Yet Hungarians in Romania survive. Even at official statistics that understate their numbers at 1.7 million (independent estimates are 2.1 million to 2.5 million, about 10% of Romania's population), Hungarians are the largest minority group in non-Soviet Eastern Europe. They are more concerned over the restoration of their rights than in seeing Messrs. Grosz and Ceausescu paper over their differences, the U.S. and Romania patching up their trade dispute, or Bucharest succeeding, as Budapest has, in striking a commercial bargain with the European Community.    The U.S., Britain, France and the Soviet Union, parties to the 1947 Paris peace accord, all share responsibility for the treatment of Eastern Europe's minorities. During those negotiations -- which in the end confirmed Romanian rule in Transylvania -- Bucharest promised &quot;absolute freedom for the minority nationalities living on its territory.&quot; Business with Romania should not go on as usual while that country wages war on its own citizens and thumbs its nose at the rest of the world by, for example, killing the final document of the Helsinki review meeting in Vienna because of its references to human and minority rights.    There are serious dangers that extend beyond the borders of Romania. These lie in the increasing possibility of political collapse in Romania. Appallingly low living standards already have caused unrest; there are signs of divisions within party leadership; the military has increased its role in government, and the secret police have stepped up repression. Any breaking out of open hostilities would further incite already evident scapegoating against minorities, as well as attempts to settle scores. With the Soviet retreat from Afghanistan, Mr. Gorbachev's apparent renunciation of the Brezhnev doctrine and increasing talk about a Soviet troop pullout from Hungary, such an event would present to the Kremlin leadership a dilemma whose risks would be far greater than it would face in providing firm minority protection measures.    Soviet military intervention to end any hostilities would lose Moscow whatever credibility the regime has earned in the Gorbachev era -- both internationally and among liberals at home; staying out would risk another conflagration in Eastern Europe and a conservative revolt at home. As for the West, could London, Paris and Washington sit idle -- again -- if Moscow felt compelled -- again -- to make a move in Eastern Europe? And if Moscow hesitated could the West afford not to intervene, at least with a United Nations force?    Mr. Grosz may ponder before collaborating with Mr. Ceausescu to put the nationalities genie back in the bottle: What would, or could, Hungary do alone were Hungarian lives endangered in Romania?    ---   Mr. Keresztes is deputy editorial page editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>