<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0012 </DOCNO><HL> ATandamp;T Finding the Price Cap a Profitable Alternative---Long-Distance Results Gain in SomeStates Ending Limit on Earnings---By Janet GuyonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) </IN><TEXT>   In its plea for relief from federal regulation of its long-distance profit, American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. argues that consumers will benefit. But if experience of some states is any guide, ATandamp;T may be the bigger winner.    In at least three of the 12 states that no longer regulate ATandamp;T's profit, ATandamp;T's earnings have soared, while long-distance prices have declined moderately. In some states where earnings have increased, prices have increased also.    Based on the experience of Maryland, says John Glynn, Maryland People's Counsel, &quot;we should all quit and buy their stock&quot; if ATandamp;T gets relief from profit regulation on the federal level. Maryland People's Counsel is a state agency charged with representing consumer interests.    Indeed, ATandamp;T shares have been trading at record levels because analysts anticipate that the federal government will decide to mirror state regulatory experiments.    In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, ATandamp;T closed yesterday at $33 a share, down 75 cents.    The Federal Communications Commission, with ATandamp;T's support, earlier this month proposed regulation similar to state experiments. If adopted, such regulation would mean ATandamp;T's interstate profit no longer would be limited to 12.7% of its $9.1 billion investment in interstate plant and equipment. Instead, its prices would be limited to a yet-to-be-determined cap.    The New York-based company argues that the change would increase its incentives to cut costs. Some of those cost savings, presumably, would be passed on to consumers in the form of lower prices.    But some state officials with experience question whether replacing profit regulation with a cap on prices has spurred competition or, instead, promoted an informal cartel with ATandamp;T setting a price ceiling for its smaller competitors.    Despite all the talk about competition, some state officials say competition still isn't effective enough to pressure ATandamp;T to cut prices to its costs, which, because of ATandamp;T's huge volume, are thought to be the lowest in the industry. The company has said it currently holds a 75% share of the interstate market.    MCI Communications Corp., the second-largest long-distance company, supports the FCC plan. The Washington-based company has been hurt by having to match ATandamp;T's price cuts and says it believes the change will help it earn more money.    ATandamp;T doesn't talk about profit in individual states for political and competitive reasons, says Richard A. Romano, an ATandamp;T vice president, external affairs. But it is required to file earnings reports for eight of the 12 states that have removed profit regulation.    In Maryland, which ATandamp;T says it considers a model of how a price cap -- rather than profit regulation -- should work, the company earned a return on investment of 125% in the year ended March 31, according to the Maryland People's Counsel. The company's in-state profit rose to $11.4 million from $3.7 million the previous year. Meanwhile, prices for five-minute calls within 100 miles have dropped 15% during all periods of the day and night, according to ATandamp;T. When news of the company's earnings levels became public last month, ATandamp;T announced it would cut regular long-distance rates in Maryland again by 6%.    In Pennsylvania, where prices have decreased about 3% since profit regulation was dropped in August 1985, results have gone from a $2 million loss in 1985 to net income of $32 million last year, says Daniel Clearfield, the telecommunications coordinator for the state's office of consumer advocate. He estimates that the company is earning about a 20% return on equity in that state.    Meanwhile, in South Carolina, ATandamp;T's in-state profit has gone from an operating loss of $850,000 for the year ended June 30, 1986, to $7.8 million operating profit for the year ended last March 31, reflecting a rate-of-return on investment of 43.64%, says Raymon Lark, head of the Consumer Advocacy Division of the state Department of Consumer Affairs.    Just last month, ATandamp;T proposed a 5% average rate cut for in-state calls in South Carolina -- its first price cut since profit regulation was lifted last January.    ATandamp;T's Mr. Romano says, nationwide, ATandamp;T's in-state operations have gone from an estimated $200 million loss in 1984 to a profit, which wasn't disclosed. More-liberal regulatory practices, as well as reductions in ATandamp;T's operating, billing and costs to connect to local phone companies, have been responsible for the turnaround, he says. Reductions in connection costs account for most of the profit increase, he says.    But Mr. Romano says earnings in states such as Maryland are overstated. ATandamp;T hasn't increased profit in West Virginia, one of the states that has lifted profit regulation. Profit declined slightly between 1986 and 1985, according to state reports. Prices there increased at night, but decreased during the day since profit regulation was lifted in June 1986, ATandamp;T says.    In Maryland, ATandamp;T says a rate decrease in February should be treated as though it occurred over the entire year, although the company acknowledges it actually took in $11.4 million for the latest fiscal year. Spreading the February rate decrease over the entire year, would make ATandamp;T's rate of return 48%, not 125% as cited by Mr. Glynn of the People's Counsel, says ATandamp;T, still a healthy earnings level.    Mr. Romano also says that ATandamp;T's earnings in states such as Maryland, where it has a relatively low level of investment, shouldn't be measured against the value of its in-state plant and equipment. He says he prefers using profit margins, with 5% being in the middle of what ATandamp;T considers &quot;adequate.&quot; He adds, however, that he considers both measures when deciding whether ATandamp;T's earnings are adequate in a state.    State officials aren't yet convinced their experiments with lifting profit regulation have worked. Nevada currently is auditing the company to determine who benefited most, customers or the company.    &quot;Did the consumer get the full benefit, or did ATandamp;T keep more of the revenue than it would have been allowed to under a more regulated environment?&quot; asks Scott M. Craigie, chairman of Nevada's Public Service Commission. He said he believes consumers have gotten price cuts faster than they would have otherwise, but says he doesn't yet know whether the cuts otherwise would have been bigger. Since April 1985, ATandamp;T has cut in-state toll prices 25% for five-minute calls within 100 miles. So far, state officials believe ATandamp;T's return on investment is between 8% and 18%.    Meanwhile, in South Carolina, &quot;their earnings are arguably excessive for intrastate toll,&quot; says Mr. Lark. &quot;The maximum price approach to regulation may need some fine tuning or a complete revisit.&quot; A report on the company's expenses indicates most of the profit boost in South Carolina is the result of big reductions in billing costs and costs to connect to local phone companies that aren't fully passed on to customers.    State officials who like their new regulation say it is because of a &quot;gentleman's agreement,&quot; which dictates that ATandamp;T voluntarily lower prices to reflect obvious cost reductions, such as tax cuts. In Nevada, ATandamp;T hastily told staff members of the Public Service Commission it would cut prices again when it learned of the state's audit, says one staff member.    But not all states have the staff to closely monitor ATandamp;T. &quot;I haven't even looked at&quot; ATandamp;T's reports on its profits, says the staff member in charge of telephone matters at Pennsylvania's Public Utility Commission. Mr. Clearfield of the state's consumer advocate office says he is more concerned about local rates than toll rates because long-distance calling isn't an essential service.    &quot;I don't think anybody disputes that there isn't effective enough competition to force (long-distance) rates down,&quot; says Mr. Clearfield. &quot;But I have all I can do to protect the local ratepayers.&quot;    In at least one state, the price of intrastate toll calls has actually risen since profit regulation was dropped. Virginia's rates have climbed 24% overall since the regulatory change was made in August 1984, says Penny Sedgley, a senior economic analyst with the Virginia State Corporation Commission. Meanwhile, ATandamp;T has gone from posting losses to profit in that state. If the federal government adopts price cap regulation on ATandamp;T's interstate business, says Ms. Sedgley, &quot;I have to wonder if there will be any more price reductions.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>