<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880324-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Scientists Use Medical-Record Data Bases To Detect Adverse Side Effects of Drugs </HL><AUTHOR> David Stipp (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA EDP </IN><G> FDA </G><TEXT>   Do drugs that lower blood pressure increase the risk of hip fractures among the elderly? Is a widely used vaccine connected with infant death syndrome? How safe are anti-arthritis drugs?    Such questions once would have taken years to answer. But now the gumshoes of drug research are going electronic. Using huge, computerized data banks of medical records, researchers can quickly sift through data on millions of people to detect correlations between drugs and health problems. Within a few years, their data banks may serve as early warning systems for intercepting insidious drugs before they can do much harm.    Adverse side effects that occur rarely or show up long after a drug is taken can elude researchers until many people are affected. And as the population ages, detecting such problems is getting even trickier. &quot;We see more and more people with multiple and chronic diseases taking multiple drugs,&quot; which can interact in adverse ways, says John Norton, president of Health Data Resources Inc., a Providence, R.I., concern that is developing a comprehensive drug-monitoring data bank.    The use of the computer to investigate adverse drug reactions is growing rapidly because medical data on millions of people already are collected in computers for billing purposes by pharmacies, hospitals, insurers, government agencies and other health-care groups. When combined in centralized data bases, they enable researchers to cross-reference patients' drug prescriptions with records on their treatments for health problems. That can turn up associations between the drugs and the problems that are missed in traditional drug studies, which typically involve tests with fewer than 3,000 patients before the medicines reach the market.    Health Data, for example, collects data from a network of health-care organizations in Rhode Island. When completed this summer, its data bank for drug research will contain continually updated, minimedical biographies of almost every state resident -- a million people. With it, &quot;we will literally be able to follow a patient from cradle to grave,&quot; Mr. Norton says.    Advocates cite thalidomide as one drug whose disastrous side effects could have been quickly detected using data-base research. An anti-nausea drug used during pregnancy, thalidomide was pulled off the market in 1961 after thousands of women who took it, mostly in Europe, gave birth to babies with missing limbs.    The Food and Drug Administration has fostered growing use of the data banks, many of which are based on data from Medicaid, the government health program for low-income people. Their use already resembles a medical specialty with recognized specialists -- and controversies.    Confidentiality, of course, is a big issue, but medical researchers faced it long before the computer's advent and are taking pains to satisfy similar concerns about the new data banks. Patients' names are typically erased from records as they are incorporated in the data bases.    There also are concerns about the new field's validity. Some critics charge that it generates misleading findings that help bad drugs stay on the market and cause undue alarm about good ones. Nevertheless, &quot;over the past five years, the data bases have undoubtedly become more important in decision-making on drugs, new medical devices, new foods&quot; and other areas, says John Norris, the FDA's deputy commissioner.    When reports surfaced in late 1985 about gastrointestinal bleeding among patients who took Pfizer Inc.'s anti-arthritis drug Feldene, &quot;we called everybody in&quot; who had medical-record data bases to help investigate, says Gerald Faich, who directs the FDA division that monitors adverse drug reactions. &quot;Much of the data we used&quot; in deciding no actions were needed in the matter came from their studies, he adds.    Data-base research now under way includes a study by Harvard Medical School researchers on whether drugs that lower blood pressure increase the risk of hip fractures. The study is inspired by &quot;an old aphorism in medicine that when you treat blood pressure in the elderly, it can become too low, and they get dizzy and fall,&quot; says Jerry Avorn, a Harvard researcher.    In another data-base study, Vanderbilt University scientists are investigating whether a vaccine for diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus increases the risk of sudden infant death. Previous research indicates the vaccine poses no significant risk, but &quot;it would be nice to have another study to reassure people,&quot; says Wayne Ray, a Vanderbilt researcher.    Drug companies support data-bank studies, which can help allay concerns about their products raised by occasional adverse drug reactions. The studies also can help the companies quickly assess whether problems with their drugs are serious enough to warrant drastic actions.    After getting reports a few years ago indicating patients developed cataracts at a higher than expected rate after taking Burroughs Wellcome Co.'s anti-gout drug allopurinol, the company turned to Hershel Jick, a Boston researcher who pioneered data-base use. &quot;Amazingly,&quot; says Hugh Tilson, who directs Burroughs's research on adverse drug reactions, Dr. Jick produced within 20 minutes a preliminary study of 1,700 allopurinol users showing no association between the drug and cataracts. &quot;We used to have to spend 10 years to answer that kind of question,&quot; he says.    Dr. Tilson and other data-base specialists emphasize that findings with the new methods must be treated cautiously until confirmed with other studies. That is partly because the data used aren't always accurate. Records showing a child has had convulsions, for example, are prone to error because of mistaken diagnoses or miscoding of suspected seizures as actual ones, says Dr. Ray, the Vanderbilt researcher. Adds Brian Strom, a University of Pennsylvania drug researcher: &quot;Problems with diagnostic validity are the Achilles heel&quot; of data-base research, which typically requires double-checking of computer data against hospital records.    Another problem is health factors outside the scope of data-base information. Health problems due to nonprescription drugs, alcohol or unrecorded past illnesses can easily be confused with effects of prescription drugs in data-base studies, says Samuel Shapiro, a Boston University drug researcher who believes most such studies are misleading.    The FDA's Dr. Faich, who has spearheaded data-base use, acknowledges their limitations. But &quot;as long as the automated data bases are used intelligently and backed up by other kinds of studies, they offer some tremendous advantages, such as speed,&quot; he says. &quot;If we heard about problems with a thalidomide today, we should be able to turn to a data base and say 'yes' or 'no' on it very fast.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>