<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0088 </DOCNO><HL> French Firms Cashing In on Cash Flows---They Use Money ManagementTo Boost Profits---By E.S. BrowningStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Thomson S.A. had a great year last year: Its operating profit nearly quadrupled. But the biggest profit spinner for the French defense and electronics giant wasn't television sets, washing machines or even radar systems. It was finance.    Framatome S.A., one of the world's biggest builders of nuclear power plants, has maintained profit levels despite a world decline in its line of business. One reason: It has nearly seven billion French francs ($1.11 billion) invested in stock and money markets, generating 25% of its earnings.    Peugeot S.A., which like Thomson was deep in the red just a few years ago, burst back to profitability in 1985. The reason? Not car manufacturing, which didn't make money until 1986, but financial management.    In sector after sector, French companies are learning to boost profits by manipulating their cash flows and retained earnings.    &quot;Last year, our sales grew 10%, but our profits grew 20%,&quot; says an official at L'Oreal S.A., France's leading beauty-products maker. &quot;Most of the difference can be explained, directly or indirectly, by financial operations.&quot; L'Oreal officials estimate they have about 4.5 billion francs invested in stock markets and money markets.    Some industrial concerns, such as L'Oreal and Thomson, even have obtained banking licenses for their main financial subsidiaries, giving them the right, in theory, to take deposits and make loans.    Already in France, some large chain stores and tour operators have found that they can operate at tiny sales margins because of their financial profits. They require payment in advance from customers, and then put off paying their own bills for months. That leaves them with what bankers call a &quot;float&quot; -- a large, self-renewing pool of money that costs them little and that they are free to invest.    &quot;Large tour operators actually lose money on operations but make a profit overall because of the financial gains,&quot; explains Jacques Espinasse, financial director of Agence Havas S.A., which among other things is a leading travel agent. &quot;The sudden increase in interest rates in the early 1980s really woke people up to this.&quot; Around half of Havas's total profit comes from its financial placements.    In the U.S. and Japan, companies such as Toyota Motor Corp. and General Motors Corp. have made financial management a science. But in France, the idea remains controversial.    Politicians are complaining more and more that companies are letting their plants run down because it is easier to make profits in the bond market than by corporate investment. And people remember companies that speculated in real estate and lost. The result is that few managers like to brag about financial gains.    Thomson's group treasurer, Jean-Francois Henin, insists that the company isn't neglecting industrial investment. In fact, Mr. Henin says that the ability to fall back on financial profits has helped Thomson weather a tough restructuring that has brought it back to overall profit after several years of heavy losses.    &quot;The financial side isn't our No. 1 goal,&quot; says Mr. Henin. &quot;Our goal is to make money on television sets and radar systems. We aren't a trading room lost in space.&quot;    Perhaps. But Mr. Henin's dealings last year accounted for more than half of Thomson's profits, more than Thomson made on all its industrial operations put together, and he did it with just 200 employees. Mr. Henin says that isn't likely to be the case every year.    However, Thomson owns two specialized banks. They trade currencies, options and bonds, and they engage in arbitrage. Recently, Thomson acquired a small London oil-trading concern, and another subsidiary specializes in insurance. It dabbles in venture capital. And because Thomson is 70% dependent on exports and imports, Mr. Henin is getting into barter and counter-trade. He says that one day as much as half of Thomson's exports could be linked to barter agreements.    So far, Thomson's financial subsidiaries haven't marketed their services to outsiders -- they operate only for Thomson's own account. But Mr. Henin is thinking about seeking a stock listing for the overall financial subsidiary, and he doesn't rule out the possibility that Thomson, like General Electric Co. of the U.S., might wish to have a full-service investment bank.    L'Oreal, another pioneer, began managing its profits more carefully about a decade ago. It set up its own trading room five years ago, got its banking license this year, and is active in a variety of financial markets.    &quot;When I arrived at L'Oreal 17 years ago, they barely knew what an interest rate was,&quot; recalls one company official. &quot;I didn't have a secretary and we had a telephone that didn't work properly. To call traders and make a deal, I had to dial four or five times.&quot;    In those days, bankers considered corporate treasurers country cousins. Today, with the ability to move hundreds of millions of francs with a single telephone call, the corporate treasurer is gaining prestige.    Companies like Thomson and L'Oreal got interested in finance in part because they are heavy exporters. Thomson regularly signs high-priced multiyear contracts for military exports, and to be competitive it has to provide financing and take payment in the currency of the customer's choice.    Thomson decided in 1982 that it was foolish to pay banks for protection from currency fluctuations. It decided to handle the financing itself and make a profit in the process. Today, Mr. Henin's single biggest source of profit is managing the money involved in more than 300 export contracts.    It was an easy step from there to making deals purely for profit. Mr. Henin's second-biggest profit-spinner today is an arbitrage and trading subsidiary aimed only at making money in the market, operating almost entirely separately from the rest of Thomson.    Some companies have firmly avoided that approach.    Peugeot, for example, offers financing to customers who want to buy cars, as well as to its dealers. It prides itself on using innovative means of borrowing money. But a Peugeot official says the auto maker doesn't want to alienate its banks by competing with them too much.    &quot;We have made money by going into the dollar and by foreseeing interest-rate movements,&quot; says the Peugeot official. &quot;But if we become more aggressive financially we will end up eating our banks' lunches.&quot;    Peugeot also limits speculative trading by its financial subsidiaries. &quot;Otherwise, you run the risk of something like the Volkswagen affair,&quot; explains the Peugeot official, referring to the foreign-exchange losses uncovered this year at West Germany's Volkswagen AG.    Executives at other companies worry privately that the rage for financial activities will lead to speculative disasters. Already, Paris's new financial-futures market is buzzing with rumors that some big corporate players were stung by recent market shifts.    But that has done little to quiet many companies' interest in finance. It isn't farfetched to imagine, say some, that one day a big manufacturer will handle money for its sub-contractors, distributors and even customers, investing and lending much like a specialized bank. L'Oreal officials say they aren't ready for that sort of thing. But others note that, with more than 120,000 stores selling its products in France alone, L'Oreal would be well-placed to try. </TEXT></DOC>