<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880912-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BURMA'S PARLIAMENT APPROVED multiparty elections for this year.    In an emergency session of Rangoon's People's Assembly, the lawmakers voted to hold a general multiparty election in about three months. Such balloting would be the first since 1960. Despite the move, protesters marched in the capital and in Mandalay to demand an interim government to supervise the voting. President Maung Maung, addressing parliament, indicated a tougher stance against those defying law and order, saying troops had been ordered to quell the demonstrations.    An attempt by former Premier U Nu to form an alternative government in Burma apparently foundered, failing to gain international recognition.    ---   Opposition activists in Poland united behind Solidarity founder Lech Walesa as he convened a meeting with about 60 advisers to forge a strategy for talks with Warsaw officials. He is expected to meet with a government aide this week to arrange a date for the talks, which are expected to include a call for the legalization of the union.    ---   Tens of thousands of Iraqis paraded past the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad to denounce U.S. Senate approval Friday of sanctions against Iraq in response to Baghdad's alleged use of poison gas against Kurdish rebels. While evidence hasn't been found to support the claim, the rebels said such gas was used during a recent offensive.    ---   Assailants in Haiti attacked parishioners during a Roman Catholic Mass at a church in Port-au-Prince. The men, armed with guns and machetes, killed at least three people, injured about 60 and burned the building down. The priest celebrating Mass has been critical of Haiti's military regime.    ---   Bush's choice for a GOP post resigned as a result of a published report that he compiled figures in 1971 on the number of Jews in a Labor Department agency. Meanwhile, Dukakis conferred with Democratic congressional leaders to discuss defense policy in an effort to bolster his image on national-security and foreign-policy issues.    ---   Snow dusted parts of Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming, helping firefighters battle forest fires that have charred more than a third of the 2.2-million acre park. Rain also aided the effort. Federal officials said they would send an additional 2,000 soldiers to help fight the fires in the West.    ---   Flood waters began to recede in Bangladesh, and the Dhaka government said it had received $236 million in aid to help about 30 million people left homeless. Health officials said more than 200,000 people have contracted diarrhea from tainted water, and about 120 have died from the ailment.    ---   Mexico's Congress certified the ruling party's Carlos Salinas as winner of July's disputed presidential election. The lawmakers voted 263-85 Saturday, removing the final procedural hurdle faced by Salinas, who is to take office Dec. 1.    ---   The Yonkers City Council reversed itself early Saturday and approved a court-ordered housing desegregation plan. The move came as fines against the New York City suburb hit $1 million a day and hundreds of workers faced layoffs. A federal judge is to meet with the parties in the case Wednesday to discuss modifications to the plan.    ---   Pope John Paul II appealed for reconciliation, racial harmony and human rights in southern Africa as he celebrated Mass in Harare. The pontiff had criticized South Africa's apartheid system Saturday upon his arrival in Zimbabwe for the start of a 10-day, five-nation tour of the region.    ---   A car bomb exploded near the Pakistani Embassy in Afghanistan's capital of Kabul, killing at least 10 people and injuring about 40 others, Tass reported. The Soviet news agency blamed Afghan guerrillas.    ---   Shooting erupted in Chile, after President Pinochet's motorcade was stoned while traveling through a Santiago slum on the 15th anniversary of the coup that brought him to power, local radio reported. Five people were said to have been wounded.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir urged Israel's Arab neighbors to find Palestinians other than the PLO to join Israel in Mideast peace talks. In the occupied territories, Palestinian activists stabbed and wounded an Arab physician, and the army said other Arab doctors had recently been attacked for allegedly collaborating with Israeli authorities.    ---   Hurricane Gilbert swept toward Jamaica with 100 mph winds, and Caribbean officials issued warnings to residents in the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Cuba. Along the Gulf Coast, thousands of residents returned to their homes as the remnants of Hurricane Florence weakened over land. One death was linked to the storm.    ---   Stars and Stripes won the best-of-three 1988 defense Friday off San Diego against New Zealand's monohull sailing team to retain the America's Cup. New Zealand, however, has threatened to challenge the eligibility of the U.S. catamaran in court.    ---   Mats Wilander of Sweden beat Czechoslovakian-born Ivan Lendl, three sets to two, to win the U.S. Open Tennis championship. On Saturday, West German Steffi Graf won the women's title and completed the sport's Grand Slam by defeating Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina, two sets to one. </TEXT></DOC>