<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880601-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN AND GORBACHEV VOWED to work quickly for a strategic-arms pact.    While it was clear that an agreement reducing superpower long-range arsenals wouldn't be completed at this week's summit in Moscow, both leaders agreed to prod negotiators to draft an accord before Reagan leaves office. A U.S. official said Reagan and Gorbachev are likely to sign a statement spelling out progress on the arms pact in an overview of superpower ties. Following the working session, Reagan toured Red Square with Gorbachev. U.S. and Soviet officials signed two secondary arms pacts, a cultural exchange accord and six bilateral agreements.    Thousands of Armenians staged a general strike in the city of Stepanakert to press demands for the return of control over an enclave in Azerbaijan.    ---   Jackson said he has &quot;earned consideration&quot; as a vice presidential candidate if Dukakis captures the Democratic nomination, and said he expected a harmonious party convention. Meanwhile, in a Monday interview on CNN, Meese said &quot;it would be a real liability&quot; to Bush's campaign if he were to resign now as attorney general.    ---   Israeli Defense Minister Rabin said he had met with Palestinians to search for ways to end violence in the occupied territories. But Arabs involved in the talks during the past few days said Rabin had nothing to offer and that the six-month-old rebellion would continue. Israel's army said 207 Palestinians have been killed in the unrest.    ---   Afghan guerrillas have escalated rocket attacks on Kabul and gained control of a valley that is being used as a route for a Soviet troop pullout, Western diplomatic sources said. They also reported rumors of an imminent military coup in the capital and said the Soviets are supplying the Afghan army with more-sophisticated arms.    ---   El Salvador's Duarte traveled to the U.S. for treatment of what he described as a malignant stomach disease. The president has been rumored to have cancer. A spokesman said tests would be conducted at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.    ---   Pakistan's main opposition parties said they wouldn't participate in an election controlled by President Zia, who dissolved the government and dismissed the prime minister over the weekend. Zia has called for elections within 90 days, and some opponents said the actions could be an attempt by Zia to extend his power into the 1990s.    ---   A West German-born pilot flew a light plane into Soviet air space from Norway last weekend to mark the first anniversary of Mathias Rust's flight into Red Square, officials in Oslo disclosed. They said Moscow had allowed the intrusion because of the U.S.-Soviet summit. Rust currently is serving a four-year term in a Soviet prison.    ---   Police in Holland recovered three 19th century paintings stolen last month from Amsterdam's Municipal Museum. The works by van Gogh, Cezanne and Jongkind are valued at about $52 million. Three suspects were arrested following a raid at a local hotel. The works weren't damaged.    ---   Sikh separatists exploded bombs at a Hindu temple and in a market in Punjab, killing at least 26 people and injuring nearly 100 others, police said. Separately, the United News of India reported that more than 280 people have died in a weeklong heat wave across northern India. Temperatures have hit 120 degrees Fahrenheit.    ---   Yugoslavia's Communist Party ended a three-day party conference in Belgrade. Some delegates castigated party leaders and demanded their removal. They said the party's failure to solve economic problems -- including foreign debt, inflation and unemployment -- was destroying the public trust.    ---   A New Jersey company began selling a copper intrauterine contraceptive device in the U.S., the first available to American women in more than two years. IUDs, which have been linked to genital infection, had almost disappeared from the U.S. market after the two major marketers withdrew their products from sale.    ---   Malaysia's king suspended the head of the country's Supreme Court, who has complained about what he called Prime Minister Mahathir's constant attacks on the judiciary. The jurist will face a tribunal of judges who will decide whether to remove him from office for alleged misbehavior.    ---   South African religious leaders decided at an emergency meeting to support a three-day trade union protest against apartheid later this month and to launch a nationwide campaign of non-violent opposition to Pretoria's racial policies. The two-day meeting in Soweto was attended by about 200 Christian, Moslem, Hindu and Jewish leaders.    ---   Died: Russell DeYoung, 79, former chairman of Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co., Monday, in Naples, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>