<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881014-0192 </DOCNO><HL> Americas: An Insider's Reflection on the Brazilian Debt Package </HL><AUTHOR> William R. Rhodes </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON BNK </IN><TEXT>   Over the past few months, in anticipation of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank meetings in Berlin, we saw a succession of studies advocating increased debt reduction as a means of solving the less-developed countries' debt crisis. We need to address the concept of debt reduction, along with the new techniques developed recently with the government of Brazil in its current financial package.    Innovation has been a characteristic of the current stage of debt-crisis management. Over the past six years, the crisis has gone through several phases.    In the first phase, emergency packages met the immediate needs of borrowing countries as they started to adjust their economies.    In the second phase, the commercial banks and the countries negotiated multiyear restructuring agreements acknowledging the long-term nature of the problem. The concept of a &quot;menu of options&quot; was introduced. Mexico's 1984 agreement was the first to provide for debt-equity conversions that since have become a significant form of debt reduction.    The third phase came with the Baker Initiative, which emphasized the need for countries to grow out of the crisis by adopting market-based policies to boost investment and invigorate the private sector. Structural economic reform by the countries was to be accompanied by continued commercial-bank lending to back the countries' programs. Sharply increased support from the multilateral organizations (IMF, World Bank, etc.) was also included.    The commercial banks and the countries continued to add to the &quot;menu,&quot; with medium-term trade facilities, co-financings with the World Bank, on-lending, relending and securitization (through new-money bonds and exit bonds).    In 1987, many commercial banks significantly increased their reserves, giving them additional flexibility in managing their portfolios. Later that year, the Mexican government introduced a different type of exit vehicle in its debt exchange, which reduced its external debt by approximately $1 billion.    Each phase evolved from its predecessors and each responded to needs of the time. Some observers hail debt reduction as a new concept; in fact, it dates back several years, and has steadily grown in importance.    This Sept. 22, banks started signing the financing package negotiated with Brazil. The package gives Brazil time to concentrate on its pressing internal economic problems. It also points the way to the future pattern of our restructuring and debt-reducing efforts.    It is the first package to combine substantial new money with significant debt reduction; it demonstrates that new money and debt reduction need not be mutually exclusive. Not, that is, when the two are combined in a way that meets the needs of a country and its creditor banks, and advances the country toward a return to the voluntary markets.    The package includes $5.2 billion in new money to support the government's economic program to mid-1989. It also has the most comprehensive and innovative menu of options negotiated to date.    Some options are for new money and others for debt reduction. Among the latter, the exit bonds are particularly innovative. They can be converted from foreign-currency debt into local-currency obligations in the form of Brazilian treasury notes and also can be traded or converted into equity. Banks that do not convert will receive a fixed interest rate of 6% over 25 years, with 10 years' grace on principal; Brazil should gain either way.    These bonds are already a success, with some 100 banks participating to date, subscribing to more than $1 billion. Even some of the so-called &quot;free-rider&quot; banks that have long refused to participate in new-money packages are taking these bonds.    Larry Brainard of Bankers Trust, chief economist for the Brazilian advisory committee, has produced some numbers on future debt reduction in Brazil. Based on existing conversion programs and the new debt-reduction provisions, his analysis indicates that Brazil potentially can reduce its external debt to commercial banks by more than $18 billion (net) from this year through 1993 (with corresponding savings of $5 billion on future interest payments). Additionally, Brazil will save approximately $3 billion under the reduced interest margins in our agreements.    The Brazilian package is important for another reason. It reinforces the cooperative approach central to our past efforts. Brazil's partial moratorium on interest payments to commercial banks, declared in February 1987, was a milestone in the debt crisis. To many, it signaled a negative shift from cooperation to confrontation.    However, by this February, the Brazilian government had concluded that the moratorium was not in the country's interest. Reserves were expected to increase under the moratorium; but they did not. Some economists estimate that the moratorium cost the country at least $1.5 billion. This estimate includes forgone interest-margin reductions from the delayed restructuring; the cancellation or higher costs of short-term credit lines; the loss of new funds from the multilaterals and export-credit agencies; the movement of reserves to the Bank for International Settlements; and capital outflows.    Brazil formally ended the moratorium last month -- another milestone in the debt crisis and one that demonstrates that moratoriums don't work.    Across-the-board mandatory solutions are simply not the answer to the debt crisis. The call for imposed debt forgiveness, as opposed to voluntary debt-reduction schemes, would seriously retard the countries' return to the marketplace. Commercial banks, once losses are imposed on them, will stop or severely curtail lending to the countries in question. Many developing countries would have to rely exclusively on capital flows from official sources, limiting their growth.    Creditor governments have an important role to play along with the multilateral institutions. Through the Paris Club, the governments should restructure borrowings for more years of debt and with longer maturities and grace periods. Official export-credit agencies should restore their credit lines more rapidly to countries making progress in structural adjustment. The governments also should support the World Bank in its capital request and resolve their disputes at the Inter-American Development Bank. In addition, the World Bank needs to put greater emphasis on cofinancings with the commercial banks.    The challenge now for creditor governments, the multilaterals and the commercial banks is to find further ways to help developing countries that are making efforts to restructure their economies. We should keep in mind the lessons learned from Brazil's recent external debt experience, along with the innovations in the Brazilian package. The combination, where appropriate, of new money and debt reduction may be the way to bring countries back to the voluntary markets.    ---   Mr. Rhodes is chairman of Citibank's restructuring committee. The article is based on remarks made at a Sept. 26 Group of Thirty meeting in Berlin. </TEXT></DOC>