<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870302-0084 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The Baker Regency?</HL><DD> 03/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   In an important sense, Ronald Reagan is profoundly fortunate in attracting as distinguished an American as Howard Baker as chief of staff. With Drew Lewis and Paul Laxalt turning down the job, the administration was able to come up with an appointee who has highly plausible qualifications to serve in the presidency itself.    What is more, Mr. Baker has precisely the qualities to soothe the critics who have recently dominated the administration. With him in charge of the White House staff, there will be no Ollie Norths, no half-baked plans to ransom hostages. He is known as a conciliator, the consummate legislator. Mr. Reagan's critics on Capitol Hill and in the media are already celebrating the appointment. So is the first lady. Iranamok has ended in harmony, or at least produced a moment of it.    Despite all this -- indeed because of it -- we find the appointment disquieting. It is not Howard Baker; we certainly join in the universal respect for him and share the hope that he can stabilize the White House. What disturbs us, rather, is the whole scene that started with the disclosure of the arms shipments to Iran. What keeps running through our minds is how familiar these events would seem to a courtier transplanted from the 17th century.    The aging king, though still acclaimed by the people, had developed powerful foes within the court. Not least, he had capped the taxes and rents the nobility could collect from his subjects. One day, the king slips. No immediate harm comes to the kingdom, but the embarrassment is acute, for the king has broken a pledge. Powerful earls demand that he confess and apologize, but he stubbornly persists in the belief that while his gamble did not win, the odds were worth playing and that he has made no real mistake.    The court is consumed with gossip. The Privy Council conducts an official investigation of all the dirty linen and pillow talk. Not surprisingly, this scrutiny finds much bumbling. Those who've opposed the king's policies start to demand the head of this or that of his appointees; others in his service protest they've opposed his policies all along. The queen joins the gossip against the prime minister, who had never shown her proper deference. Whispers start that the king stuttered at Vespers the other day, and dozed during Mass. With scandal enveloping the court, the kingdom's essential business can no longer be conducted. With no one to support him, the king is forced to come to terms. The prime minister is summarily exiled. The king is allowed to sit on the throne, but turns affairs of state over to a regent acceptable to the earls and dukes.    In the United States, of course, this kind of government went out in 1776. Here the people choose their rulers, electing their president to a four-year term. Indeed, a sitting president can be removed only for high crimes and misdemeanors. This way, the people can vote in the policies they choose, ordering up more national defense or lower taxes or whatever. Their choice of president and their choice of policies is not subject to the caprice of court intrigue. Or so the civics books say.    Yet somehow the celebrations of the Baker appointment have an eerie resonance of a celebration of a Baker Regency. In 1972, the people voted overwhelmingly for Richard Nixon, but shortly had as president Gerald Ford, a consummate legislator who'd never been elected to any national office. The techniques of deposing a president were learned and honed, and have clearly been applied again with Iranamok. The people's choice will again be overturned, and with far less reason, if Howard Baker turns out to be their de facto president.    The people voted for Ronald Reagan, a president with an agenda: tax cuts, strong defense, free trade, anti-communism. Among the dukes and earls of Capitol Hill, even Republican ones, pressures are already building to reverse this agenda. To ditch the contras and effectively end the Reagan Doctrine. To retract the 28% tax rate in the troglodyte belief this could mean a lower deficit. To reach some arms control agreement, gutting the president's strategic defense initiative. To enact a protectionist trade bill, sure to reach the president's desk with the administration already having yielded much of the high ground.    We will know whether we have the same president the people elected if the White House stands firm on the Reagan tax cut, if the veto is wielded with Reaganite warnings of protectionism and the Great Depression, if President Reagan's personal initiative on SDI is not traded away, and if the administration at least goes down fighting on the contras to preserve the Reagan Doctrine as a viable issue for the future. If the White House does not do these things, if it reacts to these pressures by splitting differences, it will signal that President Reagan has been deposed, that power is now exercised by Howard Baker, the regent and great conciliator.    We hasten to add that these are mere forebodings, not accomplished facts. For one thing, Howard Baker is a conscientious public servant, certain to be sensitive to his role as chief of staff and to recognize that the administration bears some responsibility to the voters who elected it. For another, Ronald Reagan, though he has always been a bit laid-back, is far from infirm. Surely he will recognize that he will sacrifice his place in history if the last two years of his presidency are spent giving away the accomplishments of the first six years. And surely he will exert himself accordingly. </TEXT></DOC>