<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880127-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN PLANS to request a scaled-back $36 million Contra aid package.    In an effort to show it wants to promote the Central American peace process, only 10% of the administration's request, or $3.6 million, will be for &quot;lethal&quot; goods such as weapons and ammunition. And shipment of the lethal aid would be delayed for at least 30 days. Moreover, the administration says it will send Secretary of State Shultz to the region to meet with Nicaraguan and other officials if serious negotiations between the Contras and Nicaragua's Sandinista government get under way.    Managua said it believes Americans were aboard a Contra supply plane it shot down. It also lifted a ban on 11 radio news shows and five magazines.    ---   A Salvadoran military court ruled that three suspects charged in the killings of 13 people, including six Americans, in 1985 attacks on San Salvador sidewalk cafes should be released under a government amnesty. The U.S. Embassy in San Salvador said the government could lose $18.5 million in aid in response to the court's decision.    ---   An aspirin taken every other day cuts the chances of a heart attack by 47%, according to findings from an experiment involving 22,000 men. The study is being published this week in the New England Journal of Medicine. The study provides the first indication that aspirin reduces heart-attack risk among healthy men.    ---   Bush appears to have won a clear victory over CBS anchorman Dan Rather in a heated prime-time television exchange between the two Monday over the vice president's role in the Iran-Contra affair. CBS and its affiliates were flooded with phone calls, mostly critical of Rather, following the interview.    ---   Sen. Helms was criticized by colleagues for attempts to condemn the proposed treaty banning intermediate and shorter-range nuclear missiles. The North Carolina Republican's assertion that the treaty would ban only missiles, not warheads, was branded a &quot;red herring&quot; during ratification hearings.    ---   Colombia's President Barco vowed not to be blackmailed by cocaine traffickers who claimed responsibility for the killing of Bogota's attorney general in order to stop efforts to extradite them to the U.S. Barco gave no details of the measures the government would take, but a diplomatic source said he met with the U.S. ambassador.    ---   The State Department said Shultz would meet with two Palestinian leaders during a visit by Egypt's President Mubarak, who will meet with Reagan and the secretary of state this week to push his Mideast peace proposals. A U.S. official said Mubarak's plan was &quot;welcome,&quot; especially a proposal for a six-month halt in Palestinian unrest.    ---   NASA discovered a new problem in the redesigned space shuttle booster rocket, and officials said a further delay was possible in the first post-Challenger mission. The space agency said it is investigating cracks it found in an engine-seal weld. A decision on a launch date is due later this week.    ---   The Senate Judiciary panel is expected to recommend approval today of the nomination of Anthony Kennedy to the Supreme Court. A Senate aide said a vote by the full Senate could come as early as next week.    ---   Philippine election officials froze the proclamation of election winners in 26 areas, including a province where a former military officer linked to a coup attempt won a gubernatorial race, citing charges of voting irregularities. Separately, President Aquino mocked U.S. critics in calling for a stepped-up war against communist rebels.    ---   Rescue workers in Mexico dug for more bodies following a coal-mine explosion that left at least 33 miners dead near the northern town of La Esperanza. At least 10 more were trapped and assumed dead and 50 were injured, Mexican authorities said.    ---   Cocom is to open two days of high-level talks today that U.S. officials hope will lead to stronger restraints on technology exports to the Soviet bloc. France disclosed the arrests in November of four people charged with organizing exports of electronic measuring and communications gear to an East-bloc country.    ---   An AIDS conference opened with delegates from 150 countries gathering in London. The director of the World Health Organization said one million cases of the disease can be expected world-wide by 1991.    ---   A top Bonn aide testified that Chancellor Kohl's government decided not to extradite a hijacking suspect to the U.S. because of death threats against two West German hostages. Kohl's chief of staff made the disclosure at the kidnapping trial of the brother of Mohammed Hamadi, suspected of the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jet to Beirut.    ---   A black South African youth was found shot to death five days after he was questioned by police about his appearance on a CBS-TV documentary on apartheid.    ---   The Justice Department rejected changes in review procedures called for by a Cuban-American bishop who helped end recent rebellions by Cuban inmates at two federal detention centers. The bishop said officials aren't living up to their promise of full and fair reviews of individual cases before deportation decisions are made.    ---   Died: Travers J. Bell Jr., 46, chairman of Daniels andamp; Bell Inc., an investment banking firm, in New York, of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>