<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871218-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BUSH SUPPORTED the arms-for-hostages initiative, a memo shows.    The previously undisclosed document, released by congressional Iran-Contra investigators, describes the vice president as having been &quot;solid&quot; in support of efforts to sell arms to Iran as a means to win the release of U.S. hostages in Lebanon. The Feb. 1, 1986, note, to McFarlane from Poindexter, was soon followed by the first shipments of U.S. arms to Iran. Aides to Bush, a GOP presidential candidate, described the memo as &quot;nothing new.&quot;    CIA chief Webster confirmed that he had disciplined several agency officials involved in the Iran-Contra affair. The move was lauded by Congress.    ---   ROH REJECTED allegations of vote fraud and urged stability in South Korea.    The president-elect, who defeated opposition rivals Kim Young Sam and Kim Dae Jung by a wide margin in Wednesday's direct balloting, appealed for &quot;national harmony.&quot; The ruling party's candidate also indicated he would form a presidential advisory body that would include members of the opposition. Dissident leaders, who charged that Roh won the election by massive government ballot-rigging, called for nationwide street protests.    Police in Seoul clashed with 2,000 protesters who had occupied a polling station, arresting 900. About 31 people were injured in the melee.    ---   Gustav Husak resigned as leader of the Communist Party in Czechoslovakia. Installed by the Russians in 1968, Husak was succeeded by Milos Jakes, who isn't likely to relax Husak's resistance to adopting Moscow's recent economic and political liberalizations. Husak will remain as the country's ceremonial president.    ---   A judge in Bhopal, India, directed Union Carbide Corp. to pay $270 million as interim relief to victims of the December 1984 Bhopal gas leak. More than 2,800 people were killed and as many as 40,000 were injured in the incident. Carbide disputed the judge's order, saying it amounted to awarding damages without a trial.    ---   Dole endorsed the U.S.-Soviet treaty on intermediate-range missiles but made it clear that he wants to attach some conditions as he helps steer the measure through the Senate. The minority leader, a GOP presidential candidate, made his remarks at the White House with Reagan at his side.    ---   The FAA mandated that all airline and airport employees pass through passenger security checkpoints, and congressional investigators reported that thousands of employee identification badges are missing at major airports. The moves followed a Dec. 7 Pacific Southwest Airlines crash that apparently was caused by an ex-worker of USAir, which acquired PSA in May.    ---   The FBI detained a Soviet diplomat on suspicion of espionage, U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar said. Administration officials said the envoy, who was released because he has diplomatic immunity, would be expelled from the U.S.    ---   Israeli Defense Minister Rabin said Palestinian rioting in the Gaza Strip is part of an effort by Mideast radicals to focus Arab and world attention on the Arab-Israel conflict. In the occupied territories, Israeli troops enforced a curfew following more than a week of unrest.    ---   House-Senate conferees reached agreement to designate Nevada as the site of the nation's first permanent nuclear-waste repository. The accord was attached to Congress's budget reconciliation bill, and must be approved by both houses. Such approval is expected.    ---   The Democratic Party chairman accused Gary Hart of placing personal needs ahead of the party by rejoining the race for the 1988 presidential nomination. Paul Kirk said the move by the former Colorado senator would cause short-term damage to the party's chances of capturing the White House.    ---   The U.S. government issued a listing of death rates among Medicare recipients treated at 5,971 hospitals last year. The report found that 2.4%, or 146 hospitals, had higher-than-expected death rates among Medicare patients.    ---   The Army ordered a general court-martial on a charge of desertion for a private who defected to the Soviet Union from his post in West Germany. The soldier later returned to the West. The order by the commander of Fort Dix, N.J., overruled a recommendation for a lower-level prosecution made by an Army investigator.    ---   Iranian speedboats launched two attacks on a sulfur-laden Maldivian vessel in the Persian Gulf. The rocket-propelled grenades ignited a fire that threatened the toxic cargo and forced the crew to abandon ship. A U.S. warship offered assistance.    ---   A bomb exploded in a crowded shopping area in the western Afghan city of Herat, killing one person and wounding at least eight others. Radio Kabul blamed anti-government guerrillas for the blast.    ---   A trial against Lyndon LaRouche opened in Boston, with a federal prosecutor charging that pressure by the extremist political candidate drove his supporters to commit credit card fraud to help finance his 1984 presidential bid. LaRouche and 11 other defendants are charged with fraud and interfering with a federal investigation.    ---   India's peacekeeping forces battled Tamil rebels in eastern Sri Lanka. At least 25 people were killed, a military official in Colombo said. New Delhi's troops were sent to Sri Lanka to enforce a July peace accord aimed at ending ethnic strife.    ---   Authorities in Tokyo said at least two people were killed and as many as 50 others injured in an earthquake that measured 6.6 on the Richter scale. The temblor, which swayed skyscrapers and collapsed walls, was strongest in Chiba prefecture.    ---   Died: Joseph P. Mott, 80, chairman of Mott's Supermarkets Inc., Wednesday, in Hartford, Conn.    (Revised WSJ Dec. 21, 1987)</TEXT></DOC>