<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871104-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SOVIETS EXPRESSED optimism about a superpower summit in Moscow.    A Soviet Foreign Ministry official said the U.S. and Soviet Union had reached &quot;an understanding&quot; that would lead to the signing next spring of a treaty halving strategic arsenals. U.S. officials, however, said differences had to be resolved over limits on space weapons. Reagan and Gorbachev are to meet in Washington Dec. 7 to sign an accord eliminating intermediate-range missiles. The Soviet statements came after officials said Defense Secretary Weinberger would resign. His departure would leave Reagan's inner circle without its most influential anti-communist.    NATO defense ministers meeting in California discussed ways to bolster conventional forces in Europe following the signing of a superpower INF treaty.    ---   The government's ethics office said it was reviewing the role that Supreme Court nominee Douglas Ginsburg played last year in handling a cable-TV case while having an investment in a cable firm. The American Bar Association, which currently is assessing Ginsburg's judicial qualifications, also said it was studying the matter.    ---   Democrat Wilson Goode claimed victory in Philadelphia's mayoral race, though GOP opponent Frank Rizzo refused to concede. With 99% of the precincts reporting, Goode had 51% of the vote, compared with 49% for Rizzo. In Baltimore, Democrat Kurt Schmoke beat GOP rival Samuel Culotta to become that city's first black mayor.    ---   Persian Gulf shipping sources said a U.S. frigate fired on a fishing boat last weekend, rather than on a hostile Iranian craft as the Pentagon believed, and killed an Indian crew member. In Kuwait, a bomb exploded near the Interior Ministry, intensifying fear about possible Iranian sabotage.    China said it would take &quot;strict measures&quot; to prevent the diversion of Chinesemade Silkworm missiles to Iran, Undersecretary of State Armacost said. The move came as the Reagan administration urged the U.N. to begin drafting sanctions aimed at ending the Iran-Iraq war.    ---   The Commerce Department said two Japanese businessmen and two Hungarian diplomats were indicted by a U.S. grand jury in North Carolina, accused of conspiring to ship semiconductor gear to Hungary. In San Francisco, four Americans were charged with trying to divert a supercomputer to the Soviets.    ---   Nicaragua's defense minister said the CIA persuaded a military officer to defect to the U.S. Humberto Ortega said Maj. Roger Miranda Bengoechea secretly left Nicaragua Oct. 25, carrying military data. Miranda, who sought asylum at the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City, is reportedly familiar with Managua's intelligence operations.    ---   Switzerland supplied U.S. investigators with bank records tracing the money and activities of central figures in the Iran-Contra affair. The documents were turned over in Bern to investigators for independent counsel Lawrence Walsh. The move came as the Senate voted to extend the law creating court-appointed independent counsels.    ---   A fire raged through Haiti's independent election council's office in Port-au-Prince hours after some supporters of ousted dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier were barred from running for president Nov. 29. At least one person was reported injured in the blaze, which was blamed on arson.    ---   A Massachusetts man was arrested by police in Washington and charged with threatening to kill Secretary of State Shultz. Officers removed an M-16 assault rifle and two shotguns from the unemployed chemist's car. His motive wasn't disclosed.    ---   Reagan named Ann Dore McLaughlin to succeed Brock as labor secretary. McLaughlin was undersecretary in the Interior Department until March. Capitol Hill sources said that while she has little labor experience, it didn't appear that her nomination would be challenged.    ---   The Rev. Jerry Falwell said he was resigning as president of the Moral Majority and would end his political activities. Falwell, who said he was &quot;rededicating my life to the preaching of the gospel,&quot; noted that he would speak out on moral issues.    ---   Arizona Gov. Evan Mecham won a temporary delay of a grand jury investigation of an unreported $350,000 campaign loan. A state Supreme Court justice stayed the proceeding so the full court can consider Mecham's argument that the attorney general be removed from conducting the inquiry because he is the governor's legal adviser.    ---   South Korean students battled with police in Seoul during rallies held to demand that an interim government take over to ensure a fair presidential election, which is expected next month. The students also demanded that the ruling party's candidate, Roh Tae Woo, withdraw from the race.    ---   Meese testified for four hours before a grand jury investigating his involvement with Wedtech Corp., which won a $32 million no-bid Army contract. Meese has acknowledged interceding on the firm's behalf. The independent counsel in the case is expected to decide soon whether to seek an indictment of the attorney general.    ---   Indian commandos clashed with Tamil separatists defending a stronghold in Sri Lanka's Jaffna peninsula. Heavy casualties were reported on both sides. Fighting in the region has raged for nearly a month. India sent peacekeeping troops to Sri Lanka to enforce a July 29 cease-fire. </TEXT></DOC>