<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880407-0027 </DOCNO><HL> House of Mirrors: Lorenzo's Texas Air Keeps Collecting Fees From Its Ailing Units --- Texan's Airline Group Suffers Huge Losses and Debts, While Parent Is Insulated --- A Revealing Report to SEC </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas Petzinger Jr. and Paulette Thomas (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TEX LABOR </CO><IN> AIR </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Imagine a house of many rooms.    Every room has a paying tenant. A bank can foreclose on an individual room, but not on the whole house. The landlord has many partners, but no one can challenge his management of the property.    This is the house that Frank Lorenzo built.    As the chairman of Texas Air Corp., Mr. Lorenzo presides over some of the nation's sickest airlines -- Continental, Eastern, the corporate remnants of People Express, Frontier and New York Air. All are losing money at some of the fastest rates in aviation history and rank as the industry's biggest debtors. As such, they are blocked by their lenders from paying profit to the parent company for years.    Yet thanks to Mr. Lorenzo's masterly corporate architecture, huge losses at subsidiaries don't stop cash from moving to the top. While the airlines' public debt holders anxiously watch the deficits close in on half a billion dollars, the parent company keeps raking in from the airlines an assortment of management fees, airplane rents, airport-gate rents, fuel-purchase commissions and other payments. &quot;Upstreaming&quot; of cash, company officials call this, and it totaled more than $150 million for the parent last year.    Perhaps most remarkable, Mr. Lorenzo has built one of the most leveraged major corporations in the nation while insulating Texas Air -- and himself -- from most of the cost and much of the risk. As a group, the Texas Air companies have piled up $5.4 billion in debt. Last year they had to pay $623 million simply to service the long-term part of that debt -- an interest bill higher than the annual revenue of each of nearly 100 companies at the bottom of the Fortune 500. Yet parent Texas Air paid creditors barely one-tenth that amount.    Now, reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission show how far the airlines have to go. The reports, among other things, list some $7 billion in lease-related liabilities that are invisible on the balance sheet, and they show that Texas Air's once-huge cash reserves were dwindling last year at a rate of more than $1 million a day. The situation is not without irony; the entire Texas Air empire, after a year that produced the company's biggest net loss ever -- $466 million -- has just won its first unqualified auditors' opinion in five years.    All this may make the 47-year-old Mr. Lorenzo the quintessential manager-on-the-edge -- a live practitioner of the concept that cash flow is more important than profits. Fighting a war of attrition against the losses at his ailing airlines, he buys time with a seemingly foolproof trickle-up system. If he eventually wins the war -- curbs Eastern's costs and fixes Continental's service problems -- his airlines, with their exceptional size and market dominance, may become for him a kind of mass-production profit machine.    Should he fail, well, the parent company could be hurt, yet it would be almost sure to remain standing. For by financing the operation so piecemeal and by draping it with so many corporate veils, Mr. Lorenzo has left most of the leverage to himself -- and not to airline creditors. Mr. Lorenzo, though his personal investment is virtually nil, preserves voting control with corporate defenses that make poison pills look like penny candy.    Mr. Lorenzo declined to be interviewed, although a Texas Air spokesman responded to a list of written questions. The company has always maintained that it conducts internal transactions at arm's length, and that its overriding goal is to build profitable airlines. Texas Air, however -- viewed solely as a parent company, segregated from the consolidated empire that reports financial results -- ran a &quot;modest&quot; profit in 1987, the spokesman said.    This is a company in which internal transactions worth hundreds of millions of dollars have been conducted with house money, securities labeled &quot;scrip.&quot; At the same time, with 24 issues of publicly traded securities listed on U.S. exchanges, Mr. Lorenzo treats the financing markets like drive-up teller windows. In one of many private placements, Eastern, desperate for $200 million in cash, last month agreed to pay 17.25%, or more than twice the prime rate.    Partly by happenstance, partly by design, Mr. Lorenzo has created one of the nation's most complex major corporations. &quot;It took me months to figure this company out,&quot; says Richard Bilotti, who worked on Texas Air's first junk-bond issue at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. and who now follows the company as a junk-bond analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. &quot;I've opened Texas Air annual reports and documents and thought, 'I'm going to become a TV repairman.'&quot;    But within the units, crisis seems to follow upon crisis. The reports to the SEC last week -- &quot;10K&quot; filings by Texas Air, Continental, Eastern and the surviving corporate shell of People Express -- spell out the problems. The parent's report lists six pages of litigation and even a 130-sponsor congressional resolution demanding a federal investigation of Texas Air's affairs.    At Eastern, executives worry that lenders could repossess assets if a threatened strike takes hold. At Continental, officials expect further big losses for the first quarter, partly from the cost of overcoming continuing customer-service problems. The reports tell how New York Air temporarily slipped into default on one lending agreement. And they show how the net worth of the entire enterprise -- the largest airline operation in the non-communist world -- sank 38% last year, to just $500 million.    Mr. Lorenzo keeps the enterprise going with techniques that range from the iron fist to the velvet glove. After cutting a deal to acquire People Express in 1986, he twice forced debt holders to accept reduced terms. Yet a few years ago, at a presentation to Standard andamp; Poor's Corp., he slipped his arm around the shoulders of a ratings agent, quietly pleading for a bond rating better than triple-C.    To Mr. Lorenzo's critics, the structure of Texas Air is a blueprint for greed -- designed by Mr. Lorenzo and a few close associates &quot;to satisfy their own selfish desire,&quot; as the public debt holders of Continental once alleged in a lawsuit; &quot;to destroy trade-union representation,&quot; as the machinists' union claims in a suit filed this month; or to &quot;loot Eastern for the benefit of Texas Air,&quot; as the pilots' union charges in another suit.    But if Mr. Lorenzo is intent on personal enrichment, it isn't evident from his operations to date. He does draw a $1,000-a-day salary, has profited nicely from personal transactions with the company and has traded Texas Air shares in the market adroitly. But he has hardly accumulated the kind of wealth available to most executives who personally control $8 billion-a-year enterprises. Mr. Lorenzo gets his jollies running marathons rather than collecting antique cars or European guest houses.    The exotic structure of the enterprise, has, however, given him the chance to earn a little more than mad money.    Mr. Lorenzo maintains control of the empire through a special class of supervoting stock held by his flyspeck personal holding company, Jet Capital Corp. With only 1% of the equity of Texas Air, it has 34% voting control. The investment company, which shares its headquarters and telephone number with Texas Air's New York office, also invests jointly with Texas Air and conducts other activities in whose spoils Mr. Lorenzo shares as Jet Capital's 52% shareholder.    The way Eastern Airlines has been treated in a few transactions is worth a look. For instance, according to Texas Air's SEC filing last week, Jet Capital arranged a $1.25 million fee for itself for advising Texas Air on its recent plan to shift ownership of Eastern's East Coast shuttle to a new Texas Air subsidiary for $225 million. In exchange for its role in &quot;structuring&quot; the transaction through a chain of five corporations, Jet Capital was also awarded an equity interest in the new unit.    Jet Capital, alas, may receive only part of its fee and may never receive its equity stake. For at the behest of Eastern's union leaders, a federal judge last month put the brakeson Mr. Lorenzo's efforts to continually reconfigure Texas Air, temporarily blocking the shuttle sale as a violation of Eastern's labor agreements.    Ever since acquiring debt-plagued Eastern 16 months ago, Mr. Lorenzo has been carving up the airline to bring Eastern's few profitable operations closer to home. It began with Eastern's computer-reservations subsidiaries, System One Direct Access Inc. and EAL Automation Systems Inc., which in 1986 generated $255 million in cash. The units' profits, however, merely subsidized Eastern's huge overall deficits.    Eastern's own investment bankers had valued part of the system at between $200 mllion and $320 million. But Texas Air paid Eastern just $100 million for the whole works -- and not in cash but in a note bearing interest of only 6.5%, payable in 2001.    &quot;If one were creating junk, this would be at the bottom of the barrel,&quot; says Farrell Kupersmith, a senior partner in the accounting firm of Touche, Ross andamp; Co. Today, Mr. Kupersmith advises the pilots' union at Eastern, but when Continental went through bankruptcy proceedings in the mid-1980s, he testified against the unions. Explaining his switch in sides, the accounting executive says, &quot;We have a pro-business bias, but the system here is being abused.&quot;    Texas Air justified the terms of the transaction with the fairness opinion of an investment-banking firm. These are no mere 6.5% notes, after all. Eastern can convert them into, of all things, the common stock of its parent company; of course, for Eastern to do so profitably, Texas Air's shares would have to be worth more than their all-time high of $51.50 apiece, according to calculations by Touche Ross. They trade at about $12 now.    Eastern explains the sale of the reservations system by noting that only the parent company had the wherewithal to upgrade its software and set System One on an expansion binge. Texas Air combined the former Eastern unit with CCS Automation System Inc., a system it had picked up from Continental a year earlier for $15 million. As a direct unit of Texas Air, it has become the third-ranked and fastest-growing reservation system in the all-important travel-agent market.    But today, System One draws funds from Continental and Eastern that the airlines used to pay to themselves. These include a fee of $1.65 for every airline reservation plus other fees, payments that total about $130 million a year in Eastern's case alone. A Texas Air spokesman declines to say what income, if any, the parent company is drawing from this flourishing new unit. But neither do the financial statements reveal any injection of capital by the parent. In the true style of a Texas Air unit, System One has accumulated $64 million of its own debt.    Other assets and operations have been switched out of Eastern. For instance, it sold 11 gates at Newark International Airport to Continental for $11 million -- in a promissory note paying 10% interest. Yet Eastern sold eight gates and related facilities in the smaller market of Charlotte, N.C., to Piedmont Aviation for $25 million. Eastern explains that the gates in Charlotte were especially valuable to Piedmont because its hub is there, and says the price paid Continental squares with other Newark gate sales.    Eastern has suspended nonstop service from its hometown of Miami to London and on more than a dozen other routes; Continental later began service on the same routes. A new unit has been created to hold Eastern's chain of members-only Ionosphere Clubs -- a sure sign, Eastern's unions contend, that they, too, will be moved to Continental. Eastern says it merely wanted to segregate the profitable club chain from the airline's problems.    &quot;Eastern's new management team is in the business of running an airline, not dismantling it,&quot; the company says in a position paper recently distributed on Capitol Hill. Until labor costs are slashed and losses reversed, the company adds, &quot;it should not surprise anyone that the company is smaller.&quot;    If Texas Air's planes and gates and reservation systems are structured like a modular home, with movable walls for maximum flexibility, its finances seem more like a hall of mirrors.    New York Air assumed nearly $50 million of debt in the failed Frontier Airlines subsidiary of the nearly failed People Express -- but the debt was also guaranteed by Texas Air. Eastern, though desperate for cash, paid Texas Air $25 million -- &quot;for investment purposes&quot; -- in exchange for notes in People Express. (The notes yield 20%, a Texas Air spokesman says.)    When Continental bought 50% of Bar Harbor Airways, a commuter that feeds passengers to Eastern, the apparently grateful Eastern paid Continental a fee of $1 million -- although the whole sale was worth only $1.5 million.    Then there are the leases. People Express's SEC filing described one of these succinctly, if not necessarily simply: The lease, involving a Boeing 747 worth $30 million, was &quot;sold by the lessor in a sale and leaseback transaction pursuant to which the aircraft was leased to a special-purpose subsidiary of Texas Air and simultaneously subleased to the airline under an operating lease agreement.&quot;    At the operating level, such day-to-day dealings can go over the heads of even top executives. Michael Levine, a Yale Law School professor who served as president of Mr. Lorenzo's once-promising New York Air unit, always tried to make sure that the unit's public shareholders were treated fairly in transactions with Texas Air -- as, he says, they were. &quot;Other than that,&quot; he adds, &quot;it wasn't a concern of mine how many layers it came through.&quot;    Much of Texas Air's complexity happened by accident -- or by circumstance, at least. Though its planes were repainted in Continental colors, People Express remains a separate entity, an arrangement that, among others things, helps shield the rest of the empire from huge litigation claims. Frontier Airlines, though also a Continental unit, remains in Chapter 11 proceedings, which began just before its acquisition by Texas Air. Mr. Lorenzo created Texas Air Leasing so that Continental, which underwent its own bankruptcy reorganization from 1983 to 1986, could launch a feverish expansion -- leasing planes from Texas Air rather than trying to acquire them on its own.    Tax matters, too, drive much of Texas Air's complexity, even though as a big money-loser &quot;Texas Air is not a taxpayer on a consolidated basis under any circumstances,&quot; as one of the company's investment bankers puts it. The company's $7 billion in off-books liabilities consist of long-term rent payments for planes that Texas Air might otherwise own; renting them enables some profitable owner to take depreciation deductions and share the savings with Texas Air. And because the units have lost such stunning sums, dissolving their corporate identities would forfeit a windfall of future tax benefits, assuming they ever have profits to shelter.    Finally, Texas Air's financing has left Mr. Lorenzo some breathing room to wage his cost war with organized labor and to attack his operating problems. For this year and next, long-term debt will mature at a rate of only about $300 million a year; by 1992, the cost will have climbed to more than $500 million. And while the whole empire's debt-service costs have risen 485% in the past three years, the parent's debt-service cost has remained steady or declined slightly, without giving effect to relatively small preferred-dividend payments.    Thus, in 1988, Texas Air needs only to &quot;upstream&quot; $83.7 million to meet its obligations to debt holders, preferred shareholders and aircraft lessor. And while the company won't disclose how much money it expects to take in from units, it is clear the parent will be well provided for.    Eastern and Continental burned an estimated 2.5 billion gallons of fuel last year. For efficiency's sake, a single unit, Texas Air Fuel Management Inc., supplied the fuel-but it collected a penny a gallon from the airlines for doing so. Continental currently pays Texas Air more than $9 million a month in rent for 51 aircraft and 21 gates. Management fees and debt-guarantee fees totaled an estimated $32 million last year. The grand total, not counting any income from the plum reservations unit, gains on cash investments or any undisclosed income: about $150 million.    Even that won't be enough when the company, in 1990, has to begin paying off the huge debt issues that financed its pell-mell growth. But so far, nobody at Texas Air seems to be panicking.    &quot;At some point,&quot; says Robert Snedeker, senior vice president and treasurer, &quot;we would anticipate it would be appropriate to look for something beyond breaking even.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>