<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0131 </DOCNO><HL> 'Road to Vanuatu':A Media SpectacleStarring Two Libyans---Pair From the Mideast BringsChaos to an Island Resort;Stampede for Plane Seats---By James P. SterbaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST MDEST </IN><DATELINE> PORT VILA, Vanuatu  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ross Winter is a formerly jovial raconteur from New Zealand who came here three years ago to scuba-dive and manage the Teouma Village resort, a formerly restful assemblage of 16 bungalow apartments on Erakor Lagoon.    Like other expatriates who discover Vanuatu, Mr. Winter quickly fell in love with its unspoiled islands, warm people and pristine coral reefs. And he saw no reason thousands of vacationers and divers shouldn't be similarly smitten once Vanuatu got on tourist maps. Even a lot of neighboring Australians haven't heard of the place, partly because it was called New Hebrides until its independence from joint French-British colonial rule seven years ago and still is called that on a lot of maps.    But Mr. Winter figured that was a problem that could be easily solved by a little strategic promotion. So he applied for American foreign aid. And with a grant from the U.S. Agency for International Development, he led a delegation to Las Vegas earlier this year to attend the annual trade show of the diving-equipment manufacturers' association to extol Vanuatu as a diving destination.    Then one day in early May, Taher Marwan and Fathi Farhat arrived at Teouma Village in a Budget Rent-A-Car seeking accommodations. Only they weren't divers. They were Libyans. While they have since been described variously as &quot;cordial young men&quot; and even &quot;nice blokes,&quot; it is probably fair to say that Libyans and tourism haven't gone well together around the world in recent years. And while the presence of two actual Libyans probably wouldn't be as devastating to the tourist business as was Hurricane Uma, which whooshed through in February, it was cause for concern.    It was cause for outright alarm in Australia, where unidentified intelligence officials leaked fresh reports that the Libyans were in Vanuatu to establish a base from which to spread subversion and terror into a previously tranquil region. This set off a small stampede for airline seats to Port Vila by Australian reporters, photographers and television crews, who, according to David Jenkins, the foreign editor of the Sydney Morning Herald, were soon moving &quot;like foraging bees across an increasingly blighted landscape.&quot;    Initially, Mr. Marwan and Mr. Farhat checked into the Intercontinental Hotel, where the Aussie paparazzi recorded their every move and kept their phone ringing long into the night. The discovery of Vernon A. Walters, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, in the same hotel (on what a Walters spokesman described as a &quot;routine&quot; regional visit) brought yet more press attention, and the Libyans decided to move to more secluded quarters, namely Mr. Winter's place.    The Vanuatu government, meanwhile, announced that the Libyans hadn't followed protocol in coming here and would be asked to leave -- news quickly trumpeted around the world under headlines such as, &quot;Vanuatu to Eject Libyan Envoys.&quot; Only the government didn't say when. As secretary of the Vanuatu Hotels and Resorts Association, Mr. Winter acted as a proper and gracious host, only to find himself similarly besieged by the press, including requests for live radio interviews on call-in programs in Australia. Fortunately, a coup d'etat in neighboring Fiji sent the press corps scurrying for Suva.    But, oddly enough, the attention paid to Mr. Winter's tiny resort didn't abate. While other resorts were all but empty, his stayed fully booked. While nearby restaurants lapsed back into their tourist drought, Mr. Winter found himself turning down requests for his home-cooked steak dinners. All sorts of interesting strangers -- identifying themselves as New Zealand lumberjacks, Australian hurricane-relief workers, fisheries experts, missionaries, investment advisers and even &quot;just tourists&quot; -- were dropping by for a beer, a game of darts, home cooking and homey conversation.    It should be stated here that on the subject of his Libyan guests, Mr. Winter's only comment was &quot;no comment.&quot; He didn't even acknowledge their presence. The two Libyans, meanwhile, went about whatever business they had mainly from behind the closed blinds of their apartment. They weren't responding to phone calls.    Vanuatu, still suffering from something of a hangover from its colonial past, is the only South Pacific nation to join the nonaligned movement. Last year, it established diplomatic relations with Libya as well as with the U.S. and the Soviet Union. The Libyans want to set up a &quot;people's bureau&quot; -- Tripoli's terminology for its embassies -- here. Only Australia, Britain, France and New Zealand have embassies here at present.    Those who monitor Tripoli's activity in the region (Messrs. Marwan and Farhat are probably the most closely watched Libyans east of Suez) say Libyan subversion is well under way. The observers maintain that Moammar Gadhafi is providing both money and moral support to indigenous Melanesians struggling for independence from France in New Caledonia, guerrillas fighting the Indonesian government in West Irian and Timor, Moslem rebels fighting the Philippines government in Mindanao, and even radical aborigines and Maoris in Australia and New Zealand. For the past several years, Libya has scattered free plane tickets around the region for Vanuatuans, Caledonians, Fijians and Papua New Guineans to attend anti-imperialist conferences in Tripoli. Moscow does the same through leftist trade unions in New Zealand and Australia. Islander recipients usually explain that while such anti-West fests aren't everyone's first choice in world adventure, it beats staying home.    A couple of dozen Vanuatuans and Caledonians have gone to Libya for &quot;training&quot; in the past two years. Local officials say it was for training in public relations and public service. Those who have returned to Port Vila seem to be mostly bodyguards for Barak Sope, the 35-year-old secretary-general of the ruling Vanuaaku Party and the leading anti-West politician here.    Nonetheless, the New Zealand lumberjacks, among others, took more than a casual interest in the recent arrival at the local container wharf of two large metal crates. Mr. Sope and his bodyguards prevented customs officers from inspecting the crates, which the Sope contingent whisked off to Mr. Sope's fortresslike home on Ifira island in Port Vila Bay.    Mr. Sope, a former foreign minister, has no government job now, but residents say he mostly gets his way. He arranged the visit of the Libyans, and he and his party officials have met with them several times during their stay.    Pro-Western government officials and tourism promoters are quick to point out that Vanuatu is awash in missionaries of various Christian persuasions, that 1,400 sunburned Australian cruise-ship passengers alighted the other day to shop and eat, and that Vanuatu's capitalist tax-shelter haven hums along -- Libyans or no Libyans. And Prime Minister David Lange of New Zealand has labeled Libyan adventurism here &quot;small bikkies,&quot; or tiny biscuits.    But this doesn't do Mr. Winter much good. His wife has been away on a vacation to Australia. &quot;Actually, I am loath to say it,&quot; he says when asked about a dinner reservation, &quot;but I wish you'd call tomorrow.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>