<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870924-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Prices Surge Amid Signs StockpilesDidn't Rise as Much as Traders Expected---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   U.S. oil prices surged on spot and futures markets amid signs that weekly stockpiles hadn't risen as much as many traders had expected.    The rally, led largely by spurting heating oil prices, was also fueled by continued tensions in the Persian Gulf, analysts and traders said.    The American Petroleum Institute said late Tuesday that domestic distillate, gasoline and crude oil inventories edged only slightly higher for the week ended Friday. Many traders said they expected more significant inventory increases. Distillate stockpiles, moreover, stand at about 16 million barrels, or 11.4%, below year-ago levels, the API said.    &quot;This may be the first leg of the seasonal pick-up in heating oil,&quot; said Andrew Lebow, energy analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., New York.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil contracts for November delivery rose 38 cents, to $19.68 a barrel. November heating oil contracts surged 1.19 cents a gallon, to 53.96 cents; gasoline futures prices for November delivery rose 0.89 cent, to 50.5 cents a gallon.    Spot, or non-contract, prices also spurted. The spot price for West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, rose 45 cents, to $19.70 a barrel, and spot North Sea Brent, an abundantly traded European crude, edged up 15 cents in late trading, to $18.55 a barrel.    Meantime, vitriolic statements by Iranian President Ali Khamenei at a United Nations news conference led to further buying, some brokers said.    The Iranian leader said, among other things, that the U.S. &quot;has taken the first step&quot; toward a war with Iran. Monday, a U.S. helicopter attacked an Iranian ship that administration officials said was caught planting mines in the Persian Gulf.    Some analysts maintained, however, that much of the news coming from the Persian Gulf has already been discounted. Rather, the effect of continuing tensions &quot;is keeping a lot of would-be sellers from the market but not necessarily prompting a lot of buying,&quot; said James Ritterbusch, vice president, energy, at PaineWebber Inc. in Chicago.    In any case, chart-guided technical buying also fueled yesterday's rally, brokers and traders said. Many analysts, meantime, expect prices to continue to trade in a narrow range until the market receives estimates of this month's production figures from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, expected in the coming weeks.    In other futures markets yesterday:    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean and soybean meal futures rose amid continuing reports that rain is delaying what has been expected to be a strong grain harvest in the Soviet Union. The reports are fueling speculation that the Soviets might need to import more soybean meal than expected. The Soviet Union isn't a big buyer of U.S. soybeans, but some traders say it might boost its purchases because some its traditional sources, such as Brazil, are running short of meal. Yesterday's price rise was sparked by a Soviet newspaper article about factory workers in some small cities helping farmers. A U.S. Agriculture Department official said several Soviet newspapers are reporting harvest problems but said it isn't clear whether the harvest delays will increase Soviet import needs. Wheat prices fell as traders waited to see whether rumored U.S. purchases by China materialize.    COTTON: Futures prices rose sharply following a government report that showed domestic cotton consumption continued strong and stocks again declined. The December contract settled up the daily limit of two cents a pound, at 75.45 cents. March also advanced its limit and deferred positions ended with near limit gains. The near-most contract, October, closed 1.86 cents higher. One analyst said October didn't advance as much as December and March because today is the first day on which notices to deliver cotton against October contracts will be issued and some traders who held long, or buying, positions decided to sell to take profits. The Census Bureau, in a report issued yesterday morning, said daily cotton consumption by U.S. mills during August was 30,702 bales, compared with 27,020 bales in July and 26,708 bales in August 1986. The bureau said U.S. cotton inventories, as of the end of August, were down to about 3.69 million bales from 4.49 million in July and 8.28 million in August 1986.    COFFEE: Futures prices rose after coffee-producing countries agreed on a proposal for the restoration of export quotas to present to the full council of the International Coffee Organization in London. The December contract settled at $1.1285 a pound, a gain of 1.07 cents. The producer proposal differed only slightly from the quotas that were suspended in February 1986, analysts and trade sources said. Brazil accepted what was called a &quot;symbolic&quot; cut in its share, to 30.48% from 30.55% of a 58-million-bag global quota, and the French-speaking African group of growers, OAMCAF, also took a modest cut under the proposal. Brazil and OAMCAF previously had adamantly resisted any reductions in their quota shares. At least one analyst thought that the proposal faced possible rejection by consuming countries because it showed so little change from quotas that used to be in effect.    STOCK INDEXES: Index futures finished higher in choppy trading. &quot;A lot of traders were on the sidelines,&quot; Kurt Schultz, a senior stock-index analyst for Refco Group Ltd., Chicago, said. A lack of follow-through buying after Tuesday's gains made traders nervous, he said. The Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index contract for December settlement closed 0.90 higher at 324.90. Much of the day's trading followed the see-saw movement in the bond futures market. Treasury bond futures for December settlement closed down 1/8 at 83 7/16. </TEXT></DOC>