<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Medical Personnel Scramble to ReassessSafety Stance Following AIDS Infection---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Doctors, nurses and other medical personnel are scrambling to reassess their safety policies and practices in the wake of three new cases of occupational exposure to the AIDS virus.    The three cases of infection -- unlike earlier cases that involved major wounds with contaminated needles -- apparently resulted from a splash of blood in the face and mouth, seepage of blood into ungloved and chapped hands and a spill over the hands and forearms. The report by the Centers for Disease Control is to appear soon in the publication Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.    The early reaction from the medical community was that such cases needn't concern the &quot;worried well,&quot; who would avoid a handshake with AIDS patients, but that they pose some additional concerns for medical personnel who are in daily close contact with patients. For while such incidents constitute much more than &quot;casual contact&quot; with patients, the exposure involved in each case seems to be less than some doctors previously thought was required for the transmission of the virus causing acquired immune deficiency syndrome.    The news also underscores conflicting pressures on health-care workers to avoid contamination, but also to deliver a degree of personal and compassionate care that is difficult to convey across layers of gauze and rubber.    In a separate but related move, some doctors have proposed a test giving a short course of anti-viral drugs to health-care workers who suffer accidental exposure to the AIDS virus. Burroughs-Wellcome Co. is said to be considering such an experiment using its drug AZT, provided the trial were properly controlled.    Gloves, gowns, masks and goggles already are part of the CDC's recommended safety precautions for medical and laboratory personnel who come into contact with patients' blood and other bodily fluids. However, observance of such rules is very sketchy, doctors said.    &quot;Originally, doctors dressed like astronauts,&quot; says Jerome Groopman, a physician at New England Deaconness Hospital in Boston. &quot;Later, people got sloppy.&quot; Some institutions actively discourage personnel from wearing protective clothing when merely entering a patient's room or delivering food or medicines because it may deepen the sense of isolation AIDS patients experience.    Norma Watson, a nurse, has sued San Francisco General Hospital for the right to gown and glove -- but hospital personnel familiar with the case counter that only casual contact was at stake in the case, not massive exposure to blood. A hospital spokeswoman declined to comment on the suit. The San Francisco city attorney, who is representing the hospital, couldn't be reached for comment.    Elsewhere, health-worker unions and dental groups are voicing heightened concern for their occupational safety. A recent survey of California dentists -- many of whom now don gloves and goggles before drilling -- disclosed that most feel a responsibility to treat AIDS patients but a surprising three-fourths acknowledged they would rather not do so and prefer to send them elsewhere. The National Union of Hospital and Health Care Employees, which represents 150,000 health-care workers nationwide, requested urgent meetings with the secretaries of the U.S. Labor Department and the Department of Health and Human Services to discuss the new findings.    &quot;We've looked at these cases very hard,&quot; said James Hughes, CDC's director of hospital infections program. &quot;We've decided they indicate a need to reemphasize (rather than change) existing policy.&quot; He urged workers to adopt &quot;some reasonable middle ground. It may be people have become cavalier (about safety). Though the risk is small, it's not zero.&quot;    At San Francisco General Hospital, physicians agreed with the CDC assessment. &quot;Our feeling is, existing policies are adequate,&quot; said Julie Gerberding, a physician who directs a study of health-care workers there. She said a study of more than 500 hospital employees, who are subject to frequent needle wounds and splashes of blood, hasn't turned up a single known case of infection so far.    &quot;That tells you the risks are very, very low, &quot; she said. However, Grace Lusby, a registered nurse who directs San Francisco General's infection control program, acknowledged, &quot;A lot of people haven't been wearing gloves when they should have.&quot;    Doctors around the country varied in their reaction to what appears to be cases of infection through the small lesions of chapped hands, or through mucous membranes of the mouth. Many other viruses -- ranging from the rhinovirus that causes the common cold to potentially fatal Hepatitis B virus -- can infect people through mucous membranes, moist tissue that lines the nose, mouth and eyes.    &quot;I didn't think chapped hands would permit the virus to get through,&quot; said Michael Grieco, chief of allergy, clinical immunology and infectious diseases of St. Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center in Manhattan. He said he was skeptical about the oral exposure because the individual later suffered a needle scratch, which he speculated might have played a role in transmitting the virus.    Dr. Groopman of Boston said he wasn't surprised by the possible oral exposure because he has documented cases of AIDS patients whose only known exposure to the virus has been through intimate oral contact with their partners.    Some doctors said one of the three cases of infection -- in which the health-care worker stanched a patient's bleeding wound by compressing a gauze pad with bare hands -- involved a frank breach of good practice.    &quot;The sense from our nurses is that this is something they would not do,&quot; said David Busch a doctor and infectious-disease consultant at Children's Hospital of San Francisco. &quot;Masking and gloving isn't cool for carrying a patient tray. Gloving is cool for handling blood.&quot;    But the most vulnerable arena for doctors and nurses -- emergency care -- doesn't always permit cool and deliberate safety precautions. Indeed, one doctor recently told of an incident in which a frenzied resuscitation attempt was climaxed when a physician tossed a bloody syringe over his shoulder, striking a nurse behind him. And Johns Hopkins University doctors recently reported a surprisingly high 3% of patients admitted into the emergency room tested positive for the AIDS virus.    All this underscores the need to presume infectious risk. With so many healthy carriers of the virus -- the CDC estimates 1.5 million in the U.S. alone -- Dr. Busch says: &quot;You don't always know who is a carrier. You need to assume everybody's blood is a risk item. And I'm not just talking about AIDS. I'm talking about hepatitis as well.&quot;    &quot;You don't want to become a blood brother with anybody,&quot; he said. </TEXT></DOC>