<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0013 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Genetic Engineers Seek WaysTo Improve Food Processing---By David StippStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DNAP BIOT CRIC DOWFOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN><TEXT>   BIOTECHNOLOGY PROMISES to spill a cornucopia of improved foods into America's dining rooms over the next few years. Researchers are working on crunchier carrots, crispier celery and tastier popcorn. Gene tinkerers also are working with cheese, beer, corn and coffee.    But genetically molding cheaper, more nutritious or better tasting food is tricky. When developing a new drug, genetic engineers typically identify a single human gene, then cut and paste it into a simple bacteria cell. But improving a peach's flavor might require altering dozens of genes associated with different taste-affecting chemicals.    &quot;We're talking about an orchestra of genes,&quot; says William R. Sharp, a scientist with DNA Plant Technology Corp., a Cinnaminson, N.J.-based biotechnology concern. &quot;We're still quite ignorant about what genes are responsible for traits like texture, taste and fragrance.&quot; Moreover, he adds, scientists haven't yet figured out how to stitch desired genes into plants and animals as they have into single-celled organisms.    But some chemicals involved in food processing are relatively simple and can be genetically engineered in microorganisms in much the same way that drugs are. And during the past five years, biotechnology researchers have developed techniques -- falling somewhere between gene splicing and traditional plant breeding -- to speed production of plants with new, desired qualities. Indeed, DNA Plant Technology sponsors focus groups with consumers to find out what they want in the food plants that the company's scientists are redesigning. Food processors such as Campbell Soup Co., General Foods Corp. and Hershey Foods Corp. are helping to fund DNA Plant Technology's work.    THIS SPRING, BEER TASTERS with the Brewing Research Foundation of Surrey, England, plan to sip, swirl and swallow one of the first genetically engineered light beers. The beer will be made with yeast genetically altered by BioTechnica International Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., to reduce fattening starches.    Since the 1960s, when light beer was invented by a diabetic Swiss researcher worried about the starches' effects on blood sugar, brewers have made low-calorie beer in two ways. The lightest lights are made with an added enzyme that turns starch into sugar, which normal yeast then ferments into alcohol. Example: Miller Brewing Co.'s Lite beer, which has 96 calories a bottle. Other brewers, such as Anheuser-Busch Cos., make somewhat less-light beer by using naturally occurring enzymes in barley to break down starch during an extended brewing process. Anheuser-Busch's Bud Light has about 110 calories a bottle, a third less than regular Budweiser.    In the past few years, researchers have genetically tailored a few experimental yeasts that produce starch-eating enzymes, potentially saving costs of added enzymes or longer brewing. BioTechnica claims to have gone one step further by inventing a way to insert genes for the enzymes into any brewer's yeast -- that's important because different beers are made with different yeasts.    Researchers with Britain's Bass PLC recently drank some experimental gene-spliced beer they had brewed. &quot;It tasted precisely the same&quot; as regular low-calorie beer, says Edward Hinchliffe, a Bass scientist and one of the volunteer tasters. In theory, gene-spliced light could taste even better than beer made with added enzymes, which tend to produce compounds that impart a &quot;sharp, cidery flavor,&quot; says Rogers Yocum, a BioTechnica scientist.    CHEESE MAKERS FACE a perennial shortage of calves' stomachs, which provide rennin, a substance that curdles milk in cheese making. In fact, about two-thirds of U.S. cheese is made with a kind of rennin extracted from microbes. That gets the job done, but some traditionalists say it hurts yield and flavor.    To increase supplies of calf rennin, researchers at Collaborative Research Inc. of Bedford, Mass., have grafted genes for it into bacteria and yeast. The company recently won a U.S. patent for the process. Dow Chemical Co. has bought rights to the technique and is negotiating to sell it to cheese makers.    But some scientists believe extract containing rennin taken from calves' stomachs contains impurities that contribute to cheese's taste. So researchers may have to add such impurities to genetically engineered pure rennin to give cheese an old-fashioned flavor.    DEVELOPING A HYBRID with traditional plant-crossing methods can take a decade or more. But with a recently perfected technique called somaclonal variation -- which involves growing new plants from a few plant cells -- scientists can fashion plants with desired traits in about three years.    Using the method, DNA Plant Technology has made a dense, low-water tomato desired by soup and ketchup makers. The concern also is working on popcorn so tasty that consumers won't be tempted to blanket it with unhealthful quantities of butter and salt.    More exotic hybrids may result from a method called protoplast fusion, which can be used to merge cells of different plant species. Scientists already have used it to make a &quot;pomato&quot; plant, although its tomatoes and potatoes were too small for commercial use. A less successful effort produced a plant with cabbage roots and radish leaves, but no cabbages or radishes. Still, Mr. Sharp of DNA Plant Technology says the method promises to speed production of useful hybrids from different strains of the same species. </TEXT></DOC>