<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870320-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Chairman of Jefferies to Admit Felonies,Settles SEC Market Manipulation Charge---He Aids U.S. InvestigationOf American ExpressOffering, Sources Say---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JEFG WNEWSSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK </DATELINE><TEXT>   Boyd L. Jefferies, chairman of Jefferies Group Inc., the Los Angeles-based brokerage firm that pioneered off-market trading and became a major force in takeovers, agreed to plead guilty to two felony counts of securities law violations.    And, according to people familiar with the government's investigation, Mr. Jefferies also has implicated others in the securities industry's rapidly widening scandal, including individuals believed to have manipulated the price of an offering by American Express Co. of Fireman's Fund Corp. securities last year.    Mr. Jefferies also settled, without admitting guilt, related charges by the Securities and Exchange Commission that he engaged in multiple violations of securities laws as a participant in a market manipulation scheme, and in a separate scheme with takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky to &quot;park&quot; stock.    Parking stock occurs when an investor buys stock for another who doesn't want to be identified as the owner. The SEC charged that, in certain cases, Mr. Jefferies helped mask Mr. Boesky's identity, and that in others the arrangement was reversed.    The developments are dramatic confirmation that the government's investigation has moved far beyond insider trading. People familiar with the investigation said Mr. Jefferies, who is cooperating fully with the government, has described other instances of parking and stock manipulation, suggesting that the illegal practices have been widespread on Wall Street.    In a letter to shareholders of publicly traded Jefferies Group, Mr. Jefferies, who resigned yesterday as chairman, said, &quot;I fully accept sole responsibility for these transactions&quot; and &quot;it is with deep personal sorrow and regret that I leave the company that has been my life for the past 25 years.&quot; He emphasized that neither he nor the company engaged in insider trading and didn't breach &quot;any trust or confidence placed in us by our customers.&quot;    As part of his settlement, the 56-year-old Mr. Jefferies was barred from the securities industry for at least five years and placed his personal 13% stake in Jefferies Group in a voting trust.    Frank Baxter, 50, who has been president and chief operating officer of Jefferies, became the new chief executive.    In national over-the-counter trading, Jefferies's shares closed at $11, down 25 cents.    The SEC also censured Jefferies andamp; Co., the company's securities trading unit, and ordered the unit to retain an outside consultant to review its procedures designed to detect violations of securities laws. No fines were imposed. On Wall Street, the penalties were generally deemed to be light, given the scope of the offenses charged, and suggest that Mr. Jefferies's cooperation is important to the government.    The market manipulation charge was the most startling of the offenses alleged yesterday by the SEC because it has nothing to do with Mr. Boesky or insider trading, and implicates other individuals and firms. Mr. Jefferies was charged with manipulating the price of a stock involved in a 1986 secondary public stock offering at the request of an unnamed person. Allegedly, he bought huge blocks of the stock at or near the close of trading to boost its price, thereby affecting the price of the public offering the next day.    The SEC refused to identify the person or the companies involved. But people familiar with the government's investigation said the transaction described is an eight-million unit offering of stock and warrants of Fireman's Fund by American Express last May. American Express received $332 million from the offering, which was underwritten by a syndicate led by Salomon Brothers Inc. and Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., an American Express subsidiary.    According to the SEC charges, Jefferies, at the request of the unnamed individual, agreed to drive up the stock price by buying the blocks. In return, the person agreed to indemnify Jefferies for any loss incurred in buying and holding the stock. Jefferies subsequently sold its shares at a loss and was reimbursed. To disguise the payment, Jefferies issued a fraudulent invoice to the person for alleged &quot;investment banking services,&quot; and later, at the person's request, issued another fraudulent invoice to someone else.    The people familiar with the case wouldn't identify any of the individuals involved, but said the person who initiated the arrangement had ties to officials of American Express. The SEC noted that the issuer had received firm commitments from its underwriters for the offering, meaning that the underwriters bore the risks of any decline in the price of the stock just before the offering.    Neither American Express, Shearson, Salomon nor any individuals at those firms were charged with wrongdoing in connection with the Jefferies case. Both the SEC and the U.S. attorney's office said investigations of the offering are continuing.    Spokesmen for American Express and Salomon Brothers declined to comment.    The &quot;parking&quot; charges, while extensive, came as less of a surprise. This newspaper reported last November that Mr. Jefferies was under investigation, and later disclosed that a $3 million payment from Ivan F. Boesky Corp. to Jefferies was being examined by the SEC as part of a suspected parking scheme. That invoice, purportedly for &quot;investment advisory and corporate financial services,&quot; was identified yesterday by the SEC as an important part of the alleged parking scheme between Mr. Boesky and Mr. Jefferies. The similar fraudulent invoice prepared by Mr. Jefferies in connection with the market manipulation scheme is entirely separate, the SEC alleged.    As alleged by the SEC, Boesky and Jefferies entities secretly held stock positions belonging to the other, and agreed to &quot;buy back&quot; the positions and reimburse each other for carrying costs and any losses incurred on the holdings. Periodically, the two netted out the profits on the holdings, the SEC charged.    The agency charged that in one instance last March, involving a $27 million, 500,000-share position in G.D. Searle andamp; Co. parked by Mr. Boesky with Jefferies, the price dropped about $7 a share, and Mr. Jefferies demanded that Mr. Boesky buy back the stake and repay him immediately for part of the loss. Mr. Boesky did so, giving Mr. Jefferies the payment of about $3 million, and Mr. Jefferies in turn supplied Mr. Boesky with the phony invoice, the SEC charged.    The SEC charged that besides Searle, Mr. Boesky parked with Jefferies an $11.7 million, 810,000-share position in Cooper Laboratories Inc. and a $17.3 million, 600,000-share position in Southland Financial Corp.    Mr. Jefferies, in turn, parked with Boesky entities positions in American Broadcasting Cos., Ideal Basic Industries Inc., ITT Corp., Phillips Petroleum Co., Pioneer Corp. and Texas Oil andamp; Gas Corp. -- a total of $43 million in stock -- the SEC alleged.    As reported, the SEC is also examining a $5.3 million payment last March from Ivan F. Boesky Corp. to Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. After the payment was made and questioned by Mr. Boesky's auditors, Drexel, a major securities firm, sent Mr. Boesky an invoice for &quot;consulting and advisory services.&quot;    The government is seeking to determine whether the payment was actually part of a parking arrangement involving Mr. Boesky and Drexel similar to the one between Messrs. Boesky and Jefferies, according to persons familiar with the investigation. Drexel has repeatedly characterized the payment as an &quot;investment banking fee&quot; and denied any impropriety. Mr. Jefferies is understood to be providing new details about Drexel's relationship with Jefferies.    At a news conference yesterday afternoon, U.S. Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani said Mr. Jefferies will plead guilty &quot;in the very near future&quot; to a criminal violation of margin requirements and aiding and abetting the falsification of the records of a Boesky-controlled brokerage house. He said it was Mr. Boesky who first implicated Mr. Jefferies.    As reported, Mr. Boesky has agreed to plead guilty to one felony charge for his role in the scandal. Mr. Giuliani added that the relationship between the Jefferies case and the massive insider-trading scandal &quot;will become clearer in the next couple of weeks.&quot;    The SEC said that, among other provisions, Mr. Jefferies violated anti-fraud laws, disclosure requirements, books and record-keeping provisions, net capital requirements and margin requirements.    As the Justice Department's charges reflect, willful violations of many provisions of the securities laws are criminal offenses. While these laws have long been on the books, many on Wall Street have taken a cavalier attitude toward the more technical aspects of securities laws.    Peter H. Morrison, a partner in the New York law firm of Morrison Cohen andamp; Singer, Mr. Jefferies' lawyer, noted that Mr. Jefferies &quot;was accommodating customers. He grew up in the business accommodating customers. The rules are changing.&quot;    ---   William Power contributed to this article.    ---       A Chronology of the Stock-Trading Scandal   May 12, 1986 -- SEC charges Dennis Levine of DrexelBurnham Lambert Inc. with making $12.6 million since mid-1980from insider trading. SEC also names as defendant BernhardMeier, Mr. Levine's broker at Bank Leu International inNassau, Bahamas.   May 13, 1986 -- Mr. Levine is arrested and charged withobstructing justice for attempting to destroy records. He isreleased on a $5 million bond.   June 5, 1986 -- Mr. Levine pleads guilty to four felonycharges and agrees to cooperate with the government in itsinvestigation. Settling civil insider-trading charges, heagrees to pay $11.6 million.   July 1, 1986 -- SEC charges Robert Wilkis and Ira Sokolow,former investment bankers at Lazard Freres andamp; Co. and ShearsonLehman Brothers Inc., with exchanging confidentialinformation with Mr. Levine. They settle with SEC. Mr. Wilkisallegedly made about $3 million from insider trading. Mr.Sokolow agreed to give up $120,000 in profits.   July 3, 1986 -- David Brown, investment banker at Goldman,Sachs andamp; Co., resigns amid SEC investigation.   July 14, 1986 -- Ilan Reich, takeover lawyer at Wachtell,Lipton, Rosen andamp; Katz, resigns amid government investigation.   Sept. 4, 1986 -- Mr. Sokolow and Mr. Brown plead guilty tocriminal charges of passing stolen information to Mr. Levine.   Oct. 3, 1986 -- Mr. Reich is indicted by federal grandjury in the Levine case.   Nov. 14, 1986 -- Ivan F. Boesky agrees to pay $100 millionpenalty for trading on insider information supplied by Mr.Levine from February 1985 to February 1986; agrees to pleadguilty to unspecified criminal charges.   Nov. 18-19, 1986 -- Drexel is identified as being underinvestigation for possible securities law violations inconnection with the Boesky probe.   Jan. 28, 1987 -- Michael Davidoff, former head trader forMr. Boesky, pleads guilty to one count of securities fraudfor violating capital requirements at Mr. Boesky's firm. Mr.Davidoff, who had close contacts with many Wall Streettraders, agrees to cooperate with the government.   Feb. 11-12, 1987 -- Three top Wall Street figures --Robert M. Freeman, a Goldman Sachs partner, Timothy L. Tabor,a former official at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., and Merrill Lynchand Co.; and Richard Wigton, a Kidder vice president --arrested and charged with an information-swapping conspiracythat allegedly made Kidder millions of dollars in illegalprofits. Mr. Freeman was also charged with trading for hisown account on the information.   Mar. 19, 1987 -- Boyd L. Jefferies, Jefferies Group Inc.chairman, agrees to plead guilty to two felony counts ofsecurities law violations; He settles SEC charges that heengaged in multiple violations of securities laws as aparticipant in a market manipulation scheme, and in aseparate scheme with Boesky to &quot;park&quot; stock.</TEXT></DOC>