<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880325-0158 </DOCNO><HL> Toward a Dreary Summer </HL><AUTHOR> Vermont Royster </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   I don't know about you, but for me this 1988 presidential race is coming right up against the threshold of boredom. I haven't seen its like in 50 years of journalistic observing.    Part of this is due to the candidates. I can't remember such a colorless field. I might have to make an exception to that remark for Gary Hart, the down again, up again, gone again candidate, but that's only because he couldn't keep his pants on. Except for that I doubt if the voters would even come out to look at him.    As for the rest of the field, even the front-runners come across as pretty lackadaisical. Or anyway they do when you can remember FDR, Harry Truman, Jack Kennedy, Herbert Hoover, Hubert Humphrey, Adlai Stevenson or even Alf Landon. Coolidge, old Silent Cal, would outshine the lot of them.    I can't remember either a campaign so marked by snide remarks among Republicans about each other, or Democrats about their party colleagues. There've been some pretty rough and dirty campaigns in the past -- think of FDR hammering away at Hoover, or Lyndon Johnson at Barry Goldwater; in the latter campaign we were introduced to the dirty TV ads now so common. But in those days the target was the real &quot;enemy,&quot; the opposition party.    Another part of the boredom, I suspect, is the plethora of runners in both parties, many of whom had slim prospects to begin with. But that forced the press, print and electronic, to pay attention to them as they flitted here and there lest we be accused of unfairness. The result has been snippets of this fellow or that one with rarely a chance to learn what he said about the issues, even if he did so.    But part of the boredom comes from the sheer longevity of the campaigning. It got started in earnest last fall and a campaign from November to November is just too much for anybody's attention span.    That's bound to make you a bit envious of the British system. There the prime minister calls for an election, often without much notice, and then sets election day hardly ever more than six weeks away, sometimes less. Maybe that doesn't give parliamentary hopefuls much time to get organized, but they seem to do it and it certainly cuts down on the wear and tear on the electorate.    I happen to live in North Carolina these days, one of the states in the great &quot;Super Tuesday&quot; primary held in 20 states. The consequence was that once Iowa and New Hampshire were out of the way we got inundated by the crowded field of four Republicans and six Democrats. Every day one or another of them flitted around the state getting 15 seconds on the TV and scattered mentions in the newspapers. Distracted us right in the middle of the basketball season.    The best thing you could say about Super Tuesday was that it was better than having 20 separate primaries stretched out until convention time. Even as it is we will have primaries strung out until June 7, when we will hear from California and New Jersey, if anybody is still listening. That's barely a month before the Democratic convention in Atlanta.    Now I see where some of the candidates have dropped out, and for that relief much thanks. The only dropout that surprises me, and saddens me a bit, is Jack Kemp. He came to politics as the thinking man's football player, played a major role in Mr. Reagan's election and in shaping the president's program. But somewhere along the way he lost his playing-field charisma. He came across on TV as rather spiritless, and that, I think, is what done him in.    My younger journalistic colleagues still out on the hustings seem to think George Bush may lock up the Republican nomination; and the present Democratic leader is Gov. Michael Dukakis, followed closely by Jesse Jackson.    The Rev. Jackson, no doubt about it, has flair and fervor, which has gained him white votes as well as black. What he doesn't have is any experience in political office and he's erratic in many of his oratorical flights. Messrs. Bush and Dukakis both have good credentials in political-office experience. Mr. Dukakis is governor of Massachusetts, a successful one who has satisfied the voters with his management of the state. Mr. Bush has been a two-term vice president, a former congressman with experience on the Ways and Means Committee, ambassador to the U.N. and director of the CIA.    Yet neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Dukakis has a memorable personality or that mysterious thing called &quot;presence,&quot; which only Jimmy Carter lacked among our recent presidents, and he wasn't a successful one.    So a race between Messrs. Bush and Dukakis, if that's what it turns out to be, hardly promises any excitement to stir up the voters. Yet willy-nilly, the already long presidential race will stretch out until November, nine months more. And one way or another somebody will be our next president.    Whoever he is he will have his hands full of problems, foreign and domestic. The government's finances cry out for a strong president to grapple with them and to persuade a chaotic Congress to accept his program. All over the world there are knotty problems for the U.S., from Latin America (Nicaragua and Panama) to the Middle East. Our presidency is not just a ceremonial office; its demands are such as to try any man's spirit, intelligence and political skill.    What these candidates think about these problems I've no ideas. True, Mr. Bush has vowed no tax increases; Mr. Dukakis promises &quot;good management.&quot; Every candidate has his one-liners on this topic or that. What I've not heard or read from any of them is a well-thought-out statement on any major issue. The kind of thing that makes you think &quot;a mind has been at work on this topic.&quot; So beyond their personality or their past record they are all mysteries.    Once the nominees are chosen, whoever they are, I hope we will get a clearer view of how they think about this country's foreign policy, what it should be, and how they would deal with our economic problems, not in one-liners but in thoughtful presentations.    It's true that every president, once in office, changes when confronted with the realities unperceived when he was on the outside looking in. But if the election is not to be a game of blindman's bluff, the voters deserve more than they have had amid all these primary scramblings.    Otherwise we are in for a long, dreary summer, and many voters may well be too bored to vote at all.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>