<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870717-0152 </DOCNO><HL> The Real Issue in Corporate Takeovers---By Beryl W. Sprinkel</HL><DD> 07/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   The lexicon of corporate governance is notorious for its hyperbole. Even the most basic terms like &quot;takeover&quot; and &quot;raider&quot; convey pejorative, militarist images. There is, therefore, a danger that semantics will displace substance. However, a substantial body of scientific research exists on the effects of corporate-control transactions and corporate-governance issues. The policy debate should center on this empirical evidence, not on the rhetoric.    There is also a danger that concern over Wall Street's recent insider-trading scandals will overshadow the technical proposals to alter corporate governance contained in recent legislative proposals. But insider trading and corporate governance are two separate issues. To the degree that insider trading is associated with tender offers, it is only because tender offers are like other pieces of information that indicate the potential for dramatic profits. Any dramatic event will tempt insiders before it is publicly disclosed. There is nothing unique about corporate-control transactions in this regard.    Furthermore, it is critical to recognize that bidders in tender offers do not necessarily gain from insider trading. To the contrary, insider trading often harms the bidder and gives him a strong incentive to prevent it.    A change in corporate control occurs when an alternative management team believes it can manage a corporation's resources more productively than can the incumbent management. For this reason, the rival management team is willing to offer a premium for the corporation's shares over the present market price. Until the bidder announces his intentions, the prospect of an imminent change in corporate control is known to the rival management team and its professional advisers, but not to the public. Such information is analogous to the information, prior to public disclosure, that a mining company would have upon discovering a valuable new mineral deposit.    Insider purchases made before the announcement of a tender offer hurt bidders because they drive up the price of the target's stock. Such purchases reduce the return to investing in the production of information about good takeover targets.    Nothing about this variety of insider trading is unique to the corporate takeover process. To argue that tender offers should be restricted in order to prevent insider trading would be analogous to arguing that mineral exploration should be restricted in order to prevent insider trading before the disclosure of a valuable discovery.    Corporate-control transactions produce information that is valuable to someone predisposed to committing insider trading. But the meaning of that information is that new management can be expected to run a corporation more productively and cause shareholder wealth to increase.    The relevant policy debate over corporate takeovers is narrow in focus. The issue is not mergers in general, nor is it tender offers in general. The issue is strictly confined to unsolicited changes in corporate control. Contested tender offers in 1986 accounted for only 1.2% of all mergers and acquisitions. It is simply false to suggest that contested tender offers are reducing competition throughout the economy. Various statistics support the conclusion that the intensity of merger activity during the 1980s has not been greater than at other periods during the 20th century.    Put simply, the relevant policy question is: Do unsolicited corporate-control transactions improve the process of corporate governance, thereby benefiting shareholders and increasing the productivity of the corporation? If, on balance, they do, the transactions are beneficial and should not be impeded by federal or state policy.    The available evidence shows that unsolicited transactions that result in mergers and acquisitions increase national wealth. These transactions improve efficiency, transfer scarce resources to higher valued uses, and stimulate effective corporate management. They also help recapitalize firms so that their financial structures are more in line with prevailing market conditions. There is no evidence that mergers and acquisitions (including friendly ones) have caused anti-competitive price increases on any systematic basis.    Public policy on takeovers should not be based on the outcomes of individual transactions. It must be based on aggregate trends describing the consequences of contested corporate-control transactions as a whole.    Maximizing shareholder wealth by enhancing a competitive market for the management of public corporations serves the national interest and should be the guiding principle in issues of corporate governance. In the process of maximizing the wealth of America's shareholders, we create benefits for the economy as whole.    Although estimates of the magnitude of the wealth increases for shareholders vary, recent studies find average gains in the range of 16% to 34% of the value of the target's shares. The data regarding changes in the value of acquiring companies are not as uniform. In my opinion the best available evidence shows that the value of acquiring companies' shares also increases as the result of takeovers, but that the amount of the increase has decreased over time.    That evidence is consistent with the operation of an efficient capital market. On average, and over the long run, bidders will not desire to be able to complete acquisitions unless the acquisitions are expected to be profitable for the bidding firm. Indeed, bidders often terminate or reduce the price of their offers when scrutiny of the target leads them to conclude that the initial offer price was too high. Target stockholders will similarly refuse to sell their shares until their wealth increases as a result of the transaction.    The administration favors efforts to enhance the ability of shareholders to monitor the performance of management and to direct the control of their corporation. The administration opposes initiatives by the federal government that would impede the market for corporate control or dictate to shareholders how to structure the governance of their corporation. Sometimes shareholder self-determination takes the direct form of shareholder votes; other times it is undertaken indirectly by selling ownership in the firm. Shareholder self-determination also is undertaken collectively through corporate governance legislation at the state level. Any of these avenues is preferable to intrusive federal regulation of corporate governance.    Traditionally, the balance between management's need to act expeditiously in the interest of the corporation and the shareholders' right to call that action into account has been resolved at the level closest to the issue and the relevant facts -- by the shareholders of the corporation in the first instance, and then by state law, if necessary.    Two desirable results arise from placing corporate governance decisions as close to the shareholders as possible. First, the decision makers closest to the issue are likely to have the best information with which to make decisions. Second, the opportunity arises for experimentation with different rules of corporate governance.    Empirical evidence shows that the different approaches of different states produce competition that in turn encourages corporate resources to flow into the state whose rules for corporate governance maximize shareholder welfare. For these reasons, the administration believes that the federal government should not deny shareholders and the states the freedom to choose the corporate governance rules that best protect the investments that shareholders have made in a corporation.    The legislation now in Congress to restrict corporate takeovers would reduce competition in the market for corporate control and usurp the traditional authority of the states to regulate corporate governance.    ---   Mr. Sprinkel is chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers. The article is based on his testimony before the Senate Banking Committee on June 23 in response to the Proxmire bill. </TEXT></DOC>