<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871105-0051 </DOCNO><HL> The Peacemakers:Harried Judges RelyOn 'Special Masters'To Settle Tough Suits---Alabama Law Professor ProdsLitigators to Compromise;'He's Clearing the Docket'---Is It Assembly-Line Justice?---By Paul M. </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> RAHBANKRUPTCIES (BCY)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   The federal court in Cleveland seemed to be headed for a litigation logjam, so the judge called in Francis McGovern.    Hundreds of construction workers were demanding tens of millions of dollars for diseases allegedly caused by asbestos insulation. Two dozen manufacturers were girding for years of pretrial skirmishing.    Then in 1983 the court summoned Mr. McGovern, a University of Alabama law professor, to serve as the case's &quot;special master.&quot; He investigated, negotiated and twisted arms to get a settlement.    He fought lawyerly exaggeration and delay by devising a computer program to show exactly how much had been paid in other asbestos settlements and verdicts. Lawyers for some of the asbestos makers protested that their clients were hustled into paying for questionable claims. But the companies settled 500 cases in an unusually speedy four years, saving what the judge estimates at more than $5 million in legal fees.    Special masters such as Mr. McGovern are a new breed of peacemakers. Federal and state courts for many years have appointed special masters -- who usually are lawyers -- to handle mostly accounting tasks and other technical matters. The role expanded in the 1970s as masters were hired to carry out ambitious court orders to desegregate schools and reform prisons. These days the masters are wielding even more clout. They are taking the lead in settling enormous product-liability suits and other huge cases that threaten to paralyze the courts.    Although 90% of civil suits are settled without a trial verdict, courtroom adversaries often play a long and costly game of chicken before coming to terms. The increasing authority of special masters is challenging the assumption that justice is most likely to prevail when judges sit back and allow free-swinging confrontation.    Mr. McGovern offers judges a way to manage cases aggressively. &quot;The goal,&quot; he says, &quot;is to keep the parties honest.&quot;    Critics contend that the newly assertive masters are promoting assembly-line justice. Some big corporations fear that previous settlements will lock them into a losing pattern in product-liability suits. &quot;Generalizing from a statistical data base about what a particular case is worth doesn't fit my idea of what the court system is supposed to do,&quot; says Martin Murphy, an attorney for major asbestos producers.    Quiet deal-making also undermines the longstanding legal notion that defendants ought to meet their accusers publicly. Litigation gives society &quot;sagas where we define good and bad,&quot; says Judith Resnik, a law professor at the University of Southern California. Moreover, she says, &quot;How do we hold {masters} accountable for what they do?&quot;    Mr. McGovern, 41 years old, acknowledges that the &quot;jury is still out&quot; on the appropriateness of his tactics. But he emphasizes that the results are in: He has helped to settle 10,000 pesticide-pollution claims in Alabama and 10 years of strife over Great Lakes fishing rights. Now he is struggling to find ways for A.H. Robins Co. to settle with armies of personal-injury claimants. His work in the Robins case will receive intense scrutiny in hearings beginning today in Richmond, Va.    In the Cleveland asbestos cases, Mr. McGovern and another master presided over sessions at which lawyers' demands and counteroffers typically were hundreds of thousands of dollars apart. The masters then presented a narrow range of dollar amounts generated by their computer, based on data they had assembled from court records and lawyers' files. &quot;We knew the facts,&quot; says the other master, Eric Green, a Boston University law professor. &quot;We could reject the wild arguments, and it was hard for {the lawyers} to deny reality.&quot;    Most lawyers quickly compromised within the masters' suggested range, according to federal Judge Thomas Lambros. Today the settlement process has become so routine that the judge, unassisted, runs hearings involving 150 claims at a time. &quot;No depositions, no experts, no trial dates, no jurors summoned,&quot; he says. &quot;This thing actually works, and we're clearing the docket.&quot;    Mr. McGovern sees his job as forging compromise, not determining right and wrong. As a child, he says, &quot;I was the guy who settled schoolyard fights.&quot; Now, for a fee of $200 an hour, he is &quot;teaching big boys and girls that they're better off settling disputes on their own than at the mercy of lawyers and judges.&quot;    His style is one of folksy charm and humility. The professor, who favors horn-rimmed glasses and blue blazers, &quot;can become a real good ol' boy if that helps,&quot; says one lawyer. &quot;But he'll also wear you down&quot; with nonstop negotiations.    Judges often refrain from privately discussing possible settlements with one side in a case in order to avoid bias in their court rulings. Less fettered, Mr. McGovern presses constantly for accommodation. A look at two big federal court cases shows how he maneuvers, not always successfully, to accelerate compromise.    In Alabama, a federal judge brought in Mr. McGovern to pre-empt immense litigation over DDT disposal. About 10,000 people had sued Olin Corp. in the early 1980s for diseases allegedly caused by the chemical maker's dumping of the pesticide into a Tennessee River tributary.    Chances for a quick resolution appeared slim. The purported victims, their appetites whetted by a previous Olin settlement with a different group, expected &quot;more manna from heaven,&quot; the presiding judge, U.W. Clemon, recalls. Olin argued that many claimants couldn't prove that DDT caused their ailments and that in some cases the statute of limitations had expired. The company was ready to spend heavily on pretrial proceedings to wear down its opponents.    Mr. McGovern's unusual solution was to exclude attorneys from almost all preliminary investigations. Instead of enduring the usual written and oral interrogation by defense lawyers, plaintiffs answered questionnaires administered by college students who were trained by Mr. McGovern and were paid $4.25 an hour.    &quot;We were suspicious&quot; of the lawyer-free procedure, concedes M. Clay Alspaugh, a lead attorney for the plaintiffs. But Mr. McGovern &quot;convinced us that bringing out the facts this way would get our people their money faster.&quot;    The no-frills survey took nine months to complete but saved years of jousting and millions of dollars in legal fees, Judge Clemon says. Plaintiffs' attorneys obtained inexpensive medical and sociological information that isn't usually available in aggregate form. Olin got untutored answers from its opponents and saw almost 3,000 claims weeded out when some claimants failed to participate in the study.    Mr. McGovern brandished the survey's results in private negotiations to win concessions from both sides. He convinced the suing lawyers that many of their clients had weak cases. He used the same data to convince Olin that even if it survived most of the trials, some people with severe diseases might win jury jackpots. Meanwhile, Mr. McGovern disseminated the judge's view of important procedural issues, such as which claims might be barred from trial by the statute of limitations.    The cajoling paid off. Olin agreed to provide $15 million that will be distributed to claimants based on the McGovern questionnaire. At least two other courts are using similar surveys to speed settlement of complex cases.    Mr. McGovern's most frustrating assignment is to help resolve the more than 200,000 personal-injury claims currently pending against Robins, a Richmond-based maker of health care products. Instead of hastening a settlement, the special master so far seems to have inadvertently driven the two sides further apart.    Robins sought bankruptcy-law protection in August 1985 in order to freeze a tidal wave of suits by women who say they were hurt or rendered infertile by Robins's Dalkon Shield intrauterine contraceptive. Mr. McGovern was summoned to help estimate total claims in the case by creating a data base to extrapolate from past Dalkon Shield settlements and jury awards. Lawyers received his findings this summer under a court order of confidentiality.    Robins has publicly praised the special master's work, but its lawyers and financial advisers privately scoff at the notion of definitive neutral information. The estimating of claims, says one person close to the company, &quot;is all a statistics game.&quot; At court hearings beginning today, lawyers for Robins and the women are expected to cite the McGovern research to support estimates that diverge by $1 billion or more.    Mr. McGovern's research seems to have prompted the women to toughen their stance. Earlier this year the women's lead lawyer, Murray Drabkin, indicated privately that he would be willing to settle for $1.75 billion. But when Robins in August formally offered $1.77 billion to be paid into a trust fund over seven years, he rejected the proposal, charging that he could &quot;easily imagine&quot; thousands of victims getting only &quot;50 cents on the dollar&quot; for claims such as pelvic inflammatory disease and sterility.    Mr. Drabkin says he changed his mind after receiving &quot;new information.&quot; He refuses to elaborate, but other lawyers believe Mr. McGovern's data contributed to the switch.    If the parties remain at odds, Federal District Judge Robert Merhige Jr. has vowed to put his own price tag on the Dalkon Shield claims. He has the option of asking the professor himself to testify as to the amount the victims deserve. In that event, the judge might well base his decision on the professor's testimony, according to a person close to the court.    Should a lone law professor tip the scales in such an important case? Mr. McGovern won't comment. But he notes that the uncertainty over what he might say &quot;may convince {the opposing lawyers} to think quickly about accepting a compromise.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>