<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0140 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Architecture:Beyond Neon: New Ideas From an Ex-Enfant Terrible---By Ellen Posner</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Philadelphia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In January, the National Gallery in London made an astonishing decision. It named the American firm Venturi, Rauch andamp; Scott Brown to design it an extension that almost had to be controversial.    Robert Venturi was one of the first architects to challenge the tenets of orthodox modernism, by looking backward to mannerist, baroque and classical design and by paying attention to the pop art, conceptual art and the American commercial vernacular all around him.    So Mr. Venturi was a bold choice, but the museum's willingness to take a risk with him looked even rasher in the light of all the tumult that had already shaken its extension plans for years. Mr. Venturi is, in fact, the winner of the second competition. The British firm Ahrends, Burton andamp; Koralek won the first one in 1982. But its gridded modernist structure with a skinny tower topped by multiple flagpoles ran afoul of official planners, enraged the public and was even denounced by the Prince of Wales. He compared it to a fire station and called it a &quot;carbuncle.&quot;    At the core of all this hostility was not only anti-modernism but also a passion for context and a deep-rooted dislike for the jarring note. So Mr. Venturi might be just what the National Gallery needs. His early work showed an unusual sensitivity to existing conditions. In the houses he has been designing over the past several decades, Mr. Venturi has demonstrated an ability to use local forms and local imagery, whether in New England, Bermuda, the Rocky Mountains, or a New Jersey beach town. By exaggerating some elements and shifting the standard arrangement of others, he's been able to give each house a strong personality and presence and to make each one obviously contemporary.    When Venturi, Rauch andamp; Scott Brown unveiled its design for the extension in London in April, it was clear that Mr. Venturi (who is the firm's design principal) had used much of the same strategy there. The National Gallery's Corinthian columns and pilasters reappear in the stone facade of the extension but abstractly, asymmetrically and tightly clustered at the point closest to the main building. Farther away, they are joined and then replaced by small lamppost-like metal columns with colorful abstract capitals, which flank the recessed and retiring modernist metal-and-glass entrance.    In an elegantly worked out solution to contemporary museum problems, the Venturi design proposes a broad interior stair (a &quot;grand ascent&quot;) running along one glass-walled side of the building. It would shoot visitors past food, shopping, and entertainment, directly to the room-like galleries above.    This summer visitors to the National Gallery can see the Venturi model at the museum. It is both a practical exhibit and a symbol of Mr. Venturi's status within his own profession: iconoclastic, influential and yet sometimes almost an exile.    The house that he designed for his mother in suburban Chestnut Hill in the 1960s, for example, helped to usher in postmodernism with its historical allusion, its applied ornament and the intricate layering of its interior spaces. His book &quot;Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture&quot; (1966) argued, with wit and erudition, for the reintroduction of both to that art form, and is considered to be one of the most important architectural documents of the 20th century. But the book and the house were both perceived as assaults on the prevailing modernist orthodoxy. Mr. Venturi also seemed to challenge the early 20th-century idea of the architect as a heroic and revolutionary figure whose task was to create the world anew.    To make matters worse, in 1972, Mr. Venturi, with his wife Denise Scott Brown and their colleague Steven Izenour, produced a serious analysis of the symbolism of the Las Vegas strip (billboards, neon signs, architectural doo-dads) in &quot;Learning From Las Vegas.&quot; &quot;People thought we wanted to put neon signs in front of cathedrals,&quot; Ms. Scott Brown says. &quot;But that isn't what we meant.&quot; Nevertheless, at about the same time they did run a white neon tube across the choir of a Catholic church they were restoring in Philadelphia and kept it there until members of the congregation had it removed.    Clients have not flocked to the Venturis since that time. In fact, the handsome catalog of their work that Rizzoli has just published shows a disproportionate number of drawings and relatively few completed buildings. But in recent years, with the rise of postmodernism, commissions began to trickle in, and for increasingly significant projects: a series of buildings for Princeton University; the Laguna Gloria Art Museum in Austin, Texas; the Seattle Art Museum; the National Gallery extension. Last month an extension to the La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art joined the list.    So, as they are fond of saying, the Venturis have gone from being young Turks to old fogeys without ever having been establishment in between. Mr. Venturi is 62, reserved in dress and manner, very busy and visibly uncomfortable with his earlier reputation as the &quot;enfant terrible&quot; of architecture. &quot;We had a knowledge of and an interest in history,&quot; he says. &quot;Is that radical? Or is that conservative?&quot; And he doesn't see what was particularly astonishing about his firm's acknowledgement of popular culture and the commercial vernacular. &quot;What about when people said that machines were beautiful?&quot; he says. &quot;Or that factories were beautiful?&quot;    &quot;We never said that we 'liked' Las Vegas,&quot; Ms. Scott Brown adds, explaining that it provided &quot;an aesthetic jolt&quot; that seemed worth investigating. She and Mr. Venturi used to play a game together at the time, she says. They called it &quot;I can like something worse than you can like.&quot;    The game involved more than just kidding around. Among their firm's project proposals over the years were a gigantic, punning &quot;big apple&quot; sculpture for Times Square in New York. Their idea for the Philadelphia Bicentennial celebration of 1976 was to avoid such humdrum images as the Liberty Bell and Independence Hall, in favor of plainer symbols of local life -- the hoagie and the soft pretzel.    When, however, they were given a chance to build, they were capable of considerable sublety and calm, but some of their early buildings had a grittiness that was hard to like. Mr. Venturi refers to this effect as bearing &quot;the sweat stains of struggle.&quot;    Not all of their recent work has been entirely successful either. Gordon Wu Hall at Princeton, for example, has a richly elegant masonry-and-glass exterior but is ordinary inside. Yet there is nearly always an original touch in their work. They combine modernism and postmodernism with a defter touch than those who imitate them, often with a disarming gentleness.    It has been said that Mr. Venturi will be remembered for his theories and for the stylistic freedom he made possible for other architects -- but not for his buildings. These days, however, that assessment seems premature. With an international practice and actively preparing designs for the building type that has become emblematic of our time -- the art museum -- Mr. Venturi will have an opportunity to go beyond his astute and wry responses to what is. He can now begin to address human aspirations -- or what might be. </TEXT></DOC>