<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861223-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Understanding a New Economy---By Ronald K. Shelp and Gary W. Hart</HL><DD> 12/23/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   The U.S. is adjusting to the most profound economic transition since the industrial revolution. No longer are the majority of our workers employed in producing goods and commodities. They are engaged in producing services and working with information. In 1981, the Labor Department predicted that by 1990, 71% of the work force would be in services; 75% already is -- and 1990 is three years away.    But while we have a new economy, most of us continue to think in terms of the old one. We still regard the U.S. as primarily an industrial economy.    This tendency is reinforced by the problems confronting industrial America, where about 2.6 million manufacturing jobs were lost in the past six years. High-tech manufacturing industries are in trouble as well. President Reagan's Commission on Industrial Competitiveness warned: &quot;Even in high technology -- often referred to as the 'sunrise' industries -- the United States has lost world market share in 7 out of 10 sectors. . . . Our bilateral electronics trade deficit with Japan is likely to surpass our deficit in automobiles.&quot;    While we should be focusing on the problems of these industries, we are shortsighted if we fail to address the service/information sector as well. The same kind of domestic neglect in the face of foreign competition that cost us our industrial lead is beginning to appear in service trade. Britain, France, Japan, Sweden and other nations are putting programs in place to promote their service industries. Even the advanced developing countries like Taiwan and Korea will not long remain content with being primarily industrial nations. They, too, are determined to carve out a niche in the world of services.    The ambition of other nations is taking its toll. In four years the service-trade surplus has plummeted nearly 60%, so that in 1985 the balance of service trade was barely in the black.    Redressing this situation requires understanding an economy as different from manufacturing America as was the industrial revolution from the agrarian society that preceded it. Yet we are easily diverted from this task. There are conflicts between advocates of older and new industries, with smokestack politicians and labor leaders caricatured as backward-looking dinosaurs and high-tech proponents as Buck Rogers enthusiasts who are indifferent to working people. Our thinking is clouded by popular catchy slogans such as &quot;Big Mac vs. Big Steel&quot; or frightening metaphors like &quot;America is becoming a national laundermat.&quot;    The latter thinking has its roots in the way economists traditionally have valued producing goods over providing services. Adam Smith, the father of classical economics, chose the &quot;menial servant&quot; as his paragon of service work. But he put lots of other service workers in the same class: &quot;The labour of some of the most respectable orders in society (lawyers, physicians, men of letters, government officials) is, like that of menial servants, unproductive of any value. . . .&quot;    This has led to a series of myths about services. Yet the realities are these:    --Most service work is not what we think it is. The stereotype of service work as menial and low-paid is misleading. For one thing, what we think of as &quot;services&quot; is far more involved with &quot;information&quot; than &quot;service.&quot; A 1984 government report noted that more than 60% of U.S. employment is in some type of information job such as programmer, teacher, accountant, manager or technician. An information/service economy does, of course, generate unskilled jobs -- as does an industrial economy. But higher-level, better-paid jobs constitute the fastest-growing segment of service-sector employment.    --Information/service production is increasingly a high-capital/high-technology activity. The &quot;McDonald's Myth&quot; is a product of the persistent equation of the service sector with businesses such as restaurants and video arcades. Yet these and other consumer-type operations constituted only 10.3% of overall service activity in 1982 -- the bulk of the service sector consists of a variety of high-skill, technologically sophisticated enterprises such as telecommunications and data processing.    Service firms are in the midst of a technological revolution that some have dubbed &quot;the industrialization of the service function.&quot; For example, in 1982, service/information firms made $140 billion in investments in these technologies.    --Information/service industries are essential to a strong industrial sector. A vital service sector directly benefits industrial activity since many of its products make possible more widespread, flexible manufacturing and resource-conserving production. Robots made &quot;smart&quot; by business software and &quot;expert systems&quot; using artificial-intelligence techniques are two examples of service-sector products upon which future American manufacturing competitiveness depends.    --Information/service activities can narrow the trade deficit. The technical capacity that now exists to transmit information instantaneously between any two points on the globe has spurred a world market in services estimated at $700 billion annually and created numerous new trade opportunities in a wide variety of telecommunications, data processing and information services.    Before this technological revolution, if a U.S. engineer or a doctor wanted to provide his services in Pakistan or Brazil, he had to be there. Now, engineers in San Francisco produce architectural drawings for over-the-wire transmission to Pakistan. Doctors in New York diagnose patients in Brazil using CAT-scan and X-ray satellite transmissions.    Once we accept the fact that today's economy is not only very different from the kind of economy we are accustomed to thinking about, but that the old industrial economy will never return, the task of developing appropriate public policies will be much easier.    But this goal is severely handicapped by the kind of information available to guide policy decisions: Our system is at least a half-century out of date in the way it's geared to collect data. An example is the Standard Industrial Classification code organizing economic activity into major industry groups. It still classifies leather making and tobacco farming as major industries but has no separate classification for digital computers, microprocessors or computer software.    Another example of gross national product data: Because price indexes for computers were developed only recently, government data has assumed that computer prices have not changed since 1972. Given the importance of computers to a modern economy, such distortions ripple throughout the official statistics. Joel Popkin, a former assistant commissioner for prices at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, argues that this distortion has resulted in a cumulative understatement in the level of real GNP of as much as 5%.    In short, the world's first and largest information economy is operating with an economic-information base that is antiquated. Rectifying this situation is a mammoth but essential task.    Because the available data are so inadequate, economic policy making is made even more speculative and uncertain. We will have to experiment once again as we did in earlier periods of sea change.    The old methods aren't the solution. The tax system isn't going to provide any magic cures. We are moving toward using the tax system only to raise revenues rather than to influence the shape of economic activity, and that is all to the good. Further, even if we were to try to use tax policy to improve the service sector, it is unclear whether we could succeed.    The 1981 tax bill included a generous investment tax credit and cost-recovery system to encourage investments in the manufacturing sector. But as a study by Brookings economist Barry Bosworth points out, manufacturing did not respond strongly. Purchases of computers and automobiles, and investment in commercial real estate -- not investments in manufacturing facilities -- accounted for 93% of the increase in business investment between 1979 and 1984.    It is ironic that the information/service sector seems to have prospered the most during a period when fiscal incentives were specifically crafted to help manufacturing. This raises serious questions about the efficacy of traditional tax-policy approaches in today's economy.    A second area where thinking is limited by a vision of the old economy is research and development, which we associate with traditional manufacturing enterprises such as steel plants or high-technology businesses such as telecommunications. But today, service/information companies are in the vanguard of innovation as well. Consider the remarkable advancements made in just one service industry-software.    Yet Randamp;D public policy is a continuation of the policies of the past. More than 80% of the benefits of the Randamp;D tax credit accrue to manufacturing. Most product and process improvements in service industries do not qualify. If we are going to have an Randamp;D tax credit, does it make sense to deny it to a service industry such as international construction whose revenue could improve our trade balance?    The policies we pursue to protect our trading interests also have lagged behind the realities of a changed economy. Service trade accounts for about 25% of all U.S. trade, yet it is the only trade sector outside the system of rules established by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. As a result, governments can do as they please. They discriminate against U.S. service exporters, subsidize their own service exports and construct a complicated web of trade barriers -- all with impunity.    At the GATT ministerial meeting in Uruguay in September, U.S. trade negotiators had to drag a group of recalcitrant countries to the table to reach agreement to include service discussions in a new trade round scheduled to begin next year. But even if these negotiations are successful, at best the results will not go into effect until the early 1990s. Meantime, trade barriers will grow unchecked. To protect its trading interests, the U.S. should use its trade laws and economic muscle to dissuade nations from imposing new service trade barriers, and reform trade-promotion laws and practices to reflect the fact that we trade in something besides goods and commodities. For example, Export-Import Bank financing for exports has over the years allocated less than 5% of its funding to service exports. Government-funded trade-adjustment assistance for workers and firms suffering from import competition is available only to manufacturing industries.    One does not need to be a trade expert to grasp how to remedy these deficiencies. We must revise our trade laws and practices to ensure that government encourages the competitiveness of all its industries -- manufacturing, agriculture and services.    The shift to a post-industrial economy has dramatically altered the economic fabric of the U.S. The pace of technological change, the impact of computerization on production, and, most important, the internationalization of the world economy have made economic change a permanent part of our economic life. From 1929 to about 1970, the amount of goods and services that the U.S. either imported or exported remained at about 5% of GNP. Since 1970, however, U.S. trade has increased significantly, and in 1985 we imported 11% of GNP. Today about 70% of all goods and services produced in the U.S. are subject to actual or potential foreign competition. Fortress America is one more relic of the old economy that will not return.    Facilitating adjustment to this economic change is a more difficult -- and more important -- task for public policy than it has ever been before. As the ATandamp;T layoff of 27,400 workers demonstrates, job displacement is no longer limited to the blue-collar worker. The pink-collar office worker, white-collar management and the farmhand are all being hit as well.    The most important role of government is to provide incentives to encourage adjustment and remove disincentives that retard it. The secretary of labor's Workforce 2000 proposals are a step in the right direction, but they do not go anywhere near far enough.    A quick step governments can take to facilitate adjustment is to repeal those laws that discourage workers from preparing for change. In numerous states, for example, workers receiving unemployment compensation lose the compensation if they enter into a full-time training program that would prepare them for new employment. These kinds of laws are anachronisms. It is hard to understand why they ever made sense. But they definitely do not make sense in an era where economic adjustment will be the norm.    A positive step complementing the repeal of archaic legislation would be enactment of the Individual Training Account concept designed by policy analyst Pat Choate and introduced in Congress by Gary Hart. Under this plan, employers and employees would pay into a fund, much like Social Security. A displaced worker or one who foresaw being displaced could draw on it for retraining. Unquestionably, the creativity that exists in both the private and public sectors will unleash a bundle of ideas that can ease the pain of economic transition. But this will occur when we condition ourselves to accept the hard truth that economic adjustment is not a one-shot problem but a permanent process that will repeat itself again and again.    In 1910 nearly a third of the work force was employed in agriculture. Today, it is 3%. During that period, America underwent an economic revolution that transformed the country from a nation of farmers to a powerful industrial nation that nevertheless remains the world's leading agricultural producer.    We are in the midst of another economic revolution. A dwindling percentage of our population is employed in manufacturing. We have become the world's leading service/information economy, yet we remain the leading industrial and agricultural nation. In many ways, however, the shift to an industrial economy was an easier one because the policies required to make it work were buttressed by a distinguished body of economic thought that encouraged industrialization.    This is not the case as we shift to a post-industrial economy. This economic revolution, like the industrial one, requires a policy revolution. But that cannot happen until we have a revolution in thought.    ---   Mr. Shelp, a manufacturing executive, has written about trade in services for the current issue of Foreign Policy. Sen. Hart (D., Colo.) is leaving office next month, possibly to seek the presidency in 1988. </TEXT></DOC>