<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881031-0185 </DOCNO><HL> Escape Bid Highlights FSLIC's Problems --- Great Western Bank Tries To Jump to the FDIC </HL><AUTHOR> David B. Hilder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT GWF </CO><IN> BNK TNM </IN><DATELINE> BEVERLY HILLS, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last week's bold bid by Great Western Bank, the third-largest U.S. thrift, to leave the industry's woefully insolvent deposit insurance fund underscores an argument that executives of healthy thrifts make every day.    They claim that the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., with its high premiums, low public esteem and growing backlog of failed thrifts, is the biggest single threat to their profitability and even their existence.    By attempting to switch its $20 billion in deposits to the far healthier Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which has a better public reputation and charges lower premiums, Great Western is, in effect, trying to jump off a sinking ship.    But the majority of thrifts can't jump because they don't have enough capital to qualify for FDIC membership and don't qualify for a loophole in the law that bars escapes from the FSLIC. For them, Great Western's plan is an ominous sign that the byword in the once collegial industry has become every Sandamp;L for itself.    &quot;I think it's devastating,&quot; says Norman Coulson, president of Glenfed Inc., the Glendale, Calif., parent of the nation's fifth-largest thrift. &quot;I hate to see a company the size of Great Western going out of the FSLIC system, because it will put an additional burden on the remaining healthy thrifts like Glenfed.&quot;    The nation's thrift executives, who are gathered in Honolulu today for the opening of the annual convention of the U.S. League of Savings Institutions, are running scared. Until recently, the debate in Washington over how to handle failed thrifts and how to bail out the FSLIC -- a project that could cost taxpayers $50 billion -- was an annoying distraction for most of them, better left to powerful lobbyists from the U.S. League, their biggest trade group.    Although many more thrifts are healthy than ailing -- about 2,600 vs. 500 -- the immensity of the sick thrifts' losses -- they should top $15 billion this year alone -- and the bitter debate over a taxpayer bailout have increasingly diverted the attention of industry executives. No wonder:   --Regulators are proposing that healthy thrifts continue to pay a surcharge for deposit insurance for 30 years to help bail out the fund. The surcharge costs the industry $1.2 billion a year and will increase as Sandamp;L deposits grow.    --Institutional investors are avoiding thrift stocks -- even those of highly profitable, stable companies like Great Western Financial Corp., parent of Great Western Bank -- because of the uncertainty about how the FSLIC mess will be resolved.    --Simply because they have the FSLIC sticker on the door, most healthy thrifts have to pay significantly more to attract deposits than banks insured by the FDIC. Thrifts have always paid a bit more, but the FSLIC's well-publicized problems have pumped up the spread, and the extra costs come right off the bottom line.    --Strategic planning at many healthy thrifts is now focused on how to get out of the FSLIC, rather than on basic business issues. Decisions on geographic expansion, capital-raising and diversification are being driven more by FSLIC concerns than by fundamental market trends.    To see Great Western's concerns up close, one need only walk into the lobby of its black-glass headquarters here, past the bronze statue of John Wayne that guards the door. At the new accounts desk, customers are offered 7.7% annual interest on six-month certificates of deposit.    That may sound like a reasonable rate. But just across Wilshire Boulevard, the local Bank of America branch serves cookies and punch but pays only 7.15% on the same six-month CDs. And the difference between the rates costs Great Western more than $100 million a year.    Based on financial analysis, the rate difference doesn't make sense. Because Great Western has more than 1 1/2 times as much capital per dollar of assets as Bank of America, depositors at Great Western face far less risk of losing their money. In theory, Great Western should be able to pay lower rates and still attract deposits. But according to analysts and Great Western customer surveys, the FSLIC sticker on Great Western's door forces it to pay more to attract deposits.    To add insult to injury, thrifts pay 2 1/2 times more for FSLIC deposit insurance than banks pay for FDIC coverage. The FSLIC surcharge, known as the special assessment, was imposed in 1985 to help prop up the fund, which was being drained by record thrift failures. The assessment costs Great Western about $25 million a year, or nearly $100 million so far.    James F. Montgomery, chairman of Great Western, says the special assessment is grossly unfair. &quot;We don't think it's right to punish Great Western and make us pay the bill for the misadventures of others,&quot; he says.    The special assessment by itself doesn't threaten the survival of well-capitalized thrifts like Great Western. But for hundreds of solvent but thinly capitalized or narrowly profitable thrifts, it is a major cost. Last year, it caused net losses at slightly more than 100 thrifts that otherwise would have been profitable, according to a U.S. League study.    Mr. Montgomery says Great Western first started looking for a way out of the FSLIC when the special assessment was adopted. Great Western claims that an internal memo dated March 30, 1987 -- which it kept secret until now -- entitles it to exit under a &quot;grandfather&quot; clause in the law that generally bars such exits. By leaving now, Great Western would also avoid an exit fee of about $80 million that takes effect next August.    The memo called for Great Western Bank to merge with a tiny, FDIC-insured thrift and loan company in Salt Lake City owned by the same holding company. Great Western claims the memo gives it grandfathering rights under the law even though Great Western Bank is now proposing to merge with a different FDIC-insured subsidiary in Bellevue, Wash.    While Great Western kept its plan quiet until last week, it carefully maintained its capital above the FDIC's tangible capital requirement of at least 6% of assets.    Mr. Montgomery says Great Western didn't acquire any troubled thrifts because such purchases would have reduced its tangible capital ratio. The company even stayed out of Texas, a market Mr. Montgomery is eager to enter. &quot;We kept our powder dry,&quot; says Mr. Montgomery.    If Great Western's plan works, the company will reap major benefits. Allan G. Bortel, a thrift analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., estimates that it could save Great Western $130 million a year in costs and raise net income 30%.    But Great Western's proposal quickly generated opposition from regulators and controversy among executives of other healthy thrifts.    M. Danny Wall, chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which controls the FSLIC and must approve the switch, says he has &quot;a pretty serious question&quot; about whether Great Western's plan meets the law's requirements for grandfathering.    Few of the nation's 3,100 FSLIC-insured thrifts could duplicate Great Western's exact escape route. But according to an FDIC study, 1,152 FSLIC-insured thrifts have enough capital to qualify for FDIC insurance, and some will almost certainly look for a similar way out of the FSLIC. &quot;All strong associations are interested in Great Western's approach,&quot; says Richard H. Deihl, chairman of H.F. Ahmanson andamp; Co., parent of the nation's largest thrift. </TEXT></DOC>