<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890913-0025 </DOCNO><DD> = 890913 </DD><AN> 890913-0025. </AN><HL> Critical Condition:@  Generic-Drug Scandal@  At the FDA Is Linked@  To Deregulation Drive@  ---@  Agency Treated the Industry@  As 'Partner,' Critics Say;@  A Cut in Staff Also Hurt@  ---@  An Official's Free Trip Abroad@  ----@  By Bruce Ingersoll and Gregory Stricharchuk@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/13/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> MYL BCL BRL PRX </CO><IN> DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)MEDICAL SUPPLIES (MDS)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD) </IN><GV> FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)CONGRESS (CNG) </GV><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The conditions were ripe for a regulatory disaster at the Food and Drug Administration.    The agency, which regulates a hefty 25% of the nation's consumer economy -- from kumquats to cosmetics -- has been lurching from one crisis to another in recent years, trying to meet mounting demands with a shrinking staff. There were product tamperings to contend with, a blood-bank emergency triggered by fears of AIDS contamination, a panic over cyanide-laced grapes from Chile and ever-increasing pressure to speed new life-saving drugs through the approval process.    So it was that disaster followed.    In the last two months, a drumbeat of disclosures has revealed a widening scandal involving the agency's generic drug program -- a five-year effort to bring to market cheap alternatives to brand-name drugs. Three FDA employees already have pleaded guilty to taking illegal gratuities from generic-drug makers. Two generics companies have admitted duping the agency with falsified data. And the FDA has found manufacturing and record-keeping problems at nearly all of the 12 generic-drug makers it has investigated so far.    &quot;I would hang them if I could,&quot; says FDA Commissioner Frank Young.    But the generic-drug scandal, unlike the grape scare or the epidemic of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, is a crisis largely of the FDA's own making -- and a crisis in which many feel Dr. Young played a prominent role. &quot;He was in his own world, whether it was chasing grapes or problems concerning Social Security programs,&quot; contends Roy McKnight of Pittsburgh-based Mylan Laboratories Inc., a generic-drug maker. It was Mylan's complaints about the FDA's generic-drug practices that spurred investigations of the agency by the House Energy and Commerce Committee's investigative panel and the U.S. attorney in Baltimore. And it was these investigations that brought to light the FDA's raft of troubles.    There were policy issues, too, that led to the scandal. The FDA's current problems are a legacy of the Reagan administration's push to deregulate. By scaling back their enforcement actions while publicly embracing the generic-drug industry as a &quot;partner&quot; rather than an adversary, the FDA created &quot;an atmosphere of lawlessness,&quot; says Sidney Wolfe, head of the Public Citizen Health Research Group. &quot;It isn't surprising that the generics companies pulled these shenanigans.&quot;    Some notable shortcomings within the agency aided in the scandal. Five years after Congress ordered the FDA to speed the approval of generic drugs -- as part of the 1984 Waxman-Hatch Act -- the agency has yet to issue specific rules for the process. Indeed, officials are still soliciting public comments on the proposed package of regulations. In the meantime, the agency has been operating under guidelines that have fostered arbitrary, case-by-case decisions on generic-drug applications, creating opportunities for favoritism and fraud.    Petty internal squabbles have worsened things. FDA policy forbids the approval of a new generic drug if inspectors have found manufacturing problems at the drug company's plant. Yet officials in the plant-inspection office have refused to provide inspection reports to other FDA officials reviewing new-drug applications; instead, the new-drug department has had to file for the reports under the Freedom of Information Act -- an almost unheard of practice. And when the documents were turned over, much of the information had been blanked out.    The generic-drug division is also severely prone to losing paper work -- so much so that some industry officials fear they are the victims of deliberate sabotage. For instance, the disappearance of documents filed by Biocraft Laboratories Inc. delayed a new-drug application by that company for at least a year. Internal investigators from the Health and Human Services Department, of which the FDA is a part, are looking into the possibility that an FDA drug reviewer intentionally mislaid the documents as a favor to a rival company.    After presiding over, from a regulatory standpoint, the rise of generic drugs from a cottage industry to a multibillion-dollar business, Dr. Young generally defends his agency's actions. But he admits that the scandal may devastate the industry he befriended: &quot;There's a real possibility that the generic-drug industry may be totally discredited,&quot; he says.    That, in turn, would deal a severe blow to the government's efforts to bring down health costs with generics. Specific generic-drug regulations still haven't been issued, leading one senior FDA official to conclude: &quot;If we find out many more things that are wrong, we will have to reevaluate&quot; the agency's pending generic drug regulations.    The generic-drug scandal is far from the only problem plaguing the agency. Consumer advocates complain that food safety -- in particular, the growing problem of bacterial food poisoning -- has been given short shrift. The FDA inspects only a dribble of the swelling tide of food imported into the U.S. Critics fault the agency for relying too heavily on state authorities to ensure the safety of shellfish and milk supplies.    At the same time, the agency is being faulted for not cracking down on medical-device manufacturers for failing to report malfunctions that result in deaths and injuries. Some manufacturers see disturbing parallels between regulation of this area and the generic-drug mess. In a lawsuit, closely held Clark Research andamp; Development Inc., which makes dialysis-related devices, accuses the agency of losing documents and of pursuing a &quot;pattern of harassment&quot; after Clark complained about a competitor being allowed to make misleading claims. &quot;We want that company subject to the same regulations we're subject to,&quot; says Michael Pearl, a Clark officer. &quot;We want a level playing field.&quot;    The FDA's defenders, while not playing down the seriousness of such allegations, say the current controversy obscures the agency's positive accomplishments. &quot;Don't focus on the glitches that occur periodically,&quot; says Sanford Miller, a former FDA official, who is dean of the University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences. &quot;Take a look at the overall health of the American people.    &quot;Doing everything people want the FDA to do would require an FDA the size of the Defense Department,&quot; he says. But over the last decade the agency has instead shrunk -- to 7,400 employees from 8,100. The Bush administration is seeking a budget authorization of $570 million for the next fiscal year, a 5% increase.    Although some AIDS activists depict him as an uncaring paymaster of a sluggish bureaucracy, Dr. Young insists he has made new drugs for the desperately ill a top priority: The average time to approve such critical drugs is 4.2 years; the average for most other drugs is 7.8 years. The FDA approved an anti-viral drug, AZT, in 107 days -- a record. The new medication slows the progression of AIDS in individuals showing early symptoms.    The generics scandal, in Dr. Young's view, is the fault of an unrealistic Congress, which five years ago saw generics as a way of reducing prescription-drug costs for constituents. The Waxman-Hatch Act generated thousands of applications to market generic duplicates of brand-name drugs on which 17-year patents had expired. The law spared companies the cost of time-consuming clinical tests to prove the safety and effectiveness of their copycat products. Instead, the companies merely had to show the FDA that their products were &quot;bio-equivalent&quot; to the brand-names they mimicked -- that they performed in the bloodstream in about the same way.    As patents expired, companies scrambled to be the first to win FDA approval for their products. Typically, the first on the market could count on capturing a lucrative share of total sales by undercutting the brand-name price.    In view of the high stakes -- and the FDA's practice of accepting bio-equivalency test results on faith -- the scandal shouldn't have caught the agency completely off-guard. As early as December 1985, middle management at the FDA began receiving reports of drug reviewers favoring one company over others in return for &quot;some quid pro quo,&quot; according to a Congressional investigation. There was even a tip telephoned to the FDA about a romantic entanglement between an agency drug reviewer and a woman executive from a drug company that was seeking his approval of its product. The tip wasn't acted on.    At the very least, critics say, officials should have been suspicious of the phenomenal success of two small generic-drug makers in beating their competitors to market. Par Pharmaceutical Inc. and its Quad Pharmaceuticals Inc. subsidiary received a stunning 77 drug approvals in 1986, almost twice as many as any other company. The companies pleaded guilty earlier this year to dispensing illicit gratuities to speed their drug applications through the FDA bureaucracy.    In time, other companies complained about bureaucrats deviating from the FDA's first-come, first-served policy on new generic-drug applications.    The FDA &quot;engages in nothing short of market manipulation&quot; as it decides on applications, H. Lawrence Fox, an attorney for Barr Laboratories Inc., asserted in Congressional testimony, adding: &quot;The FDA has told us, &quot;We screwed you on this one, so we'll take care of you on the next one.&quot;    The untimely disappearance and destruction of documents at the FDA further fueled suspicions of favoritism. At the same hearing, a Congressional panel embarrassed the FDA by producing the original copy of a generic-drug application that had been found, torn in half, in the trash of Charles Y. Chang, a former FDA branch chief, who pleaded guilty in a federal court in Baltimore to two counts of interstate travel in aid of racketeering.    Specifically, the charges involve his accepting a paid, round-the-world trip totaling more than $3,000 that a drug industry consultant offered him at the direction of the president of American Therapeutics Inc., a generics maker based in Bohemia, N.Y. The president of American Therapeutics also purchased furniture and computer equipment for Mr. Chang totaling almost $8,000.    In return, Mr. Chang allegedly took steps to get American Therapeutics drug applications through the process more quickly by assigning the applications to speedy reviewers, among other things.    Neither American Therapeutics nor its officers have been charged with a crime. The company denies any wrongdoing.    Harold Snyder, chief executive officer of Biocraft, says he &quot;went into orbit&quot; when he learned that part of his company's application had been mysteriously misplaced. &quot;They lose samples, they lose this, and they lose that,&quot; he says. But out of fear of retaliation, Mr. Snyder won't accuse the agency of playing favorites.    Taking most of the flak for the agency's failings is Dr. Young, a Bible-quoting biotechnology specialist who previously served as dean of the University of Rochester medical school. Many in industry doubt that he will survive the scandal as head of the FDA. One view is that the 58-year-old Dr. Young is exhausted after five years in the job and about to resign. The other is that his ouster is imminent. But Dr. Young, seemingly upbeat, says he &quot;has the best job in town,&quot; while administration insiders say he still has the confidence of the White House and Health and Human Services Secretary Louis Sullivan.    There are doubts, too, whether Dr. Young is tough enough for the battle ahead. Says one industry executive: &quot;He's not a street fighter; he's a pussy cat.&quot; But Dr. Young, decked out in the summer whites of the U.S. Public Health Service's officer corps, aggressively defends his agency's performance.    &quot;Here you've got an industry,&quot; he says, &quot;that would stoop to giving gratuities to federal employees, that would stoop to falsifying data and submitting false data to the FDA.    &quot;Could we have designed the system (to catch) that? Yes, we could have.&quot; But, he adds, &quot;What was Congress telling us to do? 'We need to get generic drugs on the market. We're going to give you four months, agency, to get your act in order.'&quot; The solution: to use &quot;the procedures that were tried and true in the past.&quot;    Although there is no evidence yet that shoddily made generic drugs have gravely injured anyone, Dr. Young vows that within three months he will be able to conclusively answer every consumer's question: &quot;Doc, are the drugs safe and do they work?&quot;    FDA officials are conducting top-to-bottom inspections at more than 30 generic-drug makers, and scrutinizing the paper work and pre-marketing test results on some 200 generic drugs to see if there are more instances of companies falsifying data and, as was the case with some companies, substituting brand-name products as their own to win approval for their generic copies. So far, the inspections have resulted in 128 product recalls and suspensions. FDA chemists are also testing the potency of the 30 top-selling generics on the market.    The agency, asserts Mr. McKnight of Pittsburgh-based Mylan Laboratories, &quot;is doing what they should have been doing five years ago -- they're now off their derrieres.&quot;    The FDA's efforts to get to the bottom of the generic-drug scandal further overextends an agency long on mandate and short on money and manpower. &quot;The bottom line is, routine work doesn't get done,&quot; says a senior FDA official. &quot;Surveillance inspections of other drug and food companies don't get done.&quot; Gavin Meerdink, a veterinary toxicologist at the University of Arizona, for example, says he recently tipped off a local FDA official to illegal over-the-counter sales of oxytocin, a prescription drug for livestock. &quot;He just didn't have the manpower to do anything about it,&quot; says Dr. Meerdink.    Though he got blind-sided by the generic-drug crisis, Dr. Young runs the FDA bureaucracy like a chief executive officer specializing in crisis management; he plans for emergencies. But sometimes the challenges may simply be too overwhelming for the FDA. Take the grape scare. At its peak, the FDA threw 650 investigators and lab technicans into the fray. Though they worked night and day, they managed to inspect less than 5% of the fruit unloaded off nine freighters.    ---   Sue Shellenbarger in Chicago contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>