<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881107-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Zones Make Holes in NATO's Defense </HL><AUTHOR> Loic Bouvard </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Mikhail Gorbachev's &quot;new thinking&quot; has helped to shape an improved atmosphere for further progress in East-West relations. But the reality is that many problematic features of Soviet foreign and defense policy endure. One of the most disturbing of these is the support of nuclear-free zones.    Nuclear-weapons-free zones are attracting increasing and misguided public and parliamentary attention in the post-INF Western world. Creating a nuclear-free zone is partly a local decision: Citizens or government in a certain geographic area decide to ban nuclear weapons from that area. They can also involve international cooperation: The goal often is to get foreign states with nuclear arsenals to pledge not to use nuclear weapons against the zone. In addition, nuclear-free zones often include arrangements that require nuclear weapons deployed adjacent to the zone on land or at sea be pulled back.    The nuclear-free idea was originally a Soviet one, advanced by Moscow as early as 1958. Today, it commands the support of several political parties in NATO countries that include Denmark, Norway, Iceland, West Germany and Greece. The idea has also spawned local activism. More than 4,200 cities, counties and provinces in 24 countries around the world have declared themselves &quot;nuclear-free.&quot; These include 177 in Britain and 150 in the United States.    It is in Europe however, that the zones' impact on potential negotiation between major military alliances is most profound. In April 1988, for example, the West German Social Democrats, an opposition party, proposed an &quot;interim step toward a zero/zero solution&quot; for nuclear weapons of under-500-kilometer range. These short-range missiles are already the focus of Alliance tension, as certain countries have expressed reservation about necessary plans to modernize them.    The SPD wants the creation of a nuclear-weapons-free zone of 150 kilometers on both sides of the border with East Germany and Czechoslovakia. Such cooperation already has a tradition, for the SPD has in the past negotiated with the East proposals for chemical-weapon-free zones and limiting military maneuvers.    As the planners envision it, the new zone eventually could be expanded to cover Central Europe, and eventually, all of Europe. The importance of such projects is highlighted when we take a look at public opinions in Germany today. According to a poll taken by the Allensbach Institute in June, some 68% of West Germans are opposed to NATO short-range nuclear modernization. Some 79% even favor the complete denuclearization of the Federal Republic.    Predictably, the Soviet Union continues to exploit these sentiments. The communique of the July Warsaw Pact Political Consultative Committee meeting in Warsaw proposed &quot;the start of separate talks in the near future on the reduction and subsequent elimination of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe.&quot; Several initiatives have already been re-launched for &quot;zones of peace&quot; directed at the Nordic countries, Central Europe and the Mediterranean region -- e.g., the proposed withdrawal of the U.S. Sixth Fleet.    All sorts of arguments have been put forward as to why zones are a good idea. Last year the &quot;Nordic Committee of Parliamentarians on the North as a Nuclear-Free Zone&quot; -- a group that included representatives from Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden -- stated that a Nordic zone would contribute to &quot;promoting detente and disarmament in Europe.&quot; And according to Mr. Gorbachev's own remarks on June 19, the zones can &quot;contribute to narrowing the sphere of nuclear preparations, to disengaging the nuclear forces of the opposing alliances, and thereby to reducing the risk of nuclear conflict.&quot;    It is time these escapist myths are put to rest. The truth is that nuclear-free zones in Europe would harm NATO's strategy of forward defense and flexible response, and consequently degrade the central mission of the Alliance: deterrence of war.    The reasons why this is so are rather intuitive. Zone supporters say that nuclear-weapons-free zones contribute to world peace because they often call for &quot;negative security assurances&quot; -- commitments from foreign powers that they wouldn't use nuclear weapons to strike the zone.    But these are nothing more than unverifiable promises of benign intent. The creation of a zone would not translate into the removal of incentives to strike targets in the zone. And longer-range weapons automatically render the associated notion of adjacent &quot;thin-out&quot; zones irrelevant.    In Central Europe, for example, a nuclear-free zone might not permit nuclear artillery. But it would do nothing about longer-range missile or aircraft-delivered weapons within a few minutes flight time of all significant military and civilian targets in the zone. A nuclear-weapons-free zone, in short, could never be a nuclear-detonation-free zone.    Zones could dangerously complicate NATO's mission. For instance, by extending to crisis and combat situations the current Danish and Norwegian peacetime bans on the presence of nuclear weapons, a zone would automatically impede needed reinforcements even during the conventional phase of battle. Because any aircraft and ship can be considered capable of executing both nuclear and conventional missions, it is possible that in a nuclear-free zone fighters and frigates might be subject to on-site inspection. The howitzers of the Sixth German Panzer Grenadiers reinforcing Jutland might be searched, for example, when the division crossed the Danish border.    More broadly, it can be argued that the creation of nuclear-free zones would signal to Eastern commanders that NATO was prepared to accept conventional aggression from Warsaw Pact forces. Is this the security message NATO should conveythat some regions of the Alliance would prove less risk-laden for an aggressor than others?    The overriding goal of arms control must be to reduce the risk of war by militarily significant measures, not to generate cosmetic and even unilateral gestures. This means working toward conventional stability. It means a global ban on chemical weapons.    It also means confidence -- and security-building measures. Advance notification of major air and naval exercises on a global basis should be pursued. So should agreements on avoiding incidents at sea to curtail the numerous violations of Scandinavian waters by what are believed to be Soviet submarines.    Whatever the undertaking, it should be made clear that zonal nuclear &quot;solutions&quot; are illusory.    In the meantime, it is for the advocates of nuclear-weapon-free zones to demonstrate how, 30 years into the debate, their ideas can promote meaningful arms control within the collective NATO security framework. This challenge has yet to be met.    ---   Mr. Bouvard, vice president of France's National Assembly, is also a member of the North Atlantic Assembly, the interparliamentary organization of the Atlantic Alliance. </TEXT></DOC>