<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Let the Market Regulate Digital Technology---By Tom G. Palmer</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Ever since the first home tape recorder appeared on the market, the recording industry has worried about what it sees as the temptation for bootleggers to steal its profits. The industry's most recent target is the digital audio tape recorder, a new consumer product that will play miniature tapes -- called DATs -- that sound as good as compact disks. The question is whether the machines will be equipped with a device that prevents taping of encoded pre-recorded material.    The Reagan administration and several members of Congress -- mostly from the Hollywood-Nashville axis -- have spearheaded legislation that would use the force of law to require that all DAT recorders contain an &quot;anti-taping chip.&quot; Sen. Albert Gore (D., Tenn.) argues, &quot;It is time for us to respond to new technologies about which the law has been silent, before the damage is done.&quot;    To the extent he means that current laws governing intellectual property are incapable of meeting the challenge of new technologies, Sen. Gore is right. Where he is wrong, however, is to argue that property rights must be defended by government control of evolving technology, rather than through the market itself.    There are several DAT bills in committee now, and the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee is scheduled to vote on one this week.    The legislative proposals would require that every DAT recorder come with a built-in anti-taping chip. The chip would be triggered by a &quot;notch&quot; cut into the musical frequencies on compact disks, tapes, records or any other pre-recorded material. The chip would search for the notch and turn off the recording circuitry when it found it. Any measure to remove, deactivate or bypass the chip would be illegal.    The DAT bills are premised on the notion that by invading the property rights of consumers, the law would defend the property rights of musicians, composers and record companies. Whether such a defense would in fact inspire artists to greater creativity, or simply advance the pecuniary interests of recording companies, is not entirely clear. What is clear is that any law restricting the use of DAT technology would be unenforceable -- or enforceable only at great cost to our liberties and wallets -- and inappropriate to the new age of information technology.    Those favoring government control see intellectual property as a classic &quot;public-goods&quot; problem, in which producers have little incentive to supply consumer demand and consumers attempt to &quot;free-ride&quot; on the purchases of others. But today, economists realize that -- through the &quot;bundling&quot; of private with public goods, &quot;fencing&quot; mechanisms and other voluntary arrangements -- markets are very effective at addressing free-rider problems. Drive-in theaters, for example, avoid free riders by fencing out nonpayers and providing -- at considerable expense -- speakers for each car.    To be fair, many of those who support anti-taping devices for DAT recorders accept that public-goods problems result from nonexistent or improperly defined property rights, rather than from any failure of the market. But efficient property rights cannot be imposed from on high by an all-wise government; they must evolve in the market. Defining &quot;property rights&quot; so that enforcement requires continuing intervention by government, invasion of personal privacy and rigid government control over technology makes a mockery of the very concept of property rights.    In the past, the recording industry has proved itself capable of using new technology to its own advantage. In 1980 the industry was on its back. Its customers were feeding quarters into Pac-Man games instead of saving them for albums; discos were closing. Then in came the Walkman, and out went video games. In, also, came improved car stereos, and up went tape sales. The magnetic tape that the industry had feared would promote bootlegging made the home tape recorder the center of a music system that the industry captured with pre-recorded tapes. These now outsell records 3 to 1.    Record companies played little role in the next &quot;hardware&quot; invention, the compact-disk player; yet, disks have proved extremely lucrative for them. (Part of the record companies' objection to DAT technology is because they fear it will cut into the compact-disk market.)    Information markets respond to new technology challenges through innovative approaches that are unforeseen by any nervous legislator. One example is the computer program, a product that is easy to copy and that does not diminish in quality when reproduced. Computer companies now bundle many programs together with private goods such as service manuals, periodic updates, and toll-numbers (with authorizing pass codes) that users can call for technical advice. Similarly, Boise Cascade Co. developed paper that splashes the words &quot;Unauthorized Copy&quot; across a photocopy but is invisible on the original.    The movie industry has also succeeded in exploiting new technology. When it was denied laws to control video-cassette rentals, the industry developed pricing mechanisms that now make home video rentals and sales a $5 billion industry, providing greater returns than box-office receipts. Is Hollywood really sorry that it failed to enjoin sales of VCRs when the Sony Betamax first came on the market?    The film industry was unsuccessful when it asked Congress last year for legislation that would require anti-taping chips on videotape recorders. Now there are reports of improvement to a system called Macrovision, which &quot;tricks&quot; VCRs into making unauthorized copies unviewable.    DAT technology offers exciting possibilities for information storage and retrieval, possibilities that could be wiped out by Congress in one stroke. Imagine what would have happened to the personal-computer industry if, as was proposed when it was in its infancy, anti-copying chips had been mandated in all personal computers.    The legitimate concern about rewarding creativity should lead us not to government restrictions on technology, but to a freer market. Technological change demands that we rethink intellectual property rights -- not ban new technologies.    ---   Mr. Palmer is editor of Humane Studies Review, published by the Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University, and a participant in the Intellectual Property Project of the Competitive Enterprise Institute in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>