<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890811-0144 </DOCNO><DD> = 890811 </DD><AN> 890811-0144. </AN><HL> Federal Pay Scare's Hidden Agenda@  ----@  By Terry W. Culler </HL><DD> 08/11/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><GV> EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </GV><TEXT>   In forum after forum, the inside-the-Beltway advocates of &quot;more&quot; for the federal sector echo former Federal Reserve Board chairman Paul Volcker's assertion that &quot;government in particular is increasingly unable to attract, retain and motivate the kinds of people it will need to do the essential work of the republic in the years and decades ahead.&quot;    But evidence of this dire emergency, said to be the result of the &quot;low&quot; salaries of federal workers, is hard -- if not impossible -- to come by. It's no wonder it has been dubbed the &quot;quiet crisis&quot; by its popularizers, who include some of Washington's heaviest hitters.    No less than President Bush has been snookered on this issue, recommending pay increases ranging from 25% for run-of-the-mill federal executives to a whopping 200% for people called &quot;critically skilled workers.&quot; The Office of Management and Budget is said to be working on a complicated sliding scale of executive salaries. Mr. Bush has failed to recognize that while the stated goal of the proponents of more money for federal workers is to improve the quality of the federal work force by raising salaries, increasing morale, getting rid of political appointees, ensuring policy stability, and making federal careers attractive to the &quot;best and brightest&quot; of America's young workers, the real goal is to perpetuate existing federal policies in the face of political change.    Several groups are now active in the quiet-crisis camp. The most important and conspicuous group is the National Commission on the Public Service, headed by Mr. Volcker. Others include the Center for Excellence in Government, the National Academy of Public Administration, and the National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration.    Also in the camp are many other academics, as well as such political luminaries as Comptroller General Charles Bowsher, former President Gerald Ford, and former Vice President Walter Mondale. Among congressional efforts is the Excellence in Government Management Act, introduced by Rep. Patricia Schroeder (D., Colo.) last year. Charles Levine of the Congressional Research Service is one of those who warn that &quot;human resource erosion&quot; is undermining the federal government. Yet in a 1987 paper, &quot;The Quiet Crisis of the Civil Service: The Federal Personnel System at the Crossroads,&quot; he concedes that &quot;building a case for the proposition that such erosion is taking place is no easy task. Systematic evidence to confirm or deny the proposition simply does not exist.&quot;    Instead of presenting hard data, the quiet-crisis camp treats us to anecdotes, quotations from John F. Kennedy and Franklin D. Roosevelt, and the results of opinion surveys of federal employees conducted by interested groups. Punctuating the mass of speculation and supposition are statistics showing recruitment and retention problems within specific occupations and occupational categories. Those problems are then attributed to the work force as a whole.    Most of the concern focuses not on federal employees in general but on high-level careerists in Washington, who are supposedly underpaid, under-appreciated, and not consulted often enough or listened to intently enough by those appointed by the president to carry out his policies. The organizations in the quiet-crisis contingent are often staffed by people who were high-level bureaucrats, people who hope to be high-level bureaucrats, high-level workers in the private sector who view high-level bureaucrats as their counterparts, and academics who enjoy associating with high-level bureaucrats.    Because the quiet-crisis camp knows that one can't get very far, even in Washington, by voicing concern over people whose incomes place them in the top 0.5% of the American workforce (as witnessed by the recent brouhaha over a congressional pay raise), its members sometimes attempt to extend the so-called crisis to include the worker bees down below. That is where they run into trouble.    The quit rate is 10.9% in the private sector but only 5.2% in the federal government. Even in occupations for which there are significant disparities between private-sector and federal salary levels, the differences in the rates at which employees vote with their feet are insignificant. The largest pay gap is that of chemists and engineers in the federal government and their private-sector counterparts, but the federal groups' quit rates are very low (2.3% for chemists and 3.3% for engineers). Given that government chemists and engineers have skills readily transferable to the private sector, something about federal employment must keep it attractive.    Indeed, federal employment seems to be an attractive option for many people. The demand for federal jobs, in fact, casts doubt on a central assumption of the quiet-crisis camp.    A few years ago, as I outlined in a May 21, 1986, article on this page, Steven Venti of Dartmouth College took a hard look at federal and private-sector salaries. He found, first, that there were queues of people waiting to fill federal jobs, and that most of those people were qualified. Second, the demand was due to a federal wage advantage of 4% for men and 22% for women. Third, the only way to eliminate the queues -- and thereby establish the federal government as a cost-minimizing employer -- would be to lower men's wages by 16% and women's wages by 42%. Fourth, such wage cuts would have little impact on work force quality; they would reduce men's average education level by one-tenth of a year and women's by three-tenths of a year. Mr. Venti used 1982 figures in his study, but nothing that has happened since would appear to significantly affect his findings.    Suppose that the government attempted to attract more graduates of the best schools by increasing salary levels significantly. It would then be spending more tax dollars to raise the salaries not only of the best and the brightest but of the other newly hired workers, who would have been happy to take jobs at lower rates. The government could not pay applicant Smith more to analyze projects than it paid applicant Jones just because Smith was an honors graduate of Yale and Jones was a middling graduate of Great Plains State.    Moreover, because fairly hefty salary increases would be required to attract more Smiths, more Joneses would be attracted as well. Remember, there already is a large pool of qualified workers waiting to fill government jobs. If the government raised salaries high enough to attract superior workers, it would be overwhelmed with applicants.    Of course, the private sector would continue to value the Smiths of the world, and it would raise its salaries to compete for them. The government would then raise salaries again in an effort to keep attracting the Smiths.    Thus, such an attempt to attract top-quality workers to federal careers would increase the already-long applicant queues and raise the cost of doing government. Furthermore, better benefits packages and more-frequent pay raises would be provided in order to retain top-quality workers.    Such an attempt to attract the best and the brightest to federal careers would also serve to deprive the U.S. economy of its driving force: the skill and knowledge that result in the production of wealth. The cost of that loss cannot be estimated. If the best and brightest Americans were employed by the government, the breakthroughs that result in new products, processes, and markets would surely come from firms in other countries.    Also important to the quiet-crisis case is the erroneous idea that political appointees hold too large a percentage of federal jobs. In fact, political appointees constitute only about 0.12% of the federal work force. When the quiet-crisis groups complain that there are too many political appointees, they generally mean that there are too many conservative Republican appointees.    It is no accident that the political figures they usually cite as good stewards of government are Franklin D. Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy, and Lyndon B. Johnson -- presidents who expanded the role of federal employees. The issue that underlies much of the quiet-crisis crusade is not federal employees' morale or efficiency but power -- who is to wield it and thereby shape government policy.    The permanent government now sees its influence waning, and it is fighting back on many fronts. At stake in the battle is whether an administration committed to reducing the size and role of the federal government can succeed. We deserve more-efficient government, not merely more government.    ---   Mr. Culler, an associate director of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management during the Reagan administration, is an executive recruiter. This article is adapted from the June Cato Policy Report. </TEXT></DOC>