<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880307-0022 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   U.S. HELICOPTERS DREW machine-gun fire in the central Persian Gulf.    The aircraft, on a reconnaissance flight, took evasive action and escaped the gunfire from an oil platform and several small boats, U.S. officials said. Iran was believed responsible for the attack. There weren't any casualties reported. The assault came about 25 hours after a U.S. warship fired on what were believed to have been Iranian gunboats near the Navy's offshore supply barges. Meanwhile, Iran and Iraq fired missiles on each other's capital cities in an escalation of attacks begun last week.    Rioting Iranians attacked the Soviet Union's Embassy in Tehran, accusing Moscow of supplying Iraq with missiles used in recent raids on Iran.    ---   ISRAEL'S CABINET CLASHED over a U.S. initiative for Mideast peace.    The Israeli ministers, in a weekly cabinet meeting, argued over whether to respond to the U.S. plan ahead of Prime Minister Shamir's visit to the U.S. next week. The proposals, offered by Shultz before his return to Washington over the weekend, reportedly called for an Israeli response soon. Shamir, who opposes aspects of the plan, is expected to offer a counterproposal. Meanwhile, a group of U.S. senators, in a letter to Shultz expressed concern about Shamir's refusal to support the U.S. plan.    Israeli troops killed two Palestinian teen-agers in the occupied West Bank, raising the unofficial death toll to at least 86 Arabs in 12 weeks of unrest.    ---   Bush campaigned in Missouri following his victory Saturday in South Carolina's GOP primary. He won 48% of the vote, with Dole getting 21%. The state's Democratic primary is set for this week. In Wyoming's caucuses, Democrats Gore and Dukakis ended in a virtual tie. Bush and Dole split the GOP delegates.    ---   Panama's Defense Forces accused the U.S. of waging &quot;outright war&quot; on the country and vowed to &quot;resist&quot; Washington's economic pressure. A U.S. move Thursday, freezing Panama City's accounts in the U.S. to keep the funds from Noriega, helped prompt the closure of Panamanian banks, which could remain closed this week.    ---   Thousands of Tibetans clashed with police in the capital city of Lhasa during demonstrations calling for Tibet's independence from China, according to unconfirmed reports reaching Beijing. As many as nine people were reported killed in the daylong protests Saturday, which came at the close of a major Buddhist festival.    ---   Residents of Soviet Azerbaijan criticized recent disturbances in a predominantly Armenian area of the republic that wants reunification with Soviet Armenia, Moscow Radio reported. In a letter to Kremlin officials, the residents apparently opposed demands to redraw regional borders. At least 31 people were killed in the Azerbaijani unrest.    ---   South Africa proposed a direct accord with the Soviet Union to establish a neutral government in Angola, where Pretoria's troops support the Unita rebels and Moscow backs the Luanda government. The plan, along lines suggested for Afghanistan by Gorbachev, excluded the U.S. and barely mentioned neighboring Namibia.    ---   Pakistan's chief negotiator returned to U.N.-sponsored peace talks in Geneva after consultations with officials in Islamabad. He didn't give any indication that Pakistan was willing to compromise on its demand for a new government in Kabul, an unresolved issue in a proposal leading to the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.    ---   The Vatican projected a 1988 budget deficit of $61.8 million, about $5 million more than its record 1986 shortfall. The Vatican, which released the budget Saturday, has operated at a loss every year since 1979, when it first made its financial details public.    ---   Hundreds of Czechoslovaks chanted demands for religious freedom after about 10,000 people joined in one of the largest Roman Catholic Masses celebrated in Prague since Communist rule began 40 years ago. Church-state relations in Czechoslovakia are considered the worst in eastern Europe.    ---   The Postal Service is expected to begin considering today recommendations by the Postal Rate Commission calling for an increase to 25 cents from 22 cents for a first class letter. The increases, slightly larger than those proposed by the board of governors, include an average 17.5% boost in other postal classes.    ---   Sandinista supporters clashed with opposition marchers in the southeastern Nicaraguan city of Masaya. At least six people were reported injured. The violence flared during an opposition demonstration against forced military recruitment and Managua's economic austerity measures.    ---   A Soviet general disputed NATO claims of Warsaw Pact superiority in conventional forces in Europe, and said Moscow was disappointed with a statement issued by alliance leaders last week calling for cuts in East bloc forces. He said NATO had 1,500 more strike aircraft and twice as many helicopters as the Warsaw Pact.    ---   East German security forces moved to block Christian worshippers from attending a church service in East Berlin, detaining an unspecified number of people, West German radio reported. The action followed an East German denial of Western reports that more than 200 people wishing to leave the country had been taken into custody.    ---   Died: Bernard J. Clarke, 67, former chairman of Columbia Gas System Inc., Friday, in Wilmington, Del. . . . Robert F. Bensinger, 90, former chairman of Brunswick Corp., Friday, in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>