<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871231-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ISRAELI LEADERS DISCUSSED plans to deport Arab riot ringleaders.    Despite warnings from Washington that such punishments could cause more violent protests in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Israel's cabinet appeared to favor plans for the expulsion of Palestinians accused of leading disturbances. The officials remained split over the extent and timing of the deportations, but an official said there wouldn't be mass expulsions. Meanwhile, two people were injured in the explosion of one of eight letter bombs mailed to addresses in Israel and the West Bank. All carried a return address in Turkey.    The death toll from recent unrest rose to 22 as an Arab died of wounds sustained last week, as trials for more than 900 Palestinians continued.    ---   The army in Transkei staged a bloodless coup in the nominally independent black homeland in South Africa, ousting the prime minister after less than three months in office. The military commander who led the coup said he had taken power, declared martial law, suspended the constitution and outlawed political activity.    ---   A Salvadoran prison official said two former guardsmen, serving 30-year terms for the murders of two Americans and a government aide, were freed under an amnesty law that is part of a Central American peace plan. The U.S. said that it was &quot;appalled,&quot; and that it would review $9 million in aid for El Salvador's judiciary.    ---   Two Chinese diplomats were expelled from the U.S. last week for activities incompatible with their official status, the State Department said. It was the first such incident since U.S.-China ties were established in 1979. The Washington Times newspaper reported that the pair had been arrested by the FBI on suspicion of espionage.    ---   Contra rebel leaders accused the Nicaraguan government of trying to stall the Central American peace process so it can strengthen its military. At a news conference in Miami, officials of the U.S.-backed insurgents also renewed demands to meet directly with the Managua government for another round of cease-fire talks.    ---   NASA engineers traveled to Morton Thiokol's Utah rocket plant to determine why a part of the space shuttle's booster rocket nozzle broke during a test last week. Meanwhile, the company canceled the scheduled Saturday shipment to Cape Canaveral, Fla., of rockets for the first post-Challenger launch, which was delayed indefinitely.    ---   Investigators for Morton Thiokol studied work logs and sifted through the wreckage of a Brigham City, Utah, building where a rocket-propellant fire Tuesday killed five workers. The fire destroyed the facility, which is used to make part of the MX missile. Officials said it could take several weeks to determine the blaze's cause.    ---   Authorities in Algona, Iowa, said seven people were found shot to death at the home of a prominent landowner in what may have been a murder-suicide. Family friends said the landowner's son apparently killed his parents, his sister and her three children and then turned the gun on himself.    ---   The Army has proposed to destroy its aging stockpile of chemical weapons in incinerators at sites in eight states, rather than transfer them to one or two facilities for destruction. The conclusion was contained in an environmental impact statement to Congress, the Army's latest step toward a 1985 order for disposal of the arms.    ---   Authorities in Poland proposed electionlaw changes that would end preferential ballot listings for local council candidates and provide for mandatory secret ballots next year. Warsaw's official news agency said the proposals, advocated by Soviet leader Gorbachev, were aimed at &quot;a further democratization of the election system.&quot;    ---   Dissident leader Kim Young Sam called for a merger of South Korea's divided opposition to defeat the governing party in next year's parliamentary elections. Kim, however, said the proposed merger could be possible only if rival opposition leader Kim Dae Jung disbands his breakaway movement, a condition that was rejected.    ---   Iraq said its warplanes bombed a tanker near the Iranian coast. The claim couldn't be independently confirmed. In London, the Independent newspaper reported that Iran agreed to provide chemical weapons to Libya in exchange for Soviet-made missiles. Iran's prime minister denied that Tehran was producing chemical arms.    ---   Prime Minister Mugabe was proclaimed Zimbabwe's first executive president by both houses of Harare's parliament. Mugabe is to be sworn in today, taking over from Canaan Banana, who has been titular president for the past seven years.    ---   Fighting erupted between Tamils and Moslems in Sri Lanka's eastern Batticaloa district. At least eight people were killed in the renewed violence, which followed the killing Sunday of as many as 30 people in Batticaloa, allegedly by police.    ---   A federal health official said the nation's first test of an experimental AIDS vaccine is behind schedule because finding 81 suitable volunteers is taking longer than anticipated. Only 26 volunteers have qualified, and officials, who had planned to have completed all injections by next month, now believe it will take three more months. </TEXT></DOC>