<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0136 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ALWC ACFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><DATELINE> DULUTH, Ga.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Arthur L. Williams says he is &quot;really on a high today.&quot; The head of the A.L. Williams insurance empire has just told 50,000 agents huddled before 900 satellite-TV receivers across the nation that they have won a national championship. The rest of the life-insurance industry, the former football coach chortles, should head for the showers.    The rest of the industry has never heard of the &quot;national championship,&quot; but it can't deny the score. With a born-again securities counterfeiter and American Can Co. as teammates, Art Williams's mostly part-time sales force of 155,000 sold enough term insurance last year -- $76 billion face value -- to lead the industry. His team won with this sales pitch: Cash-value insurance is &quot;the biggest rip-off in America.&quot;    &quot;He hit this industry like a bomb,&quot; says Ken Young, a Dallas Prudential agent who crisscrosses the country teaching agents how to fight A.L. Williams. &quot;They didn't know what happened to them.&quot;    Mr. Williams preaches integrity, but not everyone is convinced. &quot;A.L. Williams's sales tactics threaten industry survival,&quot; warned a recent headline in National Underwriter, a trade publication. Some critics call the company a cult; others, a pyramid sales scheme.    Mr. Williams calls it a crusade. It is right versus wrong, he says with the evangelical fervor of his friend Jerry Falwell, and he adds that A.L. Williams stands up for average families against fast-talking agents who would rob widows and orphans for a quick buck. Mr. Williams says other insurers mesmerize clients with talk about the investment potential of cash-value life insurance but don't mention that it often leaves a family with only a modest payoff if the breadwinner dies young.    The American Council of Life Insurance says the average death benefit paid by all insurers for policies on individuals in 1985 was $6,800 -- hardly more than a burial policy, in Mr. Williams's view. His policies paid an average death benefit of $72,000, although they didn't generate any investment value usable for educational expenses or retirement. With so much at stake, Mr. Williams doesn't care whether his agents bend a few rules.    &quot;In the real world . . . sometimes you have to hit after the whistle,&quot; he says.    The 44-year-old Mr. Williams also assails &quot;mealymouth liberals&quot;; a fellow Georgian, Jimmy Carter, often comes under attack. When President Reagan visited Atlanta last fall, Mr. Williams helped fill an auditorium with 3,500 agents and introduced him. Some 48 Williams executives anteed up $2,500 each for pictures with Mr. Reagan. Mr. Williams also gave $100,000 to Pat Robertson last year and pledged to raise another $1 million if the evangelist runs for the presidency.    But Mr. Williams calls politics only a diversion; his real passion is attacking what he calls the &quot;low-life scum&quot; of the traditional life-insurance industry. And he approaches it with what he concedes is &quot;an intensity and a will to win that's almost fanatical.&quot; He adds: &quot;Art Williams had a tremendous, burning desire to be somebody. Art Williams didn't want to be ordinary.&quot; Mr. Williams likes to refer to himself in the third person.    Seventeen years ago, Mr. Williams was making much the same take-no-prisoners locker-room speech to a championship high-school football team in Columbus, Ga. To make ends meet for his young family on his $10,700 salary, he refereed basketball games for $12 a night.    He started selling insurance part-time for ITT Financial Services and, he says, his commissions soon topped his teaching salary. A few years later, he was a full-time regional manager for Waddell andamp; Reed, where his use of part-timers and his belief in term insurance began to jell into dogma. In 1977, he took 85 believers and started his own insurance-sales company.    It sold so much so quickly that the insurer underwriting the policies exhausted its capital in six months, and Mr. Williams needed help. About that time, he met Charles &quot;Boe&quot; Adams, who was making a comeback and reading the New Testament cover to cover once a month after 12 months in prison for forging stock that he used as collateral in Texas land deals.    Before falling from grace, Mr. Adams had been the president of a Denton, Texas, life insurer. Earlier, he, too, had been a high-school coach and a part-timer in insurance. The two men quickly hit it off. &quot;My job is to keep Art on the right track,&quot; says Mr. Adams, who officially is only a consultant. Outside Mr. Williams's office at his suburban Atlanta headquarters is a life-size portrait of Mr. Adams that bears this inscription: &quot;The Mastermind.&quot;    That's worth about $2.5 million a year in income, he said last summer in a deposition in a federal district court in Alabama. He also testified that his contract calls for him to get about a third of Mr. Williams's income. Mr. Williams won't say what he makes.    Most of both men's earnings come from A.L. Williams andamp; Associates, a general agency owned by Mr. Williams and his wife and controlling the 155,000 agents. It is affiliated with A.L. Williams Corp., a public company that reinsures policies and markets mutual funds, $1.3 billion worth last year.    It takes a lot of money to grow an insurance company, and that's where American Can comes in. Massachusetts Indemnity andamp; Life Insurance Co., an American Can unit also called Milico, underwrites all A.L. Williams policies. The financial-services and specialty-retailing concern owns 20% of A.L. Williams Corp. This spring, an American Can unit will form a joint venture with A.L. Williams Corp. to sell its own mutual funds. The two companies have long-range plans for a partnership in home mortgages as well as home and auto insurance. Mr. Williams sums up their relationship: &quot;Right now, the A.L. Williams Corp. is just a dad-gum gravy train.&quot;    The train runs on an ideological zeal for term insurance -- simple insurance that pays a death benefit for a relatively small premium. Most insurers promote forms of cash-value insurance such as whole life and universal life that may have substantially lower death benefits and much higher premiums (and commissions) but also provide long-term savings.    Buy enough term insurance to protect your family, Mr. Williams says, and invest the difference in a mutual fund, preferably one he sells. The concept has long been advocated by consumer groups. What riles the industry is that Mr. Williams teaches his agents to indiscriminately replace other companies' cash-value policies. They say that isn't always good for the client; Mr. Williams says it is.    Many A.L. Williams agents going around comparing cash-value and term insurance are teachers or coaches or policemen who learned the business in a few months of part-time study. &quot;You might be interested in the possibility of earning $1,000 or $1,500 a month on a part-time basis,&quot; a recruitment brochure beckons.    &quot;We know most people go out there and sell to their friends and relatives and quit,&quot; says Mr. Williams, who adds: &quot;The whole industry has high turnover. You can't hire decent people who'd give up a comfortable, guaranteed job to go out there and sell life insurance when most are guaranteed to fail.&quot; At A.L. Williams, real salesmen are quickly separated from pretenders. Many part-timers have a three-sale career, and about 400,000 of them have come and gone in 10 years.    Those who stay and eventually go full-time -- about 30,000 of the 155,000 salespeople at present -- work for a company that forbids its agents to join trade associations such as the National Association of Life Underwriters. Recruits learn a new lexicon. You don't sell; you win. A competitor is an &quot;enemy agent&quot; who must be destroyed at the client's kitchen table.    Although condoning almost any tactics against rivals, Mr. Williams teaches his people to place God and family before business, and every convention includes Sunday-morning worship. Mr. Williams drinks nothing stronger than Diet Coke. Barbara King, an executive vice president, insists that he doesn't force his beliefs on anyone, but she adds, &quot;People follow Art because he's such a tremendous leader.&quot;    Eddy Rae Kelly recalls a meeting at which Mr. Williams passed out new contracts to be signed. According to Mr. Kelly, &quot;Art says, 'We need them back in today. There's no reason you would want to take it home unless you didn't believe in what I was saying.' I didn't want him thinking that. I believed in everything he said. It was like a religion.&quot;    Mr. Kelly, another former coach and once a regional vice president, says he would still be a believer -- and maybe a millionaire -- if he hadn't been fired. He is suing in a federal court in Alabama over his termination.    For a few, the dream of becoming a millionaire will come true. Mr. Williams says about 1,000 agents earn more than $100,000 a year. S. Hubert Humphrey, a former south Georgia railroad engineer and one-time Amway distributor (but never a coach), says he made $1.5 million last year before office and travel expenses.    Mr. Humphrey, the manager cited in Mr. Kelly's allegations, heads a &quot;family tree&quot; of 30,000 agents and gets overrides on all of them. All 155,000 agents are in Mr. Williams's family.    Everybody gets an override on the sales of those he has recruited -- and their recruits as well. That sounds like a sales pyramid to some, but it isn't illegal because money flows up the family tree only through insurance sales. Mr. Williams says this gives his salespeople unlimited opportunity; critics say it offers more incentives for recruitment than sales.    Every client, then, is viewed as a potential recruit. Before selling, he has to get a license, but Mr. Williams says any &quot;dum-dum&quot; who pays a state licensing fee of $25 or so can pass the exams.    Such talk sparks much hand-wringing. Rival companies complain to state regulators that A.L. Williams sales materials distort comparisons of term and cash-value insurance. Unlicensed trainees who supply leads are sometimes accused of participating in sales and getting money under the table. The military and the Tennessee Valley Authority have had complaints of agents pressuring subordinates. Others accuse the company of a smorgasbord of little deceptions. For example, a brochure cites a U.S. Treasury decision to bolster an argument against dividend-paying policies but omits its date -- 1911.    Mr. Williams views matters such as the 1911 Treasury decision as acceptable &quot;late hits.&quot; He denies that his brochures distort comparisons, though he concedes that he has revised sales literature several times under regulatory pressure. He adds that he doesn't encourage his agents to break the law but says that, with 155,000 of them, a few violations are inevitable.    The bottom line, he contends, is that one of the most powerful industries in America has scrutinized his every move and failed to persuade regulators to shut him down. The industry has scored a few minor regulatory victories: Milico and A.L. Williams have entered into consent orders and paid fines as high as $13,500.    About the most the insurance industry has been able to do is ordain several unofficial spokesmen who have turned A.L. Williams bashing into a mini-industry. The most prominent is Joseph Belth, an Indiana University professor who writes a newsletter on insurance issues. He has accused the company of various excesses, including churning clients' portfolios. Since selling 160,000 reprints the first time he criticized the company, he has written about it frequently -- always noting that reprints sell for 20 cents each.    Mr. Williams says mealymouths -- whiners -- just increase his zeal. But for a while last year, he flirted with politics. Georgia Republican leaders even approached him about running for governor. After about eight months, however, he says the &quot;low-life&quot; he met in politics caused him to &quot;run for the hills.&quot;    Besides, it seemed that every time he watched a football game, he had to endure a Prudential commercial. By year-end, he knew his priorities. &quot;When I take my last dad-gum breath,&quot; he says, &quot;I want to be kicking Prudential's butt.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>