<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870313-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Carr Suffers Slings, Arrows of First Executive's Fortune---Chairman Works to Dispel NotionsAbout Life Insurer's Operations---By David B. HilderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FEXCFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last Friday, a rumor started spreading among analysts and others who track the fortunes of First Executive Corp. that Fred Carr, chairman of the fast-growing insurance holding company known for its big &quot;junk bond&quot; portfolio, had been arrested in connection with the government's widening investigation of insider trading.    Thomas G. Richter, an insurance analyst with Robinson-Humphrey Co. in Atlanta, was certain the rumor was false. But after hearing it several times and watching First Executive's stock drop, Mr. Richter telephoned Mr. Carr at his office to make sure. Mr. Carr, who obviously wasn't under arrest, joked that if he were ever arrested, he'd use his one phone call to alert Mr. Richter.    Despite his good humor, these are trying times for the 55-year-old Mr. Carr, who brought First Executive from the brink of insolvency in 1974 to a position today as one of the nation's 20 largest life insurers.    The past four months have brought First Executive an unusual dose of bad news. Even as it fights rumors like last week's, the company faces increasingly hostile insurance regulators who are raising questions about the company's investment strategy and its methods of supporting growth. On each front, the battles are likely to affect the company's operations.    First Executive's sales keep soaring, but agents are spending more time defending the company against questions by customers and competitors. Some sales managers say business has been lost as a result.    Proposed regulatory limits on junk bond investments of First Executive's New York unit could cause the company to shift some business to a California-based unit that must pay higher premium taxes. Disputes with regulators in two states over the form of reinsurance contracts -- which are intended to shift certain risks to other companies and allow First Executive to keep issuing new annuity contracts -- could limit growth if they aren't resolved soon.    First Executive's stock price has been depressed recently, and several analysts believe that if the stock remains depressed, Mr. Carr will seek a buyer for the company. Mr. Carr won't comment on the analysts' speculation, but points to a statement in his 1975 and 1985 annual reports in which he said he believes &quot;shareholders should reap the benefits of their own patience and investment.&quot; In the past, he has sharply criticized executives who resist takeover bids in order to preserve their jobs.    Mr. Carr managed the Enterprise Fund in 1967 and 1968 when the mutual fund's shares tripled in value; the shares fell in the years after he stopped managing the fund. In the life insurance industry, he has long been controversial because his investments in the high-yielding junk bonds allowed First Executive units to offer higher rates on policies and annuities than most competitors.    The earliest of First Executive's recent woes also stemmed from its identification with junk bonds. In November, its stock took a pounding when the junk bond market fell in the wake of Ivan F. Boesky's guilty plea to insider trading charges and reports that Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s junk bond operation in Beverly Hills was under investigation. First Executive is believed to be one of Drexel's biggest customers, and Mr. Carr is close to Michael Milken, who heads the operation.    In December, the New York state insurance superintendent said he would propose limits on insurers' investments in junk bonds. Executive Life Insurance Co. of New York, a unit of First Executive, was identified as one of two companies regulated by New York that had more than 10% of its assets in junk bonds.    Last week, First Executive paid a $250,000 fine to the New York Insurance Department and contributed $152 million in capital to its New York unit to settle charges of violating various regulations on reinsurance contracts.    And this week, the California insurance commissioner, who regulates First Executive's biggest unit, Executive Life Insurance Co., said she believes the unit isn't complying with a 1985 order covering reinsurance contracts.    There isn't any indication that either First Executive or Mr. Carr is the subject of an insider-trading investigation. And the reinsurance disputes center on the wording of contracts, and don't concern the solvency of First Executive, which is among the most strongly capitalized insurers in the U.S.    But the rumors, the scrapes with regulators and the resulting news stories are taking a toll.    &quot;I'm sure that these things have lost us business,&quot; says Jerry Schwartz, president of Executive Life Insurance Co. of Arizona, a First Executive affiliate. &quot;My gut feeling is that we would have done more business if we hadn't had to spend time answering these questions (from potential clients).&quot;    Walter Duemer, who runs an agent group that accounts for about 35% of the life insurance policies issued by Executive Life in California, says, &quot;Of course it has had its impact. I'd rather be out marketing than hunkered down someplace with people throwing hand grenades in on me.&quot;    Mr. Carr, meanwhile, is angry because he believes some competitors are using the Boesky-Drexel investigation against First Executive. &quot;It is always difficult to deal with innuendo and untruths, because it's always easy to say about your neighbor, 'There's a possibility he may have herpes,'&quot; he says.    To fight the rumors, Mr. Carr held a conference call with eight securities analysts a few months ago and told them he was confident neither he nor First Executive would be implicated in the trading scandal. He won't say whether he has been questioned or subpoenaed in the investigation.    Mr. Carr says he welcomes the Securities and Exchange Commission's crackdown on insider trading. &quot;The Boesky situation is really a credit to the SEC because long term, it will provide substantially greater integrity in the securities markets,&quot; he says.    Further, since he joined First Executive, Mr. Carr says, he hasn't bought or sold any publicly traded common stock except his First Executive shares, which are valued at more than $22 million.    Mr. Carr, who was paid $1.3 million in 1985, lives in a rented two-bedroom condominium that's about a four-minute drive from First Executive's modern 11-story building on the west side of Los Angeles. He gets up between 5 and 5:30 a.m. and works at home, mostly on investment issues, until between 10 a.m. and noon, then goes to his spacious second-floor office. Placing that office on the lowest floor possible, Mr. Carr says, was to &quot;break the pecking order&quot; among senior executives who would normally jockey for offices on the highest floors.    Unlike many chairmen of financial companies, he doesn't have a stock quotation machine in his office. But he does have dozens of apples of all sizes and materials. They've been given to him to commemorate one of his first orders after taking the helm of a troubled Executive Life in 1974. &quot;I suggested putting out a basket of apples because we weren't going to be able&quot; to offer the employees much more, Mr. Carr recalls.    Despite his lingering reputation as a gunslinging mutual fund manager, Mr. Carr runs a company that is conservative by several financial measures.    Almost as a chorus, industry analysts and executives describe Mr. Carr's strategy as one of concentrating nearly all his risk in one area that he believes he can manage skillfully: the credit quality of the company's investment portfolio.    Standard andamp; Poor's Corp., for example, which gave Executive Life a triple-A rating for its ability to pay claims, said it &quot;found the company's investment performance to be at least as conservative as the typical 'triple-A' rated life company in every investment performance category except credit quality.&quot;    First Executive is less leveraged than several other major life insurers. Its units in 1985 had an assets-to-capital ratio of 11 to 1, compared with a 19-to-1 ratio at Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. and 18-to-1 at Prudential Insurance Co. of America.    In accounting for earnings from annuities, First Executive has taken a more conservative approach than some other insurers. First Executive books profits only as they are earned over the life of an annuity, although accounting rules allow companies to book as much as 33% of the earnings up front. And the company has relatively lower expenses than many insurers -- 15% of premiums at Executive Life in 1985, compared with 20% at Prudential and 33% at John Hancock Life Insurance Co.    First Executive's assets grew to $14.38 billion in 1986 from $1.88 billion in 1981. Its investment yields are among the highest in the industry -- about 13% in 1985, compared with an industry average of 9.9%. Last year, yields fell to 11.8% at Executive Life in California and 12.4% at Executive Life of New York. Industry figures for 1986 aren't yet available.    Junk bonds are largely responsible for the high yields, although there's some dispute about the exact size of First Executive's junk bond holdings. Mr. Carr says junk bonds represent more than 40% of First Executive's assets. Terence Lennon of the New York Insurance Department, however, says Executive Life of New York had at least 57% of its assets in junk bonds at year end, while Executive Life in California had 47%. Mr. Carr declines to comment on the figures, but says the New York unit has a higher percentage of junk bonds than the California unit.    Mr. Carr, who personally directs the company's investment strategies, appears to have a better-than-average record in picking junk bonds. Currently, about $100 million of its debt securities holdings are in default, or about 1% of its corporate debt portfolio, compared with the historic default rate on junk bonds of about 1.5%. Reserves of $100 million have been set up against possible losses on those defaults, Mr. Carr says.    The disputes with New York and California regulators over reinsurance could hinder First Executive's continued growth. Annuity issuers generally promise to pay interest rates to annuity holders that exceed those specified in insurance regulations. For regulatory purposes, the insurer must set aside enough cash to cover the difference between the two rates over the life of the annuity, generally several years.    To get around that requirement, insurers can pay a reinsurer to assume part of the risk of loss on the annuity in return for part of the premium. But most reinsurance contracts don't transfer investment risk -- the risk of failing to earn enough to pay the promised rates. That's where First Executive, which has relied heavily on reinsurance to support expansion of it business, and the regulators haven't agreed on the proper form of contract.    &quot;With the new generation of products, the real risk is the investment risk,&quot; says Mr. Lennon of the New York department. &quot;These companies (such as First Executive) don't want to pass the investment risk because they don't want to pass the assets over.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>