<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890914-0005 </DOCNO><DD> = 890914 </DD><AN> 890914-0005. </AN><HL> What's News --@  World-Wide </HL><DD> 09/14/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   HUNGARY INTENDS to rewrite accords limiting migration of East bloc residents.    Saying Warsaw Pact agreements limiting movement in Eastern Europe are out of step with human-rights commitments, Budapest's deputy foreign minister said Hungary will revise certain policies. He also said the government will continue to dismantle border barriers but doesn't intend to be a springboard to the West. More than 12,000 East German refugees crossed through Hungary en route to West Germany this week after Budapest's decision to allow their departure.    Authorities said more than 200 East Germans were occupying West Germany's embassies in Poland and Czechoslovakia in hopes of resettlement.    ---   More than 20,000 South Africans joined Anglican Archbishop Tutu and Cape Town's white mayor in a march to protest police brutality during recent rallies. The government ordered police to allow the demonstration, considered the biggest anti-government march ever permitted in the country.    ---   Leftist Salvadoran rebels offered to end their 10-year-old civil war and reorganize as a political party in exchange for judicial, political and military changes by the government. The proposal came at peace talks in Mexico City between the guerrillas and President Cristiani's rightist regime, which didn't immediately respond to the bid.    ---   Colombian drug traffickers are receiving international assistance to broaden and protect their multibillion dollar businesses, according to two men who have had dealings with the cartels. Separately, some House Democrats broke with their Senate counterparts and endorsed Bush's $7.9 billion antidrug plan.    ---   Los Angeles's city attorney filed a civil lawsuit against Mayor Bradley for allegedly improper reporting of securities holdings, but didn't bring criminal charges. The move capped a five-month inquiry. The U.S., meanwhile, is investigating the mayor's financial ties with former Drexel junk bond chief Milken.    ---   New York City Democrats pledged unity after Tuesday's mayoral primary victory by Manhattan Borough President Dinkins, who could become the first black mayor of the nation's largest city. Dinkins faces a challenge by ex-U.S. Attorney Giuliani, who is running on both the GOP and Liberal Party lines.    ---   The Senate failed to override Bush's veto of a congressional resolution imposing restrictions on the joint development with Japan of an advanced jet fighter. The 66-34 vote will allow the administration to oversee U.S. participation in the FSX program without statutorily binding curbs.    ---   The House rejected a Senate effort led by Helms to prohibit federal funding of art deemed obscene or blasphemous. Critics of the motion, which was defeated 264-153, argued that the restrictions would amount to censorship and jeopardize the future of the National Endowment for the Arts.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union are nearing a landmark agreement to disclose their stockpiles of chemical weapons and permit inspection of production facilities, Bush aides said. The pact is expected to be announced at a meeting this month between Baker and Shevardnadze. Bush will meet next week with the Soviet foreign minister.    ---   Scientists in Boston have found new evidence for genes that control the human immune response, determining whether individuals can fend off particular viruses, develop allergies or contract diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. The finding opens a new avenue in research on varying abilities to fight infections.    ---   Methane gas exploded in a coal mine in western Kentucky, killing at least 10 miners and injuring two, state police in Wheatcroft said. Federal officials said the blast was the nation's worst coal-mine accident since 27 workers were killed in 1984 in Utah.    ---   Poland's new government pledged to introduce Western-style economic changes to steer the country toward a market economy after 45 years of Communist centralization. But Communist trade unions warned the Solidarity-led regime, on its first full day in power, that they would resist unemployment and privatization of state enterprises.    ---   Western relief workers fled a refugee camp on the Thai-Cambodian border as fighting intensified between Cambodian factions. The clashes followed the failure of last month's peace talks in Paris and came less than two weeks before Vietnam's planned troop withdrawal from Cambodia.    ---   The U.S. and Nicaragua held a high-level meeting over this past weekend, the first such contact in almost five years. An assistant secretary of state joined a four-member congressional delegation for the discussions in Managua with President Ortega.    ---Afghan guerrillas launched an offensive near the strategic Salang Highway north of Kabul in an attempt to cut Soviet supply routes to Afghanistan's forces. In the capital, about 25 rockets exploded around the airport, killing a soldier and setting a Soviet supply plane ablaze, witnesses said.    ---   Israeli leaders discussed a proposal by Egypt's President Mubarak aimed at breaking an impasse over Mideast peace efforts. But Premier Shamir's top aide dismissed the plan, which calls on Israel to trade land for peace, and rejected suggestions for Israeli-Palestinian peace talks in Cairo.    ---   Syrian and Christian forces battled in and around Beirut, killing at least three people and wounding 17, police said. The fighting occurred as Arab mediators met in an attempt to revive a stalled peace effort in Lebanon's 14-year-old civil war. </TEXT></DOC>