<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0184 </DOCNO><HL> Year-End Review of Markets and Finance:Asia's Small Stock MarketsEmerge as Stars of Region---By James LeungStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST JAPANSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> HONG KONG  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The word these days in Asian investment is: Think small.    Asked to pick the best buy of 1987 among the region's stock markets, Marshall Auerback, a fund manager here, recommends Thailand, one of the region's smallest. Peter Everington, another fund manager here, says he is bullish about Hong Kong and the Philippines.    Indeed, the smaller stock markets have emerged as Asia's star performers in the past several months, and stock analysts say these markets will continue to shine at least in the first half of 1987.    In contrast to Hong Kong, Thailand and the Philippines, the Tokyo stock market, by far Asia's largest, has lost some of its glitter and looks &quot;decidedly too expensive,&quot; says Mr. Everington, a director of Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd. Although many Japanese investors have remained bullish, scores of foreign investors have pulled out since August.    The long-neglected Australian stock market has staged a spectacular bull run that could carry into the early part of 1987. But the longer-term outlook is clouded by the country's nagging recession, a large current account deficit and increased taxes. The current account measures trade in goods and services plus certain unilateral transfers of funds.    Singapore looked extremely promising in mid-1986. But the excitement generated by signs of an economic recovery that began earlier than expected wore out toward the end of the year. The stock market, too, has receded into the doldrums. &quot;More positive economic figures are needed to back up investors' expectations and give the stock market there another push,&quot; says Mr. Auerback, portfolio manager of G.T. Management (Asia) Ltd.    Of the other regional stock markets, South Korea and Taiwan are attractive but not directly accessible to foreign investors. The Indian stock market did well in 1985 and early 1986, but the rally slowed, in part because of Indian government raids on many stock brokerages to look for tax evaders, which upset the market.    The following is a sketch of how the region's major stock markets fared last year and their prospects for 1987.    JAPAN: The stock market had a good year despite occasional falterings. The Nikkei-Dow Jones Index, the most widely read market indicator, rose to 18,701.30 at the end of 1986, up 43% from a year earlier. But the outlook for 1987 is much less assured.    &quot;The question here is: What to buy?&quot; says Shozo Ishibashi, a senior manager of Nomura Securities Co.'s research unit. &quot;Neither the export-sector stocks nor the domestic-sector stocks seem particularly attractive at this time.&quot;    The strong yen has reduced the competitiveness of Japanese products in overseas markets. For that reason, many stock analysts have been bearish about shares of Japanese manufacturing companies for quite a few months. Although the exchange rate of the yen has stabilized against the dollar, the export sector on the Tokyo exchange has remained dull. &quot;The performance of the export companies is no good,&quot; says Mr. Ishibashi.    Expectations that the government will try to fuel internal economic growth to make up for the slack in exports has stirred rampant speculation in the shares of companies engaged in domestic businesses, including property development, transportation and retailing. Hottest among these companies are those that own large tracts of land in or around Tokyo. Such companies' shares have soared.    Still, the government hasn't done much to spur economic growth. It hasn't even begun to liberalize the strict zoning regulations that have hobbled property development in Tokyo for many years.    Some of the major players in the stock market have been the large Japanese corporations. They have invested substantial portions of their surplus funds in the stock market instead of in plants and machinery because of the uncertain export outlook.    Investment analysts in Japan say these corporate investors are still active in the market. &quot;They are keeping the stock market on the boil despite the lack of fundamentals,&quot; says a foreign stockbroker in Tokyo.    But many foreign investors have been selling heavily since mid-1986 to take profits, expecting share prices and the yen's value to decline.    Both did. In the two months from late August, share prices fell an average of nearly 15%, according to Nomura. The yen also weakened from a high of 152. Although share prices have recovered since the Bank of Japan lowered the discount rate to 3% from 3 1/2% in November and the yen's exchange rate against the dollar stabilized, foreign investors have remained wary.    HONG KONG: The colony's stock market has been a major benefactor of the uncertainties in Japan. After selling chunks of their holdings in Japan in mid-1986, many fund managers diverted their investments, mainly to Hong Kong. The Hang Seng Index, Hong Kong's leading market indicator, began to surge in September. It closed at 2,568.30 at the end of 1986, up 47% from a year earlier.    At current prices, the Hong Kong stock market is still &quot;cheap by international standards,&quot; Mr. Auerback says. The prospective average price/earnings ratio remains at about 11, compared with 50 for Japan and 20 for Singapore.    What's more, the Hong Kong economy is doing well. Exports are booming and foreign investment in the property market is rapidly increasing.    &quot;We expect Hong Kong will continue to do well in 1987,&quot; Mr. Everington says. But he and many other stock analysts warn that trade protectionism in the U.S. could greatly depress the colony's economy and short-circuit the stock market boom.    SINGAPORE: The exchange rebounded sharply in May when the economy, earlier than expected, showed signs of a recovery from the slump of the past two years. The rally pushed the widely followed Straits Times Industrial Index to about 940 in November from 570 in early May. Stock analysts predict that the economy will expand 1.5% in 1986 compared with earlier forecasts of negative growth.    Stock analysts say, however, that Singapore's market looks a little overpriced. &quot;Most of the blue-chip stocks are fully valued,&quot; says Hugh Peyman, senior analyst at the Singapore unit of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner andamp; Smith Inc. Mr. Ishibashi agrees, adding that the market has gotten all it can out of the economy's rebound. &quot;The market needs new impetus,&quot; he says.    That could come from an unlikely source: Malaysia. Although the Malaysian economy will continue to be depressed by low oil prices, stock analysts say, prices of other commodities, including palm oil and rubber, have bottomed out.    &quot;The best news over the past month (November) has been the resurgence in palm oil prices,&quot; Mr. Peyman says. The prices of rubber and tin, too, &quot;seem to have come off the bottom,&quot; he says. He predicts that the market leaders will shift from Singapore blue chips to Malaysian plantation companies.    THAILAND: Until 1986, few investors cared much about the Thai stock market. Its market capitalization, at about $2 billion, is less than 0.2% of Japan's. But size doesn't matter anymore. What's important is that there is money to be made, fund managers say.    Stock analysts say the Thai economy, estimated to grow 5% in 1986, fared better than those of Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia. Mr. Auerback predicts that the economy will continue to do well in 1987, with growth of about 6%.    Despite solid economic fundamentals, the Thai exchange has remained underrated compared with Singapore and Malaysia. Stock analysts say they expect share prices in Thailand will rise sharply next year to bring the average rating of the Thai stock market more in line with those of its neighbors. &quot;There is no reason the average P/E ratio of the Thai stock market is eight while that of Singapore and Malaysia is over 20,&quot; Mr. Peyman says.    The main drawback of investing in the Thai stock market is that the choice is limited. There are only about five or six large companies actively traded. The remainder are mostly small family-controlled concerns, shares of which are hardly ever traded.    AUSTRALIA: The surge in the price of gold in mid-1986 kicked off a rally in the Australian stock market. The All-Ordinaries Index closed at 1,473.10 at the end of 1986, compared with 1,003.80 a year earlier. J.B. Were andamp; Son, a large Australian stockbrokerage firm, says that the strong performance of the stock market in 1986 was sustained by a flow of investment capital to take advantage of the strengthening Australian dollar.    J.B. Were analysts say, however, that this doesn't leave the market overpriced. One reason for the bullishness is that the large depreciation of the Australian dollar since February 1985 has strengthened the competitiveness of Australian industries. Another bullish factor is that bank interest rates are unlikely to go any higher because of the currency's strength. J.B. Were analysts say the Australian government may even try to lower bank interest rates to encourage industrial investment by Australian companies.    But many investment analysts caution that Australia's economic outlook is far from rosy and the large current account deficit continues to undermine the strength of the Australian dollar in the longer term. </TEXT></DOC>