<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870611-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   PROTESTERS CLASHED with police in South Korea during anti-government riots.    Tens of thousands of demonstrators in Seoul and at least 19 other cities attacked government buildings and police stations as violence erupted after South Korea's ruling party endorsed President Chun's choice, Roh Tae Woo, as its candidate for president. Hundreds of people were injured and hundreds more arrested during the clashes. The demonstrations were considered the largest anti-government protests since Chun took power in 1980.    The nationwide protests were called by opposition leaders, who have demanded constitutional changes to allow for direct presidential elections.    ---   SUMMIT LEADERS AGREED to intensify efforts to combat AIDS.    In a joint statement issued at the close of the seven-nation economic summit in Venice, the leaders agreed to promote international cooperation in an effort to eliminate the disease, which was called &quot;one of the biggest potential health problems in the world.&quot; The statement also noted that any steps taken would have to ensure &quot;the principles of human rights,&quot; a reference to AIDS testing. The leaders also pledged to continue their fight against illegal drugs.    Weinberger said the U.S. doesn't expect Iranian attacks in the Persian Gulf despite the summit's failure to fully endorse Reagan's policy in the region.    ---   BOTHA EXTENDED South Africa's nationwide state of emergency.    Appearing before Parliament, the South African president announced that the emergency decree would be renewed, saying &quot;the security of the state is at stake.&quot; The new decree extends the emergency for as long as a year. Under emergency rule, imposed last June to crack down on unrest that has left about 2,500 dead in black townships, there has been sweeping media censorship and thousands of South Africans have been detained without trial.    Apartheid opponents faulted Pretoria's move and said two weeks of protests have been scheduled throughout the country starting Friday.    ---   The U.S. will attempt to oust the Teamsters union's national leadership, law enforcement officials said. Justice Department lawyers are drafting a civil lawsuit seeking to remove the union's president and its central executive board on the grounds that the union hierarchy allegedly is controlled by organized crime.    ---   Pope John Paul II told more than one million people at an outdoor Mass near the Polish city of Tarnow that he supported the banned Rural Solidarity union. The pope later traveled to his home parish in Krakow, where police scuffled with anti-government protesters as the pope beatified a 16-year-old girl killed by a Russian soldier in 1914.    ---   Police in Panama City fought thousands of protesters who demanded that the armed forces chief resign following allegations that he was involved in election fraud and conspired with the CIA in the 1981 death of former leader Gen. Omar Torrijos. The CIA and the armed forces chief, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, denied the charges.    ---   Sri Lanka halted an army offensive against Tamil rebels in the northern Jaffna peninsula, saying it was prepared to enter talks to end the island nation's ethnic crisis. Colombo's foreign minister, meanwhile, said India's violation of Sri Lankan airspace last week damaged New Delhi's credibility as a mediator in any negotiations.    ---   The House Labor panel cleared a bill that would bar private employers from using lie detectors to test workers. The panel voted 25-9 for the measure, which is bitterly opposed by many firms. Unions contend polygraphs are unreliable and an invasion of workers' privacy.    ---   Spain's ruling Socialists were winning about half the seats in elections for the European Parliament, but appeared to be losing ground to centrist and rightist parties in local and regional balloting, early returns showed. The Socialists, however, were expected to remain the dominant party despite opposition to their economic policies.    ---   Three rockets were accidentally launched when lightning struck a launch pad at Wallops Island, Va., NASA said. The rockets, designed to study thunderstorm effects, plunged harmlessly into the ocean.    ---   A House panel approved a $5.2 billion, five-year welfare revision package. The bill, passed 23-13 by the Ways and Means panel, would replace Aid to Families with Dependent Children with a new program that would require many recipients to work or participate in work-related activity, such as job training.    ---   Britain's election campaign ended with Prime Minister Thatcher apparently poised to win an unprecedented third consecutive term today. Labor Party leader Kinnock predicted an upset over Thatcher's Conservatives, despite the latest opinion polls showing the Tories with a lead over Labor.    ---   France scheduled a long-awaited referendum on independence in New Caledonia for Sept. 13. Paris also said it would send police reinforcements to its South Pacific territory to prevent a possible outbreak of violence.    ---   Mortars were fired at the hilltop palace of Lebanese President Gemayel in Baaba in an apparent sign of impatience over the pace of investigations into the June 1 murder of Prime Minister Karami. The bombs were fired as Moslem leaders and others met in Syria to discuss a Damascus-backed front aimed at pressuring Gemayel.    ---   Died: Richard Roth Sr., 82, architect and chairman of Emery Roth andamp; Sons, Tuesday, in New York City. </TEXT></DOC>