<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Marion Laboratories Succeeds With Different Approach---Drug Industry Maverick Wins by UsingLicensing, Super Sales Force---By Wendy L. WallStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MKCPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> KANSAS CITY, Mo.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Not long ago, Marion Laboratories Inc. was a Yugo amid the Cadillacs of the drug industry. Lately, it's beginning to look more like a Ferrari.    In recent years, the tiny drug company's exploding sales and profit have made it an industry favorite on Wall Street. Marion's net income soared 76% in the year ended June 30, marking its fifth consecutive year of profit gains exceeding 50%. Marion has also been the hottest performer in a strong market for drug stocks: Its stock price has more than doubled so far this year.    All this is particularly startling since Marion is something of a maverick. The staid Missouri company is the only major U.S. pharmaceutical maker that doesn't develop any new compounds of its own. Instead, it scours the globe, licensing drugs and bringing them to the U.S. market. It has hit the jackpot twice in recent years.    Moreover, marketing tactics Marion developed as a small start-up trying to compete against the majors have won it a reputation as one of the best marketers in the pharmaceutical industry. As competition intensifies and drug development costs soar, many old-line drug companies are starting to mimic Marion's moves.    The company focuses on chronic diseases, giving it a strong position in the widening geriatric market. Instead of spending millions in serendipitous pursuit of new compounds, Marion pours the same money into research that broadens the uses of its licensed drugs. And it combs databases to target its personal sales pitches to known high-prescribers; it uses the telephone to sell to the rest.    Such tactics have turned Cardizem, a heart medication, into the powerhouse behind Marion's growth. When the company introduced the drug in 1982, two similar compounds were already on the market. Cardizem overtook both competitors and is now the nation's largest-selling cardiovascular drug. Cardizem may have the highest sales of any U.S. drug within two years, predicts David Crossen, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein andamp; Co. in New York.    But potential problems also loom. Marion faces increasing competition for new products, as soaring drug development costs drive other pharmaceutical companies toward licensing. And the company's marketing tactics haven't played well to some health maintenance organizations, a rapidly growing segment of the health care market.    Marion was founded in 1950 by a former drug salesman, and its late arrival on the pharmaceutical scene molded its strategy. Lacking the financial muscle to develop new compounds, Marion initially sold vitamins and Os-Cal calcium supplements. Later, the company pioneered drug licensing, searching Asia and Europe for drugs it could bring to the U.S. market.    In the late 1970s, Marion scored two coups. In quick succession, it licensed Carafate, a highly successful anti-ulcer drug, and Cardizem, the blockbuster heart medication. Marion licensed Cardizem from Tanabe Seiyaku Ltd. of Japan only after other drug companies had passed it up. Marion executives say the drug's limited side effects made it attractive despite the fact that two similar medications beat it to the market.    Marion's marketing tactics, like its licensing approach, was shaped by its size. When Marion began selling Cardizem in 1982, one of its chief rivals in that market, New York-based Pfizer Inc., had nearly four times as many salesmen. &quot;If you don't have the resources and you want to play the game,&quot; you have to develop new approaches, says Harley Tennison, Marion's vice president of marketing.    The company's marketing effort starts early -- during the clinical trials needed to win regulatory approval for a drug. The company invites its marketing executives to participate in research planning meetings, and recruits top doctors to work on its studies. Mr. Tennison calls this the &quot;pyramid concept&quot;: If a field's top authorities are convinced of a drug's merits, they will influence others.    To help spur demand, Marion pushes research efforts far beyond what is necessary to gain regulatory approval for the new drug. The company annually budgets some 13% to 15% of its sales for research; but, without the need to discover new compounds, it spends most of that money broadening the understanding -- and often the uses -- of a given drug. &quot;Marion saw the connection between research and marketing,&quot; says Mr. Crossen, the Sanford Bernstein analyst. Adds Fred W. Lyons Jr., Marion's president and chief executive officer, &quot;We get more mileage for our research dollar.&quot;    When Marion licensed Carafate, the anti-ulcer drug, most physicians thought it simply acted like a Band-Aid, coating the stomach lining, says Mr. Crossen. Marion's subsequent research showed that it also stimulated cell renewal and actually helped cure ulcers.    Similarly, Marion's post-launch research greatly expanded Cardizem's potential market. Part of a class of drugs known as calcium channel blockers, Cardizem was originally approved for angina patients. The drug opens the coronary arteries, reducing blood pressure, improving the heart's performance and thus alleviating chest pain. Marion is now seeking regulatory approval to market the drug as a treatment for hypertension and an aid in preventing second heart attacks. Other studies have suggested still further uses of the drug. (Even Marion, however, concedes cardizem isn't right for everyone: When Mr. Lyons's mother had heart trouble, she was given Procardia, the competing Pfizer medication, because of her slowing heartbeat.)    Such extended research, together with the &quot;pyramid concept,&quot; seems to have worked: &quot;Cardizem had name recognition before the drug came on the market years before,&quot; says Dr. Raymond Woosley, a professor of medicine and pharmacology at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tenn.    Meanwhile, Marion has turned sales &quot;targeting&quot; into a science. Until recently, the company's traveling sales force could reach only one-sixth of the nation's doctors, Mr. Tennison says. So Marion reserved its personal sales pitches for a few important drugs. And it developed sophisticated computer programs to pinpoint the doctors who prescribe the most.    &quot;Cardizem sales reps go straight to the people who make the difference,&quot; says Ivor Benjamin, a cardiology fellow at Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago. Partly because of this focused effort, Marion's &quot;detail men,&quot; as drug salesmen are called, had average sales of $156,000 in fiscal 1986, more than 50% above the industry average. (The company recently expanded its sales force in anticipation of even more impressive Cardizem sales. It currently has about 630 salesmen compared with 218 in 1982.)    And Marion's detail men are renowned for their skill and aggressiveness. Handpicked and highly trained, they are said in the industry to be able to &quot;sell an ashtray,&quot; says Hemant Shah, an analyst for Nomura Securities International Inc. who previously worked as a drug detail man for another company. Adds Dr. Woosley, the Vanderbilt professor: &quot;They can get into busy doctors' offices where the Merck (andamp; Co.) guy can't.&quot;    Marion's telemarketing sales force deals with other customers: wholesalers, retailers, doctors who write few prescriptions and those in geographic and medical areas outside of Marion's main focus. When Marion launched the telemarketing program in 1977 to save on travel costs, telemarketing was almost unheard of in the drug industry; since then, some other big drug houses have followed suit.    But Marion's tactics haven't won over one fast-growing segment of the health care market: health maintenance organizations. Perry Cohen, vice president of pharmacy services at Hawthorne, Calif.-based Maxicare Health Plans Inc., the nation's largest for-profit HMO, orders drugs for 43 pharmacies serving some 700,000 people. But he doesn't stock Marion's Cardizem. Instead, he buys competing drugs made by Pfizer and G.D. Searle andamp; Co., a unit of Monsanto Co. of St. Louis. He says the alternative medications are cheaper and just as effective.    &quot;Marion is behind everyone else in terms of getting to me,&quot; Mr. Cohen says. &quot;They're slower out of the chute.&quot;    James E. McGraw, Marion's chief operating officer, says the company is beginning a big push to win such business: Mr. Cohen, for instance, recently attended a seminar at the company, and Marion just hired a former HMO chief executive to help in its effort. Nevertheless, Mr. Lyons says the company's main problem has been its refusal to knock down prices on bulk sales. He says Marion won't change that policy.    Meanwhile, Marion faces growing competition as skyrocketing drug-development costs force more and more old-line drug companies to spread risk through licensing agreements. &quot;At one point, we took products that were already on the market in other countries,&quot; says Mr. Lyons. &quot;Now, we're moving more and more into the very early stages of research.&quot;    In 1985, Marion formed a joint venture with Tanabe, its Cardizem licensor, to develop new products. It also has a contract research agreement with Nova Pharmaceutical Corp. of Morristown, N.J., and has invested in health care venture capital funds that give it a window on new technology. &quot;We are trying to do as many different things in Randamp;D as we can without actually doing synthesis,&quot; says a company spokesman.    Marion is wagering those arrangements will pay off in a host of new drugs. But the gamble is risky. Cardizem will boost sales for the next few years, but the drug will lose its patent protection next year. Carafate is already off patent, and both drugs could face generic competition by the early 1990s, analysts say.    &quot;The real test from now on is: Can they duplicate their enormous success of Cardizem with another compound?&quot; says David H. MacCallum, an analyst with Hambrecht andamp; Quist Inc. in New York. &quot;They've got another two to three years to go before the danger becomes more than a warning light.&quot;    For the moment, Marion executives are equanimical, predicting another 50%-plus jump in earnings in fiscal 1988 and possibly for a year or two beyond that. &quot;In all candor, we may not have another Cardizem,&quot; says the company spokesman. But he adds that the company has new drugs in the pipeline and doesn't need another blockbuster drug if it has a range of successful new products. &quot;It's inappropriate to say we've got the future aced,&quot; he says, &quot;but we are doing our homework.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>