<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871005-0038 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. ReachesTrade AccordWith Canada---Pact Faces Tough Scrutiny;Controversy Is ProbableOn Process for Disputes---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDAMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The new U.S.-Canadian trade agreement, initialed over the weekend, must face a politically tough ratification process in both nations -- especially in Congress.    The tentative pact, which would fall short of completely establishing &quot;free&quot; trade between the countries, nevertheless was hailed by President Reagan and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney as a historic step. Mr. Reagan predicted the pact will &quot;create thousands of jobs&quot; and &quot;serve as an important model for other nations.&quot;    But congressional reaction, and that of some Canadian politicians, was muted -- partly because the accord so far is only an agreement in principle that still must be fleshed out. Late last night, hours after a news conference to hail the pact, U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter and others were still negotiating details of major provisions.    &quot;It's obvious that a lot of the major points have not been resolved,&quot; Senate Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) said in a statement. John Turner, leader of Canada's opposition Liberal Party, termed the agreement a &quot;hothouse deal done in haste.&quot;    The most controversial provision in the proposed trade pact is likely to be a new mechanism it would create for settling trade disputes between the two countries. The new system would remove the right of court review and appeal as the final step in cases alleging unfair subsidies or &quot;dumping,&quot; which is defined as selling products below fair market value. Instead of the U.S. and Canadian courts, a new binational tribunal would hear such appeals, and its rulings would be final &quot;in all but the most exceptional circumstances.&quot;    The pact would retain the current process of administrative remedies under each nation's laws to resolve subsidy and dumping complaints. The Canadians had sought to eliminate the process entirely. But the U.S., which sought to continue the current system, did agree to make the new tribunal, and not the courts, the final level of appeal to determine if the government agencies -- such as the Commerce Department in the U.S. -- apply their own national laws properly.    For months, Congress has warned against acceding to Canada's demand for a new, binding dispute-settling system that would replace the current system for handling trade complaints. The arrangement approved by the negotiators would replace only a portion of the current system, and it isn't clear how Congress will react. Treasury Secretary James Baker said at a news conference yesterday that he expects Congress to accept the decision by U.S. negotiators to trade away court review because there is &quot;so much economic benefit in this (pact) for the people of America.&quot;    But some congressional trade staffers were already warning yesterday that lawmakers' blessing for the Canadian pact could be tied to administration compromises on the larger trade bill -- now pending in a conference committee -- which Mr. Reagan has threatened to veto.    Moreover, the dispute-settlement mechanism may raise constitutional questions in Congress because it would leave final application of U.S. law in the hands of a body partly composed of foreigners who weren't appointed by the president. But administration officials believe they can satisfy such complaints.    It's expected that Congress will be briefed on the tentative Canada trade accord this week, starting as early as today. Under a special law allowing for &quot;fast-track&quot; consideration of the proposed agreement, the administration has 90 days to get the full, proposed pact to Congress. After that, the House and Senate must vote on it, without amendments, within 60 legislative days. That means the final vote would come next March or April.    During the coming 90 days, Congress will get a chance informally to raise any objections, which the administration can try to fix in further talks with Canada. Congressional sources say it may be a month before a detailed draft is finished and can be sent to Capitol Hill.    In Canada, the accord will be submitted to Parliament, but Mr. Mulroney's Conservative government should have little problem getting approval because of its large majority in the House of Commons. However, the premiers of Canada's provinces, who are to meet soon, must also approve the pact, since carrying it out will require changes in provincial law. They have considerable independence from Ottawa and are likely to question sharply the dispute-settlement mechanism, which falls well short of Canada's original &quot;bottom-line&quot; demand for an independent panel that would replace, not merely review, U.S. administrative trade actions.    In a major victory for the U.S., Canada agreed to end a series of automotive-trade practices that enabled it to attract foreign factories making parts and cars for sale in the U.S. But the U.S. agreed to allow Canada to continue many practices limiting U.S. influence in its publishing, broadcasting and film industries. Ottawa justifies such restrictions as necessary to protect its &quot;cultural identity.&quot;    The pact also doesn't include a code limiting Canadian subsidies to domestic industries, which the U.S. has sought.    The two countries agreed to phase out all tariffs on trade between them within 10 years, and to remove or phase out trade quotas. But tariffs and quotas haven't been the main obstacle to increasing the $150 billion in trade in goods and services between the two nations. The thorniest issues have been non-tariff barriers, such as subsidies and various regulations. While the proposed pact would end certain of these non-tariff barriers, it wouldn't eliminate all of them.    U.S. liquor producers, who have complained that government-owned liquor stores in Canada discriminate against them, were promised more-equal -- but not fully equal -- treatment compared with Canadian companies. But details of the understanding on that issue were vague.    Some agricultural barriers were removed, including transportation subsidies for grain in western Canada, and meat-import restrictions in both countries. But a broad agricultural trade overhaul was left to world trade talks in Geneva.    Agreement was reached on codes governing investment and trade in financial and nonfinancial services -- all top U.S. goals and areas the U.S. hopes to stress in the current world trade talks in Geneva. But descriptions of these sections of the pact were still vague and all restrictions weren't lifted.    For instance, Canada would retain the right to review some U.S. investments in its economy, such as takeovers, but the accord would scale back that right in several ways. Equal legal treatment for nationals of both countries would be guaranteed in the services area, but only in &quot;new&quot; laws. And basic telecommunications would be exempt from equal treatment.    Canada promised to meet partially U.S. demands that it adopt stricter copyright and patent laws, but much of the U.S. request in this area will be put off to the world trade talks.    The agreement would lower to $25,000 from $171,000 the minimum size of government contracts that must be open to bidders from both countries, but it isn't clear if this would affect defense procurement.    This limitation on &quot;Buy American&quot; laws is one of several portions of the pact that may raise congressional ire. Others include the energy provisions, which would allow Canada access to Alaskan oil as part of the elimination of various restrictions and taxes on energy trade across the border.    Both sides expressed confidence the pact would be ratified. But on a number of occasions in the past 100 years, either the Congress or Canadian politicians have scuttled similar agreements.    U.S. and Canadian officials concede privately that Canada stands to gain more economically from the trade accord than the U.S., because it will win assured access to what Mr. Mulroney calls &quot;the largest, richest and most dynamic market in the world.&quot; But they insist the U.S. would gain sales, too, and would be able to use the services, investment and patent protection portions of the accord as a model in dealing with other nations. Canadian Finance Minister Michael Wilson called the agreement a &quot;win-win solution&quot; for the two countries.    Prime Minister Mulroney, who previously said that he had put his &quot;neck on the line&quot; in the negotiations, said Sunday that he now &quot;feels a little better about my neck.&quot; He has been trailing rivals in the polls for months, and hopes the agreement can help restore his political fortunes.    But Ed Broadbent, leader of Canada's socialist New Democratic Party, said he was deeply concerned about Ottawa's auto concessions, and demanded that the prime minister call a national election as a referendum on the trade pact. The mandate of the prime minister's government runs until late 1989, but he can call an election anytime.    ---   John Urquhart in Ottawa contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>