<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0031 </DOCNO><HL> That Airwaves Exchange---By Milan Svec</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   A surprising development of the Reykjavik minisummit is the discussion of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. exchanging radio programs.    According to the Soviet proposal, Moscow would stop jamming Voice of America broadcasts and provide the U.S. government air time on Soviet state-controlled, medium-wave stations. The U.S. would in turn let the Soviets broadcast on medium-wave stations here.    To some critics, the proposal appears to be more advantageous to Washington than to Moscow. This is not necessarily so -- the issue deserves further analysis.    It is worth contemplating, for instance, that the offer originated with the Soviets. Does this mean they have abandoned their longtime attitude that any independent information from abroad is dangerous? Continued jamming of Radio Liberty and intermittent jamming of Voice of America since Stalin's time suggest Moscow is still very sensitive about outside information. In this regard, the new Soviet proposal is a clear departure from previous policy. What are the reasons behind it?    Mikhail Gorbachev is much more aware than his predecessors were about the public-relations side of politics, and he has demonstrated a willingness to engage in it intensively. He probably realizes he won't be able to achieve any significant gains in this area, however, if he does not modify some aspects of the Soviet system -- strict internal censorship, for one. His ambitious economic plans also must have made it clear to him by now that Soviet science and technology will never catch up with the West as long as the U.S.S.R. remains a controlled, isolated society.    It is no exaggeration that Western broadcasts have had a huge impact on their recipients. They were especially important during the Cold War, when communist governments tried to impose a total blackout on news and ideas from the noncommunist world. The broadcasts made complete communist indoctrination unattainable and thus preserved freedom of thought, if not always of action. Soviet Bloc citizens gradually have learned how to live with the blunt realities of communist control; at the same time, however, authorities there have realized the limits of their power.    It is not only ordinary people who have been eager consumers of Western broadcasts. Soviet emigres have reported that even top Soviet leaders formed part of this listening audience. Stalin allegedly learned of his son's capture during World War II from foreign broadcasts. Leonid Brezhnev regularly followed the broadcasts of the Voice of America, and his successor, Yuri Andropov, listened to the BBC.    The relaxation of official controls in some communist countries has provided even larger access. While most Soviet Bloc countries continue jamming Radio Free Europe or Radio Liberty, the Voice of America (VOA) and other Western broadcasts are often not jammed at all or are jammed only selectively. In addition, people in large parts of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and East Germany have been able for a number of years to see Austrian, West German and Swiss television.    But the picture is even more complicated than that. Almost no one in communist countries, including the leaders, believes official domestic propaganda; rather, people tend to believe the opposite of what they are told. Some years ago, Radio Free Europe noticed that most of the East European emigres in West Germany were surprised to discover that there really was a genuine economic crisis in the country at that time. It had been widely reported by communist media, but because the West was consistently portrayed as being in the grips of a deep economic crisis, no one in the Soviet Bloc believed it, even when it was true. Communist Bloc people therefore often are unable to perceive reality even when exposed to Western television because of the stress on bad news; the viewers are reluctant to accept such a picture of life in the West.    With that in mind, the Kremlin could conclude that a somewhat freer inflow of U.S. radio programs might have a fairly mild impact. Meanwhile, Moscow's proposal to exchange radio programs provides it with some advantages. For example:    --It deflects attention from Moscow's other goals.    --Washington may be expected to keep its broadcasts within boundaries that would not cause the Soviets to break off the deal.    --Moscow will gain new opportunities to spread its propaganda in the U.S.    Regarding the final point, the deal proposed by the Soviets is very uneven. The U.S. will gain access only to that part of the Soviet population that either lives in remote parts of the country or is less inclined to be interested in Western broadcasts. The best-educated groups or those with the greatest interest in Western broadcasts already listen, where it is possible, despite the jamming.    The Soviets would gain access to a U.S. population that is mostly unprepared to deal with the manipulative Soviet approach to the news or to distinguish where information ends and propaganda begins.    American perceptions about the U.S.S.R. are basically correct. However, it would not be very difficult for experienced Soviet journalists to tamper with those perceptions, some of which, while correctly reflecting overall Soviet reality, are seemingly illogical. For example, the U.S.S.R. is perceived as capable of technological miracles in the military field while at the same time it is perceived overall as a technologically backward country. Seeming paradoxes such as this can be cleared up by an exposition of the facts. If, however, Soviet propagandists try instead to force upon their audience the necessity of &quot;logical choices&quot; between these inconsistencies, the picture Americans now have about the Soviet Union may eventually become distorted.    If the Soviets then start talking about such things as free health care, free education and the absence of unemployment in their country, they can justly claim that these are facts of Soviet life. But they will not concomitantly inform Americans about the poor quality or inaccessibility of some of these services.    To those who doubt the Soviets would be able to manipulate the U.S. public successfully, I recommend watching Soviet public-relations manipulators the next time they appear on U.S. television, perhaps during a series of joint satellite programs scheduled to be broadcast in both countries next year. Most of them speak excellent English and many are educated in the U.S. They know very well that their task would not be to inform, but to sell the Soviet system to open-minded Americans, most of whom will never visit to see it for themselves.    By contrast, the practical impact on the Soviet government of even the most successful U.S. information efforts will be minimal, at least in the short run. Soviet leaders are aware of the highly negative picture their country projects in the West. They are equally aware that making changes in the U.S.S.R. will not be easy. The Kremlin may be expected therefore to try to introduce only partial improvements and have the West view the changes through magnifying glasses provided by Soviet propagandists. They will resort to real changes only after they see that this ploy is not enough, either to make their society function better or to make it more acceptable abroad.    The U.S. has no need to be a part of such an obviously uneven deal.    ---   Mr. Svec is a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. He was the charge d'affaires of the Czechoslovakian Embassy in Washington before being granted political asylum in the U.S. in May 1985. </TEXT></DOC>