<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881026-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A SHIP SANK with more than 500 people aboard in a typhoon off the Philippines.    Rescuers in the Visayas Sea, about 300 miles southeast of Manila, said they had found only 15 survivors from the passenger liner, which was sunk by Typhoon Ruby. Coast guard officials said darkness and bad weather prompted the suspension of the search efforts. The storm, which hit the Philippines with 140 mph winds, killed nearly 100 people on land and left more than 100,000 homeless, authorities said.    Tropical Storm Miriam moved away from the Pacific coast of Central America, barely affecting Guatemala, El Salvador and southern Mexico.    ---   WALESA REFUSED to compromise over participants for talks with Warsaw.    The long-awaited talks on Poland's future between the government and the opposition appeared to falter as authorities objected to two Solidarity representatives. Walesa rejected a meeting with Warsaw's interior minister to discuss the matter, saying he wouldn't allow &quot;any personnel changes.&quot; A government spokesman said the preparatory meeting was &quot;indispensible&quot; for the start of the talks, expected this week.    The discussions, which could include the issue of legalizing the banned trade union, were set in August amid Poland's worst labor unrest in seven years.    ---   Dukakis told a late-night national television audience that he wouldn't adjust his campaign message in the face of polls showing him stalled behind Bush. The appearance on ABC-TV was the latest development in a new media offensive Dukakis hopes will permit him to exploit public dissatisfaction with the campaign.    ---   The Energy Department plans to permanently close nuclear plants in Fernald, Ohio, and in Rocky Flats, Colo., sources familiar with a draft report said. The report also recommends streamlining operations at three other facilities where nuclear-weapons material is produced. A final report is due in December.    ---   The Ku Klux Klan was ordered by a federal court in Atlanta to pay about $1 million to 49 civil-rights marchers who were attacked last year in Forsyth County, Ga. Two chapters of the KKK and 11 individuals were found responsible for attacking the marchers, who were pelted with rocks and bottles in the all-white county.    ---   South African police clashed with crowds protesting nationwide elections for segregated municipal councils. Black nationalist Winnie Mandela was among the demonstrators. Anti-apartheid leaders urged blacks to boycott the balloting, and Anglican Archbishop Tutu appealed for non-violence during the vote.    ---   The White House said the U.S. will no longer grant entry visas to certain categories of Nicaraguan officials. Under a new proclamation signed by Reagan, the ban applies to all Nicaraguan government and party officials with the exception of those carrying out activities related to the U.N. or other international organizations.    ---   Gorbachev and Kohl clashed over the reunification of Berlin on the second day of the West German chancellor's four-day state visit to Moscow. Kohl and the Kremlin leader, however, signed accords to help improve the Soviet Union's food industry and to put a West German in space.    ---   Yugoslavia's Kosovo province dismissed two members of its collective presidency in an attempt to ease ethnic tensions. But militant Serbs, who claim to be persecuted by ethnic Albanians, demanded a full purge. Strife between the two ethnic groups has led to Yugoslavia's worst political turmoil since the 1945 Communist takeover.    ---   The Dalai Lama proposed official talks with China on the future of Tibet. The exiled spiritual leader of Tibet, who said the talks should take place in Geneva in January, said he was encouraged by what he called the more open leadership in Beijing. The Dalai Lama fled to India after an abortive uprising against Chinese rule in 1959.    ---   The U.N. secretary-general said he planned to open a new round of talks Monday in Geneva aimed at reaching a permanent armistice in the Persian Gulf war. The talks between Iran and Iraq, which agreed to a truce in August, have been stalled over the disputed Shatt al-Arab waterway.    ---   A Peruvian airliner crashed in the Andes, killing at least 19 people and injuring the other 50 people on board, Aeroperu airlines said. The plane was en route to Arequipa from Juliaca, near the Bolivian border. The cause of the crash wasn't known.    ---   Reagan signed legislation creating the Department of Veterans Affairs, the nation's 14th cabinet-level agency. At a Washington ceremony, the president said the measure gives the U.S.'s 27 million veterans &quot;a seat at the table of our national affairs.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>