<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881020-0199 </DOCNO><HL> 'Civil Liberties,' Beyond the Anecdotes </HL><AUTHOR> Mark S. Campisano </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The American Civil Liberties Union has become a political issue with a life of its own, apart from the presidential campaign. The goals and ideals of the ACLU are undergoing a long-overdue examination, and most of the public doesn't like what it sees. The ACLU, for its part, complains that the critical depictions of it are distorted and merely anecdotal in nature. Executive Director Ira Glasser concedes the organization takes controversial positions, but insists they don't represent &quot;the bulk of what the ACLU does.&quot;    Well, is most of its work done on Bill of Rights cases that aren't &quot;out of the mainstream&quot;? Not today. A detailed examination of changes in the ACLU's caseload over time indicates that a new agenda of left-wing causes now occupies most of its time. The ACLU's new agenda is fundamentally hostile to the processes of American constitutional democracy.    The ACLU was founded in 1920, and spent its first 35 years defending fundamental civil liberties and civil rights. The Scopes case (1925) saw it defend the right of a public schoolteacher to discuss the theory of evolution with his students. In 1933, it secured a ruling that James Joyce's &quot;Ulysses&quot; was not obscene, and thus could be imported into the U.S. In Hague v. CIO (1939), it established the right of labor organizers to assemble, distribute literature, and speak in public streets. The ACLU protested the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II, carrying the Korematsu case (1944) to the Supreme Court. It also joined in the now-famous Barnett case (1943), which invalidated state laws requiring Jehovah's Witness schoolchildren to salute the flag despite their religious objections. And in 1954, it helped win the historic desegregation decision in Brown v. Board of Education.    These cases typify the &quot;old agenda&quot; of the ACLU: the rights of free speech, free press, free exercise of religion, freedom of assembly and association, and freedom from official acts of racism. Defending these rights used to take up almost all of the ACLU's energy. For example, a look at its caseload as detailed in its annual report for 1943 (selected because of the recent interest in the Barnett case of that year) shows 94% of its participations or interventions to be in that type of matter.    The ACLU's old agenda was beneficial to American society, because it helped to improve the operation of our constitutional democracy. By pressing the political arena to open itself to all viewpoints and all groups of citizens, the union helped to provide, in its own words, &quot;the missing ingredient that made our constitutional system finally work.&quot;    Regrettably, the interests of the ACLU have changed radically. The shift was already clear in its annual report for 1965, which shows only 66% of the cases pursued that year belonging to the organization's old agenda. And by 1987, the difference was stark. By that year, the ACLU no longer published details of its caseload in its annual report. But through Lexis, a legal database, it is possible to obtain a list of all cases heard by the Supreme Court, and decided in 1987, in which the ACLU filed a brief. Of these, only 45% belong to the organization's old agenda.    These figures give the ACLU the benefit of every doubt. Cases involving obscenity, sexual discrimination, and acts of private racial exclusion have been counted as part of the old agenda, though it's questionable whether the ACLU would have taken up all of those cases in its earlier years.    What is the ACLU doing with the rest of its energies? It has added a new agenda, which includes support for racial quotas and a virtual elimination of religion from public life. It also calls for substantial expansion of abortion rights, prisoners' rights, criminal defendants' rights, rights of the mentally ill, and so on.    Many may object to the substantive positions of this new agenda, but more important, the ACLU's recent thrust has a pernicious underlying theme: hostility to the processes of constitutional democracy. This appears in three basic forms: first, in attempts to override democratic processes, and replace them with judicial decrees, in ever larger spheres of public life; second, in attempts to expand individual &quot;rights&quot; without regard for countervailing public interests; and third, in attempts to prevent certain viewpoints from being heard in the public arena.    Overriding democratic processes. The premise of the old ACLU was that if politics were opened to all citizens and all viewpoints, then the process would generate tolerably fair results. The ACLU's old agenda sought merely to &quot;level the playing field&quot; before the game was played. That's why the ACLU used to advocate &quot;non-discriminatory treatment on the basis of individual merit, blind to race, color or religion.&quot; But that all changed in 1973, when it decided to reverse its earlier position and support racial quotas.    Now, the ACLU is in the Supreme Court supporting a racial-quota program that would force the city of Richmond, Va., to award 30% of all public-works contracts to businesses owned by blacks or members of other racial minorities. &quot;Individual merit&quot; no longer matters, and the ACLU certainly doesn't want Richmond to be &quot;blind to race.&quot; Equal opportunity is not enough: Now specified results are demanded, despite the openness (thanks in part to the old ACLU) of existing political processes. And the arm it seeks to use is the least democratic branch of government.    Unbalancing individual rights. In the ACLU's old agenda, there was little conflict between enhanced individual rights and legitimate public interests. On the contrary, the individual rights that were promoted generally made the democratic process work better. But the ACLU's new agenda exalts the desires of individuals without serious regard for genuine countervailing interests of society as a whole.    The ACLU's views on criminal defendants' rights illustrate this unbalanced attitude. The ACLU always had a few genuine criminal cases, but in earlier years they usually involved due process violations motivated by a desire to suppress unpopular viewpoints or groups for example, labor organizers or blacks. In recent years, the ACLU has greatly broadened its focus in this area, subordinating the legitimate public interest in social order.    For example, everyone knows that evidence obtained in an unconstitutional search is inadmissible in a criminal trial. But today's ACLU seeks to stretch that principle beyond recognition. In the recent Oliver case, two Kentucky state policemen received reports that a man was raising a crop of marijuana on his farm. They went to the farm and observed entire open fields of marijuana under cultivation, over a mile from the man's home. He was arrested, but at trial he claimed that the policemen's &quot;search&quot; of his fields had violated his rights. The ACLU supported this claim, arguing that such &quot;broad-scale, arbitrary intrusions&quot; violated a &quot;legitimate expectation of privacy.&quot; The Supreme Court rejected this argument, but a question remains: If &quot;privacy&quot; takes in an open field, how does the ACLU expect the police to do their job?    Restricting access to the public arena. The ACLU once emphasized opening up participation in American public life. But now it seeks to exclude certain perspectives, conspicuously those of various Christian groups, from that process. In the Barnett case the ACLU had stood against school officials who tried to restrict the religious freedom of students. But by the 1980s, the organization had come to supporting school officials who tried to prohibit voluntary meetings of students interested in religious discussions. In the Bender case (1986), high-school students in an evangelical Christian club had sought permission to meet on school premises during designated activity periods. All other student clubs were allowed to do so, but in this instance the answer was no. And the ACLU agreed, saying that to do otherwise would violate the Establishment Clause (against advocating and endorsing religion). On the same theory, the ACLU regularly seeks to stop public schoolchildren from singing &quot;Silent Night&quot; at Christmas time.    Indeed, it is time to move beyond anecdotes. It's not enough to attack the ACLU simply by reciting its 10 most eccentric opinions, nor is it enough to defend the ACLU by recalling its occasional defense of unpopular groups and viewpoints.    An accounting of the ACLU's caseload for the years 1943, 1965 and 1987 suggests that the organization is an ideological chameleon -- that beneath the protective coloration of &quot;civil liberties,&quot; the ACLU of today is pursuing a very different agenda, one contrary to basic principles of American constitutional democracy. The &quot;marketplace of ideas&quot; awaits a meaningful rationale for this transformation.    ---   Mr. Campisano, who once clerked for Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan Jr., is a New York lawyer. A related article by him appears in the current New Republic. Jack Goldsmith and David Flattum of Yale Law School helped in research. </TEXT></DOC>