<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0001 </DOCNO><HL> 'Sleepers' Frequently ProvideLittle Warning, or None;Their Size Can Be Colossal---By Ken WellsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Last Feb. 5 the Fish-n-Fool stood off the Baja California coast about 150 miles south of San Diego, its home port. The weather was fair. No one aboard the 57-foot sport fishing boat was prepared for what suddenly reared up out of the sea.    With no warning, a 20-foot wall of water that seemed to come from nowhere rushed at the vessel, flipping Fish-n-Fool like a toy and capsizing it. Only two of the 12 people aboard survived. The rest joined the countless victims of one of the ocean's most dangerous and unpredictable phenomena, the rogue wave.    Hurricanes, typhoons and great white sharks get more ink, but rogue waves, which occur in all oceans and large lakes as well, have also been the dread of sailors since the first man went to sea. Sometimes called &quot;sleeper&quot; or &quot;sneaker&quot; waves -- testimony to their sudden appearance -- they often give little or no warning.    As ocean commerce increases and man pushes out farther from the continental shores in search of oil, the study of rogue waves has gained more urgency. Given certain prevailing sea and wind conditions, oceanographers can now predict that rogue waves are likely to occur frequently in a certain patch of ocean, but they can't be more specific than that.    Rogues occur when two or more waves intersect and merge, often driven together by wind, to form a single wave far larger than the normal surrounding swells. The temporary result -- such waves break down after a minute or so -- may be anything from a harmless wave of modest size to a gale-driven, ship-killing monster more than 100 feet high, capable of bending and snapping steel girders like twigs.    Though no one knows the exact toll in lives and property damage taken by such waves, there are dozens of accounts of fishing boats and sailing vessels smashed and sunk by rogues. So devastating is the impact of these walls of water rushing at high speed that ships may go to the bottom almost instantly. In 1984 two rogues looming out of a squall struck the 117-foot Marques during a trans-Atlantic sailing race; it sank in less than a minute, and 18 of its crew of 27 died.    The largest of these waves have been blamed for sinking much bigger ships -- one of them almost swamped the Queen Mary in 1942 -- and for damaging and helping to topple offshore oil platforms. Even smaller ones occurring near shore can transform a walk on the beach into an adventure. Earlier this year San Francisco lawyer Stacey Pratt was exploring tide pools about 60 feet from the water's edge at a Big Sur, Calif., beach-and suddenly looked up to find a wave taller than a man, glowing orange in the fading light, towering over her. It dashed her against the rocks, but she hung on and survived.    Others aren't so fortunate. Such waves have swept bathers off beaches in Hong Kong, the French Riviera and Lake Michigan and account for perhaps a score of drownings off the California coast alone each year. At Wright's Beach, a spot 80 miles north of San Francisco where offshore rocks amplify waves by funneling them toward shore, rogues have accounted for most of the 69 drownings recorded since 1965.    &quot;Sooner or later, waves are going to intersect and reinforce. If you happen to be in the way, you could be in trouble,&quot; says Reinhard Flick, an oceanographer with California's Department of Boating and Water Safety.    Small boats can escape by turning their bows into the wave and riding over it -- if they have the time and if the wave doesn't break over them. In June, sixth-grader Damien Savoie was on a student whale-watching expedition off Rhode Island when his vessel was struck by a 20-foot rogue that suddenly materialized out of four- to six-foot seas; the vessel rode over it but plummeted like a roller coaster, flinging students around the deck and hurling Damien into the sea.    He was fortunate to be rescued. &quot;I was holding on to a bow railing and I found myself doing a handstand,&quot; recalls the boy, who had no life preserver and cannot swim. &quot;I thought I was going to die.&quot;    The size of rogue waves can be exaggerated by localized tides, currents and subsea terrain. Just northwest of San Francisco, in a choppy shoal known as the Potato Patch, strong ebb tides colliding with merging swells can produce steep, pyramid-shaped rogues that catapult sailboats end over end, a terrifying experience sailors know as &quot;pitchpoling.&quot; At least two crews have perished there in this way.    Out in the deep ocean, rogues can grow to colossal size. The largest ever measured lurched out of a North Pacific gale at the U.S. Navy ship Ramapo in 1933. The wave was 112 feet high. Miraculously, the ship survived. Many others have not, and even the biggest vessels may suffer heavy damage. In one 1974 case, a mountainous wave peeled off part of the bow of the Norwegian supertanker Wilford and snapped steel beams thicker than railroad tracks.    In trying to gauge the probable size of rogue waves under given conditions, scientists long relied on a formula that researchers at Canada's National Research Center in Ottawa have now put in question. Using computer models and wave-making machinery to unleash scale-model rogue waves against scale-model oil-drilling platforms, their work suggests that rogues are more common than previously thought and can grow bigger than the old formula indicated.    North Sea waves, for example, were thought to have a maximum potential height of 85 feet; actually, the limit appears to be well over 100 feet. Such findings have led to planned increases in the height of drilling platforms and other structures.    Armed with a clearer understanding of the conditions likely to produce rogue waves, oceanographers also are getting better at predicting them, at least in a general way. For example, J.K. Mallory, a South African oceanographer, found an answer to what was happening off that country's southeast coast. The answer lay in a treacherous strip of water where several tankers have fallen into &quot;holes in the sea&quot; -- actually the troughs in front of 60-foot rogue waves.    Mr. Mallory found that these waves seem to march in a narrow offshore corridor where the continental shelf drops off sharply. He also discovered that the waves almost always appear during storms in which the wind shifts abruptly from northeasterly to southwesterly. Chevron Corp., among others, now uses his analysis in issuing rogue-wave advisories to its tanker captains navigating those waters.    Some people apply a kind of regional mythology to waves in general, believing that the third wave in a series or the 11th, depending on the ocean involved, will be the highest and may even be a rogue. Other waves in the series, according to this theory, don't pose that much of a threat. Bunk, says Blair Kinsman, an oceanographer and author of a text on waves. There is no shortage of mariners, he says, who were &quot;knocked on their butts by a wave that didn't believe the mythology.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>