<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870722-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Senate Votes Sweeping Trade BillDespite Threat of Veto by Reagan---Margin Is 71-27 on MeasureSeeking to Open MarketsAbroad to U.S. Products---By Monica LangleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)AEROSPACE (ARO)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Senate approved a sweeping trade bill despite the threat of a presidential veto.    The Senate last night adopted the trade package by a decisive 71-27 vote, overwhelming last-minute attempts by the Reagan administration to urge enough Republican opposition to make a veto stand.    The margin was large enough to override a veto, but many Republicans said they reserve the right to change their stance once a House-Senate conference merges the two versions and the president makes his decision.    Nineteen Republicans voted for the bill, which is broadly aimed at opening foreign markets to U.S. products.    The 1,000-page bill will now be combined with the version passed by the House in April, and the House-Senate conference is expected to iron out differences and send the package to the White House this fall. It would take a two-thirds vote of each chamber to override a presidential veto of the measure.    A spokesman for Mr. Reagan said the president told GOP senators yesterday in a private meeting: &quot;So far, the signs point straight to a veto.&quot; In a statement released after the vote, Mr. Reagan repeated that he would veto either the Senate or the House version of the trade bill if they came to him in their present forms.    The trade measure has been a top priority of the new Democratic-controlled Congress. &quot;We had strong bipartisan support that withstood pressure,&quot; said Sen. Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas). &quot;The president's effort to make the trade bill a partisan issue was a serious tactical blunder.&quot;    But the bill's easy passage reflected Senate Republicans' split over how to move the bill forward, yet pressure congressional conferees to modify the final package.    Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas, one of 27 Republicans who opposed the measure, had urged Republicans to vote against the bill in the hope of it receiving only lukewarm support if, in fact, it reached the conference committee.    Most Republican senators who voted for the bill said they had done so because it was important to see the legislative process on trade progress. Sixteen of the 19 Republicans voting yes, however, signed a statement saying they'd vote against the final package if improvements weren't made. Sen. Dole predicted that, without substantial changes, a veto could be sustained.    The Reagan administration has attacked the bill as protectionist and geared to special interests, and has asserted that it would cost the government about $7 billion in new authorizations.    The trade legislation, which has been debated on the Senate floor for the past month, is designed to toughen the U.S. stance toward some trading partners considered consistent offenders, particularly Japan. And it would require the president to take stronger, more frequent action to lessen the nation's trade woes, partly by providing relief to certain import-battered industries.    The measure also would repeal the windfall-profits tax on domestic oil companies. That tax on domestically produced crude oil was designed to capture for the government some of the profit generated when controls were lifted from soaring oil prices in 1980.    But the bill also includes certain measures that are attracting opposition from domestic companies, such as the provision requiring advance notice of plant closings to employees.    In one major provision of the bill, the Senate voted to require the president to impose import restraints aiding domestic industries, unless that relief, typically in the form of quotas or tariffs, would &quot;disproportionately burden&quot; the poor or farmers.    However, for the first time in such legislation, the Senate bill requires domestic industries to demonstrate that they can become internationally competitive if they receive temporary relief. The House-passed trade bill, by contrast, would authorize import relief even for dying industries.    In one of the provisions directed at Japan, the Senate would direct presidential action against countries with &quot;a consistent pattern&quot; of barriers to American exports. The provision would for the first time mandate U.S. action against an entire country -- rather than particular industries -- for unfair trading practices. The president could order direct retaliation, or negotiate to reduce barriers.    The Senate measure is an alternative to the more controversial House-passed Gephardt amendment, which has been criticized as protectionist. Under the amendment sponsored by Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.), countries would have to reduce trade surpluses with the U.S. or face automatic retaliation.    However, the Senate added a controversial measure of its own. This provision, if accepted by the House, would require employers to give advance notice of plant closings. A victory for labor, the provision jeopardizes business support for the trade package and is one of the measures labeled &quot;veto-bait&quot; by the administration.    The provision requires companies to notify workers 60 days in advance if plants are to be closed either to consolidate work forces or to relocate. In certain cases, though, it would exempt &quot;faltering&quot; companies working to avert a closedown.    A related Senate measure would expand the entitlement program for workers displaced by imports, and pay for it with a small fee on all imports. The House version would set up a voucher system for workers to receive cash benefits and retraining.    In a further, though less sweeping, provision targeting Japan, both House and Senate bills would bar foreign companies from becoming primary dealers in U.S. government securities unless their governments gave U.S. companies matching rights. The Federal Reserve Board recently accepted two Japanese firms as primary dealers.    The Senate and House have addressed the connection between foreign trade and national security issues. Both would give the president authority to restrict foreign acquisitions of U.S. businesses if such acquisitions threatened national security. This provision is aimed at situations similar to the recent proposed merger, now abandoned, of Fujitsu Ltd. and Schlumberger Ltd.'s Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. unit.    Both chambers are planning action against two companies recently shown to have sold militarily sensitive technology to the Soviet Union. A Senate provision would prohibit almost all sales to the U.S. for at least two years by Japan's giant Toshiba Corp. and Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk of Norway. The House is considering a similar measure.    Also included in the package are provisions authorizing the U.S. to negotiate for greater access for U.S. telecommunications equipment in foreign markets, to ease export controls on high-technology goods, and to improve protection for U.S. patents, trademarks and copyrights against foreign violations. Other provisions would increase federal export subsidies for American farm products.    The bill treats debt and currency questions in certain directives to the president. One provision gives the administration discretion in negotiating an international debt authority that would buy Third-World loans from banks and renegotiate their terms.    The president also would be directed to engage in currency talks if a foreign government is manipulating exchange rates or maintaining barriers to investment in order to gain an unfair trade advantage.    The Senate rejected a provision that would prevent oil imports from exceeding 50% of U.S. consumption.    ---   Senate Trade Bill   Important provisions of the trade bill passed by the Senate last night:    Require the president to provide import curbs to help struggling U.S. industries become competitive, unless such restraints would put a disproportionate hardship on the poor or farmers.    Direct presidential action against countries with a consistent pattern of import barriers.    Repeal windfall profits tax on domestic oil companies    Require employers to give 60-day advance notice of plant closings    Extend administration's authority to negotiate multilateral trade agreements    Expand asistance and retraining benefits to workers who have lost their jobs due to imports </TEXT></DOC>