<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880701-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Rehnquist Leaves an Unforeseen Mark On Court in Second Year as Chief Justice </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> SUP </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In his second year as chief justice, William Rehnquist left his mark on the Supreme Court. But it wasn't the one observers were expecting.    In 14 years as an associate justice -- and even in his first year as chief justice -- Mr. Rehnquist earned a reputation as a loner, a justice who spelled out his own conservative views with little concern for whether he persuaded a court majority to join him.    But in the court term that ended this week, Chief Justice Rehnquist surprised constitutional experts. In a half-dozen cases, he demonstrated leadership by assigning the decisions to himself to write and by producing opinions that were able to muster a majority. Surprisingly, this leadership yielded comparatively liberal results.    &quot;There is a sense of statesmanship emerging in the chief justice that I wouldn't have predicted at the beginning,&quot; says Harvard Law School Prof. Laurence Tribe, a liberal constitutional scholar.    Bruce Fein, a conservative watcher of the Supreme Court, agrees: &quot;Rehnquist is moving to play more of a role as a team leader.&quot;    Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote decisions upholding the independent-counsel law, throwing out the Rev. Jerry Falwell's damage award for emotional distress allegedly inflicted by Hustler magazine, subjecting the Central Intelligence Agency's dismissal of employees for security reasons to court review, rejecting a challenge by landlords to a San Jose, Calif., rent-control law, and requiring the Federal Bureau of Prisons to give inmates who request them copies of investigative reports prepared before sentencing.    Several of these liberal decisions disappointed conservatives, but they still expect the high court -- with three Reagan appointees and Chief Justice Rehnquist elevated by Mr. Reagan -- to move in a more conservative direction.    A look at Mr. Rehnquist's decisions suggests a possible explanation. In the half-dozen liberal rulings out of the 15 majority opinions that Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote this term, the court had only eight justices participating. Newcomer Anthony Kennedy, who joined the court in February, didn't participate.    Mr. Fein and others speculate that Chief Justice Rehnquist may have taken some of these cases on himself, in the absence of a conservative majority, to prevent the writing of more-liberal rulings by Justice William Brennan or others in the court's four-member liberal wing. &quot;Some of the decisions may not read like they were written for damage control,&quot; Mr. Fein says, &quot;but you don't know what the alternatives were.&quot;    The CIA ruling may be a case in point. Conservative Justices Antonin Scalia and Sandra O'Connor dissented in the 6-2 ruling. If Chief Justice Rehnquist had dissented, there would still have been a liberal majority and Justice Brennan would have decided who wrote the opinion. By writing the majority opinion himself, the chief justice ensured that it remained narrower.    With Justice Kennedy voting, however, the possibility of a conservative majority exists in many cases and &quot;damage control&quot; won't be as necessary next term, Mr. Fein and others say.    In other respects, the high court term was notable for extremes in the 139 decisions the justices issued. With only eight justices voting from last October until February, the court was evenly divided on all or part of nine decisions, an unusually large number. Four others had to be argued a second time so Justice Kennedy could break a tie. Despite this division, the number of unanimous decisions was also unusually large -- 58, or 42%, in which some or all of the issues were decided by 8-0 or 9-0 votes.    Decisions with major business ramifications cut across liberal and conservative lines, and across unanimous and closely divided categories as well. Among these decisions, the high court ruled that:   --Federal prosecutors may use mail-fraud and wire-fraud laws broadly to crack down on insider trading on Wall Street. The ruling affirmed the conviction of former Wall Street Journal reporter R. Foster Winans and two co-conspirators.    --State public utility commissions must go along with federal regulatory decisions, not only on wholesale electric rates, but on the allocation of power as well.    --Federal contractors are shielded from liability for injuries caused by defects in design of their products, as long as they followed government specifications and warned of the risks.    --Shareholders may sometimes be able to sue companies for failing to disclose the existence of early merger talks.    --Congress properly required that tax-free state and local bonds must be issued in registered form, with records kept of who owns them, and that Congress is free to tax the interest on such bonds, if it chooses.    --A manufacturer may consult with retailers and decide to cut off a retailer who is discounting prices, without being subjected to automatic antitrust liability.    --Employees may use statistical evidence to prove that an employer's subjective decisions about hiring and promotions had a general, discriminatory effect, even without proof that the employer intended to discriminate.    --Unions can't use the dues that nonunion workers are required to pay for political activities or legislative lobbying, if those workers object.    --Federal rules setting minimum standards for the quality of cable-television signals pre-empt tougher state and local standards.    --State and local governments may bar discrimination by private clubs that serve a public role, such as offering meals and providing members a place to do business. </TEXT></DOC>