<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0117 </DOCNO><HL> The Pacific:Glasnost Comes to Australia---By Michael Danby</HL><DD> 08/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MELBOURNE, Australia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Eighty-nine newly free Soviet citizens does not a change in Kremlin policy make.    Moscow's announcement late last month that it will allow the reunification of 89 of its people (some 36 families) with their relatives in Australia appears less a result of any change in the U.S.S.R.'s emigration policy than the latest wrinkle in a public relations bid that already has seen Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze pay Australia a visit, Moscow accept the much-touted South Pacific nuclear-free zone and Soviet diplomats in Canberra hype the Kremlin's readiness to abolish the 100 SS-20 intermediate-range missiles in Asia. In the short term, the Soviet permission for 89 of its people to reunite with their families here paves the way for an October visit to the U.S.S.R. by Prime Minister Bob Hawke. Mr. Hawke will probably be in Moscow in mid-October following a Commonwealth meeting in Canada.    The issue of family reunification was first raised by the speaker of Australia's federal Parliament, Joan Child, during a visit to the U.S.S.R. last year. She surprised Soviet President Andrei Gromyko by interrupting his monologue to press him about such cases. Immigration Minister Mick Young and Foreign Minister Bill Hayden followed up on these cases with Mr. Shevardnadze during his March visit here. What impressed Canberra is the relative speed with which the Soviets acted. This reflects the smoother style of the Gorbachev regime and its intention to overcome this bilateral human-rights hurdle before Mr. Hawke's almost certain visit in two months.    In the international context the 89 Soviet citizens permitted to reunite with their Australian relatives are but a small part of the larger image problem Moscow has had since signing the Helsinki human-rights accords in 1975. These accords included the right to emigrate. Indeed, Soviet officials dropped hints that 11,000 people would be permitted to leave this year. Yet in the first six months of 1987, only 3,092 left.    The number of Soviet Jews receiving exit visas, moreover, plunged from a high of 51,000 in 1979 to just over 1,000 last year. Given an estimated 400,000 Jews who wish to leave, this means that Moscow has actually tightened its formal policy. As of Jan. 1, &quot;invitations&quot; to Soviet citizens to immigrate may come only from &quot;first-degree&quot; relatives (husband, wife, brother, daughter, father, etc.), whereas before, at least in theory, more distant relatives could send &quot;invitations.&quot; Applied rigorously, this means that only members of groups that have already experienced significant emigration -- Jews, Germans and Armenians -- have a real chance of leaving the U.S.S.R. Those Soviet citizens who qualify on family grounds must further be able to escape classification as security risks or as individuals whose departures would impair public order.    This latter qualification was probably the unexplained reason why exit visas were granted to only 89 of the original 124 people whose release was requested by Canberra. Foreign Minister Hayden, for example, cited the case of a former soldier who had stood guard duty at a missile site as one of the latest of those refused. Such a person would not seem to have access to classified information but is nonetheless routinely refused by his local emigration and passport office. Moreover, many of the most prominent refuseniks denied emigration on security grounds have not worked in their fields for 15 to 20 years. This violates a pledge Mr. Gorbachev made in Paris in October that no application for emigration and family reunification would be rejected for this reason after a 10-year absence from posts involving state security.    Nonetheless, the emigration figures are up slightly. Andrei Sakharov is back in Moscow from internal exile, and Anatoly Shcharansky was allowed to leave for Israel. A treaty eliminating whole categories of short- and intermediate-range weapons may soon be signed, and the poor condition of the Soviet economy is linked to Mr. Gorbachev's desire to slow the arms race. Attempts to improve the Soviet record on human rights (with gestures like the 89 released to Australia) are linked to the discussions on strategic arms. Of course, verification of the Soviet Union's compliance with treaties it enters into is essential for progress. But since the late U.S. Sen. Henry Jackson legislated linkage of Soviet human-rights behavior with Washington-Moscow relations, there has been a Western consensus connecting such factors as the right to emigrate with policies on other issues. It is equally imperative to keep the pressure on here as well.    It may be that the latest gesture to Australia together with the small but growing evidence of a general Soviet liberalization presages a fundamental change. Australia alone obviously will not be the catalyst for an opening up of the Soviet Union to the West. But like more important players we must not miss opportunities. If there is a beginning of a shift in Soviet policy the West must not drop its insistence on genuine change. Even if Mr. Gorbachev is genuine, an over-optimistic Western policy may lead to concessions that could be overturned by a hawkish successor. Already there are signs that some entrenched segments of the &quot;nomenklatura,&quot; or ruling elite, are unhappy at the potential loss of privileges under Mr. Gorbachev. KGB and army elements are said to be behind meetings of a xenophobic mass movement called &quot;pamyal,&quot; or memory, which is especially anti-Semitic and strongly opposed to emigration.    There is probably little the U.S., and far less Australia, can do to influence this power struggle in the U.S.S.R. Like its Western allies, however, Australia should continue to link its reasonable human-rights goals with real changes in Soviet policy. In this regard Mr. Hawke's firsthand experience as part of the Australian delegation to the International Labor Organization in the early 1970s should prove invaluable. Then, promises made by KGB-boss-cum-union-chief Vladimir Shelepin about an improvement of ties with Israel saw Mr. Hawke go on a fruitless trip to Moscow. A few years later Mr. Hawke again visited Moscow, this time as leader of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, in the hope of freeing some dissidents. Again the Soviets didn't come through, and Mr. Hawke was bitterly disappointed.    A confirmed Social Democrat, Mr. Hawke ironically will be in the Soviet Union on the eve of the 70th anniversary of the revolution that saw the Social Democratic Russian government overthrown in favor of one ruled by the Bolshevik faction. He will undoubtedly insist, as did British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, on meeting with Jewish refuseniks and democratic dissidents. Given its nascent tendencies, Moscow will probably let him meet with long-term victims of the Soviet system -- Alexander Lerner, Victor Brailovsky and Ida Nudel -- whose freedom Mr. Hawke sought back in 1979. For this reason Mr. Hawke needs no lessons on Soviet duplicity. Whether he achieves more in October depends on whether he keeps before him the hard lessons he's learned about the nature of the Soviet regime and its promises as he deals with its newest representatives.    ---   Mr. Danby is editor of the newsletter Australia-Israel Review. </TEXT></DOC>