<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0121 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Blindsided by 'Pragmatists'---By David Brooks</HL><DD> 04/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> The problem with pragmatism  </DATELINE><TEXT>    conservatives in Washingtonhave been repeating the witticism -- is that it never works.Pragmatism, defined by Washington standards as any set ofopinions oblivious to intellectual coherence, is the town'sreigning ideology. Mr. Reagan and his team came to powerprepared to do battle with liberalism, but they were soonblindsided.   &quot;Steering the Elephant: How Washington Works&quot; (Universe, 384 pages, $24.95), edited by Robert Rector and Michael Sanera, is the howl of pain caused by pragmatism's unexpected blow. It is a collection of 27 essays by people who have been in or near the administration, and who were jostled by government's mindless swelling. It illuminates the Reagan presidency better than any book to date. After a superb introduction by Aaron Wildavsky, there are provocative essays on the perversions of the bureaucratic pedantocracy from the likes of M. Stanton Evans and William Niskanen. There are forthright essays on tactics by Joseph Morris and Mr. Rector. And finally there are case studies that illustrate how Reaganites, who rode into Washington intellectually confident but politically naive, managed to cope, or not, with their new-found influence.    Reaganism has been corroded by convenient compromises, the contributors say. Their frustrated tone is captured in Fred Smith's observation: &quot;In general, the Reagan Revolution hasn't failed -- it really hasn't been tried.&quot;    One of the case studies involves James Sanders, who was appointed to head the Small Business Administration in 1982. Mr. Sanders cut red tape, streamlined the loan-application procedures, improved repayment rates, and otherwise acted the part of pragmatic administrator. Conservatives who wanted the SBA eliminated, not reformed, were furious. The agency reallocates capital away from creditworthy firms toward inefficient companies, thereby reducing job creation and growth, conservatives argued. Mr. Sanders teamed with congressional liberals and the rejuvenated SBA bureaucrats to save the agency. Pragmatism, which in this case meant running a bad agency well, carried the day, and the ideologues are left with nothing but a bitter chapter in this book.    In May 1981, White House Domestic Policy Chief Martin Anderson asked appointees at Housing and Urban Development to develop an enterprise-zone plan, which would be at the center of the Reaganite anti-poverty program. The Commerce Department objected because it feared enterprise zones would replace its own anti-poverty program, the Economic Development Administration. The Treasury Department protested that enterprise zones constitute a tax plan, which should fall under its jurisdiction. HUD bureaucrats, who favor government loans over tax incentives, were also suspicious. Peter Ferrara, a 26-year-old HUD special assistant, took on the bureaucratic tangle.    Mr. Ferrara responded to all the &quot;let's step back and study it&quot; proposals. He wrote the minutes to all the inter-agency meetings, so his version of events would be reported in the memoranda. He fought off a Treasury proposal that would have tainted the entire program by replacing enterprise-zone tax cuts with discredited tax-reduction ideas. When Treasury officials rewrote the Final Decision Memorandum for the climactic Cabinet Council meeting with the president, and then held on to it until the Friday evening before the Monday morning meeting, Mr. Ferrara came in over the weekend, got hold of the rewrite, and rewrote it again. These and other maneuvers took time, ultimately 15 months. When the administration could eventually report its enterprise-zone plan to Congress the honeymoon was over. The plan has not been passed.    Conservatives could have compromised with their colleagues in the administration and come up with a hybrid enterprise-zone idea to report quickly. The plan would have been less intellectually consistent, but it might have passed. The writers in &quot;Steering the Elephant&quot; have no regrets, however. Sound intellectual positions, they argue again and again, are always better than mindless, pragmatic policy.    But is that really the lesson to be learned from the Reagan years? In the stories repeated here, conservatives failed because they tried to shove the thick end of the policy wedge in first. The contributors to &quot;Steering the Elephant&quot; pledge that next time they will push harder.    They should try turning the wedge around. The mostly sad stories in this collection teach conservatives, or any group that wants to organize government around coherent principles, to be confrontational in the face of the enemy's tapered ideas (to deny them policy momentum), but to be concessional when proposing their own ideas (to grab momentum), and to be coy in the face of confirmation hearings and public witch hunts, which threaten to remove the true believers from government altogether.    With their emphasis on words and ideas, the contributors to this book don't seem to appreciate that winning legislative fights persuades as many people as a brilliant essay; with their distaste for bureaucratic waste, they are unduly harsh on bureaucratic procedural safeguards, which, as the Iran-contra affair demonstrated, exist for a reason. In short, there has been no efficient division of labor between conservatives who think and conservatives who finagle. As a result, as Fred Smith also notes, conservatives tend to view political wheeling and dealing the way Victorians viewed sex, as something dirty. Some of them, at least, ought to pay attention to Woody Allen's retort: Yes, it's dirty -- if it's done right. </TEXT></DOC>