<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870210-0033 </DOCNO><HL> Shaken Faith:Afrikaner Church ShiftAgainst Apartheid StirsResistance of Members---Dutch Reformed Synod StepSplits White Community,With Political Overtones---Both Sides Quote the Bible---By Roger ThurowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> KIMBERLEY, South Africa  </DATELINE><TEXT>    If there is one thing thatAndries Scholtz always trusted, it was his church.   All his life, for three-quarters of a century, the Dutch Reformed Church prescribed how he should live. The church said he shouldn't dance on Sunday, and he didn't. It said he should worship only with fellow whites, and he did. It said separation of the races -- apartheid -- was just, and he believed.    But now, after all these years, Mr. Scholtz doesn't know what to believe anymore. His church has changed its mind and confused his. Apartheid is unacceptable, the church now preaches, and worshiping alongside blacks and people of mixed race is good.    &quot;Does this mean that our forefathers were wrong?&quot; Mr. Scholtz asks his dominee, his minister. &quot;The Holy Spirit led our forefathers. Did the Holy Spirit lead them wrong?&quot;    For South Africa's Afrikaners, this idea is deeply troubling. During their three centuries in South Africa, they have looked to the Dutch Reformed Church, and its strict interpretation of the Bible, for guidance. Through the great trek north from the Cape, through the years of British domination, through the battles with the blacks, through the recent racial strife, Afrikaners have clung to their church. It lent righteousness to their belief that they are South Africa's chosen race.    But at a synod in Cape Town last October, the all-white church underwent a change as significant for all Afrikanerdom as Saul's conversion on the road to Damascus was for all Christendom. The synod's principal decisions -- to confess that the biblical justification of apartheid was in error and to open membership to all races -- are bringing the painful issue of reform to a boil in the unyielding Afrikaner community, which runs South Africa.    More than any of the government's tentative racial reforms in the past couple of years, the synod's decisions have cut to the core of Afrikaner identity. They have split the church -- some angry members are threatening to break away -- and exposed deep divisions among Afrikaners. They have also illuminated the difficulties in getting Afrikaners to accept fundamental racial reform on any level, whether in church, in neighborhood or in parliament. And without changes, starting with the church, South Africa seems destined to keep sliding toward revolution.    &quot;For the Afrikaner, the church is No. 1,&quot; says Willie Lubbe, a Pretoria theologian who is orchestrating the clamor of those against the synod decisions and against reform in general. &quot;What happens in the church is carried through in political life, in cultural life, in social life.&quot;    Indeed, the Dutch Reformed Church has often been called &quot;the National Party at prayer&quot; because so many members of the ruling National Party are also church members and because the government has used the church's preachings to support its apartheid policies. Fearing that any rupture in the church could seriously split the white electorate as well, the government has put on hold any political reform before the general election for white voters, which is set for May 6.    Some of the more liberal, and optimistic, members of the Dutch Reformed Church believe that eventually the synod's change of heart and acts of reform, which were largely prompted by the church's virtual ostracism from the world religious community, should inspire a similar conversion among government leaders. &quot;If you have one doctrine inside the church, you should have the same one being practiced outside the church,&quot; says Marius Bester, the personnel director of the city of Kimberley and a church elder.    But through the years, the church and the Afrikaners have rarely practiced what they preached. The dominees preached of the Good Samaritan and advocated &quot;love thy neighbor,&quot; but segregation and discrimination have been common, and later official, practice.    In 1863, the Dutch Reformed Church instituted separate worship for whites and nonwhites. And after World War II, as the government imposed one apartheid law after another, the church embraced the principle of separate development of the races more elaborately and found justification for it in the Bible. The church's traditional branches -- the mother church for whites, the Church in Africa for blacks and the Sendingkerk for people of mixed race -- held separate synods and, generally, didn't have anything to do with one another. Whites often refused to pray with blacks.    Now, many Dutch Reformed members find that accepting that their church has erred all these years -- and accepting the presence of a black man in the next pew -- requires a great leap of faith.    &quot;Am I now supposed to worship with my {black} farm laborers?&quot; Mr. Scholtz, the Kimberley farmer, asks incredulously. His dominee, Johann Lemmer, a man half his age, gives him a copy of the synod's resolutions and, as always, tells him to consult his Bible, specifically the book of Romans, Chapter 12.    &quot;It says, 'Do not conform to the standards of the world,'&quot; says Dominee Lemmer. &quot;The standards of our world have been to discriminate. But we now see that is wrong.&quot;    Someone like Mr. Scholtz, however, needs more persuasion. &quot;It is unacceptable for him to believe that the church can be wrong,&quot; the dominee says.    Such resistance is an instinctive reaction of the tradition-bound Afrikaners, who rely heavily on examples set by their forefathers. &quot;We taught them to think this way. Why should they change?&quot; says G.J. Swart, a Johannesburg minister and one of the church's most liberal theologians.    Mr. Swart himself changed, in the 1950s, when he set out to write a university thesis on the biblical basis for apartheid and wound up writing about the need for a unified, open church. Since then, he has been a prophet crying in the wilderness. People refusing to listen to talk of reform, he says, &quot;won't change willingly.&quot;    Since the synod, dominees favoring change have been focusing on New Testament passages emphasizing Christian duty and church unity in order to smooth the way for putting the principle of an open church into practice. In recent years, a few congregations, mainly in big cities, have opened worship services to blacks and other races, but the vast majority remain closed. And opponents of the new course have their own favorite passages of Scripture: those about the diversity of God's creation and about a chosen race, set above all others.    &quot;I prefer separateness,&quot; says Mr. Lubbe, a major opponent of the changes. &quot;If you open church membership, it can easily mean that within a few years, the majority of the congregation will be members of the Sotho or Zulu tribes or Indians or whatever. Yet the church was meant to be an Afrikaner congregation.&quot; The synod, he says, &quot;has made the Dutch Reformed Church an international church, and we don't want that. We want our own church.&quot;    Mr. Lubbe has opened an office in downtown Pretoria to act as a clearinghouse for people upset by the synod's decisions. His group of dissenters has opened a bank account to collect the money that people are refusing to put into the church's collection plates. He seeks to overturn the synod's decisions through negotiations with its leaders, and, failing that, to set up a new, purely Afrikaner church.    &quot;If people say I'm a racist, then I can tell them they're a Communist,&quot; he says. &quot;They believe that everything belongs to everybody. Isn't that the true Communist doctrine?&quot;    Zerilda Nel, a social worker and member of a Johannesburg Dutch Reformed congregation, prays for peace among the bickering church factions. &quot;Every human being must, at some stage, sit down and think about life and look at how we are living. This is what the church has done&quot; at the synod, she says. &quot;I can't be concerned that if my church is opened, then I'll be overrun by blacks. I want to be overrun by Christians, of whatever color.&quot;    Mr. Bester of Kimberley says: &quot;You can't, on the one hand, say, 'I'm a believer and a Christian,' and, on the other hand, say, 'I hate the blacks.'&quot;    But, in effect, this is just what the church and its members have long done, and the church became an international pariah. It was suspended from one world church body several years ago, and it has been regularly condemned by various faiths for being hypocritical and heretical in tolerating apartheid. This condemnation has been particularly harsh from the other major churches in South Africa, which have been zealously working to overturn the apartheid system for many years and, in the process, have seen outspoken ministers occasionally arrested.    The international pressure helped precipitate the Dutch Reformed Church's conversion last October. But some observers term this conversion far too late and still far from complete. Allan Boesak, a prominent anti-apartheid campaigner who heads the mixed-race branch of the church, demands that the white church go further and confess its own complicity in the propagation of apartheid and declare apartheid sinful rather than just &quot;unacceptable.&quot;    And despite all the talk of whites and blacks worshiping together, the white mother church hasn't managed to reconcile the racial split in the Dutch Reformed family. Chances for any quick unification of its three branches seem remote.    Putting the synod's decisions into practice in Kimberley, for example, won't be easy. The site of South Africa's legendary diamond mines and strong in Afrikaner tradition, Kimberley seems to have more Dutch Reformed churches than service stations.    Dominee Lemmer's congregation draws its members from a neat white suburb where many residents work for the government or the railway and have at least one domestic servant. Several years ago, the congregation's council decided to let local black and colored workers use the church on Thursday evenings for a service. A few members objected, Dominee Lemmer says, because &quot;they didn't like having to sit on the pews on Sunday where a black man had sat on Thursday.&quot;    Opening Sunday services to blacks is expected to be even harder, he says. &quot;I've been asked, 'Dominee, what would happen if 20 blacks come to church?' I say they would be welcome. Then I'm asked, 'Where would they sit?'&quot;    Johan Thiart, an elder who generally speaks in favor of an open church, raises another question. &quot;When a black enters the church, how do we know if he's a Christian or an ANC member?&quot; he asks, referring to the African National Congress, the banned anti-apartheid organization that includes terrorism as part of its strategy for toppling the South African government. &quot;You can't ask someone if he's a Christian.&quot;    So far, that problem hasn't arisen because, despite the synod's decision, no blacks or coloreds have come on Sunday. And few whites expect that many will.    &quot;I don't believe for one moment that if we open the doors of the church, it will be full of blacks the next Sunday,&quot; Mr. Bester says. &quot;People want to worship in their own language and according to their own culture. They would be uncomfortable with us.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>