<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861231-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Sixty-Day Cease-Fire Is Traumatic Time for Philippines---Communist Rebels, Government AreManeuvering for Hearts and Minds---By Anthony SpaethStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/31/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> TALACDAN, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Peace seems to have settledon this lush part of Negros island in the centralPhilippines, until recently a combat zone in the war betweenthe government and the communist New People's Army.   On Dec. 10, a cease-fire brought the first peaceful holiday season in 17 years to the turbulent Philippine countryside.    But around noon on Dec. 17, shooting erupted in this hilly, rebel-controlled town of 50 families. When it stopped, two communist rebels were dead, and so were a local woman, a farmer and his eight-year-old daughter. Townsfolk say all three civilians had been shot in the head.    Government troops say the communists opened fire first. The insurgents say soldiers started the fight by ambushing a group of rebels. Neither side has fully explained the civilian deaths. The joint cease-fire monitoring committee hasn't ruled on this case or on most of the more than two dozen other reported violations across the Philippines.    The cease-fire, scheduled to last 60 days, has brought President Corazon Aquino's government to the negotiating table in a move that many middle-class Filipinos regard as a sign of the government's weakness. It has also brought the rebels down from the hills -- where the government hopes they will stay and work within the system.    Now the insurgents appear on television, blandly discussing the possibility of a coalition government and the areas of the country they &quot;control,&quot; as if the government had conceded vast tracts. Satur Ocampo, one of the communist cease-fire negotiators, says the government can't claim &quot;sovereignty&quot; over the whole country. The cease-fire accord, according to Mr. Ocampo, preserves each side's &quot;areas of control.&quot;    The rebels are exploiting their links to the Roman Catholic Church -- many are former priests and nuns -- further confusing the predominantly Catholic populace. And the communists are loudly asking if Mrs. Aquino is capable of bringing true reform to a system marked by a vast gap between rich and poor.    All in all, the cease-fire is turning into a traumatic period for the Philippines. Nowhere is this better seen than on the once-prosperous island of Negros, where social change is badly needed. The question is, Will the government or the communists usher in that change?    &quot;If the government plays its cards right,&quot; says Daniel Lacson, the governor of Negros Occidental, the larger and poorer of the island's two provinces, &quot;the cease-fire can be to our advantage. We can show the people that their government is alive, and it works for them.&quot; If the government doesn't play its cards right, Mr. Lacson warns, &quot;we will lose the war.&quot;    Sugar-growing Negros suffered the greedy manipulations of Ferdinand Marcos's 20-year presidency -- the government-run sugar monopoly was a major contributor to the multibillion-dollar Marcos fortune -- and was deeply depressed by the collapse of international sugar prices in the early 1980s. The island's wealth -- like the country's -- is concentrated among a few families. The majority of the population, who mostly work the land for the rich families, are desperately poor.    Negros's rebels are highly organized and confident. The day after the cease-fire was signed, thousands of insurgents poured into the island's largest city, Bacolod, to embrace the local populace and wave red banners stating, &quot;Give Peace a Chance.&quot;    The Communist Party of the Philippines didn't support Mrs. Aquino's challenge against Mr. Marcos in February. After her victory, the party lost much of the public support it had built up during the Marcos era. Party documents quoted in the press show that it decided in July to ease the &quot;armed struggle&quot; by its New People's Army against the government and concentrate on ways to share power, with a cease-fire seen as an important step toward that goal.    As soon as the cease-fire agreement was signed in Manila, communist leaders started appearing on national television. They descended on newspaper offices to drink beer and spread the word that they are interested in the welfare of all Filipinos.    On Negros, the areas of control have polarized in recent years as the sugar industry collapsed, largely at the expense of the workers. The government and the island's landed planters control the main city and a few towns. But the communists control the countryside: the mountainous spine of the island, as well as the sprawling sugar estates and their disgruntled landless workers.    Gov. Lacson hopes the central government will compete with the rebels during the cease-fire to shore up its popularity. As the rebel leaders flock to the cities, the government has the opportunity to go back to the country towns with social programs and medical supplies, he says.    But good intentions aren't enough. His proposal to install 900 water pumps across the province was held up in Manila for four months. And after 10 months in power, the Aquino government still hasn't decided on any land-redistribution initiatives.    The governor is pushing his own, limited land-redistribution program; a more drastic program of the type being discussed in Manila could have fearful consequences among the landed wealthy, Mr. Lacson says. &quot;The extreme rightists would just arm themselves and prepare to fight it out,&quot; he says.    To hear the rebels talk, they are already near victory. &quot;Only a few remaining towns and areas remain outside our control,&quot; says Vicente Pelobello, an ordained priest who went underground in 1979 and now represents the National Democratic Front in Negros, the legal organization that serves as a front for the outlawed Communist Party.    Father Pelobello is an effective leader in the current propaganda war. Sincere-sounding and gentle, he avoids discussions of killings and military strength, preferring to discuss &quot;reconciliation&quot; and &quot;extending the hand of peace.&quot; He still prefers to be called &quot;father,&quot; though he admits to having celebrated Mass only once in seven years.    The local bishop is more than generous to the rebels: When the rebel committee was refused space in the provincial capitol, the bishop offered beds and desks at the Sacred Heart Seminary in Bacolod.    The rebels remain prepared for war, as a visit to the seminary shows. Passing the chapel, where choirboys are singing hymns, a visitor pushes open a door marked &quot;priests' dormitory.&quot; Inside is Nemisio Demafelis, the New People's Army commander on Negros and, until Dec. 10, the island's most wanted man. Now he is a member of the rebel negotiating committee, ostensibly under Father Pelobello.    On the priests' simple beds sit three bulky men in red T-shirts -- Mr. Demafelis's bodyguards. They are bored. One amuses himself by playing with a shiny handgun. He points it in the direction of a crucifix on the dormitory wall and languidly spins the gun's barrel. </TEXT></DOC>