<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870520-0148 </DOCNO><HL> A Blueprint for Defense Spending---By Lawrence J. Korb</HL><DD> 05/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The Defense Department is beginning to suffer from a debilitating fiscal crisis. Congress is preoccupied with the mammoth federal deficit, and public support for higher defense spending has evaporated. As a result, military appropriations, which increased by 50% above inflation between fiscal 1980 and 1985, declined in real terms in 1986 and 1987.    The House has all but completed work on a fiscal 1988 defense bill of about $288 billion, $24 billion below the administration's request and $13 billion below the level needed by the Pentagon to keep pace with inflation. While the level approved by the Senate may be somewhat higher, it is doubtful that the defense budget will show any real increase.    However, Reagan administration officials have vigorously resisted suggestions that they revise their plans to reflect financial constraints, fearing that smaller budget projections would become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Thus, there is a huge gap between the level of funding that planners anticipated until recently and prospective budget totals. To put the problem into perspective: Two years ago, the Defense Department projected a fiscal 1986-90 five-year budget of almost $2 trillion. Actual appropriations over the five-year period, however, will end up below $1.5 trillion, or more than 25% less.    Sooner or later, whether in the remainder of this administration or in the next, defense planners will have to address this huge funding shortfall and adjust long-term plans substantially. If the nation is to receive a reasonable return on the money it is spending for defense, then a few key guidelines -- some managerial, some strategic -- must govern the process. In the interim it will fall to Congress to make the adjustments. Let's take a look at these guidelines and how House actions have measured up:    1) Don't squander the huge investment in defense that the nation made in the first half of the 1980s. During the early days of the Reagan administration, the major emphasis in defense was on new, expensive, sophisticated weapons. Relatively less was spent on the infrastructure needed to support the new equipment -- including ammunition, spare parts, base improvement and additional personnel --on the assumption that it would be financed later, as the weapons reached units in the field.    Now the time has come to pay for the infrastructure. But with budgets shrinking, planned improvements normally are the first casualties of fiscal retreat. In 1987, for example, the final appropriation for Air Force spare parts was 49% less than the Pentagon projected a year earlier.    The House's record in this area for fiscal 1988 is mixed. On the plus side, it added funds to the Army's ammunition and Air Force munitions accounts; increased slightly the portion of the budget devoted to operations and maintenance; and preserved the military pay raise. However, it made sizable reductions in the funds devoted to tactical missiles and Air Force spare parts and ground equipment, and supported the administration's position of allowing the number of people on active duty to decline.    2) Don't rely on temporary adjustments on the assumption future budgets will grow enough to accommodate planned programs. Long-term plans of each of the military services include far more programs than future budgets will finance, but almost nothing of any significance has been canceled. Rather than face up to difficult strategic choices, planners are merely slowing down many projects on the premise that things will get back on track later. As a result, we already are paying absurd prices for some weapons -- especially Navy aircraft -- that are being kept in production at extremely inefficient rates.    Stretching out programs increases their eventual cost and aggravates budget shortfalls. In addition, slower production rates will defeat the purpose of recent defense-acquisition reforms. It is unreasonable to expect weapons manufacturers to pay a larger share of tooling costs, for example, if the services cannot guarantee sufficient annual sales. And without adequate production rates, it will not be efficient to establish competitive second sources for major weapons.    Defense planners could achieve these efficient production rates by slowing down the development of the next generation of weapon systems, canceling marginal programs and putting the savings into buying this generation at efficient rates.    To its credit, the House did cancel the AV-8B aircraft and deferred three DDG-51 destroyers, and it reduced the unit costs of the AH-64 Apache helicopter, the EA-6B aircraft, the M-1 tank and the CG-47 by increasing the purchases for 1988. However, the House paid for a good portion of the cut in the procurement account with hundreds of &quot;financing adjustments.&quot; Moreover, it failed to slow the next generation of such systems as the advanced tactical aircraft and advanced tactical fighter and refused to cancel such programs as the troubled AMRAAM missile.    3) Forget about the 600-ship Navy, and maintain 12 rather than 15 deployable aircraft-carrier battle groups. The Navy has been the big winner in the military buildup of recent years, moving toward a 600-ship fleet including 15 aircraft-carrier battle groups. The primary rationale for a bigger fleet is the &quot;maritime offensive strategy,&quot; calling for forays close to the Soviet mainland. But if the U.S. wants a Navy capable of sailing into the jaws of Soviet land-based airpower, then 15 carriers are not enough -- the U.S. would need 24 or more, a force it is never going to buy.    The Navy's proper wartime job is more limited -- to secure the sea lanes necessary to support a ground campaign and to take the Soviet navy out of the war, not primarily by seeking it out and destroying it, but by bottling it up. For this, a 12-carrier Navy should suffice. The House failed miserably in this area by approving funds for the construction of two new aircraft carriers. It thus ensures that for the next decade we will have a Navy we do not need nor can we afford.    4) Cut back substantially on procurement of the next generation of offensive nuclear weapons. New strategic nuclear programs make up 30% of the Pentagon's proposed fiscal 1988 research and development budget and about as large a share of funds for major weapons in production.    In part, these new weapons are redundant: As a means of overcoming Soviet air defense, the Stealth bomber follows B-1 bomber production, upgrades of the B-52 fleet, and two generations of air-launched cruise missiles. In part, the new weapons lack a clear strategic rationale. Since the Soviets are moving toward mobile missiles, the Trident II missile will be coming on line at about the time the number of hardened targets, such as missile silos, for which it was designed, declines substantially.    In part, the rationale for the new weapons depends on what happens in arms control: The MX makes no sense with arms control, since it concentrates too many warheads on one system, and the mobile Midgetman will be too vulnerable unless arms control constrains the number of Soviet warheads that could be used in a barrage attack on deployment areas. Most important, the new generation of nuclear weapons competes directly with modernization of non-nuclear or conventional forces that should be a higher priority.    Aside from cutting the number of MX test missiles to 12 from 21 and delaying ASAT procurement, the House did little in this area. The portion of its budget devoted to strategic Randamp;D is slightly higher than that of the administration.    5) Restructure the Strategic Defense Initiative into a sensible research program. Large increases in SDI funding are justified only if deployment of a strategic defense system is planned in the 1990s. The only system that is conceivable in that period, however, would rely on space-based interceptor missiles, backed up by ground-based interceptors.    Such a system would be only partially effective, easily overcome by countermeasures, and quickly obsolete. The Soviet reaction almost certainly would be to abandon arms-reduction negotiations and accelerate the arms race in offensive weaponry. The costs for both sides would be open-ended and the results would undermine strategic stability. A sensible research program, focused on more exotic technologies that eventually may be effective, might cost as little as $2 billion to $3 billion a year, not far below the $3.1 billion in the House bill.    These guidelines require some difficult decisions. But military planners should understand better than others the need to make hard choices when it is not possible to do everything at once. The alternative is to do everything badly, and to erode the military strength the U.S. ought to achieve for the money it is spending. Neither the administration nor Congress can allow this.    Overall, the House has made the situation somewhat better. But eventually the executive branch must come to grips with the problem.    ---   Mr. Korb is dean of the Graduate School of Public and International Affairs at the University of Pittsburgh. He was an assistant secretary of defense, 1981-85. </TEXT></DOC>