<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880628-0027 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Sugar Prices Jump to Five-Year High; Japanese Buying Helps Robust Market </HL><AUTHOR> John Valentine (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PCS </IN><TEXT>   Sugar futures prices surged to their highest levels in five years yesterday as Japanese demand entered a market that already was strong.    After the close of trading, a news report circulated that Coca-Cola Co. might switch back to using sugar and abandon high-fructose corn syrup as a sweetener because of high corn prices and the need to preserve water in the drought-stricken Midwest.    In Atlanta, a spokesman for Coca-Cola said that while the company likes to keep its options open down the road, it has no plans to switch to sucrose from high-fructose corn syrup. He said the company -- which provides the sweetener both for its own fountain business and for many of its bottlers -- isn't planning to switch. He added that none of the major bottlers have plans to switch either.    A spokesman for PepsiCo Inc. said: &quot;We have no immediate plans to go to sucrose. However, Pepsi is always exploring different, more economic ways to sweeten our drinks. If the price of sucrose becomes competitive with high fructose corn syrup, we'd consider our options.&quot; Sucrose is a sugar extracted from sugar cane or sugar beets.    Still, some analysts doubt that soft-drink makers are seriously considering a switch to refined sugar from high-fructose corn syrup, and suggested the reports could be a ploy to frighten corn processors into keeping a lid on syrup prices.    July contract for sugar settled 1.10 cents a pound higher at 11.96 cents, while the more heavily traded October contract rose 1.06 cents to 11.79 cents. These contracts on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York don't have limits on how much their prices can move in a day. All other contracts rose their daily permissible limit of 0.50 cent a pound.    Trade sources said that Japanese buying began in Tokyo sugar futures Saturday and continued yesterday when markets opened in London and New York. Heavy speculative demand followed in the wake of the Japanese buying and propelled prices higher, they said. In New York, according to one analyst, prices were the highest since 13 cents a pound in the first quarter of 1983.    &quot;On a technical basis it would be logical to expect resistance to develop somewhere between 13 cents and 14 cents a pound,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director of Elders Futures, Inc., New York. &quot;After that, the resistance level to look for is 20 cents,&quot; he said.    According to Judy Weissman Ganes, analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., New York, Japanese buying appears to be coming both from industrial users and from trade houses.    &quot;The users, of course, are interested in protecting themselves, while the Japanese trade houses have other accounts besides Japanese sugar users,&quot; she said. &quot;They are obviously beginning to realize there may be difficulty in obtaining supplies in the second half of 1988, with countries such as the Dominican Republic and Mexico having overcommitted themselves to deliver.&quot;    The market is reflecting the widening realization of factors that have been developing since late last year, she said. &quot;Supplies in exporting countries have declined around the world and any sudden increase in demand may not be able to be met,&quot; Mrs. Weissman Ganes said.    According to Stephen Platt, senior analyst for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago, a move back to sugar by soft drink makers would be caused not by price, but by increased demand for soft drinks and problems in transporting corn.    &quot;It might be simply that there would be a need for more sugar because increased demand for soft drinks due to hot weather and because high-fructose makers can't meet the added demand,&quot; Mr. Platt said.    He observed that there had been difficulties in moving corn along midwestern rivers because of low water levels. &quot;Also, high fructose prices are well below those of sugar. It would take an astronomical rise in corn prices, to around $5 a bushel or about $1.50 more than now, to create serious consideration of a switch to sugar,&quot; Mr. Platt said.    Mr. Platt also noted that soft drink bottlers are considering supply commitments for the third quarter and agreed that a threat to switch to sugar might be a move to keep fructose makers from raising prices.    Although the drought has pushed up cash corn prices recently, high-fructose corn syrup remains roughly 20% cheaper than sugar, one analyst said.    Regardless of the drought, high-fructose corn syrup prices normally rise in the third quarter as consumption of soft drinks hits it seasonal peak and demand for sweeteners rise.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices largely ignored the inflation potential of soaring grain and soybean prices. August delivery gold settled at $445.90 an ounce, down 10 cents. July platinum was off 70 cents at $555.10 an ounce. Silver, which traditionally tends to react along with soybeans, was up 13.3 cents an ounce for September delivery, ending at $7.0390. According to one analyst, the precious metals' resistance to the boom in grain and soybean prices isn't new. Over the past month, for example, he noted, all precious metals prices have actually declined, while those of grains and soybeans have risen. Another analyst, Jeffrey Nichols, president of American Precious Metals Advisors, Inc., N.Y., observed that &quot;people are not yet convinced that higher agricultural prices are going to translate to higher prices across the economy.&quot; Also, he noted, the stronger dollar will tend to stem rising import prices and thus help damp inflation.    ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices, which have been rising sharply, accelerated yesterday on prospects that Brazil's supplies of concentrate will be very tight. The July delivery contract, which has no limits on how much the price can move in one session, ended seven cents a pound higher at $1.8825. Other delivery months rose as much as 4.50 cents, approaching the daily limit of five cents. According to one analyst, realization that Brazil won't have supplies of frozen concentrate to deliver until the end of summer -- a situation which has been developing for more than nine months -- has finally prompted traders to buy contracts. Dry weather in Brazil's orange-growing areas last fall delayed the progress of the crop and also kept production from being as high as had been anticipated, an analyst said. More Brazilian oranges will be available for processing into juice, but yields will be reduced by growing problems, analysts said.    COTTON: Futures prices advanced as much as their daily permissible limit of two cents a pound in most contracts. The move was a continued reaction to a strong soybean market and concern over dry weather in some cotton-growing areas. The maturing July contract, which represents the 1987-88 season that will end July 31, and has no limits, rose 2.70 cents. The October delivery settled at 67.05 cents and December at 65.70 cents, both up the twocent limit. The most distant contracts, July and December 1989, were up 1.95 cents and 0.95 cent, respectively. The market's rise &quot;was 80% soybeans and 20% dryness,&quot; one analyst said. The Mississippi Delta and some parts of Texas where cotton is grown have been experiencing a lack of rainfall. According to one analyst, cotton traders have chosen to ignore the fact that U.S. production was expected to rise and U.S. exports to decline because U.S. prices are not competitive world-wide. Most cotton-growing areas such as California and the Southeast haven't had weather problems the analyst said, and she questioned to what degree dryness is a factor in Texas. </TEXT></DOC>