<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   U.S.-SOVIET TALKS RESUMED on medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe.    Both sides promised new proposals in the Geneva negotiations to remove the missiles from the Continent. Reagan said prospects for an agreement &quot;have moved forward&quot; though he forecast &quot;hard bargaining.&quot; But he said the Kremlin seems to have altered its position from Gorbachev's earlier willingness to eliminate Soviet shorter-range missiles. Secretary of State Shultz assured allies the U.S. won't make any decisions they oppose and he said that a pact wouldn't damage NATO's nuclear strategy.    A Soviet official said NATO consultations about its arms offer shouldn't become a barrier to an accord. Warsaw Pact nations also are holding talks.    ---   TWO MEN ARMED WITH RIFLES killed at least two people in Florida.    A shooting spree at two downtown shopping centers in Palm Bay, a central Atlantic Coast town south of Melbourne, also left at least 14 people wounded, police said. One of the dead was a police officer. An undetermined number of people were taken hostage, authorities said. One gunman was taken into custody, according to police.    Hundreds of shoppers were evacuated from the area as dozens of police officers converged on the scene and police snipers were stationed on rooftops.    ---   Argentina installed a new army staff chief, Gen. Jose Caridi, who warned troops opposed to human-rights trials against staging more rebellions, which led to the high command shake-up. Caridi pledged his support for democracy. He is the fourth army chief since President Alfonsin's 1983 election ended seven years of military rule.    ---   The Pentagon said Marine guards' duty tours at embassies in 14 foreign cities, most of them in communist nations, will be cut to one year from 15 months. In the wake of the sex-spy scandal, a Pentagon report said security changes ordered by Weinberger have only recently been implemented.    ---   Sri Lankan air force planes bombed Tamil guerrilla outposts near Jaffna, killing 20 in a second day of raids retaliating for rebel attacks that left at least 230 civilians dead in the past week. The Sinhalese majority-led government, in an emergency session of Parliament, declared an offensive to wipe out the rebels in the four-year civil war.    ---   The Soviets granted permission to emigrate to Anatoly Koryagin, a psychiatrist who spent six years in a labor camp for accusing authorities of sending sane dissidents to mental hospitals. The official announcement, believed to be the first of a dissident's departure, said Koryagin, 48, &quot;is leaving for Switzerland for permanent residence.&quot;    ---   A Soviet court will review Karl Linnas's 1962 conviction in absentia, the Foreign Ministry said, declining to disclose whether this would constitute a new trial but noting that he may appeal for a pardon. Linnas, 67, was stripped of his U.S. citizenship and deported Tuesday to the U.S.S.R., which had sentenced him to death for Nazi war crimes.    ---   Congressional investigators confirmed the diversion of more than $1 million in Iranian arms sale profits to Nicaraguan rebels, sources said. The investigators cited Swiss bank records and other data. Separately, House and Senate panels don't intend to delve deeply into Israel's role in the Iran-Contra scandal.    ---   Indonesia's ruling party seemed headed for a landslide victory in national elections, the fourth in President Suharto's 21 years of military-backed rule. Officials said the Golkar Party, which set a 70% goal, had 80% of the vote in initial returns. In the last elections in 1982, Golkar won 64% of the vote.    ---   Israeli helicopter gunships raided suspected Palestinian guerrilla bases in Lebanon twice near Sidon, in apparent retaliation for border attacks that killed two Israelis, police sources said. Meanwhile, Lebanon's cabinet met for the first time in seven months as a nationwide general strike began to protest the deteriorating economy.    ---   Grenade attacks continued in Cape Townarea townships, as the death toll in the outbreak rose to seven, Pretoria said. Thousands of Soweto residents stayed away from their jobs, to oppose evictions of black families for refusing to pay rent. Over half the 24,000 black miners striking two gold mines to protest layoffs returned to work.    ---   Italy has arrested a U.S.-born woman and at least three other people in the March 20 killing of air force Gen. Licio Giorgieri, who promoted an Italian role in the U.S. &quot;Star Wars&quot; project, state-run media said.    ---   U.S. Immigration said it doesn't plan AIDS virus testing for aliens under the new amnesty program that the agency said will be in operation by the May 5 deadline. Up to 3.9 million undocumented aliens are expected to apply for legal U.S. residence under the program, part of a 1986 law.    ---   The Defense Department said it is still optimistic about the &quot;Star Wars&quot; program, despite a new study that concludes at least a decade of research is needed to determine whether the missile defense system is feasible. The Pentagon said it plans to deploy first-phase missile interceptors by the mid-1990s if cleared by the White House.    ---   Students hurled firebombs and rocks at South Korean police in two hours of street fighting at Seoul National University, witnesses said. The anti-government protest erupted after a memorial service for a student who died of torture three months ago while in police custody, they said. Protests also were reported at 13 other universities.    ---   Solidarity founder Walesa urged Poland's outlawed trade union to organize independent May Day demonstrations across the nation to show &quot;aspirations and possibilities of the workers.&quot; The union's Warsaw branch said it would defy a ban and stage a protest on May 1, International Workers' Day, against recent food price increases.    ---   The U.S. invited Soviet experts to visit the Army's chemical-weapons destruction site in Tooele, Utah, in October, to boost talks on a world-wide ban. Secretary of State Shultz and the Soviets agreed last week on such mutual visits. The 40-nation Geneva disarmament conference has been discussing a ban for the past 10 years.    ---   U.S. agencies agreed on a proposal to address allied fears that Washington might turn a planned joint space station into a battle platform, officials said. The Defense and State departments and NASA don't intend to turn the $14.5 billion station into a base for &quot;Star Wars&quot; anti-missile weapons after it is put into orbit in the 1990s, they said. </TEXT></DOC>