<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880715-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Dubious Deals: Drexel Group Bought Stock in National Can Before Buy-Out Move --- But Big Board's Watchdogs Found 'No Connection' Of Buyers to National Can --- How Regulators Fell Short </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TRIA </CO><IN> STK SCR TNM </IN><G> CNG SEC </G><TEXT>   Over the 1983 Christmas holidays, corporate raider Victor Posner and Frank Considine, the chairman of National Can Corp., secretly agreed to take National Can private in a leveraged buy-out to be financed by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. A few days later, a partnership made up of 37 Drexel employees bought 10,000 shares of National Can stock.    On Jan. 5, 1984, National Can appointed a special committee of directors to evaluate the buy-out and any other bids for the company -- another development supposed to be kept in strictest confidence. That same day, the Drexel partnership bought 21,300 more shares of National Can. It added 2,000 shares a few days later.    Alarmed by the surge in trading of its stock -- the daily volume usually averaged little more than 4,000 shares -- National Can rushed out a public announcement on Jan. 12. It said it was considering a buy-out, and its stock price surged.    The Drexel partnership's heavy buying shortly before the announcement set off alarms at surveillance units of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange. Investment banks with access to confidential information about a proposed takeover have a duty to prevent trading in the target's stock by its employees to avoid even the appearance of insider trading.    The stock exchange launched an investigation, which lasted nearly 18 months, into possible insider trading in National Can stock. Despite that investigation and despite the obvious ties between the investors in the Drexel partnership, all current or former Drexel employees, and Drexel, the sole investment bank involved in the buy-out plans, the Big Board formally found &quot;no known connections&quot; between those doing the trading and National Can.    For regulators, the matter was closed.    Whether or not Drexel or the partnership was involved in any wrongdoing, how such suspicious trading escaped serious scrutiny is a story of regulatory ineptitude. It may help explain why insider trading could have flourished unchecked for so long on Wall Street. And it shows that even the most sophisticated computer-surveillance systems can't get human investigators to ask the right questions.    Moreover, the National Can trading raises doubts about the scope of the SEC's continuing investigation of Drexel. Even today, with Drexel undergoing the most intensive investigation in Wall Street history, the National Can trading appears to have fallen through the cracks.    Rep. John Dingell says the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigation, which he heads, has been examining Drexel's role in the National Can trading and the regulators' reaction. In National Can, the Michigan Democrat comments, &quot;it appears clear that the regulators failed to protect the public interest the way they should have.&quot; He complains that &quot;productive companies are being saddled with unnecessary debt just to enrich raiders and investment bankers.&quot;    A Big Board spokeswoman, told the contents of this article, would say only, &quot;We don't comment on investigations.&quot;    Similarly informed, Drexel issued this statement: &quot;Our records indicate no one at our firm was aware of any buy-out discussions at National Can prior to the company's public announcement that one was being contemplated.&quot; Through a spokesman, the firm declined further comment and refused requests for interviews with its employees involved in the National Can buy-out negotiations, the partnership's trading and Drexel's handling of the stockexchange investigation.    Details of the Drexel partnership's purchases of the Chicago company's stock are contained in trading records obtained by the House subcommittee in connection with its recent hearings into trading by dozens of Drexel employee partnerships in highyield &quot;junk&quot; bonds underwritten by Drexel. Copies of the trading records were obtained by this newspaper after they were introduced into the public record. They show that the main Drexel employee partnership scrutinized by the committee, Otter Creek Associates, had invested heavily in National Can even before the meeting that launched the buy-out.    According to the trading records, Otter Creek owned 54,200 shares of National Can at the beginning of December 1983. The purchases were understood to have begun in 1981. They seem unusual in view of the rest of Otter Creek's portfolio, which consisted almost entirely of Drexel-underwritten junk bonds, not common stock, during the period covered by the trading records.    Nearly all the Drexel employees who invested in Otter Creek have worked for Michael Milken, who heads Drexel's junkbond operations and is a target of the government's current investigation of the firm. Investors in Otter Creek included Mr. Milken and his brother, Lowell, and Cary Maultasch, both Drexel employees. Otter Creek's registered representative, who actually executed the trading, was Pamela Monzert, another Drexel employee. The SEC has approved, but agreed not to file immediately, a civil complaint charging securities-law violations against Drexel, the two Milkens, Mr. Maultasch and Ms. Monzert, according to people familiar with the government investigation. Those charges aren't believed to involve the National Can trading.    Until the buy-out proposal, Mr. Posner appeared to be a passive investor in National Can. Using one of his corporate entities, NVF Corp., he had acquired about a 38% stake in National Can by 1981. But in December 1983, when National Can proposed a stock offering to be underwritten by Salomon Brothers Inc., its traditional investment banker, Mr. Posner intervened. He is understood to have said he wanted Drexel to handle any such offering. Out of those discussions grew the much-bigger plan for a Posner-led leveraged buy-out; typically, such a buy-out is financed with heavy borrowings, which are to be repaid out of cash flow or asset sales.    According to participants in the discussions, Drexel was working closely with Mr. Posner. Donald Engel, a former Drexel official in Beverly Hills and now a Drexel consultant, and David Kay, Drexel's head of mergers and acquisitions in New York, met with National Can Chairman Considine and other company officials several times in Chicago that December. Drexel asserts that the buy-out was never mentioned at the meetings. Neither Mr. Milken nor Mr. Posner attended them.    At first, National Can didn't have any interest in going private; it preferred to remain a public company. But officials say they had little choice but to give in to Mr. Posner. Mr. Posner &quot;constantly threatened us by saying that more than 50% of our stock was in friendly hands,&quot; says Walter Stelzel, then National Can's chief financial officer. Despite such alleged claims by Mr. Posner, NVF never indicated in its SEC filings that it was part of any group that controlled a majority of National Can's shares. It isn't known whether Mr. Posner knew about Otter Creek or its purchases of National Can stock or whether he considered Otter Creek one of his shareholder &quot;friends.&quot;    A spokeswoman for Mr. Posner, Renee Mottran, said he stands by his SEC filings and hasn't any further comment.    Drexel won't say when, or if, it put National Can on its restricted list, which would bar any employee from trading in a stock about which the firm had confidential information. However, other investment bankers say that if Drexel knew anything about the proposed buy-out because of its work for Mr. Posner, National Can should have been at least on a &quot;gray list&quot; at Drexel, a confidential list that bars employee trading but, unlike the restricted list, is circulated to a limited number of officials, including those monitoring employee trading.    Drexel says it didn't know about the buy-out plan, and Otter Creek's buying of National Can proceeded unchecked. Its trading records show purchases of a total of 33,300 shares on Jan. 3, 5 and 9. The trading appears to have immediately triggered the Big Board and SEC surveillance systems. On Jan. 25, the exchange's head of surveillance, Lancellott Allen, formally notified the SEC that &quot;the exchange has initiated an investigation into the trading in National Can Corp. due to significant price and volume movement prior to an announcement that the firm is exploring the feasibility of a leveraged buy-out of the company.&quot; The exchange notified Drexel the same day, and no further purchases of National Can appear on Otter Creek's trading records.    Drexel responded a month later to the exchange's request for information. It listed all buyers of National Can through Drexel. But Drexel didn't disclose details about Otter Creek's stock purchases for another month.    When Drexel did explain the Otter Creek transactions, it discussed only the Jan. 5 and 9 purchases, calling them &quot;an unsolicited transaction&quot; in a &quot;nondiscretionary account.&quot; Because the exchange asked for data on Jan. 5 through Jan. 12, it missed Otter Creek's buying on Jan. 3. Drexel characterized the investors in Otter Creek as Drexel employees without naming them but then made an apparent misstatement, given the firm's work on the proposed financing for National Can and Mr. Posner: &quot;That is the extent of the relationship between them, DBL {Drexel} and the issuers.&quot; Drexel declines comment on this statement.    Ferreting out further information about Otter Creek and its trading in National Can went slowly. In a July letter responding to further questions from Nancy Repa, the exchange investigator handling the matter, Drexel added that the National Can trades &quot;were effected due to instructions given by the clients&quot; and that investment decisions for Otter Creek &quot;are made by a management committee.&quot; Only after further questions did Drexel, on Aug. 23, identify the members of Otter Creek's management committee as Lowell Milken, Reed Harmon and Robert Davidow, all Drexel employees in the Beverly Hills office, which runs Drexel's junk-bond operation.    Meanwhile, the exchange also turned its inquiry to National Can, asking whether National Can had been negotiating with Mr. Posner's NVF Corp. prior to the Jan. 12 announcement. This might have been expected to reveal Drexel's early involvement, but the inquiry appears to have been cursory. Handwritten notes by a Big Board official indicate that an exchange investigator spoke with a National Can vice president only once and &quot;was advised that discussion prior to 1/12 announcement was on a broad basis, nothing like negotiations.&quot;    That statement was at best incomplete. According to people familiar with the talks, the negotiations had been quite specific and the National Can board had appointed the special committee. Even so, the statement raised the possibility that some people did have advance knowledge of a possible buy-out. Nonetheless, there is no evidence that the exchange followed up with any more questions.    The exchange's questions came at a sensitive time for National Can officials. The buy-out negotiations with Mr. Posner were at a critical stage, and the deal soon unraveled. The financial situation of NVF and Mr. Posner was deteriorating, and on Feb. 1, 1985, the financier admitted that he couldn't go forward with the tender offer. According to a later National Can prospectus, he proposed instead that the company pay him an above-market price for his National Can shares -- in brief, greenmail. He again threatened Mr. Considine, saying that &quot;he had the support of other stockholders of the company and that, together with such other stockholders, he controlled more than a majority of the company's outstanding stock,&quot; according to the prospectus. National Can rejected Mr. Posner's suggestions.    But Drexel found another buyer for National Can. In March 1985, Triangle Industries Inc. launched a $41-a-share tender offer for National Can. That offer, later sweetened to $42 a share, rescued Mr. Posner. Trading records show that Otter Creek tendered 91,500 shares to Triangle for $3.8 million, making a profit of about $458,000 on its January 1984 purchases alone. Otter Creek's total profits on its National Can holdings would easily have exceeded $1 million.    On Feb. 8, 1985, just a week after Mr. Posner abandoned the buy-out, the stock exchange asked Drexel to submit a list of names and addresses of all members of Otter Creek and &quot;specific reasons&quot; for Otter Creek's purchases of National Can stock in January 1984. Although the exchange asked for the data &quot;no later&quot; than Feb. 22, Drexel didn't respond until April 16. Handwritten notes indicate that the exchange's Ms. Repa was persistent -- she asked Drexel for the information six times between Feb. 22 and April 16.    In a letter to the exchange dated April 16, more than a year after the investigation began, Drexel finally named the Otter Creek investors. But it didn't respond to the request for an explanation of the National Can purchases. It said only that &quot;the trades were effected by the clients.&quot; Nonetheless, there isn't any indication that the exchange pressed Drexel for an answer to that key question.    Besides this oversight, the exchange then took what seems an extraordinarily myopic view of possible avenues of inside information. The list of investors supplied by Drexel was analyzed for only two possibilities: Whether any of the investors and National Can officials were relatives or neighbors. They weren't.    At the time, many insider-trading cases had involved company officials who either traded for themselves or leaked information to relatives, friends or neighbors. But by mid-1985, the investigatory focus had clearly shifted to more sophisticated schemes involving market professionals. In 1983, in fact, a federal court had upheld the &quot;misappropriation&quot; theory of insider trading, in a case in which an investment banker had misappropriated confidential information.    In other insider-trading investigations, the SEC had begun to routinely assemble detailed lists of every lawyer, investment banker, proxy solicitor and anyone else with early access to market-sensitive information. There isn't any evidence, however, that the Big Board did any research along those lines other than the one phone call to National Can. As a result, the exchange apparently never learned that Drexel was working closely with Mr. Posner at the very time Otter Creek was buying.    On May 6, in a memorandum to the SEC written by the exchange's Mr. Allen, the Big Board formally concluded its investigation. It reported that &quot;Drexel indicated the {National Can} transactions were investment decisions made in their normal course of business.&quot; After mentioning that the names of 37 Otter Creek investors were examined, he said &quot;no geographic or familial connections were noted.&quot; Despite the recent highly publicized takeover of National Can by Triangle in a Drexel-financed deal, it apparently still hadn't sunk in that there might have been a link between Drexel and National Can. Mr. Allen's conclusion: trading by the Drexel partnership had &quot;no known connections to National Can.&quot;    The exchange said Mr. Allen is vacationing in Europe, and it refused to disclose his telephone number there. It added that Ms. Repa is on maternity leave and refused to provide either her address or phone number.    At the time the investigation was closed, Drexel hadn't achieved its current prominence as the subject of one of the most intensive securities investigations in history. Nevertheless, what happened in National Can might have been expected to pique the curiosity of government investigators now examining Drexel, not only because of the possibility of insider trading but also for the possibility of broader, takeover-related violations, such as false disclosure filings.    But no one involved in the 1985 investigation seems to have remembered National Can or alerted the SEC. Asked about the Otter Creek trading in National Can, one SEC official involved in the Drexel case says, &quot;We've never heard of it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>