<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Chip Shortage: Don't Blame the Pact </HL><AUTHOR> David B. Yoffie </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> ELE MON </IN><TEXT>   The prices of DRAMs (dynamic random-access memories) have skyrocketed in recent months. Shortages of these critical commodity semiconductors thus have been fattening the pockets of Japanese chip makers and hurting American electronics manufacturers. The prevailing opinion in the press is that a misguided trade policy is the cause: The U.S.-Japan Semiconductor Agreement of 1986 is just another foolish example of the U.S. government meddling with the market.    But the semiconductor agreement is not to blame. DRAMs are scarce partly because of normal industry cycles and partly because the U.S. hasn't been vigilant enough with its trade policy. Blaming today's problem on the semiconductor pact would send the worst possible signal to our trading partners, and doom the U.S. to further dependence on Japan for other critical products.    Higher DRAM prices should come as no surprise to veteran industry watchers. Semiconductors have a long history of booms and busts. Since it can take up to 18 months to bring new chip capacity on line, supply has always been slow in catching up to demand during periods of expansion. Thus, when video games were the rage in the late 1970s, spot shortages were common for certain chips. When personal-computer sales exploded a few years later, some chips were again hard to find.    Origins of the present shortages and exorbitant prices can be traced to the PC boom. Flush with overcapacity, Japanese firms dumped DRAMs in world markets in the early 1980s, and then in 1984-85 attacked another memory product called Eproms (erasable programmable read-only memories). All large firms in this industry want to make products like DRAMs and Eproms because producing these high-volume chips helps drive a firm down a very steep &quot;experience curve.&quot; Skills learned manufacturing DRAMs and Eproms are quickly transferred to lower-volume, higher-value-added devices. By 1985, however, all but two American chip makers had to abandon the DRAM market. Large, vertically integrated Japanese firms, able to subsidize memory-chip sales with profits from other lucrative lines, made it impossible for most American companies to survive in this business.    It was this predatory behavior in DRAMs and Eproms, as well as Japan's systematic denial of market access for American firms, that led the U.S. government to sign the semiconductor pact. In negotiating a world-wide end to the dumping, the government rightly decided to forgo the other options under U.S. trade law, including imposing tariffs or quotas on chips coming into the U.S. Those alternatives might have resulted in immediate shortages or forced domestic consumers to pay higher prices while foreign and multinational consumers could buy dumped products. Either situation could cause American firms to be less competitive in world markets.    The trade agreement just required individual Japanese companies to set prices consistent with fair market value based on their manufacturing costs, and Japanese industry to improve market access for foreign semiconductors. Even when President Reagan retaliated against violations of these commitments last spring, he raised tariffs on $300 million of widely available end-products rather than risk disruption of the semiconductor supply.    If U.S. trade policy has done nothing to distort a normal market in key components from Japan, why do we have such shortages and high prices today? Three reasons: the normal industry cycle -- no one anticipated the latest explosion in demand; technical problems, readily admitted by the Japanese, in bringing new capacity on line; and a textbook case of the negative consequences of dumping.    Any economist will tell you that we shouldn't complain about foreigners dumping, because consumers benefit. The one exception is if foreign firms can put domestic firms out of business, and then raise prices. If it is costly to re-enter the business (like it is to restart DRAM production), foreign firms can gain monopoly profits at the consumer's expense.    Japanese dumping in DRAMs reached new levels -- some firms were pricing at less than half of cost -- while the world semiconductor industry was in the midst of its worst-ever slump. Although Japanese manufacturers lost as much money as U.S. companies (at least $2 billion over 1985 and 1986), the smaller American firms couldn't sustain the losses without dramatic cutbacks. As a result, most U.S. suppliers withdrew from DRAMs. This has meant that American computer companies must depend on a handful of their Japanese competitors to supply virtually all of these critical components.    Some commentators have maintained that U.S. companies would have withdrawn from DRAM production in any case, in favor of customized chips. Not only do the learning-curve costs cited earlier belie that analysis, but the experience with high-volume Eprom production is instructive as well. There are no shortages of Eproms largely because the U.S. government prevented its domestic industry from being decimated. While Japanese firms had been cutting DRAM prices for several years, Japan did not have a major presence in Eproms until 1983. Once the U.S. industry filed Eprom dumping suits, it took only 10 months for Washington to start setting fair market values. The market is competitive and supplies adequate today.    Rather than signaling a bankrupt trade policy, today's shortages in DRAMs should remind us that dumped products in an industry like semiconductors usually lead to higher prices and limited availability if domestic suppliers are allowed to be destroyed. We need a healthy, well-balanced merchant industry to avoid future disruptions in supply. This may require a more active trade policy -- not less.    For our semiconductor industry to survive and prosper in the long run, the second part of the 1986 accord regarding improved market access to Japan must be implemented. Last year, Japan had the largest semiconductor market in the world. American semiconductor firms, however, are still not getting an even chance in Japan. Despite the trade agreement, a 40% appreciation in the yen, and increased selling efforts by all large American firms, the U.S. share of the Japanese market hasn't measurably improved.    Exclusion from that market can cause dependence on Japanese suppliers only to grow. Timely, effective trade policy is part of the solution, not the problem.    ---   Mr. Yoffie is an associate professor at Harvard Business School. </TEXT></DOC>