<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870416-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Japan's Closed Door Brings Hard Knocks---By William McGurn</HL><DD> 04/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FREST EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Commodore Matthew Calbraith Perry sailed home from this bay in 1854, his fleet of seven men-of-war carried an accord that put the first crack in Japan's centuries of self-imposed isolation. Four years later the efforts of America's first consul here, Townsend Harris, led to a commercial treaty between the two nations. All without firing a shot.    Today, alas, Washington appears to have neither the vision of the commodore nor the horse sense of the consul, if one can judge by the $300 million in punitive tariffs that are scheduled to go into effect tomorrow. A dubious response to the breakdown of what was itself a dubious attempt to &quot;monitor&quot; the international semiconductor market, America's new-found determination to Teach Japan a Lesson has encouraged similar menacing talk from other nations.    Whether the goal is a guaranteed American share of the Japanese semiconductor market or a specific British stake in a Japanese telecommunications venture, in an integrated world economy such bilateral efforts tend to expand the cartel rather than open the market. This in turn has disastrous ripple effects even for those not directly involved, as the howls now emanating from Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia and Europe attest. Despite earnest talk from all sides about avoiding the economic hara-kiri of an all-out trade war, no one scruples about the multilateral damage wrought by even a few sharp thrusts in that direction.    &quot;It's a street fight out there,&quot; says Kenichi Ohmae, a managing director with McKinsey andamp; Co., a consulting firm. &quot;You no longer know who is hitting whom.&quot;    Although economically inexplicable, the increasing resort to protectionism is an emotionally understandable response to mounting frustration at a Japan that moves in on everyone else's open doors but keeps its own relatively closed. Despite having less-onerous tariffs than even the Common Market or the U.S., Japan's infamous &quot;non-tariff barriers&quot; -- chiefly its vertical distribution system, array of niggling regulations and pernicious &quot;administrative guidance&quot; from the bureaucratic shogunate -- restrict access to almost all foreign goods save those locally produced. On top of this is a pricing and tax structure that makes most Japanese manufactured goods more expensive here than abroad.    American chip makers are neither the only nor even the most significant victims. Complaints come from a wide variety of foreign businessmen and diplomats in Tokyo. Producers of Thai boneless chicken, European liquor, Canadian lumber, Philippine papaya, South Korean light electrical goods, Taiwanese pork and Australian beef are just some who can't get through the door.    Japan might protest against America's &quot;voluntary&quot; quotas, but it eagerly imposes them on others, most recently on Korean and Taiwanese textiles. This does not begin to get at the exclusion of foreigners from the financial service sector or the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Says Rikkyo University's Chiaki Nishiyama: &quot;The real problem here is the domestic controls aimed at controlling market entry, regarded as natural in Japan.&quot;    Take alcohol. Unlike other countries, Japan does not tax by alcoholic content but according to a grading system that places foreign products like Scotch in the high-tax top grade. The upshot of this structure is that even the cheapest bottle of Scotch must sell for at least 2,600 yen ($18.60) -- up to three times as much as the cheapest Japanese whiskey, which, of course, escapes the onerous tax burden by being in the lowest grade. Set against this background, the vaunted Japanese preference for Japanese goods appears the outcome less of blind nationalism than of rational economic choice.    Under EC pressure, including a personal complaint from British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone at last year's summit here, the Japanese in December announced a reform in their alcohol grading structure. Although foreign wine and beer were freed up, the discrimination against foreign whiskey relative to the local competitors was left intact, mostly by just calling the lowest grade &quot;spirits&quot; instead of whiskey.    &quot;They never tried to solve the problem,&quot; says Warren W. Williams of Burson-Marsteller, a public-relations firm. &quot;They tried to defuse the problem by driving a wedge between the whiskey and wine producers. That's more a tactic of a trade war than participation in a world trading system.&quot;    Even more damaging are Japan's barriers against goods from developing countries, especially its Asian neighbors, for whom access to Japan's vast market is crucial to future prosperity and stability. Developing countries have it doubly tough because more often than not they offer agricultural goods, which go up against Japan's most protected market, one that is tough even for the developed world to crack.    The premier of the province of Saskatchewan complained last week, for example, that the Japanese government buys Canadian wheat at $122.60 per ton and Japanese wheat at $1,226.00 per ton, selling both at $574.60 per ton. The relative numbers are staggering: Hiroshi Kato of Keio University writes that 1985 farm support programs and subsidies to special interest groups amounted to $56 billion, equivalent to Japan's entire trade surplus that year.    Then there's Philippine papaya, today banned from Japan. To kill flies, Philippine papaya growers treat the fruit with the chemical EDB, as do Hawaiian papaya growers, who currently are able to sell their papaya in Japan. But in June new Ministry of Health and Welfare regulations will prohibit all EDB-treated papaya, and Filipinos worry that their mangoes -- for which Japan is their largest buyer -- will be the next fruit targeted. The damage such regulations can do to struggling economies such as the Philippines is immense.    Even newly industrialized countries such as South Korea and Taiwan complain more about the restrictions on foods than about the restrictions on electrical and machine parts for which they are better known. &quot;Japan should be more sympathetic to its Asian trading partners rather than getting angry at the unreasonable demands of the U.S.,&quot; says Kiyohiko Fukushima, a senior economist at Nomura Research Institute.    Although past U.S. administrations have threatened sanctions, they at least did not exhibit the current zest for determining the &quot;fair&quot; share of a given market or the &quot;true&quot; value of the dollar. In 1983, moreover, U.S. officials scored a notable success in getting the Japanese to change 17 laws in the famous baseball-bat case. The change permitted designated &quot;registered&quot; U.S.-based factories to manufacture &quot;self-certified&quot; bats. It was the first time anyone but the Japanese government was permitted to put approval stickers on goods for sale in Japan.    True, the scales remain grossly lopsided. The U.S., for example, permits several thousand factories in Japan to certify their goods for the U.S. market, while Japan licenses only a few dozen world-wide. The American victory on baseball bats was a real market-opening measure, and Korea, Taiwan and France have used the U.S. opening to get their own factories licensed. Working to change laws and regulations may not lend itself to the current wave of congressional jingoism, but it's more effective.    In trading in this approach for tit-for-tat protectionism, moreover, the U.S. has launched a kamikaze attack on its own industries by raising the price of semiconductor chips and some electronic goods while compounding the distortions in the international markets. Mrs. Thatcher probably would not have dreamed of threatening to boot some of the world's biggest lenders out of London's fledgling world financial market had President Reagan refrained from imposing sanctions. For American indulgence in protectionism against Japan traditionally has been followed by similar European moves, from steel to cars to videotape equipment.    In a world economy that's gone far beyond bilateral relationships, the real problem is that it's impossible to confine punishment to the guilty. Europe, for example, lodged a complaint with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade that the attempt to guarantee America 20% of the Japanese chip market discriminated against European semiconductors, and Hong Kong's director of trade quite rightly slammed the same accord for trying to prevent Hong Kong firms from acquiring chips for less than the fixed price of $3. Similarly, when the dust clears from the latest American sally, all we are likely to find is a rise in prices for Americans, no change in the much-misunderstood trade balances, an increased say for Japanese regulators -- and bad feelings all around.    It has yet to dawn on the bureaucrats in the Land of the Rising Sun how inefficient their actions make their own economy. Nor do they appear to appreciate that trade wars are seldom declared outright; they are, rather, the cumulative effect of protectionist blunders. More than a century ago, Commodore Perry convinced the Japanese it was time to come join the rest of the world. His heirs have yet to persuade them to let the rest of the world in.    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>