<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861204-0056 </DOCNO><HL> People Power for Political Parties---By Brooks Jackson</HL><DD> 12/04/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The still-uncounted millions spent in the 1986 House and Senate elections already are being cited as strong evidence of a need for new limits on campaign money. What's really needed, however, is some fresh thinking.    The financing of the 100th Congress shows once again that limits are devilishly difficult to enforce, that the federal elections panel isn't much interested in enforcing them anyway, and that even unlimited spending seldom &quot;buys&quot; elections.    Furthermore, the outcomes in House races -- where a record 98% of all incumbents who ran for reelection were returned to office -- show that our present system has helped create a new national office that the Founding Fathers didn't envision: Congressman-for-Life. Spending limits would make that situation worse.    The time may be ripe for change. Many Republicans have become bitterly disillusioned with political action committees, which haven't supported the GOP as much as Republicans expected. Some Republicans now mutter privately that they wouldn't mind outlawing PACs altogether, if parties can be freed to supply more money to their candidates.    Democrats, too, are sending interesting signals. Reps. Dan Rostenkowski and Tony Coelho, two of the party's most successful fund-raisers, both have said recently they think it's time to fix the system. Members of both parties say they don't like constantly begging for money, and the lobbyists they often hit up agree change is in order. At least one bill to do so has attracted support from some conservatives.    Enacting more limits, however, won't accomplish much when present limits are being violated or evaded in ever more brazen fashion. The historical cycle of scandal, reform, noncompliance and scandal seems to be repeating itself.    In the 1986 campaigns, for example, the National Republican Senatorial Committee funneled at least $6.6 million to key candidates outside the legal limits on party financial aid, through methods that even some Republican lawyers privately question. Party aid is preferable to PAC money, but the point remains: when it comes to campaign money, limits fail.    PACs, too, are sidestepping limits in ever more dramatic fashion. The law limits their direct donations to any federal candidate to $5,000 per election. Yet the National Association of Realtors' PAC spent $496,000 to run its own campaign, including radio and television ads, on behalf of unsuccessful Oklahoma Democratic Senate candidate James Jones, while the American Medical Association PAC spent $315,000 trying to defeat Rep. Andrew Jacobs, an Indiana Democrat who opposed higher Medicaid fees for doctors.    One reason limits don't work well is that courts have held that campaign spending is equivalent to speech and so is protected by the First Amendment. Another reason is that the Federal Election Commission doesn't have much stomach for enforcement. It often refuses to begin investigations even when its legal staff sees reason to think a law has been violated.    In recent cases, the FEC deliberately closed its eyes to the widespread use of largely unreported corporate and union donations to political parties, and refused to act against freshman Rep. Tommy Robinson (D., Ark.) who won election in 1984 with the help of huge, mostly uncollateralized loans from friendly banks.    But despite all the limit-busting spending, it's hard to find a House or Senate campaign where money was a decisive factor. Rep. Jacobs, for example, got 58% of the vote -- spending a laughable $8,000 at last report -- against the total of $733,000 spent by the doctors and his opponent.    Especially in Senate campaigns, spending is reaching saturation levels. In South Dakota, where Democrat Tom Daschle and Republican James Abdnor each spent about $2.5 million, this newspaper's John Fialka reported that the two candidates bought so much television time that the average South Dakotan saw 300 of their commercials. Mr. Daschle won. (All figures are complete through Oct. 15, the cutoff for the last pre-election report. Final reports are due in mid-December.)    Overall, Republican Senate candidates outspent Democrats quite heavily, but Democrats scored a net gain of eight seats anyway. Democrats won 10 of the 15 tightest Senate races.    Political scientists tend to agree that a ruthless law of diminishing returns sets in once campaign spending reaches levels that allows candidates to get their basic message across. That was shown most dramatically this year in North Dakota, where Democrat Kent Conrad won despite the fact that GOP Sen. Mark Andrews spent nearly $1.5 million to his $621,100. The lesson here is that Democratic candidates had enough money to do the job. Another lesson, equally important, is that the exponential growth in GOP party funds is over, probably forever. In the 1980 and 1982 elections, the total amount of money raised by the GOP House and Senate committees doubled from the preceding campaign; in 1984 it grew by 31%. But in 1986, it actually declined. In the 21 months ending Sept. 30, the total was off 9.5% from the equivalent period two years earlier. Republican fundraisers say they're already squeezing nearly every available dollar from their mailing lists and major donors, and that future growth, if it is possible at all, will be very difficult.    All of this could set the stage for some campaign-law compromise that would be seen as fair by both Democrats and Republicans. Privately, leaders on both sides agree on their desire for a system with full disclosure, less reliance on lobbyists, more emphasis on rank-and-file donors and less time needed to raise money. Such a system shouldn't be impossible to design.    Now that Democrats control both the Senate and House, they may be tempted to ram through a measure combining public financing and limits on spending. But even if limits could somehow be made to work -- a highly questionable proposition -- such a bill probably would just set up a presidential veto and accomplish nothing.    Last year, the House passed a measure to provide 100% tax credits for small campaign donations to House and Senate candidates. It died in the Senate, but deserves another look. It'd encourage more small donations, which are especially needed by challengers, and offset the role of PACs.    Another approach might be to strengthen the financial base of the parties by setting up a national payroll withholding system for voluntary contributions. Employees could sign a card authorizing, say, $1 a week of their pay to be directed to the party they choose. Employers could send the money to the IRS along with periodic income-tax and Social Security withholding, to be forwarded to the parties.    There's no shortage of good ideas floating around. What's been lacking so far are serious, good-faith discussions among the party leaders. Now is the time to begin those talks.    ---   Mr. Jackson is a reporter in the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>