<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880831-0030 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   WALESA IS TO MEET today with Polish officials in an effort to end strikes.    The Solidarity founder is to confer in Warsaw with Poland's interior minister and other aides in a government effort to end two weeks of labor turmoil, according to senior officials of the outlawed trade union. A representative of the Roman Catholic Church also is to attend the meeting. The union aides said Walesa won't call off a strike at Gdansk's Lenin shipyard, which the Warsaw government had said was a condition for the discussions.    At least 10 enterprises remained idled by work stoppages in what is viewed as Poland's most serious wave of strikes since 1981. The strikes began Aug. 16.    ---   PINOCHET WAS NAMED as the sole candidate in Chile's presidential plebiscite.    As riot police clashed with protesters in Santiago and several provincial cities, the country's military junta designated the 72-year-old president as the nominee for the Oct. 5 referendum, during which voters will either ratify or reject the candidate. A victory by Pinochet, who ousted Allende's elected government in 1973, would keep him in office until 1997. If a majority rejects him, multicandidate elections could be held by early 1990.    Opposition leaders have been holding rallies to oppose the one-candidate presidential referendum, and violence has erupted at many demonstrations.    ---   Dukakis criticized Bush as a failed crime fighter, misguided on defense matters and a hypocrite who sat idly by during the Iran-Contra scandal. Bush, meanwhile, said his Democratic rival was &quot;another liberal governor coming out of nowhere.&quot; In Washington, aides of both campaigns held talks but failed to arrange a schedule for debates.    ---   The Reagan administration contended that the Soviet Union has violated its Afghanistan pullout agreement by using Soviet-based warplanes in bombings against U.S.-backed guerrillas. The State Department also expressed concern about redeployment of Red Army soldiers in support of the Kabul government's forces.    ---   Morocco and Polisario rebels agreed conditionally to a plan for a U.N.-supervised cease-fire and a referendum on the future of the disputed Western Sahara. A U.N. spokesman, who announced the move toward ending the 13-year conflict over the phosphate-rich region, didn't disclose what conditions had been imposed on the plan.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett said many U.S. elementary schools need to increase the study of literary classics, math and science, as well as start foreign-language courses in the fourth grade. The proposal by Bennett, who is leaving his post Sept. 20, followed a similar model that he issued last December for the nation's high schools.    ---   Thornburgh announced the completion of a monthlong international drug-enforcement campaign that resulted in the seizure of 11 tons of cocaine, destruction of 244 tons of marijuana and 1,200 arrests. Thirty nations, most in South and Central America, cooperated in what the attorney general called the &quot;first type of operation of its kind.&quot;    ---   The Pentagon said six Americans were among those killed when three Italian jets collided Sunday at an air show at a U.S. military base in Ramstein, West Germany. There were conflicting reports on the total number of dead, with West German authorities raising the death toll to 49, and the Pentagon confirming 40 fatalities.    ---   South Africa completed its troop withdrawal from Angola after fighting for more than a year in support of guerrillas battling the Marxist government. Pretoria's armed forces chief of staff said the last 1,000 South African soldiers in Angola crossed into Namibia as part of a regional peace pact.    ---   The U.N. secretary-general blamed disagreements over an immediate troop withdrawal and a maritime cease-fire for stalling Iran-Iraq peace negotiations in Geneva. While low-level discussions between Tehran and Baghdad were continuing, formal sessions between both countries' foreign ministers have been suspended since Friday.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union ended initial, 60-day inspections without detecting any apparent discrepancies in the nuclear arsenals claimed by both sides under the INF treaty, defense sources said. Under the accord signed last December, superpower intermediate-range missiles would be eliminated.    ---   Sudan's main opposition group accused the Khartoum government of mishandling international relief efforts after floods this month. It called on the coalition of Prime Minister Mahdi to resign. Nearly two million Sudanese have been left homeless by the floods caused by torrential rains.    ---   Burma's state employees announced formation of an illegal association -- the fourth created this week -- for anti-government protests. The striking employees from more than 120 government departments and state-run corporations called for protests tomorrow, adding pressure to the embattled regime of President Maung Maung.    ---   A group of climate researchers warned that the &quot;greenhouse effect&quot; warming the Earth will continue even if there are cutbacks in the use of chemicals that cause the problem. The heating &quot;appears to be inevitable,&quot; the group led by a NASA scientist said, even with &quot;probably unrealistic reductions&quot; in carbon dioxide and other gases. </TEXT></DOC>