<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0022 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN CALLED for a bipartisan panel to devise responses to the drug problem.    The president asked that an &quot;executive-legislative task force&quot; be given 45 days to report on such matters as capital punishment when a death results from drug trafficking, tougher mandatory sentences for dealers, additional education and prevention programs and greater use of the military and National Guard in fighting drugs. Bush said he would form his own panel and suggested he differs with the administration on dealing with Noriega.    The Senate was attempting to compromise on a death-penalty amendment for some drug dealers. The dispute delayed passage of a defense bill.    ---   The Senate repelled the first attack by Republican conservatives on the U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating intermediate-range nuclear missiles. It voted 91-6 to shelve a bid by Sen. Helms to stop debate on the pact on grounds that Soviet leader Gorbachev wasn't authorized to sign the treaty.    ---   Pressure on Meese grew as a group of conservative senators, during a 90-minute closed-door Capitol Hill meeting with the attorney general, painted a bleak picture of the political damage he is causing Republicans. Meese, however, reiterated that he intends to stay in office because he doesn't believe he has done anything wrong.    ---   Dukakis won Tuesday's Oregon Democratic presidential primary, 58% to Jackson's 38%, and polls show him with a substantial lead in advance of the June 7 primaries in California, New Jersey, New Mexico and Montana. Two new polls also showed him leading Bush, who has a mathematical lock on the Republican nomination.    A federal official said a member of a white supremacist organization and his wife are in jail on charges of conspiring to kill or harm Jackson because they believed he was &quot;getting too close to being president.&quot; The two were arrested Friday in Missouri and are being held without bail.    ---   A Soviet Foreign Ministry aide disputed claims by U.S. officials that an explosion last week destroyed the only plant producing rocket fuel for SS-24 intercontinental missiles. The spokesman said the Pavlograd explosion didn't involve rocket propellant and didn't cause major damage. He said, however, that three people were killed.    ---   Sikh separatists surrendered to Indian troops at the Golden Temple in Amritsar, but three committed suicide by swallowing cyanide capsules and one was shot and killed as he attempted to escape. The death toll stood at 46 at the end of the 10-day siege. Elsewhere in the Punjab, 40 people were killed in attacks by Sikh extremists.    ---   A House panel is investigating whether $6.25 million that Northrop invested in a South Korean hotel venture in 1984 was ultimately meant to persuade Seoul officials to buy jet fighters from the company. Northrop said it was defrauded of the money and has sued to recover it.    ---   Hezbollah militia fighters pressed their Amal rivals in fighting in Shiite slums in south Beirut. Police said three people were killed. Meanwhile, an Iranian official urged Syria not to send in its troops and hinted at a possible deal involving some of the 18 foreign hostages believed held in the area.    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked a Japanese-owned chemical tanker in the Persian Gulf, and the captain and 16 crewmen were forced to abandon ship. All were rescued, shipping sources said. It was the first Iranian attack on gulf shipping since the U.S. announced a new policy that allows the Navy to come to the aid of any neutral ship under attack.    ---   Israeli soldiers raided two isolated villages in the West Bank, killing a Palestinian youth after they were surrounded by hundreds of stone-throwing protesters.    ---   Pope John Paul II told Paraguayans that their country suffers from a philosophy that puts profits and power above human needs. The pope was to end his four-nation South American tour last night. His visit to Paraguay, which included a meeting with an opposition group, was marked by friction with President Stroessner's government.    ---   Federal prosecutors are considering bringing criminal charges against General Electric for alleged overbilling on Army computer equipment. Officials said the three-year inquiry in Philadelphia focuses on allegations of fraud and false claims totaling $10 million.    ---   A South African judge agreed to reopen the &quot;Sharpville Six&quot; case to hear defense arguments against death sentences imposed on the black defendants, convicted in the 1984 killing of a black township official.    ---   South Korean protesters battled police as an estimated 43,000 students and others continued demonstrations in Seoul and other cities across the nation. Protesters called for President Roh Tae Woo's ouster as they marked the anniversary of a 1980 uprising in Kwangju in which 200 were killed.    ---   A Soviet convoy crossed the border from Afghanistan, marking the withdrawal of the first contingent in an overall pullout of 115,000 Soviet troops. Separately, Afghan guerrillas said they are gradually capturing areas south of Kabul but are allowing Soviet troops to withdraw from garrisons without opposition to speed their withdrawal.    ---   A Sudanese police official said three Arab suspects confessed to bombing and machine-gun attacks in Khartoum Sunday that killed seven. The official said they carried Lebanese passports and claimed to be part of an unidentified terrorist group.    ---   Polisario guerrillas said they killed 10 Moroccan troops during a raid Monday, the same day Algeria and Morocco resumed diplomatic ties after a 12-year breach. Morocco dismissed the claim as an attempt to mar the improved relations.    ---   U.S. and Soviet officials met in Portugal for new talks on ending the 13-year-old war in Angola and securing independence for Namibia. The U.S. voiced concern about reports of a Cuban troop buildup in Angola. </TEXT></DOC>