<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870917-0049 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Bork Doesn't Speak for a Slumbering Majority---By Hodding Carter III</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   The battle over Robert Bork's nomination is barely joined, but already its outcome is being discussed in apocalyptic terms. Partisans on both sides profess to believe that the future of all that is good and holy in the nation is at stake. At its worst, the debate is slightly ridiculous, indicative of the polarization of what passes for political discourse in the U.S.    But even if you don't buy the hype-hysteria, and I don't, it is feckless to try to pretend that this is a trivial tempest in a tiny teapot. It isn't. Nor is this just another routine Supreme Court nomination. President Reagan nominated Judge Bork for serious political reasons and the nomination is being fought for equally serious political reasons. That is as it should be in this democratic republic, and those who demand that the issue be put above politics are cynically disingenuous or stupid.    Only God and Robert Bork know what the judge feels in his heart about the issues such as race, personal choice, privacy, executive power and judicial activism that have made him so controversial. Since God does not ordinarily reveal himself to us on matters of other individuals' private beliefs, and since Judge Bork's various writings and speeches over the years make for occasional confusion as to his current beliefs, the Senate Judiciary Committee has an obligation to probe deeply during the confirmation hearings.    Even that will not be enough, since the Bork camp's strategy is pretty clear. Judge Bork will be presented, and present himself, as an intelligent and quite engaging human being who is well within the mainstream of judicial thought. His more extreme positions of the past will be recanted or recast as the outpourings of a restlessly fertile mind. Robert Bork the right-wing tiger, a role he loved to play right up until the day before yesterday, will be transmogrified before our eyes into Robert Bork the amiable exemplar of conventional legal conservatism. Since he will, quite properly, refuse to comment on how he will rule on pending cases, it is entirely possible that we will understand less about the depths of his convictions at the end of the hearings than at the beginning.    But we can look elsewhere, beyond heaven or Capitol Hill, for guidance. It is most readily at hand in the personages of the judge's sponsors. The most important of these, of course, is the president himself. On the subject of what he wants in the Supreme Court and a Supreme Court justice, he has been excruciatingly clear over the years. As he has been candid enough to tell the American people repeatedly, a model court and justice would:    --Leave state and local government free to do as they wish with minorities and unpopular expression or behavior.    --Restrain the federal government from forays into untoward social-welfare or racial-justice activism.    --Free the federal government from restraints on its ability to regulate individual speech and action in the name of national security and to hide its activities from the people under the same guise.    --Stick closely to &quot;original intent&quot; in all ways convenient to a rigid, right-wing ideology, and ignore it otherwise.    In campaign speeches and presidential pronouncements, Mr. Reagan has sworn repeated oaths to rebuild the court in that image. In his two most recent appointments, of Judge Antonin Scalia to the court and Justice William Rehnquist as chief justice, he has taken a giant leap in that direction. With the succession of Robert Bork to the seat previously held by Lewis Powell, he might well succeed.    Perhaps, as Judge Bork's more moderate (or, again, disingenuous) supporters claim, that is not a fair inference to make about the consequences of his confirmation. But it is an eminently fair interpretation of what the president hopes to accomplish. He has an ideological agenda for the court, he has been pursuing it through his grossly politicized Justice Department for seven years, and he has consistently revealed it by the nature of his most significant judicial appointments.    That is his right, as it is the right and intent of the political shocktroopers leading the fight for Judge Bork's nomination. Some of them are being quaintly modest these days about the fierce integrity of their purpose, hiding their ideological lights under bushels of sweet reason. Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah comes immediately to mind. But behind their solemn denials of Judge Bork's radicalism, they can barely mask their Cheshire Cat grins. They think they know what a Bork victory would produce, and they can hardly wait.    What it might produce -- and might is the operative word still -- is exactly what they have been unable to win at the ballot box, in Congress or before the court to date. Claiming to speak for a slumbering majority, claiming even more hypocritically to be speaking in favor of a court that does not interfere with the political process, they intend for the Bork nomination to produce victories denied them by that process so far.    And that is why the nomination should be rejected. Judge Bork, witty and engaging as he is, has been nominated for clear political and ideological motives that have no national mandate. The president has fought for that mandate, and the persistence of divided government throughout his tenure proves he has not been given it. At this late date in the life of a tarnished administration, the Senate should not provide what the people have withheld.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>