<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880919-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors: Redefining Dollar Stability </HL><AUTHOR> Martin Feldstein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP JAPAN </CO><IN> MON ECO FIN FRX </IN><G> FED </G><TEXT>   The finance ministers of the G-7 countries will be meeting in Berlin this week under the umbrella of the annual IMF-World Bank conference. They should use their meeting and the inevitable communique to begin a gradual shift in their rhetoric about dollar stability.    Their first step should be to redefine dollar stability in terms of real exchange rates -- that is, explicitly acknowledge that the dollar must decline at least enough to offset the higher U.S. inflation. Sooner or later it will also be necessary to recognize that the real value of the dollar must fall further to shrink the U.S. trade deficit to a level that can be financed by private capital inflows.    Last year the finance ministers adopted a strategy of trying to convince investors that the dollar would remain stable; they feared that a dollar decline could become precipitous. Unfortunately, their assertions of dollar stability induced a sharp, unexpected and counterproductive rise of the dollar. The overstrong dollar is limiting the improvement of the U.S. trade picture and threatening a world-wide spiral of rising interest rates.    The dollar's climb since the beginning of this year shows the danger of trying to convince financial investors that dollar exchange rates will remain constant even though interest rates are several percentage points higher in the U.S. than in Japan or West Germany. Although most investors recognize that the dollar must decline substantially over the next few years, the finance ministers created the expectation that it would not decline in the nearer term. By convincing speculators and portfolio managers that the dollar would not decline in the near future, the finance ministers made investing in the higher-yielding dollar assets irresistible.    The promise of dollar stability thus became the source of dollar instability. As the short-term investors bought dollar securities, the dollar rose. The rising dollar made dollar investments seem all the more attractive. A snowball of speculative dollar increases was under way.    The German and Japanese governments are now worried that the rising dollar and the corresponding fall of the mark and the yen put upward pressure on their domestic price levels. In addition, they are concerned that the high dollar is making their manufacturers turn again to the development of export markets, thereby frustrating the attempt to shrink the massive trade imbalances with the U.S. As long as investors see high U.S. interest rates and hear finance ministers promise that the dollar will not decline, the central banks of Germany and Japan will be under intense pressure to raise their interest rates in order to increase the attractiveness of their own currencies to international investors.    It would be wrong for Germany and Japan to raise their interest rates in order to narrow the gap with U.S. interest rates. With the much lower inflation rates in Germany and Japan, a significant hike in interest rates would make their real interest rates far too high, precipitating a serious downturn in their economies. Similarly it would be wrong for the Federal Reserve to risk higher inflation here by reversing the recent rise in U.S. interest rates.    Since the finance ministers are unlikely to abandon the rhetoric of dollar stability, the easiest way out of this financial bind is for them to redefine exchange-rate stability to refer to real exchange rates. With this standard, the dollar would be regarded as stable if the decline in the dollar is limited to the difference in inflation rates. Thus with the U.S. inflation about four percentage points higher than inflation in Japan, a &quot;stable dollar&quot; would fall by 4% over a year relative to the yen.    Redefining dollar stability in real terms would eliminate the false allure of dollar investments. The logical inconsistency of a fixed exchange rate combined with interest differentials would disappear.    The higher interest rates in the U.S. reflect the higher U.S. rate of inflation. Consumer prices are rising at 4% in the U.S. but only 1% in Germany and even more slowly in Japan. Even more relevant, wholesale prices of manufactured products are rising at more than 5% in the U.S. but only 2% in Germany and not at all in Japan. Since the interest differentials are about equal to the inflation differences, the higher U.S. interest rates are just about enough to compensate investors if the dollar declines by the inflation differential.    If the dollar does decline relative to the yen at a pace equal to the difference between the American and Japanese inflation rates, U.S. producers would just maintain their current competitiveness relative to Japanese firms. If instead the dollar were to remain absolutely unchanged, the American ability to compete in world markets would diminish. Our trade deficit would again swell, and the pressure to use the recently enacted trade legislation to block imports would become unstoppable.    At this point, it must be said further that a dollar decline that keeps pace with the inflation differential would be a step in the right direction -- but it would not be enough to bring U.S. trade back into balance or to a level that can be financed by private capital inflows from abroad. The fall in the real value of the dollar between early 1985 and the spring of 1987 brought in its wake a significant decline in the trade deficit. But with the dollar's real value unchanged since last year, the improvement in the trade balance will now gradually grind to a halt unless the dollar's fall resumes sometime soon.    The idea that the real value of the dollar has to fall further if the trade deficit is to shrink to a level that can be financed seems to run counter to the casual empiricism of travelers who compare prices in Tokyo and New York. The charge for a room in a Tokyo hotel, the cost of a meal in a Tokyo restaurant, and the prices of goods in Japanese shops seem very high even at today's exchange rate. Such comparisons make it easy for the traveler to conclude that the dollar has already fallen far enough to eliminate the trade deficit.    The fallacy in judging exchange rates by the traveler's impressions of the relative purchasing power of the dollar and the yen is that hotel rooms and restaurant meals are not representative of the goods that enter into international trade. What matters is the relative prices of tradable products like automobiles, machinery, office equipment, home electronics and chemicals. And it is the wholesale prices that count, not the retail prices charged in stores that reflect the notoriously high markups in Japan or the value-added taxes in Europe.    It's not easy to evaluate these relative prices, even for the economists and statisticians who must do it professionally. One reason is that many of the products that the U.S. imports are simply not produced here and the products that we export are not produced abroad. Even more important, it is hard to be at all confident about relative price comparisons for many manufactured goods because there is no way to take quality differences into account. There's no point in just comparing the price tags on American and Japanese automobiles when the buying public regards apparently similar cars as really very different in quality. That's why so-called Purchasing Power Parity isn't an appropriate basis for calculating exchange rates.    The real test of the competitiveness of U.S. and Japanese prices is not what the economic statisticians say, but how the market for these products behaves. And the message of the market is clear. At existing exchange rates, the trade imbalances are enormous and will remain so. Indeed, recent months have seen increases in the massive trade surpluses of Japan and Germany. And the manufacturers in Japan and Germany believe that those surpluses will increase further if the dollar exchange rates remain unchanged.    So the dollar must fall in real terms -- that is, by more than the inflation differential -- to bring the trade back toward balance and to shrink the current-account deficit to a financeable level. Regardless of what the finance ministers say or do, the thousands of market participants around the world will make that happen by refusing to accumulate dollar assets at the rate implied by the current value of the dollar. There's no way of knowing when that will happen, or whether it will happen quickly or slowly -- but it will happen.    The inevitable decline of the dollar makes it all the more important for the Federal Reserve to continue its strong anti-inflationary stance. A lower dollar means increased import prices and upward pressure on the prices of American products that can be exported or that compete with imports from abroad. But a falling dollar need not lead to a higher overall rate of inflation if the Fed continues to be vigilant and tough.    The ability of a country with a sound monetary policy to contain inflation despite a falling currency is borne out by the experience in Germany and Japan during the early 1980s. The German mark fell by 44% relative to the dollar between 1980 and its trough in early 1985, but German inflation during that period was less than three-quarters of the U.S. inflation rate. The yen began declining in 1978 and fell 20% against the dollar before it reached a trough in the first quarter of 1985. But during that period Japanese inflation was less than half the inflation in the U.S. We need not fear the inflationary consequences of a falling dollar if the Fed does its job.    It would no doubt be expecting too much to hope that the finance ministers might acknowledge the inevitability of the dollar's real decline at their Berlin meeting. They would undoubtedly fear that such an admission would trigger a sharper decline in the dollar than they would like.    But a small step in the direction of reality would not be too much of a good thing. The finance ministers should start by saying that the exchange-rate stability they want refers to &quot;real&quot; exchange rates.    ---   Mr. Feldstein, past chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard. </TEXT></DOC>