<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880808-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Drive to Eliminate Asbestos From Schools Slowed by Shortages of Funds, Contractors </HL><AUTHOR> Michele Manges (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CON ENV </IN><G> CNG EPA </G><TEXT>   School officials nationwide know they need to protect students from asbestos. But they keep putting off the assignment.    Nearly a decade after the Environmental Protection Agency urged that all schools inspect for and remove the cancer-causing substance, and six years after it first ordered inspections, thousands of schools still haven't acted. In many states fewer than half have inspected their buildings properly, and only a small portion of those that have found an asbestos problem have done anything about it.    &quot;We've been battling over 10 years to get asbestos out of our schools, and hardly anything's been done,&quot; says Arnold Fege, chief lobbyist for the National Parent-Teacher Association. &quot;How long do we have to wait?&quot;    In June, Congress pushed back the latest deadline for inspections from this fall until next spring. But school officials say money -- not time -- is what they need most. The EPA, which estimates that one-third of all schools have asbestos problems, puts the cost of inspection and removal at $3.4 billion. For now, the federal government and most states aren't giving much help.    Schools that can raise the funds, meanwhile, often can't find capable contractors, for either inspections or removals. And facilities to train school employees for those tasks are in short supply and of questionable value. At the same time, some schools just haven't made asbestos a priority; a North Dakota elementary school put a secretary in charge of its asbestos program.    Whatever the causes of the delays, health specialists say the result is the same: Children face the risk of continued exposure to asbestos. Predictions about the long-term impact of asbestos vary widely, depending on what exposure levels are considered hazardous and other factors. But the EPA and medical specialists have estimated that, even if schools eliminate asbestos quickly, 1,000 to 7,000 people already exposed to the substance in their school years would die from asbestos-related diseases over the next 30 years.    Asbestos insulation, which was widely used in schools through the early 1970s, becomes hazardous over time as it deteriorates and flakes. Microscopic dust from these flakes, if inhaled, can cause lung cancer and other respiratory diseases. Children are especially sensitive to this dust, because they have higher metabolic and breathing rates than adults.    So, the EPA urged in 1979 that all public and private schools inspect for asbestos. After many failed to act, Congress in 1982 mandated inspections. But the law was ineffective, partly because it didn't specify who should do the checking, so many schools used untrained personnel.    Congress's latest action shows just how far schools are from solving the problem. In 1986, Congress required all schools to have asbestos checks performed by EPA-certified inspectors, and to submit plans for its containment or removal, by this October. But this summer, recognizing that many schools wouldn't meet the deadline, lawmakers pushed it back to next May.    In New York, for example, 53% of schools couldn't have met the deadline, a state school board survey found. Only 20 of 600 schools in Washington state have submitted containment plans. In Michigan, &quot;a lot of schools haven't even looked at this thing,&quot; says Bill DeLiefde, asbestos coordinator for the state's health department.    Schools that don't meet the new deadline face fines of up to $5,000 a day. Even so, many say they can't afford the inspections, which cost anywhere from two to 35 cents a square foot. Dean Cochran, a retired lawyer handling the asbestos program for Asheville Catholic Community School, in Asheville, N.C., says, &quot;I just don't know where the school will turn to raise the cash -- perhaps bingo.&quot;    Schools that find asbestos have until next July to begin removing or containing it, but removal charges are hefty. Gateway High School in Aurora, Colo., spent $13 million in 1984 for asbestos removal and reconstruction work in one building; the district's budget that year was $90 million.    Many states contend that because Congress required schools to act, it should provide funds. But congressional and Reagan administration officials say states or the schools themselves should raise the money. This year, Congress appropriated only $40 million -- $10 million less than last year -- for loan and grant programs toward school asbestos projects.    &quot;The burden is falling back on the local districts,&quot; says Edward Kealy, director for federal programs at the National School Boards Association. &quot;They're faced with taking out the money for kids' education.&quot;    Some schools try to save money by training their employees to deal with asbestos. But demand for such instruction far exceeds the supply. In the Northeast, home to 3,078 school districts, federally approved inspector-training courses can accommodate only 415 people this summer.    What's more, many asbestos specialists say the classes don't teach people enough to do the job right. Instruction usually lasts two to five days, and the EPA rarely sends anyone from its staff to sit in on the courses it certifies. &quot;You can't expect a four- or five-day program to teach people about this business,&quot; says Tim Hassler, an instructor in Berkeley, Calif. For example, &quot;asbestos has been manufactured in up to 3,000 products. In the courses, they may teach you to identify 15.&quot;    Even when schools hire contractors, things don't always go smoothly. Newark Junior High School in Newark, N.Y., spent $880,000 for removal work last summer. But asbestos powder was found in the school on two separate occasions after the cleanup, and its students had to attend split-day sessions at the local high school for much of the past school year.    Parent groups say the EPA needs to crack down on contractors -- as well as on schools that drag their feet. But the agency isn't likely to: It has only about 29 people in the field to monitor school asbestos programs, down about 40% from a year ago because of budget cuts.    Also, the EPA rarely imposes stiff fines. For example, Mingus Union High School in Cottonwood, Ariz., which didn't inspect until four years after the deadline specified in the 1982 law, was fined only $300. School officials say they waited so long because they thought the school didn't have any asbestos. But it did, and the asbestos now is being removed.    The EPA says it often levies light fines because it wants schools to spend money on asbestos inspections and removals, not on fines. But parents' groups and others say the practice doesn't create much incentive for schools to comply with the law. &quot;It's like having a speed limit and no police,&quot; says Mr. Hassler, the instructor.    Still, EPA officials note one factor that may spur action: The 1986 bill requires schools to notify parents and teachers if they don't meet the inspection deadline. Walter Jaspers, an EPA regional asbestos coordinator, says, &quot;We'll see some pretty spectacular reactions (from parents) to schools that don't make the deadline.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>