<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870223-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Bungled Case?Bolles Murder ProbeStill Haunts ArizonaWith Many Questions---Inquiry Into Reporter's DeathIs Marred by AccusationsOf Cover-ups, Lost Files---One Issue: Babbitt's Moves---By John R. EmshwillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> PHOENIX, Ariz.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On June 2, 1976, Don Bolles, an investigative reporter for the Arizona Republic, was murdered here. The bomb that exploded under his car set off a saga still haunting the state.    The Bolles case, says former Gov. Bruce Babbitt, &quot;is like living in a wilderness of mirrors. No fact goes unchallenged.&quot;    Except for one. Some of the murderers are still free. Only one man is in prison for the crime, and, like everyone else, he argues that he wasn't alone. The search for the others has produced a web of tantalizing questions, such as:    --Did the authorities ignore information indicating that Mr. Bolles was murdered to stop him from finishing his biggest story, one that he said involved organized crime and powerful figures in Arizona?    --Did officials subvert their own investigation to protect guilty parties? If not, why did the Phoenix police hide and destroy evidence including, according to one officer, links between the only known murderer and some prominent Arizonans?    --Did officials nearly railroad two innocent men into the gas chamber for the crime? One of them, a local developer named Max Dunlap, has filed a $605 million damage suit against the police charging that that did happen.    The murder left its mark on many people. Each June 2, a former government investigator visits the hotel parking lot where Mr. Bolles was killed and pays silent homage to him. On the other hand, a local reporter who worked on stories on the murder says he won't set foot on that lot because of the memories it evokes.    Public outrage over the crime helped push through reforms that curbed the growing power of organized crime in the state, Mr. Babbitt says. The murder &quot;was in many ways the most important event in the history of modern Arizona,&quot; he says. Ironically, some of the unanswered questions revolve around Mr. Babbitt's own role in the case and whether organized crime was involved in the killing.    Mr. Bolles himself helped raise the latter question. As he lay semiconscious moments after the bombing, several bystanders heard him mutter the words &quot;Adamson . . . Mafia . . . Emprise.&quot;    Before the murder, John Harvey Adamson was a little-known perpetrator of assorted crimes. Mr. Bolles had gone to the hotel that day to meet Mr. Adamson, who claimed to have information about shady land dealings.    The other two names uttered by Mr. Bolles were better known and, to him, connected. Emprise was a privately held company based in Buffalo, N.Y. In partnership with a prominent Phoenix family, the Funks, it owned several dog-racing tracks in Arizona. Mr. Bolles wrote extensively about Emprise and the Funks, and no love was lost between the two sides.    At a 1972 hearing of the House Select Committee on Crime, Mr. Bolles charged Emprise with a &quot;continual association with organized-crime figures over a 35-year period.&quot; That same year, Emprise was convicted in a Los Angeles federal court of helping hide the ownership interest in a Las Vegas casino of two organized-crime figures. And at the congressional hearing, Bradley Funk, secretary-treasurer of the dog-racing operation, described Mr. Bolles as someone &quot;without honor, integrity and ability&quot; who sought to destroy his family's business.    Emprise -- now known as Delaware North Cos. -- and the Funks deny any involvement in the murder. Mr. Adamson eventually confessed to the slaying.    Mr. Adamson said he was hired by Mr. Dunlap, the developer, who told him, Mr. Adamson added, that the murder was being done for Kemper Marley, a longtime friend of Mr. Dunlap's and one of Arizona's richest businessmen. Mr. Adamson said another Phoenix man, James Robison, assisted in the crime.    Mr. Adamson was a cold-blooded killer who, according to one acquaintance, could talk about buying a Datsun someday because Mr. Bolles's car had withstood the dynamite blast so well. His tale was persuasive enough to lead to the indictment and conviction of Messrs. Dunlap and Robison in 1977. Mr. Marley, who, like the other two, denied any guilt, has never been indicted. Mr. Adamson, in return for his testimony, was promised his freedom after 20 years in prison.    However, the Bolles mystery was just warming up.    For one thing, strange events had been going on inside the Phoenix police department. A few months into the investigation, a file on Emprise was given to Harry Hawkins, a detective in the department's organized-crime bureau. As Mr. Hawkins later recalled in a memorandum, two superiors told him to pull out any information tying Mr. Adamson to the Funks and Emprise -- an unusual request because the parties have denied having any ties. He said he removed several items and was then told to renumber the pages of the file to hide the purging.    Police investigations have substantiated the tampering with the file. But it remains unclear exactly what was taken, why or from how high up in the department the purge order came.    Evidence has surfaced in the Dunlap lawsuit that much of the organized-crime bureau's main file on the Bolles homicide also has disappeared. The file grew to several inches thick, according to one police officer's deposition; currently, it is about one inch.    Shortly after the murder, the bureau's file cards on several individuals were taken and hidden. Without the cards, information in the voluminous files about individuals was essentially unfindable. Among the cards pulled were ones on Mr. Adamson, Emprise, one of the Funks, Mr. Marley and Sen. Barry Goldwater. When authorities found the cards years later, they discovered that some of the information referred to was no longer in the files.    Mr. Goldwater's name has popped up periodically in the Bolles saga, though always in odd, indirect ways. He has never been accused of any role in the murder and has denied any part in it.    Former Gov. Babbitt has had a direct, controversial part in the case. Shortly after the murder, Mr. Babbitt, then the attorney general, took the investigation away from Donald Harris, the county attorney. Mr. Babbitt said press comments by Mr. Harris had caused a mistrial of Mr. Adamson (who hadn't yet made his plea bargain). &quot;The county attorney got more bizarre as time passed,&quot; Mr. Babbitt says.    Mr. Harris, now in private practice, doesn't dispute that he talks too much, and admits to some eccentricities. A man who passes out imitation baseball cards bearing his picture could hardly claim otherwise. But he says his real sin was pushing too hard to find the murderers. He says he was about to convene a grand jury -- a step that hasn't been taken. &quot;Some powerful people wanted to mess up the investigation,&quot; he says, adding that Mr. Babbitt, probably unwittingly, was &quot;used&quot; to do just that. Mr. Babbitt strongly denies that he was used by anyone.    In 1980, the Arizona Supreme Court granted Messrs. Dunlap and Robison a new trial on the ground that defense lawyers hadn't been allowed to cross-examine Mr. Adamson adequately. Mr. Adamson then notified prosecutors that he had already lived up to his plea bargain and, if he testified again, wanted a new deal, including his freedom, new clothes and an education fund for his son.    In response, the state declared Mr. Adamson's plea bargain broken and proceeded to try and convict him for first-degree murder, complete with the death sentence. It dropped its case against Mr. Dunlap and Mr. Robison (who remains in prison for another crime) but retains the right to reinstate charges. Mr. Adamson's conviction is under appeal.    Mr. Adamson has said he is willing to go back to the original deal and testify again, but the state says no. &quot;I have a real question about whether Adamson is credible,&quot; says Robert Corbin, the current attorney general.    However, the state's one-time star witness has a different interpretation. &quot;They didn't want to prosecute the case again. They just wish they could fry me and forget it,&quot; Mr. Adamson told New Times, a Phoenix weekly. He declined to be interviewed for this story.    One man who refuses to forget is Mr. Dunlap, who charges in his suit in state court here that if the police hadn't destroyed evidence and ignored several leads, he never would have been convicted. The case went to trial last month and is expected to last up to six months.    One piece of evidence is a police tape recording, made shortly after the murder, of a phone conversation. On the tape, a man with ties to the dog-racing industry asserts that Mr. Babbitt had taken a $45,000 bribe to help the Funks and Emprise keep control of their dog-racing interests, according to a memorandum filed in court by Mr. Dunlap's attorney, Murray Miller, who has access to the tape.    Mr. Babbitt vehemently denies the charge. Apparently the police never investigated it. Attorney General Corbin says he is looking into the bribery allegation, but adds that that doesn't necessarily imply that he believes there is any truth to the charge.    In his opening argument in the Dunlap case, A. Melvin McDonald, the attorney for the police, argued that none of the material destroyed or hidden was relevant to the murder investigation. He attributed some of the purging to police fears that prosecutors might make public confidential material in the files. He said none of the actions were intended to protect guilty parties or help convict Mr. Dunlap.    Another man who refuses to forget is Don Devereux, a free-lance reporter for the local Scottsdale Progress. He has written dozens of articles on the Bolles case and created waves. He and his paper are the object of a $1 million libel suit by a local man whom the reporter identified as possibly involved in the murder plot.    Another Devereux article raised questions about whether police surveillance records contained evidence that would help clear Mr. Dunlap. When Mr. Dunlap's attorney requested those records, he was told that during a routine housecleaning recently, some of them had been destroyed even though they were part of a continuing murder investigation.    Mr. Devereux firmly believes that Mr. Dunlap was framed and says most of the Phoenix news media, particularly Mr. Bolles's own paper, have been a &quot;bunch of sheep&quot; on the issue. The animosity is mutual. At one point, a top official at the Republic wrote a letter to the publisher of the Progress calling Mr. Devereux &quot;trash.&quot;    Mr. Devereux says he was almost run down one night by a truck and believes the incident related to his Bolles work. However, he isn't ready to give up. &quot;Killing a reporter is the ultimate insult to the First Amendment,&quot; he says.    And tantalizing new pieces of information keep surfacing -- such as Kathy Kolbe's story. Ms. Kolbe, a Phoenix businesswoman and friend of Mr. Bolles's, recalls the reporter's telling her shortly before his death that he &quot;was very close to a breakthrough that would have a domino effect on the power structure of Arizona.&quot;    He outlined a complex story involving the Mafia, Emprise, race tracks and some sort of skimming operation, she says, though she no longer remembers specifics of all he said. He told her of an imminent trip to San Diego to get information for the story. But if Mr. Bolles was working on a major piece, it was without the knowledge of his editors, who had transferred him from investigative reporting to covering the legislature.    Ms. Kolbe says that right after the murder, she tried in various ways to tell the police what she knew. &quot;But the police never interviewed me,&quot; she says.    Part of her story dovetails with a comment Mr. Adamson made at the Dunlap-Robison trial. He said the Bolles murder was moved up because of a trip that the reporter was planning to San Diego. Though intriguing, &quot;that lead just never went anywhere,&quot; says William Schafer III, the chief prosecutor.    Nor is it clear that the murder investigation ever will. Attorney General Corbin says he would like to call a grand jury and has compiled a list of 130 witnesses.    But he says he fears that a grand jury would believe Mr. Adamson's version of the murder and reindict Messrs. Dunlap and Robison. If Mr. Adamson then refused to testify, the state could lose its chance to prosecute the two men because of the double-jeopardy rule, Mr. Corbin says.    Instead, Mr. Corbin says, his office will keep sifting through leads and hoping for a break. He has the temperament for long, fruitless searches. He came to Arizona in the 1950s partly in search of the fabled Lost Dutchman gold mine, and he is still trying to solve that mystery, too. </TEXT></DOC>