<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880726-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Computer Users Of the World, Unite! </HL><AUTHOR> W. Michael Blumenthal </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> T SUNW </CO><IN> EDP </IN><TEXT>   The computer industry has begun to sound like Mikhail Gorbachev's Russia, with debates on &quot;openness&quot; in computer systems and the &quot;restructuring&quot; it may cause. The factional maneuvering and flow of jargon these hot summer days could keep busy an entire institute of Kremlinologists.    This is all less complicated than it seems.    Those who use and depend on the world's 50 million computers must realize a fundamental revolution in the economics of information management is in progress. After four decades of delay, the world's biggest and most economically critical industry is rapidly adopting reliable, vendor-neutral standards that permit dissimilar computer systems to run the same software programs and communicate with one another.    Standardization and openness are taken for granted in telephones, telecommunications switches, televisions, radios and compact-disk players. Whatever the manufacturer, all these devices can &quot;talk to each other&quot; and freely interconnect.    If computers were similarly open, immense benefits would flow. User productivity would soar, computing costs would plummet, vendor competition would intensify, and technological progress would accelerate. This is what has happened over the past five years in microcomputers, the industry segment furthest advanced toward standardization.    Today, the nearest thing to a vendor-neutral standard for writing software programs is the UNIX operating system, developed and licensed to all comers over the past 20 years by ATandamp;T. The number of UNIX-based systems sold has increased more than 70% during the past two years, and by the early 1990s UNIX will likely represent more than a quarter of all computer systems sold world-wide.    The rub is that ATandamp;T also sells computers and partly owns Sun Microsystems, which sells even more; both have aspirations to be industry giants. Some competing hardware vendors fear ATandamp;T may bias UNIX development to favor itself and Sun. These vendors have formed the Open Software Foundation to develop a competing version of UNIX. Now the two camps are lobbying computer makers, including the company I head, Unisys, to choose sides.    Why has openness come so late, and with such controversy, to computers?    Entering the industry as a layman in 1980, I assumed the problem was technological. I soon learned otherwise. The main obstacle was, and remains, the self-interest of established vendors.    The world of closed systems can be very profitable for vendors with an established base of customers. I speak with authority: Unisys is such a vendor. In a closed world, customers who change or add other vendors risk losing connectivity and software portability among their systems. The established vendor can rely on a single selling point: &quot;Remain standardized on us.&quot; Vendor-neutral standards would remove this unnatural barrier to competition, putting at risk the market shares and profits of established vendors.    In assessing the schism between ATandamp;T and the Open Software Foundation, users should keep in mind three basic facts:   1.Neither camp has yet achieved vendor neutrality. ATandamp;T must resolve the potential conflict between its own aspirations as a computer maker and its role as the developer of UNIX for the industry. Recent statements indicate ATandamp;T recognizes this imperative.    On the other side, the foundation has its own conflict of interest and technical problems. Its UNIX variant will be created by stirring together personnel and technologies drawn from member companies. The core technology apparently will come from IBM, which has the industry's biggest financial stake and a reputation for resisting the spread of vendor-neutral standards. The foundation will be severely challenged to build an operating system and development program that's genuinely free of vendor bias and influence and that protects the investments users have already made in UNIX-based systems.    2.We need a single standard -- not two. The best way to slow down openness is to proliferate competing standards. ATandamp;T has a widely used product and an experienced development team, while the Open Software Foundation has rights to other promising technology and a plan for building a vendor-independent institution for overseeing product and standards development. ATandamp;T and the foundation should follow the suggestion of a number of companies and users and go forward together in some fashion with a single, vendor-insulated UNIX development effort. The whole user community, and in particular the U.S. government and the European Community, should speak up for such a standard and demand a prominent place in whatever governing body results.    3.The more users speak out, the faster openness will come. Today's spat over UNIX is a small eddy in a very powerful current. Full standards were recently agreed upon for exchanging data among disparate systems (the so-called Open Systems Interconnect, or OSI, standards); software compatibility across systems is also making strong progress. Advanced software technologies (fourth-generation languages and system-neutral data bases, for example) can already bridge many disparate computer systems. And even the competing UNIX efforts of ATandamp;T and the Open Software Foundation are, in fact, committed to standards being specified by the National Bureau of Standards and X/Open, a consortium of hardware and software vendors that includes Unisys.    After four decades of investing in computers that could not talk to each other, wary users can take heart. The 1990s will be an era of glasnost for computers, if users will assert their interests.    ---   Mr. Blumenthal, secretary of the Treasury in the Carter administration, is chairman and chief executive of Unisys Corp. </TEXT></DOC>