<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870318-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   WALSH REACHED agreement with Congress over immunity for Poindexter.    Under the tentative accord between the independent counsel and the House and Senate select panels, the former national security adviser would be granted limited immunity to compel him to testify publicly about the arms sales to Iran and diversion of funds to Nicaragua's rebels. Poindexter probably won't testify before early June. Walsh had urged the panels to wait 90 days before giving immunity to witnesses to give him time to gather evidence for possible criminal prosecution.    Poindexter appeared before a Senate panel and refused to answer questions about computer security, invoking his right against self-incrimination.    ---   A U.S. APPEALS COURT REFUSED to further delay an indictment of Deaver.    In a one-page order, the three-judge panel dissolved a stay it issued last week and ordered a U.S. judge to dismiss the former White House aide's challenge to the constitutionality of the independent-counsel law. Deaver's lawyers went to the Supreme Court in an attempt to obtain an emergency order to stop any indictment. Independent counsel Whitney North Seymour Jr., appointed to investigate Deaver's lobbying activities, has said he will seek four counts of perjury.    A similar lawsuit challenging the independent-counsel law, filed by fired NSC aide North, was dismissed last week by a U.S. judge as premature.    ---   A panel of 27 U.S. judges recommended that the House consider impeaching U.S. District Judge Alcee Hastings of Miami for alleged judicial misconduct. Hastings, the first black federal judge in Florida, was acquitted in 1983 of charges that he solicited a bribe.    ---   Foreign Minister Shevardnadze met in Moscow with Undersecretary of State Armacost to review U.S.-Soviet relations in preparation for Shultz's visit next month to discuss arms-control issues. Armacost also held meetings with Soviet officials over the Afghanistan conflict, U.S. policy in Nicaragua and other regional issues.    The Soviet Union proposed international monitoring of all space launches to ensure that countries don't deploy weapons in outer space. The plan was unveiled at a 40-nation disarmament conference in Geneva.    ---   The Reagan administration withdrew a National Security Council directive that broadly defines what amounts to a new security classification of &quot;sensitive&quot; information. Critics expressed concern that it would sharply restrict access to commercial data bases.    ---   Officials in Madrid said two days of talks with Defense Secretary Weinberger had failed to break a deadlock over Spain's demand for a cut in 12,500 U.S. troops at four military bases in the country. Following the talks, Weinberger traveled to Ankara to deliver assurances of Washington's commitment to strengthen Turkey's armed forces.    ---   Yugoslavia said it &quot;doesn't intend to abandon&quot; a wage freeze that has triggered more than 70 illegal strikes by more than 11,000 workers. The freeze, imposed last month, has brought the Communist government into open conflict with trade unions and the region of Croatia, where workers face wage cuts of as much as 50%.    ---   Pro-Iranian kidnappers said they granted a one-week reprieve to a Frenchman held hostage in Lebanon. The Moslem group, which planned to kill the French journalist Monday, again demanded that Paris clarify its policies on the Mideast.    ---   Brazil's planning minister resigned, saying it was &quot;essential&quot; that Brasilia adopt a plan to resolve economic and debt problems. Joao Sayad's move followed last month's announcement that Brazil was suspending interest payments on $67 billion of its $108 billion foreign debt.    ---   A land mine exploded under a Philippine army tank, killing 19 soldiers. Communist rebels were suspected in the ambush, which occurred 100 miles south of Manila. Separately, Aquino amended her order aimed at quickly disarming private armies. Under the new order, she called for a dissolution plan to be drafted by the end of April.    ---   Kohl is expected today to call for closer ties with Moscow in his first policy speech since West Germany's center-right coalition was reelected in January, political sources said. Relations between Bonn and the Kremlin had been strained before the vote, but the chancellor recently has been eager to seek closer ties with the Soviet Union.    ---   South Africa reported that the bodies of seven black teen-agers who had been shot and stabbed were discovered beside a road in KwaMashu township near Durban. The government said hundreds of students in the township were boycotting school classes, but it didn't indicate whether the boycott and the deaths of the teen-agers were linked.    ---   China's foreign minister told officials in Italy that Beijing intends to maintain and extend its open-door policy to the West, official sources in Rome said. Wu also said China would continue with its program of political and economic changes despite a recent campaign against Western ideas.    ---   Italy's premier-designate presented a plan to reconstruct the country's five-party coalition government. Andreotti's plan reportedly is aimed at reuniting the coalition, which resigned March 3, in an attempt to avoid early general elections.    ---   About 150 leftist rebels attacked a police barracks in northeastern Colombia, killing at least eight police officers. The Bogota government said it responded with a military offensive, in which about 17 rebels and two civilians were reported killed.    ---   An overloaded bus collided Sunday with a truck in eastern Uganda and crashed through a bridge railing into a river, killing 101 of the 150 passengers, Radio Uganda reported. The 72-seat bus had been traveling in an area hit by heavy rains.    ---   South Korea agreed to meet North Korea &quot;halfway&quot; on Pyongyang's proposals to hold high-level political and military discussions. In a letter, Seoul's prime minister offered to meet with his North Korean counterpart, but only if Pyongyang agreed to resume talks on economic cooperation and the use of water resources in both parts of Korea. </TEXT></DOC>