<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880901-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: The Folly of Editors in Uniform And Mediocrities in Politics </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Gartner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PUB </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Dan Quayle has done a lot of dumb things in his life, but asking Wendell Phillippi to make a telephone call to help get him into the National Guard wasn't one of them.    No, the dumb part of that deal was that Mr. Phillippi made the call.    At the time, Mr. Phillippi was managing editor of the Indianapolis News, a powerful newspaper owned by Mr. Quayle's grandpa. Mr. Phillippi had good connections in the Indiana Guard -- he had been its commanding general -- so he made a call or two on the youth's behalf.    There's nothing wrong with asking someone to put in a good word for you someplace. Those in Mr. Quayle's generation have done it so much that a new verb was coined -- networking -- to describe it. That comes, probably, from the noun of an earlier generation, which helped one another through its Old Boy Network.    But part of networking is the returning of favors as well as the asking. And that's why editors shouldn't get involved. For sooner or later, everyone wants a favor from his local editor -- a drunken-driving arrest kept out of the paper, a hokey ribbon-cutting picture put in, a divorce buried back in the want ads, an editorial ordered up endorsing a brother-in-law running for the city council.    The editor who has asked for favors is in a tough position to turn down favors asked of him. Pretty soon, he becomes coopted, if not corrupted.    No, Mr. Phillippi shouldn't have made that phone call.    Nor should he have been a leader in the National Guard.    Editors are supposed to print the news, not make it. They're not supposed to serve on the board of the local bank or run the town's United Way campaign or serve on the school board. That's why God invented publishers, to do all that stuff -- to the dismay and discomfiture of the editor -- so that the newspaper can be a &quot;good citizen.&quot;    Sooner or later, everything in town makes news. There's a firing at the bank, an embezzlement at the United Way, a sex-education fight on the school board. And if the editor's a part of it, he can't avoid the appearance, at the very least, of a conflict.    Indeed, it happened in Indianapolis. While Mr. Phillippi was commanding general of the Indiana National Guard from 1959 to 1963, the guard was called out at least once to quell a labor disturbance. It was tanks and all, and it was big news. Mr. Phillippi was general of the forces making the news and captain of the forces reporting it, but &quot;I kept the two jobs separate,&quot; he told me last week. Maybe so, but who can believe that that's possible? And how did it look?    Clearly, Gen. Phillippi loved the guard. &quot;I kept recruiting people for it,&quot; he told me. &quot;Lord, if the guard was the backup force (for the nation's military), I wanted good guys in it. And I worked like hell to get good people in it.&quot;    That's noble work for the commander of the guard, but not for the editor of a newspaper. The editor's tool is the editorial page, not the telephone.    Still, every editor should be in the news once, just to see what it's like on the other side. Mr. Phillippi now knows. &quot;I've been so misquoted -- by my own (former) newspaper and by so many people,&quot; said the 70-year-old Mr. Phillippi, who left the News in 1984. &quot;I've been maligned and harassed. I've been asked the same question over and over. Two nights I had two hours of sleep, one night four hours.    &quot;It's media McCarthyism.&quot;    Did that give him any second thoughts about all the people he'd had his reporters wake up in the middle of the night, about all the people that his reporters had asked the same question over and over?    That's different, he said.    Oh.    ---   Roman Hruska, a mediocre onetime Republican senator from Nebraska, once defended President Nixon's nomination of the mediocre G. Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court by saying that the mediocre people in the country need representation, too.    &quot;Even if he were mediocre,&quot; Sen. Hruska said during the 1970 debate over Judge Carswell, &quot;there are a lot of mediocre judges and people and lawyers, and they are entitled to a little representation, aren't they? We can't have all Brandeises, Frankfurters and Cardozos.&quot;    Mr. Hruska's party has come up with mediocrity itself in the person of Dan Quayle. His academic record is mediocre, his memory (just how did he get into the National Guard?) is mediocre, his honesty (he fudged his resume) is mediocre, and his judgment (who would go off on a golfing weekend, however innocent, with two pals and a female lobbyist?) is mediocre.    Clearly, if Mr. Quayle had been in the fray with Sen. Robert Dole and Rep. Jack Kemp and Pat Robertson and the others seeking the Republican presidential nomination, he would have fallen by the wayside. The press would have raised the questions it is raising now, and the public would have rejected him.    That's what happened with Sen. Gary Hart, a man of mediocre morals, and Sen. Joseph Biden, a man of mediocre judgment. Their flaws were disclosed during the grueling run through the Democratic primaries and caucuses, and they dropped out. The process was democracy at work: a free press making its disclosures, an informed public rendering its judgment.    But the public has had no opportunity to render a judgment on Sen. Quayle or his Democratic counterpart, Sen. Lloyd Bentsen. They've been thrust upon us by George Bush and Michael Dukakis, without public scrutiny and -- so it seems in the case of Mr. Quayle -- without private screening.    Yet the odds are better than one in five that Mr. Quayle or Mr. Bentsen will succeed to the presidency without being elected. Nine of our vice presidents have done that, six of them during their first year in office.    While the process is important, the result is frightening. &quot;The process of selecting vice presidential candidates in the heat of modern presidential campaigns has not worked reliably to produce qualified nominees,&quot; Prof. Hugh Heclo, Henry Reuss and Arthur Schlesinger Jr. noted in a task-force report for the 20th Century Fund this year. &quot;Instead, the process has increasingly served to create a secondary personality contest in national elections.&quot;    When this country was founded, and until the 12th Amendment was enacted in 1804, the vice presidency was awarded to the runner-up in the presidential election. That's how John Adams twice got the post, and that's how Thomas Jefferson got it. But politics and politicking messed up that system.    Everyone agrees it would be folly, of course, to go back to that. After all, who would want a Thomas Jefferson for vice president when you could get a Dan Quayle instead?    ---   Mr. Gartner is editor and co-owner of the Daily Tribune in Ames, Iowa, and president of NBC News in New York. </TEXT></DOC>