<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881110-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH ANNOUNCED the selection of James Baker to be secretary of state.    Moving rapidly after his victory over Democrat Dukakis, the president-elect named his campaign's chairman to succeed Shultz, and he appointed the directors of his transition team. Speaking in Houston, Bush also vowed to work closely with Congress, where 99% of the 408 incumbents seeking re-lection to the House will be back. In the Senate, a single incumbent Democrat was defeated while the GOP lost three seats. At the state level, the Democrats picked up one governorship, and outnumber Republicans 28 to 22.    Among ballot issues, California rejected a plan to breach AIDS patients' confidentiality. Limits on taxes fared poorly in some states and Massachusetts rebuffed nuclear-plant closings.    ---   The Air Force temporarily grounded the nation's B-1B long-range bombers for safety inspections following a crash of one of the planes Tuesday in Texas. Witnesses to the crash near Abilene said they saw fire trailing an engine of the aircraft. All four crew members ejected safely from the bomber.    ---   Officials of Estonia expressed concern about draft changes to the Soviet Union's constitution that they said would limit the sovereignty of Soviet republics. The leaders of the Baltic republic stated their complaints before a commission of the Supreme Soviet, or parliament, in Moscow.    ---   Poland's government fired the leaders of a one-day strike. They had organized the work stoppage at two small shipyards in Gdansk to protest Warsaw's planned closing of the Lenin shipyard, birthplace of the banned Solidarity trade union. The workers at the yards had ended the strike yesterday at the request of Solidarity leader Walesa.    ---   Silicone gel has been found to cause malignant cancers in about one-quarter of test animals injected with the substance, which is used for breast implants in women. FDA memos accompanying the study, performed more than a year ago, said there is &quot;considerable reason to suspect that it can&quot; cause cancer in humans.    ---   Researchers have discovered evidence that a single gene can help trigger schizophrenia. The scientists -- in England, California and Iceland -- also have estimated the gene's approximate location, an approach that may help find new treatments for the disorder, which affects one in 100 people.    ---   Demonstrators marked the 50th anniversary of Kristallnacht, the Nazi pogrom that began the Holocaust, by jeering West German Chancellor Kohl and portraying Austrians as unrepentant. Services were held around the world to commemorate the night that Hitler's army killed scores of Jews, and destroyed synagogues and Jewish homes.    ---   Energy Department officials said an atomic reactor at the Savannah River Plant in South Carolina probably won't be restarted as scheduled in late December, further delaying new supplies of nuclear weapons. A department official said there had been &quot;insufficient progress&quot; toward eliminating safety concerns at the plant.    ---   Lebanon moved another step closer to formal partition as the Moslem half of its dual government named a new army commander even though the Christian prime minister holds the post. The country hasn't had a president since Amin Gemayel's six-year term expired in September. The parliament has failed to elect a successor.    ---   Protesters in South Korea battled riot police near the Seoul home of former President Chun Doo Hwan, demanding that he be arrested on corruption charges. Student leaders have vowed to stage daily attacks on Chun's home until President Roh Tae Woo agrees to prosecute the former ruler.    ---   An Israeli patrol killed a three-year-old Palestinian boy in the Gaza Strip as Arabs staged a general strike in the occupied territories to mark the start of the 12th month of an uprising against Israel. At least a dozen other Palestinians were reported wounded in clashes with Israeli authorities.    ---   Soldiers in Sri Lanka patrolled the capital with orders to shoot anti-government demonstrators as the third day of a nationwide strike brought commerce to a standstill. The government said the strike was called by Sinhalese extremists. Hundreds of foreign tourists were evacuated.    ---   Authorities in Brazil said a death squad carrying out the orders of jailed drug traffickers is believed to be behind a series of killings in Rio de Janeiro jails. Officials said 19 inmates had been slain in 10 days.    ---   Fresh tremors shook about 100,000 homeless survivors of Sunday's massive earthquake in southwestern China, and scientists warned of further temblors in the region. More than 960 people were killed in the earthquake, Beijing radio reported. Rescue teams have been forced to travel to the remote region along footpaths.    ---   Died: John Mitchell, 75, ex-attorney general who served a prison term for his role in the Watergate affair of the Nixon administration, in Washington, of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>