<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870130-0135 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The Coup That Failed</HL><DD> 01/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;Reagan Barely Touches On Hottest Issue of Term / Democrats Ignore Iran in Their Response.&quot;    So read the headline over an analysis of the president's State of the Union address by David Broder and Lou Cannon of the Washington Post. We take it Iranamok is over. Or rather, the Iran controversy will drag on but the coup attempt is over.    Any proper understanding of the furor over Iran must include a recognition that many of the president's attackers thought they had not just a scandal but grounds for forcing the president from office, or at least from effective power. Their hopes began to wither a few weeks ago when polls started showing increased public boredom with the avalanche of press coverage. Ronald Reagan, in his State of the Union address, gave not the slightest hint that he thinks of himself as a displaced president. He has been damaged by the episode, as well as by the election of a Democratic Senate, but in the next two years he will win some and lose some.    Perhaps we can now review Iranamok with some dispassion. Truly it has been a fascinating episode in American politics.    Let's start by looking at presidential lapses even we would acknowledge. A Marine light colonel, Oliver North, was allowed to exercise powers and prerogatives going well beyond what you would expect in a government staffed up with admirals and former high executives of Bechtel and Merrill Lynch. A grand jury, an independent counsel, both houses of Congress and a presidential commission all are investigating whether any laws were broken and no doubt will find that some were, at least in a technical sense. More to the point, we may never know how candid the president was in disclaiming knowledge of the full extent of Lt. Col. North's operations. If he knew more than he is saying, the public is justified in having lost some confidence in him. If he knew no more than he has admitted about an operation this unorthodox and sensitive, his inattention to details also is legitimate cause for criticism. Though in recent years the hands-on managers haven't done so well in managing the presidency.    A bigger issue is whether the president abused the powers of his office. That question is far more difficult. A lot of people seem to have forgotten that the American presidency is one of three co-equal branches of government. A president is expected to obey laws, even those he was bludgeoned into signing by congressional use of the odious and probably unconstitutional omnibus budget process. But the president has, and must have, the constitutional power to conduct U.S. foreign policy. As Gordon Crovitz has observed on this page, presidents have been asserting that right since the Republic was founded. To argue that Congress should conduct foreign policy is tantamount to arguing that the U.S. should not have a foreign policy, since there is no way 535 individuals can speak with a single voice, let alone act promptly in pursuit of foreign-policy objectives.    Which brings us to the substantive policies. Is Iran important? Of course it is. It is growing more important daily as it gains battlefield yardage against Iraq and as the question of who succeeds the ailing ayatollah looms larger. We are talking here about the Persian Gulf, the source of a very large share of the world's oil. Gaining some influence there is a goal well worth pursuing.    Now, shipping arms without advance concessions isn't our idea of the best way to gain influence. Presidents as well as others often act from more than one motive. But in the eagerness to send the arms, surely Mr. Reagan's judgment must have been overwhelmed by the hostage issue. This is a mistake, but not an impeachable offense. Nor does it take away from the defense buildup, the Grenada and Libyan operations, the end of inflation and all the other things Mr. Reagan has done to restore American standing in the world.    Indeed, it is not clear that he has entirely failed in trying to regain some U.S. influence in the chaos of Iran. Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, speaker of the Iranian Parliament, met the Western press on Wednesday, both praising President Reagan and justifying hostage-taking. What to make of this in the uncertain world of Iranian politics is hard to say, but clearly the U.S. and the president are no longer dismissed as irrelevant.    Finally, one more large issue. The frenetic energy poured into Iranamok by the Washington political community was massive -- and revealing. There was not merely a debate over foreign-policy mistakes, but an almost savage glee. Here was the prospect of bringing down another president -- partly in rebellion against presidential constraints on the growth of Washington's control over wealth and power, partly out of partisan interests, and partly for the sheer fun of it. We continue to believe that for the future of the Republic, the main lesson in Iranamok is not that presidents sometimes make misjudgments, but that coups have to be resisted. </TEXT></DOC>