<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871102-0106 </DOCNO><HL> The New West -- Western Boom:Arizona Is ProsperingBy Pursuing GrowthAnd Helping Business---Its Sunshine Is Another Plus;Money and Migrants GainAs Cotton and Cattle Fade---Problems: Pollution andamp; Water---By John R. EmshwillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><TEXT>      {Second of two articles}   PHOENIX, Ariz. -- Not long ago, Arizonans knew that if the &quot;three C's&quot; -- copper, cattle and cotton -- were prospering, their general economy would, too. Today, the three C's are devastated, but the economy isn't just prospering. It's booming.    The desert state that John Steinbeck once called &quot;a mysterious wasteland, a sun-punished place,&quot; has been creating jobs and sucking in money and migrants at a stupendous rate. Among the states, it is at or near the top in most major measures of growth despite erosion of the natural resources that once supported it. &quot;Our economy has changed completely,&quot; says 81-year-old Roy Drachman, a prominent Tucson businessman and native Arizonan.    How that happened intrigues other Western states in the arc of resource lands stretching from the Great Plains to the Rockies and down to the deserts. Hit by increasing foreign competition and by energy conservation and other domestic developments, many of them doubt that they may ever again wallow in another rip-roaring resources boom. Like Arizona, they will have to find new things to do in a new West.    Part of Arizona's success, of course, springs from sheer luck. Its sunshine and scenery draw tourists and retirees, people who aren't migrating in vast polyester flocks to places like eastern Wyoming. But Arizona also has a formula, which might be puckishly expressed this way:    --Make growth the state religion. Take a developer to lunch; encourage him to build something, anything. Then stand aside and let him have at it.    --Favor the cities over the countryside. The cities have votes and money in them. The countryside is mostly dirt and trees.    --Remember what businesses don't like: unions, taxes, a lot of regulation. Keep these burdens light.    The state's boomer mentality and permissive stance, along with its natural setting, have struck pay dirt. Since 1970, only Nevada has grown faster in population. Arizona's net gain in that period from in-migration alone -- roughly one million people out of the present population of 3.4 million -- is exceeded only by far more populous Texas, California and Florida.    Migrants have had little trouble finding work. Over the past decade, Arizona's growth in both non-farm employment and personal income has led the nation. Anchored by big, established employers such as Hughes Aircraft Co. in Tucson and Motorola Inc. in Phoenix, high-tech and aerospace manufacturing has taken off like a rocket. Service and building jobs have grown even faster. Construction employment has nearly tripled, and jobs in finance, insurance and real estate have more than doubled. Last year, Inc. magazine rated Arizona the No. 1 state in fostering entrepreneurial activity and economic expansion.    But even though Arizona is some kind of template for the new West, it may be a new West that a lot of people may not want to live in.    The state has paid heavily for growth. Its gross insults to the environment have tainted its wells, fouled its air, choked its municipal arteries. Its live-for-today philosophy has led to the profligate squandering of its most precious asset, water.    Its intense urbanization -- three out of every four residents live in either the Phoenix or Tucson areas -- has created tension between the cities and rural counties, which have lost influence and failed to prosper along with the cities. Arizona's very Westernness, the quality that attracted so many people to begin with, the quality that somehow promised them a better, freer, more uncrowded way of life, is being paved over.    As that happens, the urban angst of the East is beginning to replicate itself here. Arizona's suicide and divorce rates are about 40% above national averages, and child abuse has been climbing. Budge Ruffner, a newspaper columnist in Prescott, says: &quot;People come expecting Valhalla West, but they find that the husband who was an S.O.B. in Poughkeepsie is still an S.O.B. here.&quot;    Meanwhile, the old Arizona resource base, the foundation not only of the past economy but also of a way of life, keeps dwindling in importance. In a state that once had nine head of cattle for every human resident, for example, the beef business is today a shadow of its old self. The herd has shrunk, most feedlots have closed, and annual income from cattle has fallen to less than $450 million from $650 million in the late 1970s.    In the sun-struck farm country of Pinal County, empty fields, flattened outbuildings and parched, cracked earth -- subsiding because of excessive pumping of groundwater -- testify to King Cotton's decline. Blighted by tumbling cotton prices and high pumping costs, cotton plantings have fallen by almost half since 1981.    Completely overshadowed by the boom in manufacturing and services, agriculture as a whole now accounts for only 2% of personal income in the state. It once provided nearly a quarter of it. The fact that one of its healthiest remaining sectors is &quot;urban agriculture&quot; -- supplying sod, trees and bushes to city dwellers -- suggests Arizona's changing priorities.    Farming will decline further. Although even now it uses 88% of the state's water, it is losing out to the cities, which see their growth threatened by the dwindling supply. The giant Central Arizona Project, which has begun to deliver Arizona's remaining share of the Colorado River to the heart of the state, was conceived mainly as an agricultural project, but it isn't any longer. Except on Indian reservations, none of its water can be used to irrigate new farmland, and any farmer getting a project allotment has to reduce his use of groundwater by that amount. In areas where groundwater supplies have been drawn down sharply -- areas covering much of the best land -- no new acreage can be irrigated with groundwater, either.    To ensure their growth, cities have been buying farmland just to get its groundwater. They already own 44,000 acres of these &quot;water farms,&quot; and some rural counties want to stop them before the cities can gobble up more of the water, developable land and tax base. State Sen. John Hays, the chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, says people in rural areas fear that &quot;the rich will end up with all the water and the poor will be left to drink tumbleweed.&quot;    Copper, another traditional prop under the economy, has long been depressed by foreign competition and, though bolstered recently by higher prices, remains so. The industry here has lost 60% of its jobs since 1981, four of the state's seven smelters have closed, and the number of active mines has plummeted.    The passing of the old Arizona and the struggle to adjust to the new are written in the history of the old copper town of Bisbee. Tucked away in the state's scenic southeast corner, it once was a boom town, with 15,000 people, four dozen saloons, its own opera house, and an economy that revolved around an epic copper deposit and such mines as the Copper Queen and Lavender Pit. But mining operations closed in 1975, and the town went bust.    Now, a shrunken Bisbee is shared by an eclectic mix of counterculturists, retirees, former miners and would-be artists in what one resident calls &quot;the largest open-air asylum anywhere.&quot; Town leaders, desperately seeking to get Bisbee growing again, want to make it a tourist center. But many of its new residents, attracted by its quiet, scenic beauty and cheap housing, disagree.    Joan Werner, a bookstore operator who calls herself &quot;a hippie and proud of it,&quot; moved here from the East precisely because Bisbee was flat on its face. &quot;I came here looking for a nice, easygoing community, and now they want to make it a boom town again,&quot; she complains.    Tourism, or at least the hope of it, is about all that some of Arizona's depressed rural towns can look forward to. The state's economy is two-tiered, with a boom largely confined to the Phoenix and Tucson areas and much of the countryside wondering what to do with itself. While the unemployment rate in Maricopa County (Phoenix) and Pima County (Tucson) is a slim 5%, it ranges all the way up to 27% in other counties.    When Bisbee was prospering, Phoenix was a struggling farm hamlet in the Salt River Valley. Lacking a mountain of metal, it staked its future on what Terry Goddard, Phoenix's mayor, calls &quot;an almost flatulent desire to promote growth.&quot; Today, almost two million people live in Phoenix and surrounding towns.    Along with a lot of jackrabbits. Phoenix's pell-mell annexation of outlying areas has made it a horizontal megalopolis. Once covering 17 square miles, it now sprawls over almost 400, an area greater than New York City's. Much of that is still desert, patched here and there by housing tracts.    Always a hog heaven for developers, the city has obligingly extended its services, sometimes across miles of empty land, to remote subdivisions. Closer in, developers have been able to do much as they please. &quot;There was always a fear that if we put restrictions on people, they wouldn't come in and invest,&quot; Mayor Goddard explains.    State policy, too, has long reflected that fear and encouraged growth, especially in new businesses. The corporate income tax hasn't been raised in 13 years, business inventories aren't taxed, land is cheap, and labor costs are low. Arizona was one of the first states to enact a right-to-work law, and unions here are feeble.    Arizonans, says former Gov. Bruce Babbitt, long agreed that &quot;the best government is no government,&quot; and state and local regulation and enforcement have been so light at times as to seem nonexistent. This certainly appeals to some businesses, but it also made the state a nest of white-shoe flim-flam men selling everything from dubious diamonds to worthless mail-order land.    All the state's new people, all its new businesses, have proved a mixed blessing. The streets of Phoenix, which has only one freeway, are so choked that wags measure progress in hours per mile instead of miles per hour. Bus service stops at night and on Sundays.    A noxious cloud of smog now afflicts a city where asthmatics once were sent for their health. An Environmental Protection Agency official says Phoenix has been one of the few cities in recent years to exceed the federal one-hour standard for carbon monoxide pollution. Tucson suffers smog, too, and both cities have serious problems with particulates in the air.    Some industries that Arizona has attracted have polluted its groundwater. Statewide, tests of 2,900 drinking-water wells found 349 tainted to some degree with toxic substances; over the past three years, 40 have been so fouled that they have been shut down. Tucson, entirely dependent on wells, has lost 3% of them.    In recent years, the state and its cities have begun to correct some of the worst problems. Anti-fraud measures have slowed down the con men. Phoenix will get a new freeway system and has started charging for extending services to new developments. The state is pressing on with a 1980 plan, enacted under heavy federal pressure, to completely end in major population areas its huge groundwater overdrafts by 2025. And, after years of failure, the legislature recently restricted developers who scoop out artificial lakes of potable water -- in a desert where evaporation soaks up six feet a year -- to enhance the value of their projects.    With a further population gain of about 60% forecast by the year 2000, Arizonans are increasingly uneasy about the future and dissatisfied with what the state has become. Polls taken over the past 10 months disclose that most people think that Arizona is growing too fast and that government is doing too little to control the resulting urban ills. The doctrine of growth for its own sake is clearly being questioned.    But what will take its place? &quot;Right now, we're groping for answers,&quot; says Shirley Agnos, the president of the Arizona Academy, a kind of think tank on state issues. &quot;We've been so busy being we've never spent much time thinking about what we'd like to become.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>