<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871211-0088 </DOCNO><HL> The Crash of '87:Were Computers a Help or a Hindrance?Securities Industry Asks After the Crash---By Michael W. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TDM SUNWSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Hidden away in a Lower Manhattan building on Water Street is a little-known, cavernous room that was a focal point of the stock market's boom and bust.    The room holds a phalanx of more than 200 Tandem TNX and TXP mainframe computers, neatly stacked in about 50 refrigerator-sized cabinets. Last Oct. 19 and 20, in one of the toughest tests undergone by any computer system, they processed as many as 60 stock-market transactions a second.    This is the computer room of Securities Industry Automation Corp. SIAC, which is run by the New York and American stock exchanges, handles all their electronic trading. Portfolio insurance, index arbitrage and other modern Wall Street trading innovations that depend on ever speedier and more complex trades -- and that crashed on Black Monday -- wouldn't have been possible without the Tandems on Water Street.    Now, the securities industry is asking searching questions about the ways computers changed Wall Street. Did computer-powered program trading -- in which grab bags of hundreds of different stocks and futures are bought and sold faster than any human regulator can monitor -- trigger the crash? More broadly, did electronic analysis and trading produce a whole new breed of high-tech investors whose criteria have nothing to do with the traditional corporate and economic forces behind stock movements?    &quot;I think there is a tendency today to substitute trading for investment,&quot; says former U.S. Attorney General Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, who was commissioned last spring to study program trading for the Big Board. &quot;Computers are an element of that, sure. But I don't think it's just because of computers.&quot;    Which came first? &quot;You answer the chicken and the egg question for me, and I'll tell you,&quot; says Mr. Katzenbach, the retired top lawyer at International Business Machines Corp. His report, due to be released later this month, is expected to express serious reservations about computerized trading.    One way or another, the computer has transformed the stock market in ways unimaginable even a few years ago. To pick just one startling statistic: At the time of the crash, some $50 billion to $90 billion of assets were covered by computer-governed portfolio insurance, up from virtually nothing two years ago, according to sources at the presidential commission studying Black Monday.    That kind of volatile growth is unsettling -- even to the small priesthood of specialists who fully understand the workings of Wall Street's computers. &quot;You're talking about a real monster, and it's obviously one that we cannot control,&quot; a top SIAC official says.    In many ways, Wall Street was an unusually ripe target for computerization. Nowhere does faster, better information command such a high premium. And few other industries' products are intangible enough to flash along wires from one computer to another.    &quot;I don't think there was another industry which could have been transformed to the degree the securities industry has been,&quot; says Frederic Withington, a veteran New York computer consultant. &quot;It's the only one where the goods have no physical reality -- they're nothing but an electronic message. So you can move the entire inventory at the stroke of the key.&quot;    In other industries, he says, &quot;The goods slow down the computers. You can't suddenly electronically switch a flight from one route to another -- you've got a physical airplane and crew.&quot;    Wall Street got high-tech religion a little later than some other fields, such as aerospace. But when it did, starting about a decade ago, change came at a torrid pace on two fronts.    One was at the trader's desk. Prices from many different markets became instantly available via computer. Software wizards figured out ways to rummage through that information and find trading opportunities -- all in fractions of a second.    Suddenly, trading desks began sprouting intricate computers normally bought by scientists and microchip engineers. A leading vendor of these, Sun Microsystems Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., started a financial-services sales force in 1985 with two salespeople. Today, the sales team has 25 people, and traders have snapped up more than 1,500 Sun machines.    The other front was at the exchanges. Their constant hunger for more computer power was a windfall to their chief supplier, Tandem Computers Inc., based in Cupertino, Calif. Last year, Tandem's sales to the securities industry shot up 80%, making it the company's fastestgrowing market.    The computers enabled the exchanges to handle surging volume and linked them more tightly to computer systems at brokerage houses. In 1976, SIAC launched its Dot system, an acronym for &quot;designated order turnaround.&quot; The system, now widely used, let member firms route electronic orders directly from their traders' computers to a printer on the exchange floor.    The Dot system -- rechristened SuperDot in its latest incarnation -- became a pivotal tool for program traders. It permitted them to place elaborate, multistock orders that could only be profitable if executed in seconds.    Today, SuperDot and the rest of SIAC's system are one of the biggest collections of computer power gathered under a single roof. Its workings have grown so vast that today SIAC uses computers to keep track of all its computers.    In hindsight, it seems that computers on Wall Street -- as in many other industries -- created an appetite they ultimately couldn't satisfy. Following the classic addicts' pattern, each time investors got more powerful computers, they developed investment techniques that needed even more powerful computers. As long as stocks kept going up and trading volume remained manageable, no one bothered to ask whether the market's basic structure was suffering hidden strains.    But now, Wall Street may face a painful withdrawal from overdependence on computers. The day after the crash, the Big Board even asked program traders not to use its state-of-the-art SuperDot system; the sheer magnitude of computerized trading was causing orders to back up as much as three hours before they could be executed.    And from the investment standpoint, a rethinking of computer-aided trading is inevitable. Portfolio insurance, the complex electronic hedging strategy that roared before the crash, became next to useless on Black Monday because of an unanticipated problem: A market in a free fall loses its liquidity. Many traders, having fled in shock, aren't available to buy what others seek desperately to sell.    But curtailing powerful technology already in wide use isn't easy -- as any arms negotiator can attest. &quot;It's very hard to go back once you've gone forward,&quot; says Ramon Villareal, Tandem Computers' securities-industry marketing manager.    Moreover, Wall Street is worried about what the Japanese may come up with. A state-of-the-art futures market is scheduled to open in Tokyo in March. Observes Mr. Villareal: &quot;Once you've got the tools, if you don't use them, someone else will.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>