<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0139 </DOCNO><HL> The Case for Donald Regan---By Jude Wanniski</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   At the current stage of the Iran/Contra crisis there seems almost unanimous agreement in Washington, among Democrats, Republicans, liberals and conservatives, that White House chief of staff Donald T. Regan should resign in the interests of the nation, the president, the GOP and common decency. The president seems alone in wanting Mr. Regan to stay. The president is right.    The only reason for Mr. Regan to resign is if he knew of the Poindexter/North contra operation, and we must assume that Mr. Regan is telling the truth in denying knowledge, that the president believes him, and that he is wise enough to know that if he isn't telling the truth, a departure in disgrace is inevitable anyway.    Others say Mr. Regan should leave because &quot;he let the president down,&quot; that &quot;he should have known,&quot; that &quot;his effectiveness has been permanently impaired&quot; as a result of this crisis on his watch. All these reasons have some weight, but they do not nearly stack up to his record of service on behalf of the president.    Mr. Regan's four years as Treasury secretary and two years as chief of staff have been vastly underrated. He has been one of the chief reasons for President Reagan's successes of the past six years. He is the only senior member of the administration who has devoted himself completely to the president and the president's electoral mandate without interruption.    This fact alone is the chief reason why so many people are calling for his head. In these past six years, Mr. Regan has not made a move that did not reflect his reading of the president's bent in the exercise of leadership. He has never displayed an agenda of his own, as others of cabinet rank have, or as James Baker III did as chief of staff in 1982, when for several months he seemed determined to save the president from himself.    When Donald Regan was chosen by the president-elect as his Treasury secretary in December 1980, the first impression of his potential and direction was a private report that he had asked to read the Reagan campaign speeches so he would better know what the president-elect had told the American people he would do in office. It's likely he was the only cabinet secretary to do so. The attitude this reflected became the chief characteristic of his administration service.    Frequently, in the early, difficult years of the Reagan presidency, Treasury Secretary Regan seemed scatterbrained, flip-flopping on positions from week to week, getting tangled in contradictions. Wall Streeters began to look at him as a buffoon and were puzzled that he could have achieved such eminence as the chief executive of Merrill Lynch.    But to those who knew of his approach to serving the president, it was clear that Secretary Regan was reflecting the policy struggles taking place in and around the Oval Office regarding tax and spending policies, and his scatterbrained flip-flopping was the chief means of communicating to the outside world the state of that shifting debate before the president. Mr. Regan was willing, it seemed, to take marching orders from the White House and carry them out, even though it made him seem weak and vacillating.    If President Reagan did not have such a person in his high command, it's difficult to see how he could have achieved as much as he did. Donald Regan was always the one person who permitted himself to be an extension of the president, an instrument in the president's hand. It was Donald Regan who conceived of the plan to switch jobs with Jim Baker in January 1985, a move that baffled many Americans and probably all Europeans, in that Mr. Regan was taking a lowlier position as his own idea.    This was an immensely important strategic move. Without it the president's 1984 mandate for tax reform certainly would never have been realized; the political and tactical skills of Mr. Baker and his partner, Richard Darman, had to be at Treasury for the reform to pull it off. For his part, Mr. Regan could not have served the president better, taking a lesser position, but one that put his service closer to the president's hand.    As a result, everyone in Washington who did not want the president to do what he has wanted to do in the past two years blames Mr. Regan for making it possible, whether it's the shape of the tax legislation, the developments at Reykjavik and the Strategic Defense Initiative, or the anti-protectionist stand the president takes so firmly.    But there is even more antipathy to Mr. Regan from those who wanted the president to do things he didn't necessarily feel inclined to do in the past two years, a mixture of Old Guard Republicans who want the budget balanced at any cost to the economy, or conservatives who want a social agenda pursued with more alacrity. Here, too, they blame Mr. Regan and &quot;the mice&quot; who work for him for not somehow making these things happen.    The outcry for Donald Regan's head is not new with the Iran/Contra crisis. It was in full cry exactly a year ago, with many of the same people insisting it was Mr. Regan's ineptness that forced the president to swallow such a terrible tax bill fed by the Democratic House, or that contra aid hadn't been squeezed from Congress, or that an arms agreement hadn't been achieved with Mikhail Gorbachev, etc., etc. Of course, Mr. Regan was fully vindicated by the year that followed, squeezing contra aid from Congress as well as the historic tax reform, with the president's steadfastness on SDI changing the terms of the arms-control debate itself. Still, people do not give up.    Secretary of State George Shultz was quite correct when he told the House Foreign Affairs Committee Monday: &quot;Nothing ever gets settled in this town. It's not like running a company or even a university. It's a seething debating society in which the debate never stops, in which people never give up, including me, and that's the atmosphere in which you administer.&quot;    The objective of this vast coalition that now demands Mr. Regan's head is nothing less than control of the past two years of the Reagan administration, with a chief of staff of the coalition's choosing. The arms-control wing of the Democratic Party and the Mondale wing of the GOP would be happy with Drew Lewis, who would almost certainly be named chief of staff once Donald Regan's head was on that pike.    Mr. Lewis, who was secretary of transportation in the first Reagan administration, has already signaled this coalition of establishmentarians, with a wink, that he believes it is imperative that the budget be moved toward balance (tax increase) and an arms treaty be worked out with the Soviets (an SDI deal). Mr. Lewis has been campaigning for the post for three years at least, and as a result would have the support of Mrs. Reagan, George Shultz, William Clark, the president's close friend and former national security adviser, and all those other old friends of the president in his California kitchen cabinet who keep hearing what a poor chief of staff Donald Regan has been and how expert Mr. Lewis would be.    It would be much better if an ineffective Donald Regan stayed on and policy was immobilized during the president's remaining two years. Mr. Lewis is a vestige of the Nixon-Ford years, and, precisely because he is expert, could unravel the president's six years of achievements in only two. If Mr. Regan does leave sometime in 1987, as he'd planned anyway, it should only be after he has assisted the president in selecting a suitable successor, one who would serve as he has.    But now, the president wants Donald Regan to stay on. So do I.    ---   Mr. Wanniski is president of Polyconomics Inc., Morristown, N.J. He advised Mr. Reagan early in the 1980 campaign. </TEXT></DOC>