<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870730-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Of Big Loans -- but Fail to Deliver---By Martha BranniganStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;New York Merchant Bank Has $100 Million Immediately Available,&quot; read an advertisement in The Wall Street Journal last summer, promising financing for commercial ventures.    Respondents were referred to Robert E. Whitehead, who operated out of impressive New York offices at the World Trade Center and on Park Avenue, lived in the lavish Trump Tower, and traveled by chauffeured limousine and chartered jet. His only requirement of the prospective borrowers was that they put up an advance fee of one percent of the loan.    But of the more than 100 applicants who paid Mr. Whitehead more than $7 million in advance fees over two years, none received a loan or even a fee refund. In September, Mr. Whitehead pleaded guilty in state court in New York City to one count of fraud and three counts of grand larceny in the loan scam. He now is in jail in Rome awaiting extradition, after failing to appear for sentencing in New York.    Authorities say such advance-fee lending schemes are flourishing across the country, and the scam artists know a thousand and one variations. Some spin elaborate yarns about access to Arab oil money and reclusive European financiers, others claim special ties to big commercial banks and insurance companies. But the common thread is that a front-end fee is collected on the promise that big money can be found for a project. The financing, however, never comes through.    &quot;I'm working 18 hours a day to pay everybody back and probably will be for two years,&quot; says Roger D. Asper, a Miami Beach businessman who paid $23,333 for a $4 million loan guarantee last year from First Union Guaranty Trust. The promised loan was never made, dashing his plans to purchase an art deco hotel on Miami Beach. The closing date came and went, and the hotel sellers declared Mr. Asper in default on the purchase agreement. He estimates legal fees and related expenses have widened his loss to $76,000. &quot;It wiped out my dream,&quot; he says.    The Florida Comptroller's Office, which regulates banking and securities, has subpoenaed the records of First Union Guaranty in Miami and is investigating for possible fraud. Company officials couldn't be reached for comment. (First Union Guaranty isn't related to First Union Corp., a Charlotte, N.C.-based bank holding company with subsidiaries in Florida.)    Regulators warn that prospective borrowers should be roundly skeptical about any lender soliciting an advance fee. &quot;We're seeing more of these,&quot; says Mary Beth Guard, legal counsel for the Oklahoma state agency that regulates banking. &quot;Most are absolutely fly-by-night.&quot;    In the Midwest and Southwest, the depressed farm and oil industries have made many people who need to borrow, but who are unable to get conventional financing, more vulnerable to lending scams. &quot;It's purely a function of the downturn in the economy,&quot; says Ms. Guard. &quot;People with marginal businesses who need money to survive are seeking these out.&quot;    Even though investigators are getting an increasing number of complaints about such scams, building a criminal case is difficult. &quot;You have to show a false representation in the first instance, or that there was an intention not to return the fee,&quot; says James H. Fogel, deputy chief of the frauds bureau for the district attorney's office in New York City. &quot;That's a very tough thing to prove.&quot;    In the Whitehead case, prosecutors told the first victim who came forth that the situation appeared to be a civil matter of failure to honor a contract. After several victims had complained, however, the district attorney's office dug through civil-court records and discovered a pattern of fraud, Mr. Fogel says.    Advance-fee scams often have the trappings of legitimacy. The Whitehead ads, for instance, appeared in several business publications. &quot;We do our best to screen out advertisers based on their past history,&quot; says Samuel Posman, the Journal's classified-advertising manager for the Eastern region. &quot;But the fact is, they'll give the best references they can. And if you have no reason to reject them and their references check out, you start running the ad.&quot; The Journal drops any ad if it finds evidence of misrepresentation, he says.    Some of the loan schemes, however, sound bogus by the grandiose nature of their claims. European Arabian Trust Inc., operating out of a high-rise tower in Miami's financial district, for instance, claimed to be administrator of the $3 trillion fortune of an Indonesian navy admiral. A chunk of the money was even earmarked to pay off the U.S. debt, testified Walter Johnson, a company officer, in a deposition filed in Florida state court in a civil suit against the company.    European Arabian attracted borrowers by boasting that it could get financing for multimillion-dollar ventures. The Florida Comptroller's Office says the company collected at least $400,000 in advance fees from hopeful borrowers before state officials stepped in and closed the operation in October. Regulators were unable to find any clients who had gotten loans.    Civil suits have been filed against European Arabian, but criminal charges haven't been filed. Company officials couldn't be reached for comment.    Thomas Glick, assistant general counsel for the Florida Comptroller's Office, says the agency has &quot;found nothing to support the wild assertion that European Arabian is overseeing a large fortune.&quot; The firm has virtually no assets, Mr. Glick adds.    Parallax Financial Corp., in Fort Lauderdale, was more modest than European Arabian in its claims. Court records show that Parallax listed assets of $118 million. Police say the company, which operated from a bare-bones office in Fort Lauderdale, had no assets at all, however.    The Florida Comptroller's Office closed Parallax in May, and two company officials have been charged in state circuit court in Fort Lauderdale with grand theft in an alleged advance-fee fraud. Police say the company took in fees totaling more than $60,000 before the scam was halted.    Some advance-fee schemes bait investors with the lure of getting something for nothing. In Los Angeles, the Justice Department in March obtained an indictment against seven men for mail and wire fraud in an arrangement in which borrowers paid fees up front to Fincoll Inc. for loans that then were to be reinvested by Fincoll. The Newport Beach, Calif., company told clients that the huge loans would be at below-market rates and would be invested in discounted bonds to produce a big profit. Fincoll also claimed it had access to Arab oil wealth and offshore trusts.    The indictment, filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleges that Fincoll collected more than $2 million in fees, usually $50,000 to $60,000 from each customer. But no loans were ever made, according to the indictment. Achille Haddad, president of Fincoll, and five other defendants have pleaded innocent and are awaiting trial in November. The seventh man named in the indictment is a fugitive in England, authorities say, and hasn't entered a plea.    Often, the borrowers aren't the only victims in advanced-fee loan scams. In some cases, the fraudulent lenders issue letters of credit that borrowers end up using as collateral in other transactions.    Tony Lama Inc., an El Paso, Texas-based bootmaker, accepted two First Union Guaranty letters of credit from a customer before delivering more than $1 million dollars in merchandise. The customer stopped paying on the order, however, and the company hasn't been able to collect from First Union Guaranty, says an attorney for Tony Lama, which is pursuing the matter in state court in Texas.    Robert Lawson, operations manager for the fraud prevention group at the National Association of Credit Management, a trade group, says bogus letters of credit sometimes are used by innocent people who have been duped into believing they have legitimate financing, as apparently happened with the Tony Lama customer. But, Mr. Lawson says, the letters also are ammunition for unscrupulous borrowers who deliberately pass them off as valid. </TEXT></DOC>