<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870723-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Luring U.S. Flag to Gulf Fits Kuwaiti Survival Strategy---Wealthy Desert Kingdom is BesetBy Iran Militants and Financial Woes---By Frederick KempStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> KUWAIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At the fish market in the Old Souk, fishmongers recall how only a few years ago their ruler, Emir Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, used to arrive in his big Mercedes, buy his dinner from them and then sit down to tea.    But two years ago his car was rammed in an assassination attempt, putting a stop to his mingling with his people. These days, the emir is seen only from afar as he drives to the palace in an armored Mercedes flanked by Chevrolets with gun-toting guards hanging outside. Traffic on the road is blocked and parked cars are removed before he goes by.    It's all part of the deepening fear that grips this New Jersey-size country, which sits uneasily among Iran, Iraq and Saudi Arabia -- a moderate land in a triangle of swirling extremes. Until recently, Kuwait was a largly unnoticed shiekdom on the Persian Gulf, not as powerful as Iraq, Iran or Saudi Arabia. Ruled for more than 200 years by the al-Sabahs, and frightened of both Iraq and Iran's ambitions on its territory, Kuwait simply pumped oil, spread the wealth among its small population and kept quiet.    But suddenly, tiny Kuwait has become a household word in America, embroiling the U.S. in a controversial pledge to protect Kuwaiti oil tankers in the Persian Gulf from Iran. That commitment risks a shooting confrontation, with American sailors as the targets.    This week the U.S. began putting the Stars and Stripes on half of Kuwait's fleet of 22 oil tankers, guaranteeing the ships U.S. naval protection as they navigate the Persian Gulf to export Kuwaiti oil. Because billions of dollars of that oil revenue go to support Iraq's war effort against Iran, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's government insists Kuwait is a combatant in the war and, as such, its tankers, and their U.S. Navy escorts, are prime targets.    Fear of direct Iranian attack is only one of the many problems facing Kuwait. Its mostly moderate Sunni Moslem population also fears internal subversion by Shiite Moslem followers of the Ayatollah Khomeini. And financial tensions have grown in the wake of a 1982 stock market collapse and falling oil prices.    But Kuwait is a survivor. When Iraq threatened to invade on Kuwaiti independence day in 1961, Kuwait turned to Britain for troops to thwart Iraq. This time, Kuwait turned to the two superpowers for protection. &quot;Calling in outsiders to save us is an old tradition,&quot; says a Kuwaiti businessman.    When the U.S. demurred at Kuwait's request earlier this year to protect its tankers, the Kuwaitis shrewdly informed the Reagan administration that Moscow already had agreed to reflag Kuwaiti tankers. Washington quickly agreed to reflag part of the tanker fleet rather than let the Soviets play a bigger role in the Persian Gulf, where U.S. Navy ships have operated for four decades.    &quot;Fear is Kuwait's petroleum, and we are seeing something of a gusher,&quot; says a West European diplomat here. The biggest fear these days, not only in Kuwait but in all the Arab states lining the Persian Gulf, is the spread of militant Islamic fundamentalism by Iran's Shiite Moslems. The more Iran grows frustrated by its war with Iraq, the more danger militarily weaker Kuwait faces because of its officially denied but clear support for Iraq.    Iraqi planes use Kuwaiti air space, and Kuwait's oil sales help finance Iraq's war. And every so often, police close off all approaches to Kuwait City's Sixth Ring Road. Then, for four hours a morning, for several mornings at a time, long military convoys rumbles down the motorway carrying Soviet arms from Kuwait's Shuaiba Harbor bound for Iraq.    For most of the time since traders and pearl divers bought them to power in the 1750s, the al-Sabahs were less-than-absolute rulers, relying on financially powerful merchants and traders for their salaries. But the oil-price boom that began in 1973 built up Kuwait's reserves to more than $85 billion, enabling the al-Sabahs to build their own financial power through investments and the bestowal of favors.    And the weakening of the merchant families enabled the ruling family to protectively stack the government with family members. The emir's brothers serve as foreign minister and interior minister. The crown prince -- a dark-skinned cousin whose mother is believed to have been an Ethiopian slave -- is prime minister. Other al-Sabahs control the defense, oil, labor, social affairs and information portfolios, and head the central bank. &quot;They were our babysitters in the 19th century,&quot; says the head of a merchant family. &quot;Now they are our masters.&quot;    The emir's smart investments during the fat years of high oil prices have meant that Kuwait has suffered less than its neighbors from the price collapse. Kuwaitis still enjoy one of the world's highest per capita incomes. And with a population of only about 1.7 million (one million of them foreign workers), and 90 billion barrels of proven oil reserves (245 years' worth at current production rates), there's plenty of prosperity to go around.    The great wealth hasn't moderated the tensions. Sunni Moslems outnumber fundamentalist Shiites here, and a system of &quot;first-class citizenship&quot; -- only men whose families arrived in Kuwait before 1920 have the right to vote -- precludes most Shiites from political life.    But last July, Kuwaiti officials say, strains between Sunnis and Shiites prompted the emir to close parliament. The emir complained that the &quot;dust of dispute obscured the sun of truth.&quot; Finance Minister Jassim Mohamed al-Kharifa insists &quot;the ruler had no choice -- the community had started to disintegrate.&quot;    But others say parliament's offense was to anger Kuwait's neighbors with foreignpolicy debates and, perhaps more to the point, threaten the regime by investigating its finances. It had removed one cabinet member for misuse of public funds and had set its sights on another.    Former lawmakers fear that Parliament's shuttering is feeding the growth of an opposition underground. In January, after years of quiet acceptance of their second-class status, the sons of some of Kuwait's prominent Shiite families lashed out: They set an oil field aflame before a summit meeting of Islamic leaders. And this spring the government rounded up what it said was a well-armed Shiite terrorist group that planned new attacks on oil facilities.    The emir is taking other precautions too. Western diplomats say al-Sabahs have been moved into municipal, army, university and even sports-club positions. A local banker says Shiites have been moved from sensitive spots at oil-production facilities; diplomats say Shiites don't serve as air force pilots or in sensitive security posts.    When they closed parliament, the al-Sabahs also muzzled Kuwait's seven newspapers, making them subject to the whims of a 24-year-old chief censor named Yussif. At the left-wing paper, Al-Watan, chief editor Jasem al-Mutwaa sifts through a box of stories banned by the censor: democracy in South Korea, Iranian political prisoners, a cartoon poking fun at Ronald Reagan.    All this doesn't seem to bother the Kuwaitis, who seem willing to trade prosperity for politics. Thus the family stepped in last summer to bail out Kuwait's most prominent families from bankruptcy in the wake of a stock market collapse -- a mere 200 debtors accounted for 80% of the country's non-performing bank debt of about $2.2 billion.    &quot;We had to tackle it in a way to protect the social system and the banking system,&quot; says Salem Abdul-Aziz al-Sabah, the central bank president and grandnephew of the emir.    The government also has been spurring the economy by buying up land at premium prices to put more money into circulation. &quot;Government is a minor issue for us in Kuwait,&quot; says a former member of parliament, Abdullah Alnafisi. &quot;We don't give a damn who rules, as long as we make lots of money.&quot;    ---   Facts on Kuwait Population 1986 ........ 1.8 million  Kuwaitis .................. 720,000  Expatriates .. ........ 1.1 million GDP 1986 ............... $17 billion Oil exports  1986 ................ $6.38 billion  1985 ................ 10.46 billion  1984 ................ 12.28 billion</TEXT></DOC>