<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890811-0104 </DOCNO><DD> = 890811 </DD><AN> 890811-0104. </AN><HL> Market-by-Market Analysis of What Is@  Behind the Recent Surge in World Stocks@  ----@  A Wall Street Journal News Roundup </HL><DD> 08/11/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> JAPAN CANDA EUROP FREST </CO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Here is how major foreign stock markets have fared since October 1987:    Tokyo    The Tokyo market has had a rollercoaster year. Pushed up by Japan's strong economy but pushed down by political problems, stock prices have climbed erratically to new highs. On July 31, the Nikkei average of 225 stocks hit a record, closing at 34953.87 -- up 16% since the end of last year and 60% since the crash.    Moreover, the Tokyo exchange wasn't hit as badly as the world's other major bourses. It fell only 14.9% during the crash and recovered relatively quickly. But most of the gains were posted in 1988, and many experts are becoming uneasy. &quot;Japan led all the other markets up, but the momentum has run out,&quot; says Peter Tasker, an analyst at Kleinwort Benson International Inc. Yet Tokyo analysts, though turning cautious, aren't predicting another crash anytime soon.    Japan went through some market-damping crises this year. The mourning for Emperor Hirohito slowed stock-market activity. Then, in May, the Recruit Cosmos influence-peddling scandal toppled Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita. After only two months in office, his successor, Sosuke Uno, announced his resignation following the ruling party's electoral defeat.    The political uncertainties may continue to haunt the market. Adding to the uneasiness is talk that the opposition parties may seek a capital-gains tax.    Already, individuals as well as foreign investors have been net sellers in Tokyo recently. No one is expecting the foreigners, who have chalked up greater profits in home markets, to return anytime soon. And Japanese investors worry about the recent strength of the U.S. dollar. As the yen weakens against it, Japan pays more for dollar-denominated imports of oil and food, and that could ignite inflation. At times, the Tokyo market has been buoyed by strength in New York, which gives investors an excuse to buy in Tokyo. But analysts say the effect is fleeting; investors in Tokyo realize that while the Fed is lowering interest rates to encourage a &quot;soft landing,&quot; the Bank of Japan raised the discount rate at the end of May. Tokyo stocks have been fairly flat ever since.    London    The U.K. equity market has surged 30% this year, and the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 Share Index is within about 100 points of its all-time high of 2443, set in the summer preceding the 1987 stock-market crash. During the crash and its aftermath, the index sank about 32%.    On the surface, this year's runup seems odd. &quot;There's a nagging feeling of disquiet: What is the market doing at these levels?&quot; says Nicholas Knight, the head of strategy at the Nomura Research Institute of London. Since June 1988, the U.K. has absorbed 10 interest-rate increases -- the Thatcher government's medicine for a surge in inflation. With base rates at 14%, the economy is slowing down, and corporate profits are certain to drop.    Nevertheless, the Nomura Research Institute predicts that the Financial Times-Stock Exchange index will pierce its pre-crash high and end the year at 2500 and, by the close of 1990, will rise to 2800.    One explanation: British stocks aren't really as high as they seem. Major industrial equities are trading at about 13 times earnings, matching the price-earnings ratio in November 1987, the month after the crash. In the run-up preceding the crash, the ratio topped 19.    In addition, a spate of British takeovers have buoyed many stocks and often create gushers of cash profits that are quickly plowed back into the market. And as takeovers push more companies out of the market, there is more money chasing fewer stocks. Institutions are keeping their cash levels at about 10%, up from about 5% in the giddy climate two years ago. Those cash levels suggest a lot of money can quickly pour into today's market.    London investors, to some extent, &quot;have taken encouragement from Wall Street,&quot; says Ian Harwood, an economist at S.G. Warburg. To some European economists, recent signs of an economic slowdown in America have relieved Europe of considerable inflationary pressure.    Frankfurt    West German stocks were hammered by the crash, which within weeks cut share prices to two-thirds their former value. In Frankfurt, the panic was compounded by fears that the rising mark would batter Germany's export industries. By Nov. 10, 1987, the FAZ stock index had dropped 35% to a post-crash low of 400.13.    German stocks were slow to recover. By mid-1988, however, unexpected strength in the German economy seemed to foreshadow record earnings, and equity markets revived in earnest. On June 20, 1989, the FAZ index reached 617.18, topping the pre-crash 613.67 for the first time.    Aided by booming exports and capital spending aimed at 1992, the economy grew at a brisk 4% annual rate in the 1989 first half, and the FAZ index hit a high of 664.22 yesterday -- up 20% from Jan. 1 and up 65% from the November 1987 low of 400.13.    The investment surge turned ho-hum builders and capital-goods manufacturers into hot stocks and even woke up steel shares. Auto makers are running at capacity, and retailers could benefit as Bonn prepares to cut income taxes in January.    West German investors and institutions began nurturing the market rise last year, but not until early 1989 did foreign institutions return. &quot;The German recession that everybody feared never came, and foreign institutional investors are bringing their money back,&quot; says Peter Pietsch, an economist at Commerzbank AG in Frankfurt.    However, some clouds are darkening the horizon. West German inflation isn't altogether whipped, and the Bundesbank might raise rates again within six months. Also looming is a round of wage negotiations amid strike threats by the militant IG Metall metalworkers union. In addition, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's center-right coalition government, which generally bolstered investor confidence during the postcrash recovery, may be in trouble. His Christian Democrats have been slipping in recent polls.    Paris    The Paris stock market plunged 10.2% on Oct. 19, followed by a prolonged slump that lasted through January 1988, when the CAC index hit a low of 251.3. And, like all major world markets, it's now in a prolonged boom: The CAC index hit an alltime high of 508.3 yesterday.    Analysts attribute this surge partly to the bourse's interconnections with other markets, which also are rising. Other factors include the healthy world economy, the easing of U.S. interest rates and the high inflation-adjusted rates in France.    In addition, the French market is strong for specifically French reasons. The economy is growing, and corporate profits are rising. Moreover, after two years of virtually nonstop elections, France now is facing three election-free years, auguring a political stability that's favorable to stock markets. And the euphoria is being fed by corporate takeovers, which are being encouraged by the efforts of French companies to get bigger in preparation for the heightened competition in 1992.    Many companies' shares have climbed in the anticipation that they could become takeover targets. For instance, the distribution sector has risen on the coattails of a takeover earlier this year of La Ruche Meriodionale, a supermarket chain. Nevertheless, many analysts are cautious.    Toronto Prices on the Toronto Stock Exchange, which has traditionally followed the U.S. market, fell 31% during the 1987 crash, but they have recovered almost all that ground. The exchange's 300-stock index peaked at 4112.86 in August 1987 and plunged to 2837.79 on the following Oct. 28. It reached its post-crash high of 4019.62 yesterday.    The buying has been led by institutions, both from within Canada and outside it, especially the U.S. &quot;The individual investor is still basically a sideline player,&quot; says David Neale, the director of institutional trading at Nesbitt Thomson Deacon Inc.    The recovery has been uneven, with profits of Canada's many natural-resources companies held back by a rise in the value of the Canadian dollar and recent declines in raw-materials prices.    Some observers expect more takeover activity because Canada's corporate sector is undervalued relative to the U.S. Foreigners will continue to invest in Canada. In addition, the Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. -- under which tariffs and trade barriers will be removed over 10 years -- boosts domestic and international sentiment for investing in Canada.    Milan    The Milan stock exchange was one of the least affected by the 1987 crash, mainly because a previous two-year rally had ended earlier in 1987. Nonetheless, on Black Monday, the Milan Stock Exchange Index slid 6.3%. Since then, the index has jumped 39% above the level that day.    The market has climbed this year despite a 60-day political crisis. But Ernesto Marelli, a trader at Milan's Akros Finanziaria S.p.A., says the installation of Giulio Andreotti as prime minister last month has generated &quot;the impression that this government will last&quot; longer than Italy's postwar average of 11 months.    Analysts and traders attribute the stock-market gains to good 1988 corporate profits and a strong 1989 outlook for the big corporations such as Fiat S.p.A. Also helping has been a lot of merger and restructuring activity, particularly in the banking sector, as Italian companies try to improve their competitive positions for the single European market at the end of 1992.    Hong Kong    After Hong Kong stock prices had inched higher last year, &quot;people woke up&quot; early this year to some favorable trends, says Timothy Moe, director of research at Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd. One, he says, was &quot;the fact that the U.S. hadn't gone into recession&quot; despite many gloomy predictions, and exporters' prospects brightened. The other, &quot;the increase in Hong Kong investment in China,&quot; eased worries about possible restraints on the tiny British colony's future growth.    So, investors began buying in earnest. They had reason to consider Hong Kong stocks undervalued; in the wake of the 1987 crash, the Hang Seng index had plunged 50% to 1895. By mid-May, it was up about 20% on the year, to a 1989 high of 3309 -- still below the 3783 on Oct. 16, 1987.    But the turmoil in China this spring set off a skid in the Hang Seng index, which fell until it hit 2093 the day after the June 4 massacre in Beijing. Despite a recent rebound, the index is down for this year.    Stockholm    The Stockholm Stock Exchange's Affaersvaerlden index plunged 40% in October 1987 but was one of the quickest to recover after the world-wide crash. In 1988, the index rebounded 51%, and so far this year it is up a further 30%.    The Swedish economy has been unexpectedly buoyant, confounding most economic forecasters, who had warned of a first-half downturn. Corporate profits also have surged. However, a slowdown in the U.S. economy could crimp some big Swedish concerns' profits. For example, two auto makers, AB Volvo and Saab-Scania AB, sell more cars in the U.S. than any other single market. But most Swedish corporations have their biggest exposure in Europe -- and U.S. influence in Stockholm markets &quot;is more on a psychological level,&quot; one expert says.    Zurich    Scared investors took their time coming back to the Swiss stock market after a long decline following the 1987 crash. Now, however, stock prices have surged, and analysts are bullish. &quot;Investors have recovered by learning that you can't build an investment strategy on fear. Money must be invested,&quot; says Werner Rein of Union Bank of Switzerland.    Swiss traders and analysts note that because Swiss companies are export-oriented, their profits tend to surge when a strong U.S. economy boosts foreign demand. In addition, analysts believe that declining interest rates in the U.S. will drag down European rates, further helping European companies. </TEXT></DOC>