<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881028-0079 </DOCNO><HL> A Sea-Change in Israel: 1984-88 </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Doron </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><DATELINE> TEL AVIV  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Israel will hold parliamentary elections Tuesday that many people, worried about the Israeli-Arab conflict, claim to be crucial for its future. But the direct impact of next week's vote may be less on the peace process and more on the economic revolution transforming Israeli society and politics. This, of course, could eventually affect Israeli-Arab relations.    The precariousness of Israel's economic position was driven home to voters four years ago, with a collapse of the stock market, skyrocketing inflation and dwindling reserves. Political parties reacted to these troubles with the same failed statist solutions that caused so many of the problems. The only suggestion for change came from outside the system. A coalition of chambers of commerce and professional associations protested discriminatory tax laws and urged members to vote for parties promising tax reform.    In July 1984, I wrote on this page that the reformist movement &quot;was still only a small cloud on the horizon, . . . but that it may presage a gathering storm that could transform eventually Israeli politics and economics.&quot; The economy has since weathered a succession of storms and is still being battered. The economic bases and ideologies of traditional power blocks are being eroded, and fresh ideas are gaining pre-eminence.    Economic issues figure prominently in the present campaign, despite the fact that on the surface the economy seems stabilized. In one recent poll, most of the 30% of the electorate that is uncommitted named economic matters as the major concern. The finance minister in the outgoing coalition government, Moshe Nissim of the Likud's liberal wing, has started to reform the economy and has resisted powerful interests. He enjoys such high popularity that he was able to cut subsidies just before the elections.    This has begun to wake up the Likud to the possibilities of the economy as a campaign issue. Its campaign has lately elevated a free economy to the same stature as security and peace, devoting numerous newspaper ads and considerable time on the state television monopoly to extolling the virtues of free enterprise. The Center Party, which shares Labor's dovish stance, also has made a strong pitch in favor of a free economy. Most smaller parties also advocate the sale of government companies and less bureaucracy.    Even Labor has come out, however begrudgingly, in favor of a freer economy. Its leader, Shimon Peres, stated that he favored &quot;the privatization of many stateowned companies&quot; and &quot;a freer economy where this is advantageous.&quot; (None of the parties seem to realize the benefits a free-market economy could bring both Arab and Jew, and how it could help bring peace to the territories.)    When compared with Labor's 1984 platform, which advocated increased government intervention at every plant level and even the rationing of labor, this is quite a turnabout. Yet this new zeal for a free economy must be treated skeptically. While promising a freer economy and reduced taxes, Labor also promises government encouragement and subsidies to almost every region, sector and interest group: Farmers, workers, students, singles, the handicapped, pensioners, women, widows and even hairdressers. Although Labor long ago became the party of the established and privileged, it still pays homage to socialism, holding the red banner high in May Day parades.    Likud also has to live down its responsibility for leading the Israeli economy to near collapse, while Labor must try to explain away the current troubles of its extensive economic empire. Both parties, moreover, rely heavily on patronage and have such dismal records of economic management that it would seem natural for them to wish economic issues away. Considering all this, the fact that hardnosed politicians decided to concentrate on economics and advocate a free economy, even for votes, is remarkable.    The change of attitude of the voters is noticeable, as well, as is seen in their reaction to the recent near bankruptcy of the Labor Federation's $3 billion conglomerate, Koor Industries, which produces about 10% of Israel's gross national product and employs a similar percentage of its industrial workers. Koor reported losses of $250 million for 1987 and owes more than $1 billion. Yet few voices were heard urging a government bailout. Its advocates resorted to scare tactics, claiming that a receivership could have a devastating domino effect on the economy, but to no avail.    In the past, the threat of closure of even the smallest plant caused irresistible pressure and assured government subsidies. Now, in the very plants that are owned by the Labor Federation, workers have allowed management to enforce massive layoffs (including of the most militant union representatives) and have accepted other cost-cutting measures opposed by their unions, preferring the preservation of their own jobs to Labor's sacred ideals of egalitarianism and labor solidarity.    The communal settlements, or kibbutzim, used to be the intellectual and social avant-garde of Israel, shaping its anti-capitalist and anti-profit bias. They are now burdened with $2 billion in debt and seem to be economically unviable now that high government subsidies have been reduced. About half the young people in these settlements are leaving. A grandchild of Israel's first kibbutz founder and chief ideologue has even called for reforming the kibbutz along the lines of &quot;enlightened capitalism.&quot; The old egalitarian system encouraged sloth and waste and punished enterprising members, he said.    These shifts in Israeli attitudes are of consequence. Proponents of the free market economy, neglected and on the defensive four years ago, are now occupying center stage. If advocates have the resources and wisdom to utilize this advantage by proposing practical solutions to Israel's problems, their victory over a defunct socialist and statist system is all but assured. When this happens, Israel will enjoy a more stable, prosperous and open society, greater individual advancement and enhanced civil liberties. Such gains should do more to improve Israeli-Arab relations than the kind of diplomatic and political deals we're hearing talked about today.    ---   Mr. Doron is director of the Israeli Center for Social and Economic Progress, a think tank based in Tel Aviv. </TEXT></DOC>