<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Judge Sorkow May Have Overstepped His Bounds---By Hadley Arkes</HL><DD> 04/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Once again, a local court has confirmed what humorist Fran Liebowitz offered as the first rule of life: Get out of New Jersey. In recent years, judges in that state have been in the vanguard of the movement to remove medical treatment, for less than rigorous reasons, even from conscious patients who are not able to insist on their treatment. And now, in the celebrated case of Baby M, Judge Harvey R. Sorkow of the Superior Court has delivered this sobering news to the legal world: that he has been obliged to do nothing less than create new law himself in a portentous field, beyond the guideposts of the law and the reach of his own competence.    The judge was not obliged to create new law or reach such a novel, astounding decision in this case on surrogate parenting. Nor was the law so spare in its guidance, so wanting in principles, as the judge assumed. He could have handled the case solely as a matter of assigning the custody of a child to one of her biological parents. He could have relied upon some traditional tests in gauging the character and stability of the rival parents, and coming to a judgment as to which set of parents was more likely to secure &quot;the best interests&quot; of the child.    There was no need for Judge Sorkow to settle this case so conspicuously on the ground of &quot;contract.&quot; He was amply alerted to the point that, even in New Jersey, there is a pronounced aversion to the notion of contracts, in which cash is exchanged for human beings.    Of course, Judge Sorkow denied that the case presented such a contract. The surrogate mother, Mary Beth Whitehead, was given $10,000, but the judge insisted that &quot;the money to be paid to the surrogate is not being paid for the surrender of the child to the father. . . . The biological father pays the surrogate for her willingness to be impregnated and carry his child to term.&quot;    But if those were the terms of the contract, those terms were satisfied. The woman was impregnated, the child was carried to term. What was left, then, to litigate under the contract? What could it have been other than the delivery of the item, the &quot;good&quot; that was promised in exchange for the $10,000? No worldly judge could suppose that William Stern paid the &quot;consideration&quot; of $10,000 for Mrs. Whitehead to have the experience of being impregnated and carrying the child to term. He paid for the delivery of a child to the custody of himself and his wife, and it was for the satisfaction of that interest that he appealed to the courts.    Judge Sorkow revealed a curious narrowing of judicial awareness when he remarked that the law offered him little guidance in this case beyond the standard of weighing &quot;the best interests of the child.&quot; Twenty-five years ago, that standard was used, even by the most liberal of judges, to award the custody of children to the white parent in mixed racial marriages. These judges reasoned that blacks were more likely to be poorer than whites and more subject to discrimination. They were willing to draw the conclusion that the &quot;interests&quot; of the child were served best by attaching them to the world of whites.    The grave mistake of the judges came in detaching the understanding of &quot;interests&quot; from the terms of principle on which the fitness of the parents was judged and the custody of the children was assigned. In effect, the courts had been deciding that race alone gave certain parents a less compelling claim to the custody of their own children. That understanding of the &quot;best interests&quot; of the child had to be altered; the law on custody had to be reshaped according to the principles on racial discrimination that the Supreme Court was establishing as part of the fundamental law of the Constitution.    The question, then, is whether the principle that bars the sale of human beings as property is any less fundamental in our law. No serious student of the American founders could entertain a serious doubt on this point. But in that event, the &quot;best interests of the child&quot; could never be understood, justly or coherently, in terms that permit the sale of a human being, in a contract, as a species of property.    The economist Frank Knight once noted that it was quite a rational arrangement for some men to exchange their freedom in a contract for long-term, indentured service that guaranteed their security. But the notion of a contract implies a &quot;free agent,&quot; with the competence to give or withhold his promise. And Knight, that philosopher of free economies, understood that free men may not alienate or waive their freedom, even when doing so could plausibly serve their interests.    With the same understanding, the courts have refused to uphold contracts in which people have voluntarily contracted themselves into peonage or slavery. As a practical matter, we know that the law could not hope to reach every informal arrangement by which people exchange babies for cash, cars or real estate. Nor can it easily reach those finely tailored accords by which certain women agree to forgo abortions, and an adoption lawyer, for a suitable fee, agrees to the placing of the child. But the law can still pronounce upon the central problem of these cases through the modest step of simply refusing to lend the weight of its endorsement. People who enter these contracts may be discouraged to know that, if the contract is not honored, they may not annex to their interests the moral approval of the law and its powers of enforcement.    It was within the means of Judge Sorkow to make that modest, but telling gesture and hold back the endorsement of the law. But in creating what he regarded as a salutary novelty in the law, he may have done more than even he intended to do.    The judge remarked of the contract for surrogate parenting that &quot;at birth, the father does not purchase the child. It is his own biological child. He cannot purchase what is already his.&quot; Nowhere in the law today can we find a more forceful statement that the child in the womb belongs to the father every bit as much as to the mother. The federal courts have been persistently denying that the father has any such claim to the child, which could justify his interference in the decision of the mother to have an abortion.    But now the same judges and courts that have given us the most radical laws on abortion in the West may be prepared to create an exception quite as radical: If a woman may not withhold the child she has contracted to deliver, if she may be compelled to deliver up the child she has borne, it would seem to follow that she may not destroy the child she has promised.    Judge Sorkow has now settled upon fathers an authority that the Supreme Court has withheld. And if the higher courts uphold his judgment, they will have marked off, in the restricted domain of &quot;contract&quot; law, a stronger ground than they have yet conceded for denying the &quot;constitutional right&quot; of a woman to an abortion.    ---   Mr. Arkes is Cromwell Professor of Jurisprudence at Amherst College. </TEXT></DOC>