<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE HIGH COURT LIMITED the impact of sex-based rulings in the workplace.    The justices, sparing employers from having to pay millions of dollars in back retirement benefits, ruled that court decisions barring sex bias in pension plans aren't retroactive. Voting 5-4, the court said employers aren't obliged to pay differences between benefits that were disbursed to men and women before a 1983 Supreme Court decision banning such discrimination. The ruling is considered a defeat for women's groups that say retroactive payments are necessary to eliminate years of bias in pension benefits.    The court ruled 8-1 that federal judges can't dismiss indictments because of misconduct by prosecutors that didn't prejudice the grand jurors.    ---   Moscow ordered the expulsion of two Canadian diplomats, and barred the return of three others. The move followed similar action by Ottawa against 17 Soviet officials accused of espionage. In Ottawa, the foreign minister said a Soviet aviation aide based in Montreal defected after providing data about security breaches by the Soviets.    ---   The Iran-Contra case judge signaled his determination to bring North to trial, ordering the former White House aide to list the classified documents he wants to disclose in his defense against charges of conspiring to defraud the government. U.S. Judge Gerhard Gesell gave North until July 11 to comply with the order.    ---   Israeli troops captured four Palestinian guerrillas who tried to infiltrate into northern Israel from Lebanon. In the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Arabs staged a general strike. Fires blamed on Palestinian arsonists destroyed more than 60 acres of forest in northern Israel. One Arab demonstrator was reported killed by the army.    ---   Vietnam elected Do Muoi prime minister at the opening session of the National Assembly, Radio Hanoi said. Do Muoi, a high-ranking Politburo member, is a veteran revolutionary who reportedly directed purges against corruption in the Communist Party. Hanoi also decided to regularly change its leadership to improve efficiency.    ---   Dukakis said that Jackson's lack of government experience did &quot;not necessarily&quot; rule him out as the vice presidential candidate on the Democratic ticket. The Massachusetts governor also said his search for a running mate would expand beyond those people who have been asked to provide financial and other background information.    ---   Haiti's military government has arrested former aides of deposed President Manigat, who was overthrown in a coup. Port-au-Prince's information minister said a number of prisoners have been held since Sunday. The U.S. Embassy in Haiti said at least two of Manigat's aides are Americans, but couldn't confirm if they were detained.    ---   The House approved a $59.7 billion bill that would fund HUD and various other federal agencies for the coming fiscal year. The measure, approved on a 377-40 vote, would eliminate a popular urban-grant program to help pay for NASA's proposed space station.    ---   The EPA proposed regulating the use of aldicarb, a toxic chemical found in wells in at least 16 states. The proposed rules, the agency's first attack on ground-water contamination by pesticides, would lead to limits and possibly a ban on the pesticide in some areas to prevent further contamination of drinking water.    ---   A House panel cleared a $400 million-a-year AIDS testing and counseling bill that includes penalties for breaching the confidentiality of test results. The bill, approved by the House Energy and Commerce Committee, would give grants to states, clinics and hospitals to expand testing programs.    ---   A car bomb exploded in mostly Christian eastern Beirut, killing one person and wounding 18, as rival Palestinian militias battled for control of two refugee camps. In London, the Independent newspaper reported that Syria has located the place in Lebanon where foreign hostages are believed held by Iranian-backed guerrillas.    ---   Iran claimed its forces repulsed an Iraqi assault in the Mawat region of Kurdistan, but Baghdad said it recaptured territory in the area. Iranian rebels based in Iraq, meanwhile, said they had withdrawn from the Iranian town of Mehran after a three-day offensive in which they reported capturing tanks and other military equipment.    ---   Ethnic Armenians began returning to work in the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh after a monthlong strike. In the southern Soviet Union, a dissident said at least 5,000 Crimean Tatars staged a strike to demand the return of their homeland.    ---   Moslem students in China protested plans to make them share dormitories with Han Chinese students at Xinjiang University. The demonstrations in the northwestern city of Urumqi followed Moslem protests against using the region for labor camps and imposing birth-control rules on minority groups.    ---   Authorities in Egypt said at least 47 Christian pilgrims were killed in a fire outside a remote monastery, about 250 miles south of Cairo. The pilgrims were participating in a weeklong homage to the Holy Family. Police have ruled out sabotage.    ---   The Los Angeles Lakers won the National Basketball Association championship Tuesday night, defeating the Detroit Pistons, four games to three. </TEXT></DOC>