<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870114-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Firestone's Restructuring Bid Works Well -- to a Point---Transforming Cost Cuts Into HigherProfit Is Harder Than Expected---By Ralph E. WinterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FIRRUBBER (RUB) </IN><DATELINE> AKRON, Ohio  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Interested in how to streamline a sprawling corporation? Consider how John J. Nevin has fared in his efforts to narrow the focus of Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co., which began at least five years before restructuring became fashionable among U.S. manufacturing concerns.    Since becoming chief executive officer of the nation's second-largest tire producer in 1980, Mr. Nevin has focused the company on its basic business: tires. And he has narrowed that operation to its strongest markets and best plants.    He used the cash from the sale of businesses and from cutting inventory and receivables to repay debt and buy back stock. Consequently, Firestone now has a strong balance sheet.    However, as other companies sell units, close plants, lay off personnel and generally streamline, they may find as Mr. Nevin did that there is also a price to be paid. Firestone's sales have shrunk by about one-third, to $3.5 billion last year. And, like many other manufacturing executives, he has found it far harder than he expected to transform cost reduction into higher profit. Furthermore, Firestone's future growth is by no means assured, despite Mr. Nevin's plans to expand its auto service business.    In addition, the executive says he has heard and read far more than he would prefer about his intentions to abandon the tire business or liquidate the company. He denies any such plans. Mr. Nevin, 59 years old, appears intensely nervous. He gave up coffee with caffeine, he says, because it made him too jittery. But during interviews, he constantly jumps up and darts around his office, digging out reports and other materials. When he finally forces himself into a seat, he usually squirms about and then folds a leg under him. His constant activity gives him a rumpled appearance, like a salesman who has spent all day on a plane.    Mr. Nevin's streamlining of Firestone, though, hasn't gone unnoticed. In today's tough climate for industry, &quot;the key to success is focus,&quot; says Robert Cizik, chairman and president of Cooper Industries Inc. &quot;Companies are being forced to fall back on their strengths, which is what Nevin did at Firestone,&quot; says Mr. Cizik, whose Houston-based company makes tools, mining and energy-industry equipment.    &quot;I give John Nevin a great deal of credit,&quot; says Patrick C. Ross, chairman and chief executive of Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co., a competing concern jointly owned by B.F. Goodrich Co. and Uniroyal Inc. &quot;He made the hard decisions required to get a bad situation turned around in a relatively short time.&quot;    Firestone was hurting when Mr. Nevin joined the tire maker in December 1979 from Zenith Radio Corp., where he had been chairman and chief executive, following a 17-year stint at Ford Motor Co. Firestone had a negative cash flow, which threatened its viability. The principal problems, in Mr. Nevin's view, were too many plants and too many products. In addition, the company was still suffering aftereffects of quality problems in the mid-1970s with its Firestone 500 steel-belted radial tires, which resulted in a massive recall and damage to the company's reputation.    The streamlining strategy Mr. Nevin employed has enough imitators these days to make him feel vindicated. The price of Firestone stock is about three times what it was when Mr. Nevin joined the company. Furthermore, he will soon receive the first half of a cash bonus of about $5.5 million negotiated under a 1980 incentive contract; the bonus is based on profits and the price of Firestone stock.    So far, however, the streamlining hasn't paid off in consistent earnings. For the fiscal year ended last Oct. 31, Firestone earned $85 million, or $2.16 a share, but $66 million of that came from a one-time gain on an over-funded pension plan, and another $16 million came from discontinued operations. Profit from continuing operations was only $3 million, after a restructuring charge of $65 million.    Mr. Nevin declines to forecast fiscal 1987 earnings, but says he expects a &quot;significant&quot; increase in operating profit. Over the longer term, he says, &quot;any profit objective below the $4-to-$5-a-share range wouldn't be acceptable to me.&quot;    Some of the speculation that Mr. Nevin would liquidate or abandon the tire industry has emerged because of his aggressiveness in pruning back operations to adjust to a shrinking industry market. After the current round of streamlining, which Mr. Nevin says may be the last such major cutback, Firestone probably will have only five tire plants in the U.S. and Canada, down from 17 seven years ago.    As part of that restructuring, the board authorized the buyback of another five million shares. When that is completed, Firestone will have bought back about 40% of the 57.7 million shares outstanding when Mr. Nevin came aboard. He has chopped debt to $313 million from $1.05 billion.    More recently, several other leading tire producers also have narrowed their activities. As a result of a takeover effort by Sir James Goldsmith, the Anglo-French financier, industry leader Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co. is selling aerospace, wheel manufacturing, real estate and energy lines. In the process, it will become mainly a tire and automotive products company, with only minor diversification in industrial products. Uniroyal Goodrich Tire also is practically a one-industry concern.    Mr. Nevin decided early that Firestone shouldn't be a full-line tire supplier &quot;competing for every sale in every tire market around the globe.&quot; He decided to narrow the product line to focus on markets where the company had a competitive advantage. He has all but exited the private-brand tire market, for example, because it has low profit margins, requires large inventories -- which soaks up working capital -- and is susceptible to profit-squeezing pressures from imports. Major customers for the low-priced, private-brand tires include mass merchandisers, oil companies and a few major distributors.    &quot;We intend to concentrate on original equipment and state-of-the-art replacement tires for cars and light trucks,&quot; Mr. Nevin says. The product development done to &quot;maintain a strong original equipment position, combined with our strong distribution system, gives us an advantage in those markets,&quot; he says. &quot;We have to accept that overseas competitors may have an advantage in producing low-priced tires&quot; for the private-label business, where the distributor handles the marketing.    The current restructuring is also expected to end the company's U.S. production of farm and construction-equipment tires. Mr. Nevin says Firestone also may phase out North American manufacture of tires for medium and heavy trucks.    Abroad, Mr. Nevin has pulled Firestone from countries where it hadn't gained a strong foothold, but has boosted investment in countries like Spain, Portugal and Brazil where the company has a stronger position with good prospects for tire sales increases.    Furthermore, Firestone's diversified businesses, which accounted for 25% of sales in 1979, make up less than 5% now because Mr. Nevin has sold businesses producing plastic resins, automotive seat belts, beer kegs, polyurethane foam, and wheels for truck, tractors and construction machinery.    Mr. Nevin isn't shunning diversification altogether. He believes the auto service sector offers profit potential. The company's nearly 1,400 tire stores have been equipped with computerized equipment to diagnose auto problems, and training of Firestone store and dealer personnel in auto service has more than quadrupled in the past two years. So far, though, auto service profit margins are thin.    &quot;The jury is still out on whether he can attract and retain enough good people in auto service,&quot; says another tire company executive, who asked not to be identified. &quot;It is hard to control costs and service quality with hired help. Even managers on profit-sharing don't work like someone who owns his own business.&quot;    Mr. Nevin, like many chief executives embroiled in retrenchment, finds the task of selecting plants that will be closed the most wrenching responsibility. &quot;My dad lost his job during the Depression, and later lost his house,&quot; Mr. Nevin says. &quot;You can't close a plant without an awareness that it is having a god-awful effect on a lot of people who aren't responsible for it.&quot;    He is especially sensitive to charges that he hasn't dealt fairly with employees, such as at the company's Albany, Ga., tire plant, where he wrung concessions from the United Rubber Workers union and then closed the facility anyway. &quot;I can accept people saying, 'Why did that dummy do that?' much more readily than charges that I didn't act with integrity,&quot; he says.    He says he spent more than $30 million at the Albany plant in an effort to keep it open, but rising tire imports and other changes in the tire market required the 1985 closing decision.    Several tire industry executives and analysts question whether a slimmed-down Firestone can prosper merely by making tires and repairing cars. They expect companies to grow -- or disappear. &quot;He has proven that he can turn a sick animal into a healthy one,&quot; says Harry W. Millis, tire analyst with McDonald andamp; Co., Cleveland. &quot;He's done very well for stockholders. But it's difficult to see where the company goes from here.&quot;    Mr. Nevin says growth is the wrong yardstick of corporate performance in the 1980s. &quot;Formerly, most chief executives perceived their role as making the firm grow,&quot; he says. &quot;Now, more recognize that there are situations in which the right thing is to downsize the company.&quot;    &quot;My biggest disappointment has been that, after getting all the support and help of Firestone employees -- from management people to production workers -- we haven't been able to get acceptable profits from North American tire manufacturing,&quot; he says. &quot;You make better tires much more efficiently, but you don't get the results you have a right to expect,&quot; because of rising imports and weak tire prices, he maintains.    Mr. Nevin has contributed to his image of the hired gun -- bent on completing an assignment and moving on -- by declining to become part of the Akron establishment. He hasn't bought a house here, for example, and lives instead in an apartment. He still owns a home in a Chicago suburb where several of his six children reside when they aren't away at college. His wife of 35 years spends time at both places. He also isn't active in Akron social circles.    Mr. Nevin says he would like to wind up his career teaching at a graduate school of business, &quot;and that's more practical at around age 62 than at 65.&quot; He has met with graduate school classes and, he says, &quot;it's always an up day for me.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>