<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870320-0045 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID he wouldn't repeat his Iran arms-sale initiative.    The president, in a nationally broadcast news conference, conceded that the policy had turned into an arms-for-hostages arrangement, and said he &quot;would not go down that same road again.&quot; Reagan also said he was unaware until November that proceeds from the arms sales to Iran were being diverted to the Nicaraguan rebels, although he acknowledged that he knew private groups were aiding the insurgents. He said it was &quot;hard to tell&quot; if the arms policy had complicated efforts to win the release of hostages in Lebanon.    Reagan insisted that the 1972 ABM treaty doesn't bar tests of a space-based antimissile system, and he quoted a Soviet military official as his authority.    ---   ISRAEL DECLARED limited sanctions against the South African government.    In an apparent response to U.S. demands that it review its policy toward Pretoria, Israel announced that it would reduce trade and cultural ties with South Africa as well as refrain from signing any new defense contracts. While Israel cited South Africa's apartheid policy, the move was viewed as an attempt to avoid possible cuts in U.S. military aid for defying a U.S. arms embargo on Pretoria.    An Israeli panel investigating the Pollard case could be disbanded because several witnesses have refused to testify about spying on the U.S.    ---   The Senate voted to begin civil proceedings to enforce its subpoena requiring retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Secord to turn over private bank records. The financial data could provide information about the diversion of proceeds from U.S. arms sales to Iran to Nicaraguan rebels.    ---   The Reagan administration has moved an aircraft carrier battle group into the northern Arabian Sea within striking distance of new Iranian missile batteries, U.S. officials disclosed. The officials also said that Navy ships soon may begin escorting commercial vessels bound for Kuwait.    ---   The Senate passed a five-year, $88 billion federal highway bill despite a veto threat from Reagan. The chamber, however, postponed action on a separate measure to allow states to increase the speed limit to 65 mph on most rural interstate highways.    ---   Poland's labor unions warned that they would call a strike if authorities raise food prices next month. The threat by the government-controlled unions, which claim more than six million workers, was unprecedented in the East bloc. Warsaw had announced price increases of 14% for food, transportation and heating costs.    ---   French intelligence agents arrested four men and two women on suspicion of spying involving the manufacture of engines for Europe's Ariane satellite-delivery rocket. A spokesman for the international space consortium said the six people were allegedly passing classified data to a foreign nation. The country wasn't identified.    ---   A Justice Department aide said Meese has expressed doubts about the constitutionality of the law authorizing independent counsels to conduct inquiries such as the investigation of the Iran-Contra affair. Assistant Attorney General Bolton told a Senate panel that the law should be changed so that the president appoints the prosecutor.    ---   Attorney General Meese advocated mandatory drug testing for the nation's school teachers in a major expansion of the Reagan administration's campaign against drugs. Calling teachers important role models, Meese backed programs requiring teachers on probation to pass drug tests.    ---   Turkey's foreign minister said congressional cuts in foreign aid to Ankara could undermine popular support in his country for ties with the U.S. He indicated that U.S. bases and intelligence gathering facilities in Turkey, a strategic NATO post, could be at risk if U.S. assistance is reduced.    ---   A Chinese parliamentary panel rejected a draft industrial enterprise law. Western diplomats said the move was an indication of the strength of Communist Party hardliners believed locked in a power struggle with those seeking economic change.    ---   An Air Force official said the administration's current space-based anti-missile plan was designed to fit within the restrictive view of the 1972 ABM treaty, rather than the wider interpretation of the pact supported by Reagan. The official, director of the SDI program, said a broader reading of the pact wouldn't be needed in &quot;the near future.&quot;    ---   NASA's chief astronaut said the planned Feb. 18, 1988, launch date for the first post-Challenger shuttle flight will be impossible to meet because a &quot;mountain&quot; of work remains to be completed, the Houston Chronicle reported. The comments contradicted the space agency's deputy administrator, who said the target can be met.    ---   Communist rebels ambushed a Philippine army patrol on a southern island, sparking an hourlong battle that left 18 soldiers dead. It was the second such attack this week and was considered the worst fighting since the Feb. 8 expiration of a 60-day cease-fire in the 18-year-old insurgency.    ---   Syrian troops in Beirut threatened retaliation if kidnappers kill any of the more than two dozen foreign hostages in Lebanon. Police said Damascus's threat was made in messages to Shiite Moslem clergymen. Separately, Iran denied a Soviet magazine report that Anglican envoy Terry Waite is being held in Tehran's embassy in Beirut. </TEXT></DOC>