<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Firm Steps:A Shallow Labor PoolSpurs Businesses to ActTo Bolster Education---They Twist Legislators' Arms,Give Students IncentivesTo Get Them Up to Snuff---The Million-Dollar Misorder---By Janice C. SimpsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the first half of this year, New York Telephone Co. gave its simple 50-minute exam in basic reading and reasoning skills to 21,000 applicants for entry-level jobs. Only 16% passed.    Because the company had only 780 slots to fill, it could skim off the cream of the applicants. But the test results offer one of many signs of a sea change in the work force. The labor pool of younger workers who historically fill entry-level jobs is declining in both numbers and quality, for reasons ranging from the demographic to the social, while the jobs waiting for them require ever more knowledge and skill.    Alarmed by this double whammy -- and by the cost of screening applicants and providing special training -- business is trying to get more involved in improving basic general education.    &quot;Education is a bigger factor in productivity growth {rates} than increased capital, economies of scale or better allocation of resources,&quot; declares David Kearns, chairman of Xerox Corp.    Some businesses are reacting by jumping into politics and twisting arms to win educational reform and bigger school budgets. Others are financing teacher and student scholarships, research and school-budget supplements. Still others are fighting high dropout rates and enticing students to read more.    The early returns from the companies' educational efforts are promising, but the problem isn't amenable to a quick fix. It isn't that the U.S. is becoming a nation of blockheads; authorities generally agree that the population as a whole is more literate than it has ever been. Considering the minimal standards used, however, that isn't saying much.    Though only a relatively small percentage of Americans have trouble reading or writing a simple passage and counting out bus fare, a distressing number can't do much more than that. The Federal Education Department estimates that the U.S. has 17 million to 21 million functional illiterates, people whose meager skills aren't up to the demands that life and work place upon them.    They commit many costly blunders. The Business Council for Effective Literacy in New York cites an insurance clerk who paid a claimant $2,200 on a $22 settlement because she didn't understand decimals; a steel-mill worker who misordered $1 million in parts because he couldn't read instructions well enough, and a feed-lot laborer who misread a label and killed a pen of cattle by giving them poison instead of feed.    To forestall such problems, one of every three major U.S. corporations now provides some form of basic skills training for employees, according to Anthony Carnevale, chief economist for the American Society for Training and Development in Alexandria, Va.    He estimates that productivity losses caused by poorly educated workers, together with the price of remedial training, costs business about $25 billion a year.    That is bad enough. But business is even more concerned as jobs requiring more than the most basic reading, writing and computational skills become the fastest growing sector of the labor market.    Linda Stoker, who directs a fundamental-skills program for Polaroid Corp., says: &quot;People changing jobs is not the problem. It's jobs changing under the people.&quot;    In a test last year given to a sample of 3,600 people aged 21 to 25, the National Assessment of Educational Progress in Princeton, N.J., found that while almost everyone could decipher the expiration date on a driver's license, just over a third could calculate the cost of a restaurant meal with tip and only 20% could interpret a bus schedule correctly. Across the board, researchers found, performance plummeted when the assigned tasks moved beyond the simpler levels.    These results, dismal as they are, still don't define the full extent of the problem facing employers in years to come. To begin with, the total number of young people in the labor pool will constrict sharply as the generation of the baby boom gives way to that of the baby bust. Second, a rising proportion of those people in the pool will be minority-group members -- the very group that schools have had the least success in educating.    Also, more people who once went into entry-level jobs after high school now go to college, meaning that those left for employers to choose from are generally the less accomplished and less ambitious members of their classes. &quot;Instead of drawing from the 60th to 80th percentile {in high-school achievement levels}, we're now drawing from the 40th,&quot; says Ronald Woods, vice president and employment manager at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.    The explosion of new opportunities for women has contributed mightily to that. Mr. Woods adds: &quot;Twenty years ago a lot of bright women went to secretarial school. Now bright women are vice presidents, and they're asking me why I can't find good secretaries.&quot;    While all this is happening, entry-level jobs are growing more complex and demanding.    To increase the flow of qualified applicants, Dow Chemical Corp. finances special training in English, math and science through the Saginaw, Mich., school system, and publicizes the training communitywide. About 50 people have enrolled since the program started last year, 21 have finished it, and 11 have been hired by Dow.    Prudential Insurance Co. of America had to begin a similar special program in clerical and math skills in its home city of Newark, N.J., because too many applicants couldn't read or compute well enough to process claims or handle similar work. (The company had been rejecting a growing number of applicants for this reason, many of them women and minority-group members, and in 1979 had been accused by the federal government of hiring discrimination.    Prudential also finances summer jobs for high-school youngsters who go to work in small businesses, not big ones like Prudential. &quot;When urban youngsters come to any large corporation, they're intimidated,&quot; says Donald Mann, Prudential's vice president for human resources. &quot;These places are as strange to them as Russia would be.&quot;    Facing similar difficulties, American Express Co. has opened &quot;financial academies&quot; for inner-city high-schoolers in eight cities where the company has offices; enrollees get instruction in basic economics, accounting and other subjects that give them some background for financial-services jobs. &quot;Fifteen years ago, kids coming into the business were from suburban homes where there was some background in stocks,&quot; says a company official. &quot;Today they're coming from urban schools, and from homes where there might not even be checkbooks.&quot;    In a number of cases, employers are concentrating on specific aspects of the educational problem. Xerox, for example, has committed $5 million for a new institute where anthropologists, psychologists, linguists and experts in artificial intelligence will investigate the nature of the learning process itself.    Coca-Cola Co. chooses instead to attack the dropout rate, spending $500,000 annually to lower it at nine high schools in four cities with large minority populations. In Los Angeles, students with poor attendance and grades in junior high are assigned &quot;teacher advocates&quot; when they enter Theodore Roosevelt High; the advocates, who get $2,000 stipends for the extra work, watch their charges' attendance closely -- sometimes even driving them to school -- arrange tutoring if needed, and meet frequently with parents. Students get incentives for improvement and can earn cash rewards of up to $400 upon graduation.    Pizza Hut, a unit of PepsiCo Inc., emphasizes reading. It gives away about $25 million a year in free pizzas through Book It!, a national reading incentive program that rewards elementary school students with free pizzas when they increase the number of books they read each month.    About 12 million youngsters enrolled last year (and 14 million this year), and results have been good. A company study shows enrollees have tripled their reading; Lila Martin, a sixth-grade teacher in Independence, Mo., says her students read an average of 28 books each in the six months they were enrolled, and haven't slacked off since.    Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. gives priority to teaching. Among other things, it seeks to increase the teacher supply by offering 120 scholarships of up to $4,000 each for college students who plan to teach in elementary and high schools. Last year the company and its foundation spent $3 million on teacher-related programs, up from only $100,000 in 1982.    Though corporate executives have long been unhappy with the quality of education, they have generally avoided political action to improve it. That too has been changing, and in recent years business has been instrumental in forcing costly reforms through reluctant legislatures.    In South Carolina, for example, businessmen helped draft a 1984 package calling for a 30% jump in the school budget and a sales-tax increase to finance it. To get the package passed, executives told balky lawmakers that they would reconsider their own investments in the state if changes weren't forthcoming. They suggested to recalcitrant lawmakers that corporate cash for their campaigns just might evaporate if they didn't vote right.    They voted right. In the three years since the reforms were enacted, the average SAT score in the state has risen 28 points, and the number of students scoring below minimal levels on standard tests has dropped from about 250,000 to 150,000.    Probably no single businessman has done more in recent years to push reform than Dallas industrialist H. Ross Perot. As head of a special education commission, he spent an entire year -- and $1.5 million to $2 million of his own money -- researching, drafting and ramming through a tax-shy Texas Legislature one of the most sweeping of all state reform packages. The measure, requiring $3.8 billion in increased revenue, mandates longer school days, smaller classes, higher teacher salaries, and competency testing for teachers.    The peripatetic Mr. Perot crisscrossed the state in his private jet, exhorting doubters. Urged to get some good lobbyists, he said, &quot;Let's hire them all.&quot; And he did -- in part to keep them from working for opponents.    It is too early to say with any certainty whether the corporate efforts to improve education will add up to a markedly improved work force in years to come. But the so-called Boston Compact provides an encouraging sign. Five years ago 200 Boston-area companies challenged local schools to register 5% annual improvements in school attendance, the high-school dropout rate, and college and job placements. In turn, the companies promised to expand part-time and summer jobs for high-schoolers, and to hire more graduates full time.    Several major concerns have since set up endowments for teacher fellowships, dropout prevention measures and experimental programs schools couldn't afford. The Compact now offers financial aid to any Boston public high-school graduate who wants to continue his education.    The experiment has been deemed so successful that the Federal Health and Human Services Department and the National Alliance of Business are attempting to replicate it in seven other cities. Meanwhile, the Compact has built up endowments of over $10 million. &quot;That's good-faith money that shows we want this to continue in perpetuity,&quot; says an official of the Bank of Boston. &quot;One of the things we've learned is that change doesn't come overnight.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>