<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870506-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SECORD SAID about $3.5 million from arms sales to Iran went to the Contras.    Testifying at the opening day of joint House and Senate hearings into the Iran-Contra affair, the retired Air Force major general also said he believed that the Reagan administration &quot;knew of my conduct and approved it.&quot; Secord said the money was diverted to fund an airlift of arms to the Nicaraguan insurgents. He said that the airlift was established at the urging of fired national security aide North, and that the operation was discussed with then-director of the CIA, William Casey.    Democratic Sen. Daniel Inouye of Hawaii, chairman of the Senate panel, said at the opening of the hearings that the scandal was &quot;both sad and sordid.&quot;    ---   HART SAID he made a mistake, but denied allegations of &quot;immoral&quot; activities.    The Democratic presidential candidate, in a speech to a group of newspaper publishers meeting in New York, said the Miami Herald had &quot;reached inaccurate conclusions based on incomplete facts&quot; in a story linking Hart to a woman other than his wife. He vowed that the controversy wouldn't derail his campaign. The former Colorado senator, however, acknowledged that he would have to &quot;struggle to retain my integrity and honor.&quot;    A Miami Herald editor defended the newspaper's tactics and its story, saying the question of Hart's &quot;womanizing had become an issue&quot; in the campaign.    ---   The U.S. was ordered by the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal in The Hague to return to Tehran $451 million in assets frozen after the 1979 Iranian revolution. The panel stressed that the order wasn't linked to Americans held hostage in Lebanon. The U.S. is likely to comply.    ---   The Justice Department is reviewing Meese's actions involving Wedtech Corp., which had been given a $32 million contract from the Army. The move could result in the expansion of an independent counsel's criminal inquiry to include the attorney general.    ---   The Postal Service will seek rate increases that would average 16% for all classes of mail and boost postage for a first-class letter to 25 cents. Separately, a member of the service's Board of Governors resigned in the wake of allegations that he disregarded certain ethical standards, congressional sources said.    ---   Anti-government protests erupted across South Africa on the eve of today's whites-only parliamentary elections, with a strike by about 500,000 black workers and students and scattered explosions and firebomb attacks. Police also clashed with militants in townships around the port city of Durban.    ---   The first wave of aliens began seeking amnesty as the new U.S. immigration law took effect, but the number of applicants was far below expectations. An estimated three million illegal immigrants are expected to take part in the yearlong program offering citizenship to those who qualify.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union agreed to establish centers in their capitals to reduce the risk of nuclear conflict that could result from any misunderstanding. The accord, the first pact to emerge from the 1985 Geneva summit, came as talks began in Geneva on space-based and long-range weapons.    ---   Saudi Arabia and Iran are using separate offers of free oil in attempts to win Syria's support. Iran has resumed shipping free oil to Syria, and Saudi Arabia has countered with a tacit offer of even more free oil if Damascus moves away from supporting Iran in its war against Iraq, Arab diplomatic sources said.    ---   A Syrian military leader said Damascus has failed to persuade Lebanese Prime Minister Karami to withdraw his resignation, which was announced Monday. President Gemayel has resisted accepting the resignation, which would automatically trigger the dissolution of the Beirut government.    ---   Richard Hatcher was defeated in his bid for nomination to a sixth term as mayor of Gary, Ind. Hatcher, one of the first black mayors of a U.S. city, conceded to fellow Democrat Thomas Barnes before any vote totals were released. Separately, William Hudnut was nominated to a fourth term as mayor of Indianapolis.    ---   Carlos Lehder Rivas has offered to cooperate with drug-enforcement authorities, a U.S. attorney in Florida said. Details of the offer, made in a letter to Vice President Bush, weren't disclosed. Lehder, arrested Feb. 4 in Colombia, is accused of heading a cartel allegedly responsible for supplying 80% of the cocaine entering the U.S.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir blocked a bid by Foreign Minister Peres to place before the cabinet a proposal to arrange an international conference on Mideast peace. Shamir, who wants direct Arab-Israeli talks, has expressed concern that a U.N.-backed forum could force Israel to relinquish certain of its occupied territories.    ---   Philippine negotiators met with a Moslem rebel leader in the southern part of the country to discuss the agenda for the latest round of peace talks, which open today. Manila's troops were placed on alert to prevent possible violence if the talks fail.    ---   Cuba said it had arrested two alleged CIA agents, one a Cuban exile from Miami, the other an employee of the Havana government. An Interior Ministry statement said the pair had been &quot;carrying out espionage activities.&quot; There wasn't any immediate comment from the U.S.    ---   A federal judge in New York ruled that the U.S. government negligently caused, and then &quot;covered up its involvement&quot; in, the death of a mental patient given hallucinogenic drugs in secret Army tests in the 1950s. Calling it a &quot;sad episode,&quot; the judge awarded $702,044 to the patient's estate.    ---   Died: Hugh Fraser, 50, heir to the House of Fraser, which once owned London's Harrods department store, near Glasgow, Scotland, of lung cancer. </TEXT></DOC>