<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861231-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Tax Report:A Special Summary and ForecastOf Federal and State TaxDevelopments---By Scott R. Schmedel</HL><DD> 12/31/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES GOVMT LATAMFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   AN ALARM SYSTEM for a home office must protect a business to be deductible.    Angus, an investor, uses a home office regularly and solely in managing his extensive portfolio; he keeps a computer and securities in the room. Bruce, a dentist, has his office in his home. Both installed central security systems to protect the homes; both sought to deduct the part of the depreciation and maintenance costs that applies to their offices. But the similarities end there, IRS Revenue Ruling 86-148 says.    Bruce uses his office in his trade or business and meets other tests for home-office deductions; he may deduct a reasonable part of the alarm-system costs as business expenses (subject to certain limits). But Angus's investment activity -- even if full-time and highly profitable -- isn't considered a trade or business; so his home office, even though it supports income production, isn't deductible as a business expense.    Thus, the IRS holds, no part of Angus's alarm system is deductible.    FEDERAL AGENCIES must begin in 1986 to report 1987 contract payments.    The tax act requires the reports to help the IRS collect contractors' delinquent taxes and spot hidden income; now, IRS Notice 871 says the first reports must be filed early in 1988 for 1987 payments. But temporary rules it will issue won't require reports on payments to a contractor totaling $25,000 or less in 1987 or reports on contracts for which no payments are made after April 30, 1988.    The rules apply to executive, military and postal agencies. Reports must cover a contractor's identification, contract dates and payment dates. Exempt from these reports are contracts with other governmental units and subcontracts. Any requirements added by the temporary rules will apply to contracts signed after the rules are published or to earlier contracts for which payments are made after April 30, 1988.    AS 1987 DRAWS NEAR, art museums fear rising prices and falling tax rates.    Soaring auction prices have pushed the average masterpiece above the reach of most museums, while directors worry that tax-rate cuts in 1987 and 1988 will make donations of art less attractive. Thus, museums have urged donors to give in 1986 to get deductions against higher rates. Yet in a few scattered cases, the tax act has worked against museums in 1986 by raising the long-term capital-gains rate in 1987.    A Rembrandt on loan to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts was withdrawn and auctioned in London for $10.3 million; the owners wanted to sell before the capital-gains rate rises. &quot;It was a bit of a blow,&quot; says the museum's George Peabody Gardiner. A Constable that had been lent to the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington was sold in London for $3.8 million; two Hals works on loan to Harvard's Fogg Art Museum went to auction in London, but didn't sell.    Both museums say they don't know why the Constable and Hals works were taken off loan, but many observers suspect the auctions were tax-related.    TAX-FACTS PACTS to exchange tax data with Grenada and Jamaica were signed by the U.S. When Grenada enacts needed legislation, it will qualify for certain investment funds from Puerto Rico and as a host for U.S. foreign sales corporations and deductible U.S. business meetings. Jamaica qualified for the investment funds; it already was eligible for the other benefits.    TOWN AND GOWN in Syracuse, N.Y., settled a five-year dispute over taxes on nonscholastic events in Syracuse University's Carrier Dome stadium. The city keeps $1.2 million in previous university payments but exempts the stadium from real-estate tax. The city gets 75 cents a ticket for major concerts and sports events and is guaranteed at least $100,000 a year.    SALES TAXES rise tomorrow in Texas (1.125 points), Nebraska, North Dakota, and Virginia. Also raising or adopting sales taxes are 44 counties and 127 cities and other localities, including emboldened Uncertain, Texas, reports Vertex Systems Inc.    PREPAYING a mortgage at a discount created taxable income on this home sale.    When Mr. and Mrs. John Albert Michaels bought a home in Raleigh, N.C., in 1983 for $65,000, they put in the capital gain from selling a prior home for $40,000 and thus deferred tax on the gain. The sale had been contingent on their getting a 25% discount for prepaying their mortgage, a &quot;recourse&quot; loan for which they were liable apart from the home itself. Paying off the mortgage saved them $6,378, which they added to the deferred capital gain on the home.    Yet the IRS saw the matter differently: It claimed $1,293 in tax on income from canceling a debt. The couple turned to the Tax Court; they argued that the mortgage prepayment was an integral part of the home sale, making the discount part of the capital gain. But Special Judge Pate agreed with the IRS: IRS rules treat income from the discharge of recourse debt as separate from gain on the sale of mortgaged property.    The judge held that the discount is taxable as current ordinary income, not as deferred capital gain.    BRIEFS: Van-pooling and other employee-commuting allowances from employers became taxable income for workers in 1986, IRS Announcement 87-1 notes. . . . Cecil Mella of Bannockburn, Ill., a tennis pro at two clubs, can't deduct his tennis clothing as a business expense, the Tax Court decided; the items are &quot;fashionable,&quot; and it is &quot;commonplace&quot; to wear such clothing for a variety of casual activities. </TEXT></DOC>