<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880318-0153 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Federal Regulations Ferment Natural-Gas Pains </HL><SO> </SO><IN> PET LNG </IN><G> ERG </G><TEXT>   Comments on the editorial page and in the letters column have revived discussion of the U.S. energy situation at a time such scrutiny is most welcome. Energy prices are down, supplies appear adequate and, it would seem, the U.S is pursuing proper energy policies. Well, yes and no.    Many people can share much of what Arnold Hite (&quot;Chicken Little Was Wrong About Oil, Too,&quot; editorial page, Feb.3) said about the silly, doomsday predictions about energy supply that characterized the 1970s. Most would agree with Charles Masters (&quot;U.S. Energy Problem Isn't Solved,&quot; letter to the editor, March 3) that energy resource assessment is improving and that credible, unbiased energy-supply forecasting is an important planning tool. What is at stake, however, is much more important than an argument over whose crystal ball is more accurate.    What is needed is to ensure that the nation pursues policies that will encourage recovery of all its potential economic energy resources. While there have been efforts to undo the maze of legislative and regulatory controls that burdened the energy industries and distorted energy markets, more work is needed.    For decades, natural-gas supply development has been burdened by regulatory overkill. Some 40% of natural-gas reserves remain under wellhead price controls. While the impact of those controls has been lessened by partial deregulation and competition, the potential for future, significant market distortions remains. The U.S. would benefit from removing all price and non-price controls at the wellhead.    It is equally important that the nation's most potentially energy-rich lands be open for exploration and development. The U.S. has significant potential natural-gas reserves. Yet, continued efforts are made to deny access to potential resources in Alaska and offshore California. Public lands should be made available for responsible energy development. Tax policies inhibiting natural-gas and oil development also should be abandoned.    The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which regulates the interstate natural-gas pipeline industry, is trying to assist in the transition to a more competitive, market-oriented environment. Considerable progress has been made, and there's confidence that if FERC concentrates on fostering competition in all sectors of the industry -- particularly through open-access transportation on interstate pipelines -- the industry and consumers will benefit significantly.    Energy policy no longer dominates public debate. If this indifference, however, leads to an unwillingness to take much-needed energy-policy actions, the future is likely to be much more unsettled and troublesome than necessary or desirable.    Nicholas J. Bush   President   Natural Gas Supply Association   Washington   ---   Mr. Masters asserts that the U.S. Geological Survey was not Chicken Little. Yet, he says that USGS still believes its warnings of hydrocarbon resource depletion, which have been made since the 1920s and, most recently, in the mid-1970s.    We, in the natural-gas industry, see this thesis as reminiscent of the finite-resources, no-growth thinking on which extensive regulatory interference in the marketplace was based. Mr. Masters may have tipped his hand when he applauds the mandatory petroleum conservation measures of the 1970s. Also reminiscent of this no-growth thinking are his statements minimizing the role technology will have on the availability of new resources.    What is most disturbing is how he integrates supply pessimism with the benefits of regulating and rationing energy. He suggests that this was and is &quot;still a good idea.&quot; These concepts, so prevalent in the period just prior to the gas shortages created by wellhead price controls of the mid-1970s, were designed to restrict the use of gas and to keep wellhead prices very low (below replacement costs). The country paid a dear price for this comprehensive rationing policy, but its failure left one positive result -- a lesson to future policy makers never to try that road again.    We are concerned that Mr. Masters's letter may reveal a bias and intransigence on the basic theory of domestic resource availability, which when applied to natural gas would say that gas resources are nearly inelastic, i.e., only nominal increases in gas supplies will result from higher gas prices. A preliminary USGS study made available recently seems to reinforce this point of view. The obvious flaws in this report led the Interior Department to circulate it for extensive peer review -- by the National Academy of Sciences, and other geologic and scientific organizations.    The record, as well as basic economic logic, points in the opposite direction. When government regulators controlled wellhead prices at very low levels in the period from 1968 through 1978, gas reserves of the lower 48 states were replaced at a 46% level (i.e., production significantly exceeded reserve additions). After phased deregulation started under the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, which allowed new gas prices to be determined by market conditions, the replacement ratio rose to 93% (1981-1986). This 93% level occurred in spite of reduced drilling incentives due to oversupply and poor demand. So there are 20 years of clear evidence that the volumes of gas reserves and resources do respond -- positively and negatively -- to such economic factors as price, supply and demand.    Estimates of gas resources by the Potential Gas Committee -- an experienced group of industry, academic and government experts -- have historically reflected a larger gas resource base than the USGS. PGC has integrated the effects of new technology -- such as production from low permeability rock formations -- into its estimates as these sources became economic and part of the accessible resource base. Mr. Masters downplays the importance of geologic sources opened up by new technology, such as tight gas, because it &quot;can only be produced slowly.&quot; Nevertheless, the economics of tight formation resources have encouraged most major producers to drill wells in these formations. Furthermore, the technology is rapidly developing to produce such gas resources more quickly.    The U.S. has abundant gas resources and given adequate prices, they will be developed. Natural gas is a resource we can depend on to support economic growth, improve environmental quality and enhance energy security.    Robert B. Kalisch   Director, Gas Supply and Statistics   American Gas Association   Arlington, Va.</TEXT></DOC>