<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880620-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Pentagon Purchasing Inquiry Examines Paisley's Actions While a Navy Official --- This article was prepared by Tim Carrington, Andy Pasztor And Edward T. Pound </HL><SO> </SO><CO> MD GD UTX GE GQ NOC LTV </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Investigators pursuing the widening Pentagon purchasing scandal are delving into whether Melvyn Paisley had improper dealings with some of the nations' largest contractors even before he resigned as assistant Navy secretary to become one of Washington's most sought-after consultants.    Previously, the investigators had disclosed that they were looking into Mr. Paisley's activities after he left the Pentagon in April 1987. It was in that capacity that he helped McDonnell Douglas Corp., which was teamed with General Dynamics Corp., net a multibillion job last December to build the Navy's carrier-based advanced-tactical aircraft.    But law enforcement officials said during the weekend they are also looking into whether Mr. Paisley improperly aided McDonnell Douglas, a St. Louis-based aerospace concern, earlier, while he was at the Navy.    The focus on Mr. Paisley's activities inside the Navy may bring the Pentagon scandal to the doorstep of his former boss and close associate, John Lehman, currently an investment banker with PaineWebber Group Inc.'s PaineWebber Inc. unit and an adviser to GOP presidential candidate George Bush.    If Mr. Paisley is charged with and found guilty of wrongdoing while he was serving Mr. Lehman in the Navy, the former Navy secretary could be viewed in one of two ways, both unflattering: either he knew of his associate's questionable dealings and condoned them; or, despite his reputation as a tough, hands-on manager, he wasn't aware of abuses in the top echelons of the Navy.    The Federal Bureau of Investigation secretly taped a telephone conversation last winter between Messrs. Lehman and Paisley, which set off alarm bells at the Justice Department, according to a person familiar with the inquiry. Some senior prosecutors suspected that Mr. Lehman, who at that point already had left government, was trying to warn his longtime associate about the burgeoning grand jury inquiry.    The Justice Department won't provide details and Mr. Lehman wasn't available for comment. But over the weekend, the former Navy secretary told one friend that he wasn't a target of the investigation and asserted that stories linking him to the broadening scandal were politically motivated, partly aimed at damaging Mr. Bush's presidential candidacy.    Still, the widening focus of the investigation raises questions, potentially embarrassing to the Reagan administration and to Vice President Bush, about efforts by Messrs. Lehman and Paisley to eliminate layers of military bureaucracy and instead manage Navy procurement programs in a more free-wheeling style out of the office of the Navy secretary.    Mr. Paisley and his attorney, Lawrence Barcella, couldn't be reached for comment.    Other new details about &quot;Operation Ill Wind,&quot; the government's sweeping grand jury investigation into Pentagon bribery and corruption include:   --The FBI used an undercover operative to penetrate the secret network of Pentagon procurement officials, consultants and contractors during the early stages of the inquiry.    --Prosecutors suspect the scandal involved a wide variety of bribery schemes directed at purchasing officials. In what officials familiar with the inquiry describe as a clandestine marketplace for proprietary information, offers of cash, cars and vacations were used to entice Defense Department employees into sharing inside information to help contractors win billions of dollars in contracts. &quot;There were many, many means (by which) something of value changed hands,&quot; said Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa), who has been briefed on the investigation.    --The government is also reviewing contract work performed on the Navy's secret cruise-missile program. It searched through documents on a classified cruise-missile contract awarded to Executive Resource Associates, a computer-software and defense-analysis concern in Arlington, Va. The company said it was told by the government that it wasn't a target of the inquiry, but it declined to say whether it employed outside consultants. Investigators also have searched the offices of William Parkin, a former Navy official who worked on the cruise-missile project, and who now is a consultant in Alexandria, Va. He couldn't be reached for comment.    As a private defense consultant, Mr. Paisley built an enviable client list that included such industry giants as McDonnell Douglas, United Technologies Corp. and Martin Marietta Co.    &quot;Mel Paisley is the kind of guy who's a star in the contracting and consulting world -- the kind of guy who could easily earn $1 million a year,&quot; said a high-ranking Pentagon official.    As a consultant, Mr. Paisley often worked for companies involved in the high-stakes contract competitions that Mr. Lehman promoted as Navy secretary. Investigators are digging into whether Mr. Paisley illegally furnished his clients with proprietary information about their rivals.    A search warrant served at the Washington office of United Technologies' Pratt andamp; Whitney engine-making unit indicates that investigators believe company officials managed to obtain internal bidding documents of rival engine-builder General Electric Co., according to persons familiar with the inquiry. The search warrant, filed in court last week, remains under seal.    United Technologies officials couldn't be reached for comment, but the company previously has said it never discusses consulting arrangements.    Meanwhile, the FBI wants to know how Mr. Paisley helped McDonnell Douglas take on rival General Dynmaics in a bid to sell fighter jets to Korea, Taiwan, Switzerland and Kuwait. In pitching its F/A-18 to the Swiss, McDonnell may have acquired inside information on General Dynamics' proposal to sell F-16s, according to court papers filed in federal court in St. Louis.    Before leaving the Navy, Mr. Paisley paired McDonnell with General Dynamics as a contractor team for the advanced-tactical-aircraft job. According to Navy and industry officials, they promised they could develop the plane for $1 billion less than a competing proposal offered by Grumman Corp., Northrop Corp., and LTV Corp., which Mr. Paisley had set up as a rival team. The cost for the entire job is projected to be $35 billion.    &quot;We at McDonnell Douglas have seen nothing indicating that any wrong has been done. We believe that our relationships with our consultants have been entirely proper,&quot; a company spokesman said yesterday, reiterating the position the company has adopted since news of the inquiry emerged.    Mr. Paisley's orchestration of the fighter project is seen as typical of the free-wheeling style of the Navy and Mr. Lehman. The former Navy secretary scorned the Pentagon's sprawling bureaucracy as &quot;a socialist culture.&quot;    Together with Mr. Paisley, he eliminated an entire bureaucracy -- the Navy Materiel Command -- and consolidated power in the Navy secretary's office. In the process, he largely shut out a layer of overseers who operated from inside the office of the secretary of defense.    The Lehman style has drawn criticism from the Defense Department and the uniformed Navy, where many admirals were shut out by Messrs. Lehman and Paisley.    &quot;The Navy was a bureaucracy run amok,&quot; said Lawrence Korb an assistant secretary of defense who often clashed with the Lehman Navy, both while he was in government and afterward. &quot;It was making its own procurement rules in many cases which are different from the Department of Defense.&quot;    Meanwhile, in an interview on ABC-TV, Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, asserted yesterday that the Pentagon's &quot;emphasis has been on salesmanship&quot; to get more money from Congress, rather than improving management. Rep. Les Aspin (D., Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said on the same program that he intends to begin an investigation of the matter.    Now, the FBI is trying to determine whether the Lehman Navy's entrepreneurial values not only fostered competition and streamlined bureaucracy, but ushered in the corrupt underside of the marketplace as well.    Independent of the grand jury inquiry, a Senate aide pieced together the following account of apparent bribery in the Navy:   Several years ago, a representative of a small company visited a Navy office seeking to become a bidder on a future contract. A Navy official said the necessary paperwork likely would take nearly a year, but suggested the company hire a particular consultant to help. Hoping to shorten the delay, the company retained the consultant for $12,000. The consultant then paid a portion of the fee to the Navy official and the company was quickly included as a qualified bidder on the pending procurement.    Tipped off two years ago by a former Navy official, the Naval Investigative Service, and later the FBI, launched the current bribery inquiry. Officials familiar with the investigation say there may be instances where consultants bought proprietary information from a service official for, say $5,000, and then sold it to a major contractor for $50,000.    In its sweeping inquiry, the FBI searched 31 locations in 12 states last week, including the offices of 15 defense contractors, Pentagon employees and consultants. Additional searches are expected, and a grand jury in Alexandria, issuing almost 300 subpoenas. The inquiry is focusing on as many as 50 consultants, according to law enforcement officials.    In the past, criminal investigations aimed at the largest military contractors or their executives focused almost exclusively on accounting irregularities, inflated labor costs and other sophisticated financial sleight-of-hand. But in this case, according to officials familiar with the investigation, an early decision was made to use more direct and intrusive methods, including electronic-eavesdropping devices, to collect evidence of suspected wrongdoing.    The FBI's use of extensive wiretaps -- commonly used in drug and organized-crime cases -- is a relatively recent investigative tool in military-procurement cases. Until the current investigation emerged, the most prominent use of such techniques was in a Philadelphia-based investigation of military-clothing purchases. In that case, the FBI used an undercover operative and wiretaps to unravel pervasive corruption among contractors, consultants, and defense-purchasing officials.    &quot;Wiretaps do all the work,&quot; said one federal investigator. &quot;They are the wave of the future.&quot;    Persons familiar with the inquiry said some of the wiretapped conversations referred to lawmakers or congressional staffers. That isn't believed to be a major aspect of the investigation at this time. But Justice Department officials, among other things, are asking questions about any ties between Reps. Roy Dyson (D., Md.) or Bill Chappell (D., Fla.) and contractors or consultants under investigation. Both lawmakers have denied any wrongdoing and said they aren't targets of the grand jury.    The name of Joseph Addabbo, a deceased Democratic representative from New York, also has surfaced in the inquiry, law enforcement officials say.    Although Attorney General Edwin Meese and Justice Department spokesmen have predicted that an initial round of indictments is likely to come in the next month or two, other law enforcement officials contend that process is likely to take much longer.    Reacting to the widening investigation, President Reagan Friday praised the investigators pursuing the case.    &quot;I'm sorry to see that such a thing evidently has been going on,&quot; he said. &quot;. . . But at the same time, I would think that the people would be encouraged by the very fact that . . . they have gone in so thoroughly to this investigation, and kept it totally secret so there was no panicking and no leaks or anyone running for cover; I'm very proud of them and what they were able to do.&quot;    Meanwhile, Vice President Bush, in what was seen as a pre-emptive strike to counter possible damage to his campaign, said at a news conference Friday that he was &quot;offended and shocked&quot; by the growing scandal.    &quot;The public should know that a Bush administration will see to it that any and all charges are aggressively prosecuted and that the full force of law is applied to anyone convicted,&quot; he said.    One Bush campaign aide said the candidate wanted to be heard on the issue because &quot;waste and fraud are our issues and it's nuts to give them away.&quot;    But campaign aides conceded the political dangers, with the scandal coming at a time when the &quot;sleaze issue&quot; hangs over the administration, of appearing to be part of the problem. &quot;The trouble with this stuff,&quot; said one Bush adviser, &quot;is that it could look like it happened during our watch rather than have it look like we were the ones who uncovered it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>