<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0045 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> SMALL BUSINESS -- </IN><TEXT>One Solution for the Jobless:Make Them Business Owners---By Steven P. GalanteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal11/30/87WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)LABORSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)CONGRESS (CNG)   AMERICA'S small-business boom has provided inspiration to Europe's economic policymakers for much of the past decade. Now, federal and state officials in the U.S. are returning the compliment by copying European programs designed to turn unemployed workers into entrepreneurs.    The U.S. efforts are modeled after British and French programs that allow laid-off workers to receive government benefits if they start or buy a business. In Britain, the benefit takes the form of a &quot;self-employment allowance&quot; of about $70 a week for up to 52 weeks. In France, a displaced worker can collect a lump-sum payment of between $880 and $15,800 for a grubstake.    The U.S. currently prohibits states from paying out unemployment insurance funds for anything but temporary benefits to someone who is unemployed and actively looking for work. But with the European models in mind, this restriction is being challenged. Michigan, New Jersey and Massachusetts are studying ways of using unemployment insurance benefits to help idled workers launch businesses. One possibility would be to allow them to continue receiving payments while they prepare business plans rather than look for jobs.    The state of Washington will test another approach next year. It will encourage 400 laid-off workers to start their own businesses by giving them lump-sum payments of up to $6,000. The money will come from a Labor Department grant rather than from one of the unemployment insurance trust funds, so it won't violate the federal ban. But if it creates lasting new businesses, the project may lead to amendment of the U.S. restrictions, says Robert E. Friedman, president of the Corporation for Enterprise Development, a nonprofit economic development organization in Washington, D.C.    THE IDEA is encountering strong resistance, though. The AFL-CIO argues that the trust funds don't even provide sufficient conventional benefits to those who need them and therefore shouldn't be tapped to finance new businesses.    Employer groups, too, aren't enthusiastic. The average idled worker collects benefits for about 14 weeks before going back to work. But most of the proposals for making lump-sum payments to turn unemployed workers into entrepreneurs call for basing the payments on the maximum allowable benefit period. In most states that's 26 weeks. &quot;You're almost doubling the cost of the program,&quot; notes a researcher at the National Foundation for Unemployment Compensation andamp; Workers' Compensation, which has close ties to corporate employers.    Small-business groups are concerned that the plan simply subsidizes new competition. Says David Stephenson, a legislative analyst for the National Federation of Independent Business: &quot;You'd be taxing an employer to finance a former employee who is probably going to use the skills he's most familiar with to set up a competing business.&quot;    Nevertheless, support for the idea is spreading. Legislation to create several demonstration projects similar to the one in Washington state already has passed the House of Representatives and is pending in the Senate.    &quot;My feeling is that right now, when you have an economy changing as rapidly as ours, you have a lot of unemployed people with very marketable skills,&quot; says Rep. Ron Wyden, the Oregon Democrat who sponsored the bill. &quot;Those people are ideal for participating in something like this.&quot;    ---   Raising Seed Capital May Get Simpler   Federal and state securities laws for a long time have made it difficult, if not impossible, for young companies to raise seed capital through public stock offerings. Now, progress is being made toward establishing a relatively simple way for small companies to raise up to $500,000 by selling stock.    At present, a business that wants to issue shares in more than one state generally must register the offering with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is costly, or seek an SEC exemption, which can limit the number and kinds of investors in a company.    Several years ago, the SEC created a special exemption for small businesses, but for that exemption to be really useful, it was necessary for the states to establish a simple, uniform mechanism for registering such issues -- and they dragged their feet.    Now, a panel of the American Bar Association has drawn up a simplified registration statement, and the ABA is urging states to adopt it. While the statement would contain information relevant to investors, its requirements are much less demanding than those of the SEC.    The ABA panel hopes to win an endorsement of the proposed registration statement at the April conference of the North American Securities Administrators Association, which represents securities regulators from all 50 states, as well as Canada and Mexico. That would encourage states to adopt it and open the way for multistate offerings by start-up companies.    There are still some hurdles, though. Some members of the securities association are uncomfortable with two aspects of the ABA proposal. One eliminates the need for the issuing company to provide investors with audited financial statements. The other requires state regulators to apply less-stringent standards in reviewing small-business issues than they do in examining other offerings. </TEXT></DOC>