<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880302-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ APPEARED close to deciding to resume a Mideast peace mission.    The secretary of state met for three hours in London with Jordan's King Hussein, who expressed interest in Shultz's effort to arrange Arab-Israeli peace talks, a U.S. official said. The monarch didn't directly endorse the U.S. initiative, aimed at ending recent unrest in the Israeli-occupied territories. Shultz, who would return to the Mideast tomorrow following a NATO summit in Brussels, said he detected a narrowing of Arab-Israeli differences, but reported little substantive progress.    Peres said Israel is willing to exchange parts of the occupied areas for peace. In the West Bank, Israeli soldiers raided a hospital, arresting two Arabs.    ---   THE SOVIET UNION IMPOSED a curfew in Sumgait to curb ethnic unrest.    Troops and armored cars patrolled the streets of the industrial city in Azerbaijan, where rioting erupted Sunday over a territorial dispute concerning an Armenian-dominated region in the republic. A Communist Party official indicated that the overnight curfew, believed to be the first military-supervised restrictions in the Soviet Union in almost 30 years, would continue until the situation was fully under control.    A Moscow official suggested the recent unrest in Sumgait and protests in Soviet Armenia were caused by &quot;mistakes&quot; made 65 years ago.    ---   Violence flared in Panama City as suspected paramilitary gunmen wounded two people as a protest strike against Noriega entered its second day. The nationwide general strike appeared to be gaining support. Meanwhile, the country's new president, Manuel Solis Palma, accused the U.S. of trying to undermine his government.    Ousted President Delvalle urged Panamanian embassies to refrain from transferring payments to the government and proposed a freeze on Panama's assets in the U.S. In Washington, Reagan announced that Panama and three other countries -- Afghanistan, Iran and Syria -- haven't cooperated with U.S. efforts to stop drug smuggling.    ---   Reagan arrived in Belgium for a two-day NATO summit, beginning today, designed to bolster Western alliance unity as U.S.-Soviet arms talks go forward. The president assured the 15 other member nations that U.S. troops would remain in Europe, and urged NATO to continue its policy of maintaining peace from a position of armed strength.    ---   South Africa intensified its crackdown on anti-apartheid groups, proposing a bill to outlaw foreign funding for political activity. The legislation, expected to be adopted during Parliament's current session, could cripple some opposition organizations. Pretoria last week banned 17 anti-apartheid groups from engaging in political activity.    ---   Bush defeated Dole in Vermont's GOP primary. With 89% of the vote counted, the vice president had 49% to the Kansas senator's 39%. Dukakis easily won the Democratic race, taking 56% of the vote. Jackson finished second with 27%.    ---   Kidnappers in Lebanon said Marine Lt. Col. Higgins would be put on &quot;trial&quot; for spying, according to a statement given to a Western news agency. The abductors said the head of a U.N. observer team had been trying to arrange a U.S.-Israeli &quot;deal&quot; in Lebanon. Meanwhile, two Scandinavian hostages were freed unharmed near Beirut.    ---   Iraq fired surface-to-surface missiles on Tehran, continuing attacks that began Monday. At least 27 people have been killed and 100 others injured in the two-day assault, the heaviest attack in the eight-year-old Persian Gulf war. Iran retaliated by firing two missiles that struck Baghdad, killing or injuring an unspecified number of people.    ---   Afghan leaders would be willing to step down for the sake of peace, the country's foreign minister said. The remarks came on the eve of U.N.-mediated talks between Afghanistan and Pakistan. The indirect peace negotiations are aimed at permitting the early withdrawal of an estimated 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that immigration officials generally aren't required to reconsider a deportation case when the alien says he has new evidence to support his bid for asylum. The 8-0 decision, which makes it easier for the U.S. to deport aliens, was a defeat for a California man seeking to avoid deportation to his native Ghana.    ---   Surgeon General Koop said he was concerned about the spread of the AIDS virus among teen-agers, and expressed outrage at suggestions that the disease can't be spread through heterosexual intercourse. Koop, speaking before a presidential AIDS commission, reiterated his call for education programs beginning in elementary school.    ---   Dutch authorities seized as much as 3,500 pounds of chemical weapons destined for Iran. Officials said the arms were confiscated in Rotterdam at the request of the U.S. The ship left the U.S. with stated plans to sail to West Germany but changed its destination to Iran. Both Iran and Iraq have been accused of using chemical weapons.    ---   Died: Thomas S. Nichols, 78, former chairman of Olin Corp., in Baltimore County, Md. </TEXT></DOC>