<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Japanese Executive, Bosses and BrokerDispute Responsibility for Huge Losses---By Kathryn GravenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><DATELINE> AKO, Japan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The man who handled Tateho Chemical Industries Co.'s money when it incurred ruinous losses in Japan's financial markets has surfaced to tell his side of the story.    Takaki Kobayashi, 40 years old, who dropped from sight before the losses were made public, met with a reporter from the Mainichi Shimbun last week in Osaka to deny reports that he alone was responsible for the loss of nearly 28 billion yen ($195.8 million) from trading in Japanese government-bond futures.    &quot;It's horrifying for them to say I did it alone,&quot; Mr. Kobayashi told the newspaper. Mr. Kobayashi said that he informed top management of his investment moves and that Nikko Securities Co., his main brokerage firm, ignored his orders to sell when the market started falling.    Mr. Kobayashi's former bosses and brokers were quick to refute his version of events. Tateho's president, Shigeru Senzaki, said in a statement that &quot;we regret to say there are points in Mr. Kobayashi's comments which aren't true.&quot; And Nikko Securities' managing director of the fixedincome department, Susumu Yamazaki, denied Mr. Kobayashi's accusations that the firm failed to execute any orders.    A detailed look at the way Mr. Kobayashi, a promising young executive, handled Tateho's money reveals that while the company's top management may have known generally about the type of his investments, it was in the dark about their magnitude. At the same time, Tateho's investment house mustered only a half-hearted attempt to rein in Mr. Kobayashi's excesses.    Tateho, the top Japanese maker of electro-fused magnesia for electric heaters, disclosed the losses on Sept. 2 and said it faced bankruptcy as a result. The news sent shock waves through world financial markets. Financial pundits said it reflected the enormous pressures that are being exerted on Japanese corporations to make money at any cost, especially by investing in the financial markets -- an activity known as &quot;zaitech,&quot; from the Japanese word for finance and the English word &quot;technique.&quot;    But the case also revealed how sheer sloppiness can lead to disaster.    Tateho's top management -- Tadashi Kawabe, the 79-year-old chairman, and Mr. Senzaki, the president, who is 57 -- weren't interested in managing the cash themselves.    Pleased with the returns Mr. Kobayashi was scoring through zaitech, company officials apparently were content to leave him to his own devices. According to the latest annual report, operating profit in the year ending last March 31 dropped 63% from the year before, to 186 million yen. But pretax profit rose 47%, to 2.65 billion yen.    Brokers and bankers who dealt with Mr. Kobayashi describe him as hard-working and smart. But it remains unclear just how well he understood the bond markets. The transaction that precipitated the fall, a 400 billion-yen investment in government-bond futures, was incredibly risky, amounting to more than Tateho's entire net worth.    &quot;That isn't zaitech, that's gambling,&quot; says Nobuhiko Nakamura, a spokesman for Taiyo Kobe Bank Ltd., Tateho's lead bank.    But Mr. Kobayashi told the Japanese newspaper that he wasn't gambling. He said he started buying bond futures in June on the advice of Nikko Securities. &quot;When our purchases reached over 400 billion yen, we thought about decreasing this a bit and instructed Nikko to sell. But Nikko didn't sell and instead advised us to take other measures. In the end, we lost out on the timing,&quot; he said.    Both Mr. Kawabe and Mr. Senzaki of Tateho maintain, however, that they hadn't any idea that Mr. Kobayashi invested so heavily in bond futures -- until it was too late. Soon after Mr. Kobayashi loaded up on three-month futures contracts in early June, the bond market plummeted.    At a news conference in early September in which he announced the losses, Mr. Kawabe apologized for the lack of internal controls, saying, &quot;We regret that our small, rural company caused problems even in the London and New York markets.&quot;    If Mr. Kobayashi gambled more than he could afford to lose, apparently his chief bankers weren't watching his activities closely enough. &quot;We didn't do enough checking on how the company used the money,&quot; says Mr. Nakamura of Taiyo Kobe.    Some analysts believe Tateho, a small, rural company, was vulnerable to the blandishments of big city brokers and got sucked into the excitement of the bull market. Besides relentless pitching of new investment opportunities, one way brokers can contribute to speculative investing is by failing to keep strict tabs on margin trading. Analysts say turning a blind eye to delinquent accounts is common practice here.    In the market for Japanese government-bond futures, for example, investors have to put up only 3% of the value of the futures contract. If the market drops more than 1%, the broker is supposed to tell the investor to deposit more funds.    In mid-July, after the bond market dropped substantially, Nikko Securities asked Tateho to make margin payments, according to Mr. Yamazaki, the managing director of the fixed-income trading department. Tateho made some effort to improve its margin balance after that, Mr. Yamazaki said.    But Mr. Yamazaki admits that Nikko wasn't adamant in exacting immediate payment from Tateho. He blames the permissiveness on the competition in the securities industry. &quot;If we make them pay and the market improves, the client will go somewhere else next time,&quot; he says.    Despite the apparently close ties between Tateho and its main bank and leading underwriter, both Taiyo Kobe Bank and Nikko Securities insist they didn't know the full extent of Tateho's losses until late August. Once they became aware of the financial crisis, they delayed disclosing details until Sept. 2 in order to buy time to work out a rehabilitation plan. More recently, Taiyo Kobe Bank and seven other banks agreed in principle to help Tateho cover payments and thereby keep it afloat.    As the company struggles to survive, it remains unclear why Mr. Kobayashi decided to come forward at this time. One possible reason is that he is reportedly under investigation for tax evasion. While Mr. Kobayashi didn't disclose all the details of his whereabouts for the past few weeks, he confirmed reports that he was hospitalized at the time the losses were announced. And despite company statements that they didn't know where he was, Mr. Kobayashi said he telephoned the company several times.    Meanwhile, Tateho employees are trying to adjust to life without zaitech. &quot;We always wanted to become a world-wide company, but not because of something like this,&quot;' says Yoshiaki Kashima, a middle-level manager. &quot;Now we will have to work overtime to get the company back on track.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>