<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870330-0001 </DOCNO><HL> New Stock Listings</HL><DD> 03/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> USC SAI ATW ESN APBI BFSB CWTS CROP FIRF HAKO MSAM NHEROFSB PXRE PRXS QFCI TODD UNSA XLGX CRR EBCOSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   Uslico Corp., based in Arlington, Va., will begin trading today on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol USC. The insurance and financial services holding company previously traded over the counter.    Consolidated Rail Corp. began trading last week on the Big Board under the symbol CRR. The Philadelphia-based freight railroad was formerly owned by the U.S. government.    Ehrlich Bober Financial Corp. will begin trading Wednesday on the American Stock Exchange under the symbol EB. The New York investment banking concern, through its principal unit, Ehrlich Bober andamp; Co., specializes in underwriting and trading municipal securities. The company previously traded over the counter.    Four new listings began trading on the American Stock Exchange last week.    Allstar Inns L.P., Santa Barbara, Calif., began trading depositary units under the symbol SAI. The company operates the Allstar Inns motel chain in the western and southwestern U.S.    Americus Trust for Merck Shares, New York, began trading units, prime and score portions under the symbols MKUWI, MKPWI, MKSWI, on a when-issued basis. The prime portion receives dividends, the score portion certain capital appreciation. The trust, sponsored by Americus Shareowner Service Corp., is issuing the units in exchange for shares of Merck andamp; Co. stock.    ATandamp;E Corp., San Francisco, began trading under the symbol ATW. The company, which makes voice and data communications equipment, previously traded over the counter.    Escagen Corp., San Carlos, Calif., began trading under the symbol ESN. The company applies plant biotechnology to develop food products and planting materials.    Fifteen new listings began trading over the counter recently.    Applied Bioscience International Inc., an East Millstone, N.J.-based toxicological testing company, began trading under the symbol APBI.    Bristol Federal Savings Bank, Bristol, Conn., began trading under the symbol BFSB.    Country Wide Transport Services Inc., a Pomona, Calif.-based trucking company, began trading under the symbol CWTS.    Crop Genetics International, a Hanover, Md.-based agricultural biotechnology company, began trading under the symbol CROP.    First Financial Savings Association, Downingtown, Pa., began trading under the symbol FIRF.    Hako Minutement Inc., based in Addison, Ill., began trading under the symbol HAKO. The company makes commercial and industrial vacuums, floor and carpet care equipment and chemical cleaning and coating products.    Marsam Pharmaceuticals Inc., Cherry Hill, N.J., began trading under the symbol MSAM. The company develops, manufactures and markets injectable generic prescription drug products.    National Heritage Inc., based in Dallas, began trading under the symbol NHER. The company operates intermediate and skilled long-term care facilities, providing nursing care to individuals who don't require the services of an acute-care facility.    Oriental Federal Savings Bank, Humacao, Puerto Rico, began trading under the symbol OFSB.    Phoenix Re Corp., a Hartford, Conn.-based reinsurance company, began trading under the symbol PXRE. The company will be 33%-owned by Phoenix Mutual Life Insurance Co.    Praxis Biologics Inc., based in Rochester, N.Y., began trading under the symbol PRXS. The company develops and manufactures vaccines.    Quality Food Centers Inc., a Bellevue, Wash.-based supermarket chain, began trading under the symbol QFCI.    Todd-AO Corp., a San Francisco-based sound studio business, began trading under the symbol TODD.    United Savings andamp; Loan Association Inc., Greenwood, S.C., began trading under the symbol UNSA.    Xylogics Inc., based in Burlington, Mass., began trading under the symbol XLGX. The company makes disk and tape controllers for computer systems. </TEXT></DOC>