<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880712-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- Business and Finance </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   CENTRAL BANKS AGREED for the first time on uniform capital requirements for banks from the 12 leading industrial nations. The new standard calls for internationally active banks to have capital equal to 8% of their assets by the end of 1992. The agreement came after West Germany reluctantly made concessions.    International bankers are worried that the new capital rules will further hinder their competitiveness against other financial institutions, particularly investment banks and insurers.    ---   A huge drought-relief bill is expected to win congressional approval and be signed by Reagan as early as this month. The package, which may be introduced in Congress today, could cost up to $5.5 billion in the current fiscal year, economists say.    Soybean and corn futures plunged following weekend rains in the Midwest and forecasts for more rain this week. Still, the expected rainfall isn't expected to break the drought.    ---   The SEC charged Continental Can Chairman Donald Sturm with helping a friend trade on inside data about a takeover Sturm learned about from a daughter employed at Drexel Burnham. Sturm settled the suit without admitting or denying the charges.    ---   The Pentagon will lift its payments freeze on contracts tarnished by the unfolding procurement scandal. The move ends a 10-day cutoff that had sparked industry fears of a broad slowdown in military business.    ---   Oil prices fell sharply, though a possible meeting by OPEC's pricing committee could help stabilize prices. Stocks and bonds edged up in reaction to the drop by commodities, though trading was light. The dollar ended little changed in New York trading.    ---   Northwest Airlines cut discount fares for travel between some small and midsized cities, mainly in the East. Though several carriers said they would match the cuts, relatively few markets will be affected.    ---   Knight-Ridder agreed to acquire Lockheed's Dialog Information Services unit for $353 million, greatly expanding its presence in the electronic information retrieval business.    ---   Salomon Brothers offered its first detailed investment strategy since the departure of Henry Kaufman, warning that huge U.S. budget and trade deficits will continue.    ---   Micron Technology said President Juan Benitez and chief financial officer Leslie Gill resigned for personal reasons, raising questions among observers of the microchip maker.    ---   Advanced Micro Devices posted a nearly five-fold rise in quarterly profit, but investor concern about the firm's prospects sent its stock lower.    ---   Eastern Air's pilots union offered work-rule concessions as part of a comprehensive contract proposal on economic and seniority issues.    ---   A dispute over Aloha Air's maintenance record is likely to be aired as public hearings open into the April 28 accident involving a Boeing 737.    ---   Markets --   Stocks: Volume 123,300,000 shares. Dow Jones industrials 2111.31, up 5.16; transportation 890.83, up 1.64; utilities 178.64, up 0.12.    Bonds: Shearson Lehman Treasury index 1227.37, up 3.60.    Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 139.08, off 1.71; spot index 135.04, off 2.82.    Dollar: 133.16 yen, off 0.19; 1.8424 marks, up 0.0009. </TEXT></DOC>