<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Economic VowsBy Bonn, TokyoArouse Doubts---U.S. Trading Partners MadeToken Gestures to BakerIn Paris, Analysts Assert---By Thomas F. O'Boyle and Bernard Wysocki Jr.Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Only days after West Germany and Japan pledged to stimulate their economies, analysts are saying they expect very little to change.    As part of a Paris agreement by finance ministers of the six major industrialized powers to stabilize exchange rates, Tokyo and Bonn promised over the weekend to reduce their trade surpluses by reinvigorating their economies.    But the Japanese simply repeated bland assurances that they will introduce a stimulative package soon, analysts say. And the only West German innovation, a decision to double the size of a 1988 tax cut to about $10 billion, won't have much impact, they contend.    The Paris agreement &quot;is disappointing in the sense that the West German authorities were less forthcoming than many had hoped,&quot; says John Lipsky, an international economist at Salomon Brothers Inc. &quot;In the case of Japan, the measures discussed remain vague. It's unlikely that any action would have a material impact in 1987.&quot;    Felix W. Zulauf, a first vice president and chief global investment strategist for Union Bank of Switzerland in Zurich, describes the Paris meeting as a &quot;nonevent.&quot;    &quot;You can't improve today's foreign exchange market by making a nice statement,&quot; he says. &quot;You've got to show action -- not intervention but changes in German monetary policy -- and I don't see that yet.&quot;    Thus, despite their efforts to appear conciliatory at the Paris talks, both of America's key trading partners actually demonstrated their determination to resist U.S. blandishments to reflate their economies. Such a policy change, sought by U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker for more than a year, would presumably bolster demand for U.S. goods in those countries.    This would ease the huge U.S. trade deficit, which totaled $170 billion last year, compared with surpluses of $63 billion for West Germany and $89 billion for Japan.    Those two countries are unwilling to make major adjustments to their own carefully crafted fiscal plans right now, analysts say, and will alter course later this year only if their economies show signs of flagging dangerously.    But U.S. analysts say Sunday's accord was significant less for the economic stimulus promised by Germany and Japan than for the commitment they made to help reduce trade imbalances. &quot;The fact is that the Japanese and West German commitments are new,&quot; a Treasury spokesman said in Washington.    Japan's decision Friday to lower its discount rate one-half percentage point to a record low 2.5% was designed to help stabilize the yen and &quot;promote steady expansion of domestic demand,&quot; according to the Bank of Japan's governor, Satoshi Sumita. It was the fifth cut since January.    But loosening the monetary strings a bit will have a negligible effect on the economy, analysts say. Japan is already awash in funds, so interest-rate changes are unlikely to modify consumer behavior.    More fundamentally, the powerful bureaucrats in the Ministry of Finance zealously oppose fiscal stimulation. Known as the &quot;money mafia,&quot; they have single-mindedly pursued an austerity policy aimed at narrowing the huge budget deficit.    So far, they've stood up to the advocates of relaxation. Last fall, for example, politicians in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party promised to raise publicworks spending, but the budget for the fiscal year beginning in April actually called for a slight reduction in such outlays.    And the current tax-overhaul effort in Japan could produce a tax increase if a sales-tax proposal, backed by Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, goes through.    Prior to the Paris talks, Mr. Nakasone said he would announce yet another economic-stimulus package soon. But analysts doubt it will make much of a dent on the economy, especially as the tax structure is designed to restrain domestic demand.    This week, leading Japanese politicians, including Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, have called for new stimulative steps. Some top officials in the Foreign Ministry and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry are also known to favor such a course.    However, analysts doubt they will make any headway against the entrenched bureaucracy in the Finance Ministry or against Prime Minister Nakasone.    The West Germans appear just as determined as the Japanese to go their own way. With the lowering of interest rates by the Bundesbank last month, about the only action left to them is to cut taxes.    But the newly elected government's coalition partners didn't make Mr. Baker's economic-stimulation desires a consideration in their recent tax-policy negotiations, according to several people who sat in on the talks.    &quot;It hasn't been an issue,&quot; says Ludolf von Wartenberg, a member of the West German parliament and the parliamentary finance spokesman for the ruling Christian Democratic party. &quot;We don't believe (artificial measures) are the right way to stimulate our economy,&quot; he adds.    The partners agreed to tax relief equivalent to around $24 billion, the deepest tax cuts in West Germany's history. But they deferred implementation of most of the package until 1990, one year later than their original goal.    They also brought forward about $5 billion in cuts to next January, following up on Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg's pledge in Paris. Added to a previously decided 1988 tax-reduction package of the same magnitude, that will put an extra $10 billion in consumers' pockets next year.    Even so, the money represents only a little more than a 1% increase in their disposable income -- some of which the frugal Germans will save, not spend. Indeed, some pundits are already belittling Germany's much-touted tax overhaul as &quot;steuerreformchen&quot; (which roughly translated means a measly change).    &quot;This won't change the growth prospects of the German economy,&quot; says economist Alfed Boss, a tax expert at the Institute for World Economics in Kiel.    Washington had wanted Bonn to move up the 1988 tax reductions, but there was &quot;no chance at all&quot; that would happen, according to a senior economic adviser to Chancellor Helmut Kohl.    Political analysts in both Germany and Japan contend neither government will change its cautious policies until it is confronted with irrefutable evidence that the economy is faltering.    Some preliminary evidence points in that direction. This month, the Bundesbank reported virtual stagnation in Germany's economic activity in the fourth quarter of last year. Some institutes are predicting that price-adjusted economic output will fall about 1% in the current quarter.    And a confidential Economics Ministry report, prepared for Minister Martin Bangemann and leaked to the press, recommends that steps to spur the economy be considered in April if production and order-inflow figures continue to show big declines.    Likewise, Japanese sources say some sort of emergency fiscal package would probably emerge if the economy flashes too many danger signals. Already, they note, growth is sluggish, in part because of the yen's surge.    A rapid restructuring of Japanese industry could lead to a further slowdown. For now, experts are split over the issue of whether the economy has &quot;bottomed out&quot; or will get worse as 1987 progresses.    It's also far from clear whether Japan's trade surplus will start shrinking. Only yesterday, Tetsuo Kondo, director-general of the Economic Planning Agency, said the volume of exports grew by 5.9% in January from the previous month while a recent increase in imports came to a halt. </TEXT></DOC>