<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881010-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Has the Bull Just Been Sleeping? </HL><AUTHOR> Max G. Ansbacher </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK </IN><TEXT>   Most commentators have concluded that stock prices were so high in August that they inevitably brought about a crash that ended the bull market. The price-earnings ratio was 22.1, certainly high. But compare prices at the end of other bull markets: for instance, in 1961 the Dow Jones P-E reached 24.2. The Dow then climbed another 32% in the next four years after a falloff of its own in 1962.    And looking at the Dow Jones does not tell the whole story. In August 1987 it happened that many of the Dow stocks were those with the highest P-Es. But this has not always been the case in the past. In 1969 when the Dow had a P-E of 17, IBM (not then in the Dow) was 42 times earnings, Xerox was at 48 times, Avon 57 times, and Polaroid was actually at 71 times its earnings. Did August even begin to compare?    Another important method of telling whether the stock market is overpriced is to compare the total value of stocks with the nominal gross national product. At the August peak the value of stocks was 95% of GNP. This is high, but at the 1929 market peak it was 170% of GNP. For the market to have been that high in August, the Dow would have been at 4,627.    Another method of determining how high prices are is to take a previous high and adjust it for inflation. In 1966 the Dow hit an intra-day high of 1,001. Adjusting that figure for inflation today gives approximately 3,540, or a full 30% above the August peak.    Thus three significant stock-price indicators show that prices were not so high in August that the bull market had to come to an end. But the reasons to doubt the current bear-market consensus go beyond that line of analysis.    In the classic model, a bull market flourishes when money flows into the market. This pulls up prices, which attracts more money and increases the supply of stocks. As prices rise, the process intensifies, with additional stock issues and frenzied buying until all the money that can possibly flow into the market has done so. At that point, when the demand dries up and the supply is mushrooming, the bull market comes to an end. August 1987 was far from this model.    Instead of all the money flowing into the market, institutions had heavy cash positions all during the summer. Stock mutual funds never got to less than 9% cash. And in most large institutions, the assets were evenly balanced between stocks and bonds. As the market went higher in 1987 more and more institutions began to sell. In August, Forbes magazine's column on institutional investing noted that most managers were raising cash by selling stock.    If institutions were selling, were the individual investors the big buyers? Actually many had been turned off by the decline of the small high-technology stocks after 1983, and the high volatility of the market. The common belief was that individuals were turning to professionals and investing through mutual funds. But they were not doing this at an accelerating pace. According to the Investment Company Institute, purchases of stock mutual funds peaked in April 1987 and were about half that much for May, June, July and August. But even more interesting is that from January through August the public bought $29.4 billion of stock mutual funds, and $50.2 billion of bond and income stock funds. Hardly the type of speculative behavior one expects at the peak of a bull market.    Perhaps one of the clearest signs of a classic market top is the tremendous appetite of investors for any type of stock. In 1929 huge amounts of investment trusts were issued, often with 3-to-1 leverage. They usually sold at large premiums to the value of their underlying assets, and sometimes sold for twice as much. Compare this with the mutual funds of today: There is no leverage, and open-end mutual funds by definition sell at net asset value. But the closed-end funds could sell at a premium. Did they in 1987? Despite bearing the names of the top market advisers, such as Allmon, Zwieg and Gabelli, they generally sank to a discount.    We've been told that the real greed showed up not in the stock market itself, but in the options market. On the day when the market reached its high, the most popular stock index had 365,207 calls in existence and 599,500 puts. Thus at the very peak of the market, options traders were more concerned about the market going down than going up. Hardly an indication of all-out greed. Furthermore, the relative prices of the puts and calls on that date show that people were paying 16% more for puts than for comparable calls, another indication that investors were not carried away with the bull market.    But perhaps the most meaningful test of the top of a bull market is to examine who has been buying and who has been selling. Near the top of any major bull market the professionals and the corporations are offering stock and the institutions and individuals are grabbing it. It is during these times that the Greater Fool Theory arises. This states that when stock prices get very high, the buyers know that they are too high based upon any rational evaluation, but that doesn't bother them, because they believe that with a rising market the prices will go even higher, and they will be able to sell at a higher price to an even greater fool than they are. The last person is the greatest fool because he pays the highest price, after which the stock plunges to its true value.    At first glance it might seem that there were stocks like that in 1987; stocks that were above their normal valuation but were eagerly bought anyway. Those were the takeover stocks. They were certainly the fad of the '87 bull market. All you had to do was to learn that one of the famous raiders was rumored to have taken a position in a stock, and the fun was on. But this fad had one big difference from the usual Greater Fool Theory.    The people who were expected to eventually buy the stock were not the greater fools. In fact they were exactly the opposite. They were the most knowledgeable, sophisticated, best-capitalized and best-informed investors. They were either the actual managers of the corporation who presumably knew the true value of the stock better than any outsider, or professional investors who made a great deal of money because they knew the value of the underlying corporation.    Furthermore, the last purchaser was not hoping to sell it to someone else for a higher price. He actually wanted to acquire the stock because he wanted the corporation. Where the Greater Fool Theory is predicated upon the price of a stock being above its true value, the takeover artists were buying the stock precisely because they believed that the stock price was below its true value. A strange activity if this was a drastically overpriced stock market.    This takeover fad was no small item. In fact it drastically altered the amount of stock available. Generally in a bull market the supply of stock increases, as corporations sell stock to take advantage of the high prices. This supply is decreased by any corporate repurchases, mergers, leveraged buy-outs or takeovers. According to figures supplied by the Federal Reserve Board, the bull market of 1982 produced an increase in the supply of stock of $10 billion, and in 1983 of $35 billion. But then a strange thing happened. In 1984 so much stock was bought up that the supply decreased by almost $80 billion. In 1985 it contracted by more than $80 billion, in 1986 by even more, and tentative evidence suggests it continued to shrink in the first eight months of 1987.    How strange. In a major bull market the supply of stock was actually decreasing instead of increasing. Could it be that these savvy professionals were buying stock right up to the end of the bull market when it is the most overpriced? And that the individual investors and institutions, which at the peaks of past bull markets had been buying stock with both hands, had this time become so smart that they were selling stock at the perfect time? On Wall Street anything is possible, but it would certainly be unusual.    Alternatively, we must consider whether August 1987 wasn't the end of a bull market. Instead, it may have been an intermediate top followed by a major drop and the consolidation of the last year.    ---   Mr. Ansbacher is an associate director at Bear Stearns andamp; Co. in New York. </TEXT></DOC>