<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870611-0098 </DOCNO><HL> By Gary PutkaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   {First of two articles on the defense of Europe.}    BONN, West Germany -- In matters of war and peace, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is looking for a few new ideas.    Since 1979, NATO has pursued a policy of deploying mid-range nuclear missiles in Europe to get the Soviet Union to take arms control seriously. Now that a U.S.-Soviet accord cutting the superpowers' missiles in Europe appears near, NATO's old policy verges on success.    But its implications could be ominous: Soviet-bloc advantages in conventional arms will loom even more menacing after the missiles go, yet the West has no plan to spend more on conventional arms or to negotiate cuts in such arms. In its search for new defense and arms-control strategies, the Western alliance is stumbling badly.    &quot;We are groping for a strategy and we have no time to lose,&quot; says Horst Teltschik, the top security adviser to West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. &quot;What are our main defense policies? What are our concerns? And how does it all fit into arms control?&quot;    Meanwhile, Soviet Premier Mikhail Gorbachev holds the initiative. Without a strategy for seizing the lead from Mr. Gorbachev, Western European policy makers fear that unilateral-disarmament movements will grow stronger while transatlantic divisions deepen. According to a recent Gallup poll, more Britons believe that the U.S. will start a nuclear war than believe that the Soviet Union will. Another European survey found West Germans agreeing by 2 to 1 that Mr. Gorbachev is doing more for arms control than President Reagan.    An accord on missiles in Europe moved a step closer last week when the West German government conditionally endorsed the so-called zero-zero option, which has been broadly agreed to by Washington and Moscow. Under it, the U.S. and the Soviet Union would scrap their intermediate-range land-based missiles in Europe -- those with ranges of 300 to 3,300 miles. NATO would still keep, all told, about 4,000 nuclear bombs, artillery shells, shorter-range rockets and sea-based missiles in Europe, not counting French and British arsenals outside allied command. The U.S. says the Soviets would retain a much larger nuclear force in Europe, but estimates of its size vary widely.    Official NATO endorsement of the zero-zero, or double-zero, idea -- the name derives from the fact that the plan would scrap the superpowers' European missiles in two separate classes -- is expected at a meeting in Reykjavik, Iceland, that begins today. Some issues remain to be worked out, but U.S. and Soviet officials already talk of a signing ceremony at a possible superpower summit this fall.    But what then? Ideas for a NATO follow-up, military or diplomatic, are as varied as the competing national interests within the alliance.    --NATO planners are talking about adding nuclear weapons in categories not covered by an accord as a substitute for the departing missiles. These might include more sea-based missiles under NATO command, modernized short-range missiles, or airplanes with nuclear weapons. But West Germany, where more land-based weapons might make the most strategic sense, doesn't want to take them on alone and increase its already abundant targets.    --Mr. Gorbachev has proposed talks to reduce nuclear weapons with ranges below 300 miles. Britain and the U.S. want no negotiations on this for now, fearing that the conventional imbalance would become even more dangerous. But West Germany, where most of the West's short-range weapons are, wants such negotiations immediately.    --Both NATO and the East bloc indicate they want to replace stalled talks on conventional-arms control with a new forum covering more countries. But four months of talks in Vienna about starting new talks have gone nowhere because of a Western squabble. The U.S. and other NATO countries want to deal alliance-to-alliance; France, which isn't in NATO's military command, wants each nation to speak for itself in a forum linked to existing arms talks.    --In Geneva, the Soviets have edged close to accepting a British proposal for verification measures in United Nations talks on controlling chemical weapons like nerve gas. But the U.S. doesn't think the British proposal goes far enough.    &quot;NATO has no unified position on what force levels it feels comfortable with or what it would like to be the final outcome of any arms-control talks,&quot; says James Steinberg, an analyst at London's International Institute for Strategic Studies. &quot;The real question is, does NATO need a new strategy?&quot;    Even if some of the differences are patched over in Reykjavik, analysts and West European government officials see a troubled time ahead for the alliance. Trade and economic tensions between the U.S. and Europe are growing. Budgetary pressures and local anti-nuclear sentiment have forced smaller NATO members such as Belgium and the Netherlands to reduce alliance commitments. Congressional resentment of low West European defense spending, meanwhile, has never been greater, prompting more calls for U.S. troop pullouts from Europe.    &quot;I can see a host of political difficulties ahead,&quot; says Malcolm Spaven, the director of the Armament and Disarmament Information Unit at Britain's University of Sussex. &quot;We're on the verge of a whole new era of debate on what constitutes sufficient deterrence in Europe.&quot;    The 16-nation Atlantic alliance has always had trouble deciding how much -- or how little -- firepower it needs. NATO pledged to match East-bloc troop levels in 1952 but gave up soon thereafter, concluding that, in peacetime, the democratic West could never divert resources to arms the way the East could. So the alliance adopted the doctrine of &quot;massive retaliation,&quot; in which conventional Soviet aggression would be met by an annihilating U.S. nuclear strike.    By 1967, the Soviets could annihilate the U.S., so NATO moved to its present strategy of &quot;flexible response.&quot; Under this doctrine, conventional forces form the first line of defense; if they fail, the U.S. nuclear guarantee still applies.    Now, each leg of the &quot;triad&quot; of forces underpinning flexible response -- conventional forces, strategic nuclear forces such as intercontinental missiles, and shorter-range nuclear weapons -- appears open for negotiation because of recent Soviet arms-control moves. Thus, Western leaders are being forced into a reappraisal. &quot;It isn't a question of abandoning flexible response,&quot; says one West German official. &quot;It's a question of whether we need to do anything to make it more credible.&quot;    Some Europeans fret that the U.S. not only will seal an accord on intermediate-range missiles but also will agree to the 50% cut in intercontinental warheads discussed in last year's Reykjavik talks between Mr. Gorbachev and President Reagan. Each deal would mean fewer warheads to hit Soviet military targets that pose a threat to Europe. &quot;The U.S. is negotiating away the security of Europe,&quot; complains one alarmed French government aide.    One European response could be more self-reliance. France and Germany have stepped up military operations together, while NATO's main European members have revived joint defense-policy talks. More recently, Europe's two nuclear powers, Britain and France, have discussed closer strategic cooperation. After last year's Reagan-Gorbachev meeting in Reykjavik, says a British official, Anglo-French talks &quot;have gotten more serious.&quot;    An idea under discussion in London and Paris is a jointly developed airplane-launched nuclear missile. France currently builds all its nuclear weapons, while Britain relies chiefly on U.S.-designed nuclear submarines.    Alan Lee Williams, a former top British defense aide, says he is certain that the two nations are coordinating nuclear targeting more these days, but neither will officially discuss this. Mr. Williams notes that British Defense Minister George Younger and French defense officials have stepped up official visits recently with no obvious explanation. He and other analysts have urged France and Britain to integrate their nuclear forces into NATO military planning, but so far this idea is being resisted. &quot;They want to avoid pressure to bring their systems into arms-control discussion,&quot; says one West German official.    Defense planners in the U.S. and Europe also worry that Western conventional defenses will become less effective because of flat spending plans in many nations and demographic trends for draft-age men in Western Europe, which provides 90% of NATO's manpower on the continent. Analysts estimate that West Germany, for instance, will have only 250,000 19-year-old males in 1994, about 55% of the current level.    The East bloc already has bigger numbers. Western estimates vary, but Britain says the Warsaw Pact fields about 50,000 tanks in Europe, giving it a 3-to-1 advantage over NATO, and 7,700 military aircraft vs. 4,300. On the central European front, the comparisons are better for the West.    Defense policy makers see no prospect of a major Western arms buildup to redress these imbalances after a U.S.-Soviet missiles accord. The U.S., Britain and West Germany, NATO's three biggest contributors, plan flat or declining defense spending for the next year or more because of overall budgetary pressures.    If new conventional-arms talks begin, the U.S. has some fresh ideas for altering the balance of power. U.S. officials say they would shy away from past, unsuccessful attempts to force Soviet disclosure of troop and weapons levels as a prelude to reductions. Instead, the U.S. intends to focus on reducing the East bloc's capability for surprise attack by proposing mutual ceilings on a wide range of offensive equipment, such as tanks and river-crossing gear, followed by disclosure of armies' locations.    But analysts are skeptical of the chances of success because the West may have few negotiating chips. Most Western analyses show East-bloc superiority in virtually every arms category. &quot;The truth is we have very little to give the Soviets in conventional arms talks,&quot; says Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a former member of the U.S. National Security Council. &quot;But if Mr. Gorbachev is serious about reducing the abilility to launch surprise attacks, he shouldn't mind imbalanced reductions.&quot;    What the Soviets might like -- Western nuclear reductions in exchange for conventional reductions -- doesn't seem likely. Until 1979, the West had offered to reduce battlefield nuclear warheads by 1,000 in a package that sought a pullout of over 4,000 East-bloc tanks. But U.S. negotiators say that after a U.S.-Soviet missiles agreement, NATO won't be in a position to make any further nuclear cuts. </TEXT></DOC>