<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Fading Barrier:Germans Are DebatingAn Unthinkable Idea:Removing Berlin Wall---With Travel Already Eased,Glasnost and PragmatismCould Lead to Next Step---Would Bonn Desert NATO?---By Thomas F. O'BoyleStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FREST </IN><DATELINE> WEST BERLIN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Some facts about the Berlin Wall: It is a 13-foot-high scar of concrete and barbed wire that encircles this city. It stretches 103 miles, about the distance from New York to Philadelphia. It has denied freedom to millions of East Germans, 77 of whom have died trying to breach its defenses. It is now more than a quarter of a century old.    And it has long been regarded by Germans as an immutable part of their lives -- a given, something that is just there and thus not worth discussing. But that has changed; and now, it seems, everybody is talking about the wall. &quot;Young people in the East will rise up and fight it,&quot; says 20-year-old Jens Bernhardt, an East German who sneaked out of his guard tower and escaped to the West last July. He calls the wall an anachronism.    Not so, says a young taxi driver back in the East. He explains: &quot;The wall will only be torn down when we are as strong, economically, as West Berlin, and that will never happen.&quot;    That the fate of the wall is under discussion after all these years is striking. What is even more striking is that the discussion involves not just ordinary Germans on both sides of the barrier but also major leaders in the East and the West, including President Reagan.    &quot;I would be very surprised if there weren't an offer to dismantle the Berlin Wall in the next two years,&quot; says former British Foreign Secretary David Owen. &quot;It's such a ghastly symbol for them. I can't imagine the Soviets won't do away with it.&quot;    Only a few years ago, such talk would have been dismissed as dreamy fantasizing. But when President Reagan came to this city last June and challenged Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev to &quot;tear down this wall,&quot; few dismissed the president's words as meaningless rhetoric. Three months later, East German party boss Erich Honecker, who as chief of security presided over the construction of the wall in 1961, said during his first visit to West Germany that he foresaw a day &quot;when the border would no longer divide us but unite us.&quot; Since then, two Soviet officials, including Valentin Falin, the head of the Soviet news agency Novosti, have suggested that the Soviet Union might be prepared to do away with the wall.    Clearly, something is changing in Europe. It isn't that the wall is about to fall any time soon. But the seriousness with which serious Europeans discuss the prospect vividly underscores the impact on Western Europe of Mr. Gorbachev and his reform policies.    More and more West Europeans believe that the Soviet leader is determined to modernize his country's economy, which can be done only with major financial and technological help from Western nations. They further believe that huge flows of money and technology to the East will occur only if West Europeans are confident that what they provide won't be destroyed by hot war or, in effect, frozen by renewed cold war. As a result, these Europeans conclude that Mr. Gorbachev will take previously unthinkable steps to reduce tension and reassure Western Europe. Those steps are expected to include proposals for startlingly deep cuts in conventional weaponry in Europe, reductions in Soviet soldiers in Eastern Europe and maybe, just maybe, destruction of the wall.    Since it was erected in 1961 to block the flood of Germans -- then 200,000 a year -- from the Communist East to the democratic West, the wall has become a dramatic symbol of the division between East and West, between communism and democracy, between slavery and freedom. It has spawned a library of literature and become a ritualistic stopping point for Western leaders, who climb viewing platforms to peer over the wall at the drabness that is East Berlin.    The wall's very appearance reflects the contrasts in the two societies it has split apart. On the Western side, the wall is aflame with colorful graffiti, a testament to modern, worldly young West Berliners who keep their half of the city teeming until well after midnight. On the Eastern side, the wall is gray, like the silent streets and drab, bullet-ridden buildings left standing from the war. (A few months ago, in honor of Berlin's 750th birthday, one section of the wall along a major thoroughfare in the East was painted -- in two shades of gray.)    For East Berliners, the wall isn't merely a physical scar but a psychological one as well. With talk of reform and glasnost emanating from Moscow, many young East Berliners are becoming increasingly resentful of the restrictions it imposes. That frustration was evident last summer when students gathered at the wall and, in an act of unprecedented boldness in repressive East Germany, called on Mr. Gorbachev to &quot;do away with the wall.&quot;    Privately, high-ranking East German leaders are a lot more sensitive about the wall than a few years ago, says a West German official with close ties to the East. &quot;Two years ago (removal of the wall) was unthinkable,&quot; he says. &quot;But politicians in East Berlin have started to think about it. They are increasingly sensitive about its presence and the damage it does to their people.&quot;    Destruction of the wall almost certainly would wreak as much havoc as its construction did. For that reason, talk of removing the wall raises nervous concerns on both sides. &quot;It's a black eye, and Gorbachev certainly would like to be rid of it,&quot; says Robert Legvold, the director of Columbia University's Harriman Institute for Soviet Studies. &quot;But the Soviets would have to be convinced that the situation without the wall would be manageable.&quot;    There is some evidence it might be. In recent years there has been an explosion of East Germans traveling to the West. This year alone, three million East Germans, or one in five, will visit West Germany. And, significantly, fewer than 1% decide not to return.    While retirees have always had greater freedom to travel, until a few years ago only 40,000 East Germans under retirement age were granted visas. This year, some 1.2 million non-retired East Germans will be among the throng visiting the West.    There are other signs that East Berlin's stance on the border is more flexible now. The land mines and automatic shooting devices that once lined border zones have all been removed, West German officials say. Moreover, the shooting of escapees along the border has apparently stopped since the historic trip in September of Mr. Honecker.    &quot;In a metaphysical sense, the wall has already come a long way down,&quot; asserts Jerry Hough, an expert on Soviet affairs at the Brookings Institution in Washington. &quot;There is no wall on the flow of economic goods, and there's been a big increase in the flow of tourists. The East German leadership is clearly testing the waters through a loosening of controls.&quot;    However, many Berliners doubt that the wall will ever be removed. &quot;People want the wall to come down, but no one here seriously believes it is possible,&quot; says an East Berlin woman in her mid-40s who recalls the city before the wall was erected. &quot;It was possible to travel freely then,&quot; she says bitterly. Nevertheless, she adds, she understands why the wall exists -- and why it probably will remain: &quot;It's for reasons of economic necessity. It was built to preserve our society.&quot;    Some key Western officials are also deeply skeptical about the idea of a wallless Berlin. &quot;Unimaginable,&quot; is the way Horst Teltschik, a senior aide to Chancellor Helmut Kohl, describes the prospects for dismantling the wall. If the wall came down, he says, &quot;thousands of Germans would immediately leave East Berlin,&quot; thus re-creating the situation that prompted the wall's construction in the first place. And, he adds, even if the departures were largely confined to engineers and trained professionals, rather than large numbers of the general public, a brain drain would be unacceptable to the East.    It was precisely because East Germany was losing its best citizens that the communists decided in the summer of 1961 to erect a barrier between East and West Berlin. Overnight, on Aug. 13, the East Germans threw up a barbed-wire fence separating the two parts of the city; five days later, the communists began to replace the fence with a permanent concrete wall.    &quot;That period was as tense a time as we have had in East-West relations,&quot; says McGeorge Bundy, then President Kennedy's national-security adviser.    For the 40-odd years since World War II, Berlin has been the razor's edge of East-West relations. The Cold War began here in 1948 when the Soviets blockaded the city. And the construction of the wall in 1961 brought U.S. and Soviet tanks virtually snout to snout.    &quot;When I want the West to scream,&quot; Nikita Khrushchev once said, &quot;I squeeze on Berlin.&quot;    It is that sensitivity that makes the whole discussion about the dismantling of the wall so troubling to West German officials. Although in theory they would welcome it -- and any other enhancements of human rights for their fellow Germans in the East -- they cringe at the prospect of publicly discussing the subject. Such talk, they worry, might convince West Germans that an offer on the wall could be obtained by promising the Soviets West German neutrality.    Hence, talk of tearing down the wall could reignite Germany's considerable neutralist sentiment, which led to widespread peace protests earlier in this decade and which might lead to renewed domestic demands that Germany pull out of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. In short, officials in Bonn view the speculation about possible destruction of the wall as part of a Soviet propaganda campaign to heighten tensions between West Germany and its allies.    However, West German officials have been among the most active rumormongers. Several right-wingers who believe that the U.S. is jeopardizing Bonn's security by negotiating to withdraw land-based intermediate-range nuclear missiles from Europe have proposed that West Germany seek refuge in a reunified Germany.    The biggest bomb was dropped in late September, when Ottfried Henning, a senior official in the German Ministry for Inter-German Relations, said a panel of high-level Soviet officials was weighing a possible offer not on the wall but on a related issue. Mr. Henning said that the Soviets planned to promote a confederation between the two German states and that the panel included Mr. Falin, the head of Novosti. The day before, Mr. Falin had created a controversy of his own by appearing on West German television to say he could envision a situation in which there would be two German states without foreign troops on their territories. Curiously, neither the Soviet nor the West German government ever bothered officially to refute either statement.    Meanwhile, standing atop an observation stand overlooking the wall, Guenter Landes confronts the sheer enormity of the division between East and West.    &quot;It is a hideous, horrible thing. It's the price we pay for Hitler and the Nazis,&quot; Mr. Landes says. &quot;My brother lives in East Berlin. Our children hardly know each other.&quot; His eyes begin to water, but he goes on: &quot;I hope the wall will come down one day. But when I look at it, I can't imagine it will.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>