<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): The Problem --- Hungary Looks West: It Needs Money and Expertise And Wants to Join the European Market </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST JAPAN J.SUZ </CO><IN> TEL ELE EDP MON </IN><DATELINE> BUDAPEST, Hungary  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Hungary isn't exactly pushing the frontiers of technology, as anyone would discover if he tried a Hungarian telephone. Here the telephones click, buzz and whirr. They go dead in midconversation. They dial more busy signals than perhaps anywhere in the civilized world. The only thing good about Hungarian telephones, says one visitor, is that there are so few of them.    Which leads to a question: Can a country with a telephone system like this become a high-tech power within the East Bloc?    This nation of 10 million is betting that it can, and there are a few hopeful signs that it may be on the way.    Hungary has a new political leadership that is seeking more technological and trade ties with the capitalist countries and is encouraging joint ventures with the West as well as creation of new companies by domestic entrepreneurs. It is reopening the Budapest stock exchange, which has been closed since 1948. Ask Hungarians what they would like to become, economically speaking, and they will tell you they would like to be Sweden.    Though Hungarians don't want to be thought of as some kind of economic test tube for the East Bloc, that is in effect what they are. Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev made it clear last summer that he welcomes Hungary's new directions, and it's known that the Soviets hope that the results of Hungary's reforms will offer them some clues to solving their own economic problems.    However, in a nation where pessimism is something of a national pastime, the cafes along the Danube River are overflowing with people who have heard reformist talk before -- with no results. Although Hungary is showing some promise, that innate pessimism still appears to be justified.    At first blush, anyway, Hungary would seem to have some promising assets. One of its great strengths is its tradition of excellence in math and science, two foundation stones of a technological society. Hungary has produced some of the scientific giants of the modern age, from John von Neumann, who pioneered the development of computers, to Edward Teller, father of the H-bomb. Today, Hungarian schoolchildren score impressively on international tests of achievement in mathematics and physical sciences.    Under 57-year-old reformer Karoly Grosz, who last May swept longtime ruler Janos Kadar from office, the country's leadership is trying to clear away old impediments to economic and technological advance. It has already chopped some of Hungary's state-run enterprises into pieces, forcing them to compete with each other, and it seems willing to accept the inevitable failure of the weakest ones. The medical-equipment monopoly, for example, was sliced into 14 pieces, and it's expected that at least two of these will fail.    As of next January, the government will allow 100% foreign-owned companies to operate in Hungary, and foreign firms will be permitted to buy Hungarian ones. And Hungary, which has more than 100 joint ventures with capitalist firms already, is busy setting up still more.    Most are with West Germany, Austria, the U.S. and Japan, which is a partner in a big fiberglass production project. The government has also been talking with Suzuki Motors about building an auto-assembly plant here.    Even before Mr. Grosz took over, smaller private companies, still called cooperatives here, were beginning to flourish. In computer software alone, for example, about 1,500 of them have sprung up during the past four years. Some of the better ones work under contract with European and American customers, including Atari and Epyx. In the early 1980s, Hungarian design professor Erno Rubik became one of the few self-made millionaires in the Communist bloc with his mind-boggling puzzle, the Rubik's Cube.    The economic and social climate here is far more open than the Soviet Union's. The West's pull is strong. Few young Hungarians call each other &quot;comrade&quot; in conversation. On Sunday morning at St. Matthias church, a Roman Catholic priest conducts Mass before an overflow crowd, and by socialist standards, the shops are well stocked.    But if Hungary seems to be on the road to quasi capitalism, East Bloc style, it still has many miles to go. Few of those 1,500 software companies, for example, have more than 30 employees, and many of them are under-capitalized. They aren't doing much to create the big new employment base that Hungary needs.    It's equally clear that decades of socialist central planning have left a deep mark on the nation's economy: Hungary has a lot more to worry about right now than just developing more entrepreneurs. Inflation is running at 15% officially, at 30% unofficially. Housing prices have doubled in the last year. It can take four years to get a very modest little Czechoslovakian car, and Hungary is burdened with $10 billion in net foreign debt.    Also, long beaten down by heavy-handed micro-management from above, the nation still lacks entrepreneurial spirit. The few truly swashbuckling businessmen in Hungary are a lonely, frustrated group.    One is Gabor Renyi, who founded a private company called Novotrade five years ago. The 200-employee company develops computer software, publishes translations of foreign technical books and operates a personal-computer shop, among other things. Mr. Renyi complains that he can't find employees who have the proverbial fire in the belly.    &quot;In state-owned industry, people aren't accustomed to making decisions or taking responsibility,&quot; says Mr. Renyi. &quot;They learn to wait, to postpone, or to try to create collective decisions. This is the biggest illness.&quot;    Another drawback: Hungary may turn out wonderful physicists and mathematicians, but it is legendary for its inability to turn science into commercial products. &quot;In mathematics, in some physics, the heritage is still alive,&quot; says Arpad Csurgay, deputy director general of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. &quot;But we can't exploit.&quot;    As a member of the East Bloc, Hungary also suffers because it cannot import many sophisticated high-tech products from the West. Under the rules of the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, known as COCOM, some 180 items are banned from sale by the West to Communist countries.    The rules are designed to prevent the leakage of sophisticated technology that could be used for military purposes by the Soviet Union. This means, for example, that Hungary can't import large mainframe computers that might help greatly in modernizing industry. It must build its own in small quantities at places such as the Central Institute for Physics.    Says Tibor Vamos, founder of the Computer and Automation Institute in Budapest, &quot;We're a very small country. We can't build up an IBM or a DEC. We try building clones, but it's uneconomical. We'll go bankrupt if we pursue 'autarky'&quot; -- the idea that Hungary should build everything itself.    Putting together even a few decent computers is difficult here, because many advanced microprocessor chips needed to make them are on the COCOM banned list. Hungary can smuggle them into the country, often through Austria, but the price is high and the quantity is small. Even the digital switches needed to modernize its backward telephone system can't be imported because of the COCOM restrictions, although Hungary is trying hard to get that particular ban lifted.    Strategists have long laid the blame for Hungary's problems on the East Bloc market, the country's small size and the COCOM restrictions. Increasingly, however, the bureaucrats are blaming themselves.    &quot;I'm a bureaucrat. I don't like bureaucrats,&quot; says Peter Reiniger, The Ministry of Trade's director of technical development. Mr. Reiniger recently dismissed one subordinate after months of warning the man that he needed to be more flexible in handling his 30 research contracts. &quot;I told him he should start spending some of his time looking for another job,&quot; says Mr. Reiniger.    Ultimately, Hungary's senior strategists would like to become fully integrated into Western Europe, eventually becoming part of the European Community. That community is scheduled in 1992 to drop its internal trade barriers, a move that is designed to expand the economies of the member nations. So far, however, it doesn't appear that Hungary will be permitted to join the EC any time soon.    But what if Hungary overcomes every obstacle and does become the Sweden of Eastern Europe? Will its leadership countenance the political freedom that would likely accompany economic freedom?    &quot;We have been a society nearer to secrecy than openness,&quot; concedes Frigyes Geleji, a senior official at the State Office for Technical Development. Yet he applauds a trend to put more information in the hands of more people, saying the ultimate result is likely to be a stronger economy. &quot;Information is power, and maybe we'll have greater power with information in more hands than in just a few.&quot;    {See related story: &quot;Technology (A Special Report): The Problem --- ...And So Does England: Cambridge Envies Its Namesake's Commercial Success&quot; -- WSJ Nov. 14, 1988}</TEXT></DOC>