<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870617-0150 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Britain Tests Iron Lady's Mettle---By David Howell</HL><DD> 06/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Election campaigns generate huge demands. Politicians cheerfully outbid one another with promises to spend and distribute, while awkward questions as to how the necessary wealth and resources are to be created in the first place tend to be pushed into the background. The Conservatives in Britain have therefore been lucky, as well as skillful, in winning an election so decisively on a predominantly supply-side platform -- that is to say, on the claim that the U.K. economic engine is beginning to perform adequately at last, even though the benefits have not reached large sections of the population yet.    Even so, as the recent campaign wore on, the Thatcher camp found itself forced to enter the auction to spend more. The bills for nurses' pay and the commitment to the subsidized consortium Airbus were already in before the election started. The election ended with the certainty that health care, social services and the inner cities all will be clamoring for still bigger subventions than before. The old collective welfare state, with all its grimly low standards and its wealth-destroying influence, still looks depressingly well entrenched.    During the campaign, Conservative leaders clearly were deterred from airing some of the measures that would help accelerate the British economy's exit from its past problems. Indeed, there were mornings when they came near being trapped into negative commitments that would have the opposite effect. Thus, for example, nothing fresh was proposed during the election period to meet the country's explosive demand for high quality health provision, except to pour still more of the taxpayers' money into the National Health Service. Of course, this was an area where the opposition had no difficulty in outbidding the government.    On education, while reforms were certainly put forward by the Conservatives, there were few ideas of how the vast expansion in demand in modern society, by all age groups, for educational services of all kinds, and for innovation in educational provision, might be met. The gulf between state education and private independent schools, which have become dynamic businesses in Britain, therefore seems set to widen.    Rent decontrol was promised, but the creation of a really well-stocked market for private rented accommodation -- which would increase labor mobility -- still looks far away. Little was said about privatizing pensions, leaving the government on the defensive over the plight of the elderly. Nor was much said about reducing top marginal tax rates -- to match prospective American levels -- or about radical tax simplification. And at one news conference a stop appeared to be put altogether on privatizing any part of the railway services or liberalizing Britain's protected coal market.    The possibility remains that the promised privatization of the electricity-supply industry could follow the unhappy precedent for gas and telecommunications, merely shifting portly monopolies into the private sector.    How is this army of hostages to electoral fortune to be retrieved? It is easy enough to assert that it is all a matter of having enough political will. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher clearly has plenty of that, but the problem goes much deeper. A clear assumption still prevails in the British political culture that public spending equals caring and that resisting public-spending programs as a solution to social problems somehow makes one morally inferior. The bishop of Durham put this plainly after the election when he extolled the virtues of &quot;social wealth&quot; as against individual initiative and deplored the Thatcherite emphasis on the latter.    For all their electoral success the Conservatives still have not succeeded in turning this argument around yet. The idea that a modern capitalist society can be an inherently more caring and compassionate one than the collective welfare alternative is not accepted yet. It is too big a leap after generations of anti-capitalist teaching.    In a sense the Conservatives have their own propaganda to blame for their problem. From the start of the 1987 campaign, the Conservative emphasis was on returning resources to the hands of individuals and their families to widen choice. This duly received a cheer, but it left a key point unexplained. How are lower taxes and more individual choice supposed to help the underclass in relative poverty or the millions on supplementary benefits? Surely, goes the consensus reply, lower taxation means less money for teachers, schoolbooks, nurses, hospital equipment, the unemployed and care for the elderly. How could it mean more?    A public indoctrinated over many years, however subconsciously, in static Keynesian attitudes to public budgets is not going to be persuaded to reverse its views on these questions overnight. The revolutionary thought that people who pay less tax and keep and own more actually might care more for each other, for their neighbors, communities and services is not going to be accepted by assertion. Still less is it going to be comprehended that lower taxation actually could result in high revenues, and thus more for public services, as well as more enterprise and employment, when the opposite has been the orthodoxy.    The Conservatives have this major intellectual battle to win. Until they do they will find that executing the more radical reforms required to get the main supply engines of the British economy turning will be hard work. They also will find that for all the change of mood in British society in recent years, and the great growth of enthusiasm for personal and widely diffused ownership, the deeper instincts of the British for fairness, obligations toward the disadvantaged and for social responsibility will not be satisfied merely by the prospect of more individual choice.    The old socialist morality, rooted in the virtues of a solid and upright working class, in trade-union loyalty and in the concentrated pattern of heavy industry, has probably now at last subsided. But it has left a gaping hole. A new, or reconstructed, capitalist morality now has to be pieced together to take its place -- and one that sits comfortably with the totally different industrial and social structure the electronic age permits and encourages.    Once this great battle is won, and state socialism not merely finally discredited and defeated but also convincingly replaced, the prospects for widely shared prosperity and social progress in the last decade of the millenium are unlimited. This applies not just to Britain but to the global economy, and especially to areas such as Eastern Europe, which has been most severely held back by collectivist economics. What better place is there than Britain, the oldest industrialized country and the worst scarred by traditional industrial growth and welfare mentality, to be the testing ground for working out this new, kinder and more promising pattern of affairs.    ---   Mr. Howell, a Conservative, was reelected as member of Parliament for Guildford. He was secretary for energy and transport in Mrs. Thatcher's first administration. </TEXT></DOC>