<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871127-0023 </DOCNO><HL> War of the Spies:Soviets Gain HeavilyAs New-Breed AgentsUnlock U.S. Secrets---Detection Is Harder if CulpritIs a Volunteer for Money;Cuba Ran CIA Operations---But U.S. May Be Improving---By John WalcottStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT FRESTDEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   The furor over the Iran-Contra affair has obscured what may be an even greater scandal in the U.S. intelligence community.    A series of counterintelligence disasters has enabled the Russians and their allies to peek into almost every aspect of American intelligence activity, from spy satellites to cryptography to the way the U.S. conducts covert operations.    One particularly disturbing case was disclosed by a Cuban intelligence officer who defected in Czechoslovakia last June. U.S. officials were shocked to learn that more than 90% of the Central Intelligence Agency's covert operations in Cuba had been taken over and controlled for years by the Cuban intelligence service, the DGI.    The Cubans, intelligence sources say, &quot;doubled&quot; most of the CIA's agents and put them to work against their CIA controllers. They also fed bogus intelligence to almost all the agents who weren't actually working for them.    But although what happened in Cuba was an embarrassing setback to U.S. intelligence operations, it wasn't as damaging as other failures. &quot;We have had a decade of counterintelligence fiascoes,&quot; says an intelligence official. &quot;There is nothing the Soviets don't know about our most basic methods.&quot;    Other knowledgeable officials insist that such dire conclusions are unwarranted. &quot;The damage espionage does outweighs every other intelligence problem, but the administration has made tremendous strides in addressing the problem,&quot; says one veteran counterintelligence agent.    One counterintelligence &quot;sting&quot; operation, says an administration expert on the subject, caught a spy who was about to start passing the Soviets secrets from U.S. defense contractors in California. In another case, officials say, counterintelligence agents caught up with a crewman who flew Air Force SR-71 spy planes before he delivered top-secret information about the planes and their missions.    The Cubans, intelligence sources say, used their string of double agents to peddle mostly low-grade political intelligence and gossip on Cuban leaders, not bogus information on important strategic issues. Nevertheless, insists one official: &quot;What does it show about your tradecraft if they can fool around with you at that level?&quot;    CIA Director William Webster concedes there is a problem. &quot;The role of counterintelligence in the agency must be improved,&quot; he says. &quot;We are looking for ways to strengthen it.&quot;    The job of counterintelligence officers in the CIA and Federal Bureau of Investigation is to protect American intelligence operations and secrets from foreign spying attempts, penetrate other countries' intelligence agencies, debrief defectors, and penetrate and disrupt hostile espionage efforts.    But in recent years the Soviets, East Europeans, Chinese -- even the friendly Israelis -- have managed to pry open a number of supposedly locked doors. The U.S. has arrested 63 people for espionage since 1977, most of them since 1981, but there is no way to know whether that means that the CIA and FBI are batting 1.000, .300, or .100.    Worse, many of the spies operated successfully for years and did enormous damage before they were caught, and some of them were nabbed only after they committed amateurish blunders or their relatives exposed them.    Some Americans who spied for the Russians:    --John A. Walker Jr., who recruited brother Arthur, son Michael and friend Jerry A. Whitworth along the way, sold Navy codes, coding-machine details and data on satellite communications from 1968 to 1985 -- for eight years while he was a Navy radio man and for nine more years after he retired.    --Ronald Pelton, a disgruntled former employee of the National Security Agency, was paid a paltry $35,000 for the secrets of some of the U.S.'s most sensitive eavesdropping operations.    --Edward Lee Howard, a former low-level CIA officer, is believed to have told the Soviets enough to shut down, at least temporarily, virtually all the CIA's operations in Moscow.    What is most worrisome to counterintelligence experts is that these represent a new and harder-to-catch kind of spy. &quot;Not one of them was recruited by the Russians,&quot; a former intelligence official observes. &quot;They are all volunteers.&quot;    The new traitors, for the most part, appear to be hard-luck cases, losers with money problems, or low-level officials with chips on their shoulders, not the Communist sympathizers or fuzzy-headed romantics of the '40s and '50s who believed in peace through espionage. &quot;The good news is that the Soviets don't appear to be recruiting very successfully,&quot; says one U.S. official. &quot;The bad news is they're getting walk-ins.&quot;    Mistakes and lack of discipline have also contributed to U.S. intelligence problems. Some of the Cubans' intelligence successes couldn't have come from Havana's double agents, intelligence sources say. Officials now are investigating whether the DGI also managed to break into and bug the CIA station in the U.S.-interests section of the Swiss Embassy in Havana -- and whether other hostile intelligence services have penetrated American embassies and pilfered American diplomatic pouches around the world.    Intelligence sources accuse the Naval Investigative Service of bungling its investigation of Marine guards suspected of letting Soviet spies into the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Other current investigations, these sources say, suggest the Soviets may have been compromising other Marines in out-of-the-way posts, then blackmailing them into spying after they were transferred to more important embassies.    Under investigation, too, are the State Department's relatively low-paid communications clerks, who often work alongside their CIA counterparts in embassy communications rooms. A classified report on embassies' security in 1985 concluded that since Soviet communicators had long been a top target of CIA recruiters, it seemed logical that the converse also was true. Today, says an administration official, &quot;there are an astronomical number of {U.S.} communicators under investigation for counterintelligence purposes.&quot;    Some potential problems are much closer to home. Intelligence sources say that National Security Council officials recently permitted a Soviet delegation to meet in the NSC's crisis-management center in Room 208 of the Old Executive Office Building, next door to the White House.    The room is equipped with a wealth of classified communications gear, and intelligence officials say it is the second most sensitive place in the White House complex, after the situation room in the White House basement. Administration officials insist they &quot;swept&quot; room 208 for bugs after the Soviets left, but intelligence officials say they are more worried by what the Soviets might have learned while they were in the room than by what they might have left behind.    Despite the setbacks, the CIA has resisted pressure to expand its counterintelligence operations, partly out of a desire to avoid returning to the paranoid days when longtime counterintelligence czar James Angleton turned the agency upside down in his hunt for an apparently nonexistent Soviet &quot;mole&quot; who Mr. Angleton believed had tunneled into the upper reaches of the agency.    If Mr. Angleton went overboard in his search for spies, recent American efforts to plug intelligence leaks and protect sensitive covert operations have left much to be desired. For one thing, the CIA had no inkling that virtually its entire Cuban network had been compromised until Maj. Florentino Azpillaga, a veteran of the DGI's &quot;American targets&quot; section, defected from the Cuban Embassy in Czechoslovakia last June. Maj. Azpillaga and his girlfriend walked to freedom in Austria and have been granted asylum in the U.S.    The hunt for the Walker-family spy ring took almost as long. The FBI began to suspect in 1978 that a Navy spy was passing top-secret documents to the Russians, who always seemed to anticipate U.S. ship movements. The bureau, the Naval Investigative Service and the National Security Agency all mounted hunts but found nothing. The spy-catchers didn't find the Walkers until John Walker's former wife turned him in to the FBI in 1985. The three Walkers and accomplice Whitworth are all in prison.    American counterintelligence also failed to catch Mr. Howard, the CIA officer who allegedly exposed the agency's operations in Moscow, or former NSA employee Pelton. Both were exposed by a Soviet defector named Vitaly Yurchenko, who later left his CIA handlers to go to the men's room in a Washington restaurant and redefected to the Soviet embassy. Mr. Howard eluded the FBI in New Mexico, partly because the FBI was slow to put a wiretap on his home phone, and he now is in the Soviet Union. Mr. Pelton is in prison.    President Reagan's 1980-81 transition team on intelligence, the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board and a number of senators and congressmen repeatedly urged late CIA Director William Casey to strengthen American counterintelligence efforts and improve cooperation among the CIA, the FBI and the military.    Some experts wanted enlarged counterintelligence efforts at the American Embassies in Mexico City and Vienna, two cities where there was evidence of vast Soviet espionage operations. But intelligence officials say Mr. Casey resisted, even after President Reagan in 1984 ordered improved intelligence efforts in Mexico. At one meeting with then national-security adviser William Clark and other officials, Mr. Casey angrily demanded: &quot;What the hell do you want us to do?&quot; Finally, Mr. Casey agreed to deploy only one additional agent to Mexico City but said it would take 18 months to train him in Spanish.    The attitude extended deep into the CIA bureaucracy. Even after top officials approved an enhanced counterintelligence effort in Austria, where a number of Americans spying against the U.S. had met their Soviet control officers, one newly appointed CIA station chief there fought the idea and delayed changes, say intelligence sources. &quot;The Soviets,&quot; one intelligence official says, &quot;were having a field day in Austria.&quot;    The CIA and FBI have since beefed up their counterintelligence efforts, and the new efforts have begun to pay off, intelligence officials say.    But counterintelligence, although it is a staple of best-selling spy novels, remains a backwater in the intelligence business. &quot;If you want to make your way to the top of the profession, CI isn't where you want to be,&quot; says one veteran CIA officer. &quot;You don't make many friends when your job is to figure out who might have gone bad.&quot;    Intelligence officials say the U.S. isn't well-equipped to spot today's money-oriented traitors. Staff shortages and federal privacy laws make it difficult to uncover financial strains that might push intelligence workers to sell secrets -- and make it difficult, too, to discover sudden new wealth that might reveal the fruits of espionage.    Even if a spy is spotted making contact with a Soviet embassy somewhere, it is hard to identify him or her quickly or easily because U.S. intelligence agencies don't keep computerized files of voiceprints or photographs. &quot;We have no ability to match voices or photos of people entering and leaving a meeting,&quot; says a veteran senior intelligence officer. &quot;Fingerprints are useless for this kind of work and we don't keep voiceprints.&quot;    The favorite tool of American counterintelligence officers is the polygraph, or lie detector, also known as the box. The State Department now is resisting a proposal to polygraph every U.S. employee who is assigned to duty in the Soviet Union.    But the Cubans have proved conclusively that the box can be beaten: Every one of the Cuban double agents identified by Maj. Azpillaga had passed at least one CIA polygraph exam. &quot;We have abandoned our competence in favor of the box,&quot; complains one intelligence officer. &quot;It absolves you from having to think about the problem, and it's a great way to protect yourself.&quot;    Moreover, the American counterintelligence effort remains fragmented among the CIA, the FBI and the military. &quot;If I had one decision to make, I would recommend that there be one national agency in charge of counterintelligence,&quot; says Lt. Gen. Ion Mihai Pacepa, a former deputy and acting chief of the Romanian foreign intelligence service who defected to the U.S. in 1978.    Such an agency isn't in the cards, in part because no one, including the CIA, wants a supercounterintelligence agency spying on Americans at home. Still, the status quo is unacceptable. &quot;We've been had,&quot; says one senior intelligence official. &quot;CI is a tough, demanding sport and we're getting beaten at it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>