<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0014 </DOCNO><HL> White House Counsel Culverhouse Gets High MarksFor Efficiency But His Toughest Days Lie Ahead---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A.B. Culvahouse is the very picture of an all-American success story.    A tall, blond Tennessean, he springs from modest small-town beginnings. In quick succession, he has been a star legal student, young political operative and rapid climber in Washington's high-powered legal community. He even has an all-American birthday: July 4.    And now he finds himself in the middle of the biggest political scandal in the land.    Mr. Culvahouse is the new counsel to the president, which means he is the lawyer with the job of protecting President Reagan as the Iran-Contra investigations unfold. It is a job he took at the insistence of Howard Baker, who agreed to become White House chief of staff last February on the condition that President Reagan hire Mr. Culvahouse as well.    &quot;I was very honored, very surprised and very scared,&quot; Mr. Culvahouse recalls. Very scared, he says, because once before he watched from up close as a scandal shook the country and the presidency; as Mr. Baker's legislative aide he sat behind the then-senator from Tennessee day after day during Congress's long Watergate hearings. That sobering experience now lingers in his mind as he watches from the other side of the hearing table. &quot;So I think I've some vague appreciation of what is at stake,&quot; he says.    So far Mr. Culvahouse is earning generally high marks for integrity and efficiency, although some complaints are emerging about White House strategy. He has pored over the president's private and often highly personal diaries to extract information about Mr. Reagan's knowledge of the Iran-Contra affair. His office also has gathered, analyzed and passed on to congressional investigators some 200,000 pages of documents.    &quot;We're very satisfied,&quot; says Mark Belnick, executive assistant to the chief counsel of the congressional committees investigating the Iran-Contra matter. Mr. Belnick says the committees' few disagreements with Mr. Culvahouse over access to documents &quot;have been in good faith and have been resolved in good faith.&quot;    But the thorniest days lie ahead for Mr. Culvahouse. Former National Security Adviser John Poindexter and his aide, Lt. Col. Oliver North, won't testify until next month or later. They are the witnesses whose testimony could be most damaging to the president. Already there is tension between the White House and the two former officials because Mr. Culvahouse has refused to give them access to copies of their old White House files as they prepare their testimony; instead he is referring their requests to Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel investigating the Iran-Contra affair, who has files but isn't believed to be granting access.    Moreover, Mr. Culvahouse still hasn't met all of Mr. Walsh's requests for documents, which are much more far-reaching than the congressional committees' requests. And if contested court cases grow out of the investigation, it's possible there could be a legal battle over whether President Reagan's diaries should be shown to a court.    For now, Mr. Culvahouse is expending much of his energy simply keeping up with congressional testimony. He was largely responsible for staking out the tougher line the White House has begun taking over the Boland amendment, the controversial congressional provision that limited direct and indirect American military aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents known as the Contras. The president and his aides have begun vigorously asserting that the amendment -- which barred government offices involved in intelligence work from using funds to aid the Contras -- didn't apply to President Reagan.    But the White House has drawn fire from both friends and critics of the president in staking out this position. Some Republican hard-liners thought the administration should have become more assertive earlier in attacking the law. Many Democrats, meanwhile, maintain that the Boland amendment clearly was intended to curb the president's support for the rebels.    &quot;I don't agree with their interpretation at all,&quot; asserts Rep. Tony Coelho, the House Democratic whip. &quot;I think what you're finding today is the president and his people at the White House have got caught with their hand in the cookie jar, and they're reinterpreting the law at their convenience because they got caught.&quot;    But by all accounts, Mr. Culvahouse's legal judgments are fully trusted by one important man: Mr. Baker, the powerful chief of staff and Mr. Culvahouse's mentor.    &quot;I think that Sen. Baker looks at A.B. as one of the best -- if not the best -- lawyer he knows,&quot; says James Range, who also worked on Mr. Baker's congressional staff and now is a staff vice president in Washington for Waste Management Inc. &quot;And Sen. Baker thinks he was a pretty good lawyer himself before he got to the Senate.&quot;    Certainly the 38-year-old Mr. Culvahouse has a career that is tied very closely to Mr. Baker, who is 23 years his senior. A.B. Culvahouse Jr. -- the &quot;A&quot; stands for Arthur, but he is universally known by his initials -- was born in Athens, Tenn., and after graduating from the University of Tennessee went to law school at New York University.    Through mutual friends, he caught the eye of Sen. Baker, who made him his chief legislative assistant and counsel after he graduated from law school. Mr. Culvahouse left his job with the senator in 1976, and joined the Washington office of the law firm of O'Melveny andamp; Meyers.    But he didn't sever his ties to Mr. Baker. When Mr. Baker launched an abortive campaign for president in 1979, Mr. Culvahouse was counsel for his campaign committee. In 1984, Mr. Baker retired from the Senate and joined the Washington office of the law firm of Vinson andamp; Elkins. He immediateley persuaded Mr. Culvahouse to join the same firm.    Then, early this year, Mr. Baker virtually drafted him for White House service. In late February, Mr. Culvahouse had left Washington for a vacation at a Mexican villa so remote that it didn't even have a telephone. But one day a maid appeared at his door with a fistful of urgent messages asking Mr. Culvahouse to contact Mr. Baker.    Mr. Culvahouse presumed Mr. Baker had called to say he had decided to run for president again in 1988. But when he found a phone and tracked down Mr. Baker, he discovered the former senator already had made it to the White House -- as the new chief of staff. Furthermore, Mr. Baker had insisted that President Reagan bring in Mr. Culvahouse as presidential counsel, and had informed Mr. Culvahouse's boss at the law firm that he would be leaving to join the White House. &quot;I hope,&quot; said Mr. Baker, &quot;that you'll take the job.&quot;    Mr. Culvahouse did, and began bracing for the hearings. He brought in a former assistant U.S. attorney, William B. Lytton, who was in private practice in Philadelphia, to help. He has assembled a staff of 12 archivists, four analysts and three lawyers that has largely completed the job of assembling and computerizing every White House document that might bear on the Iran-Contra affair. </TEXT></DOC>