<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870615-0012 </DOCNO><HL> Bank Board Accelerates Effort to FindA Buyer for Financial Corp. of America---By David B. HilderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT FIN F GWF CCI WFCBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   The Federal Home Loan Bank Board is stepping up its efforts to find a buyer for Financial Corp. of America amid signs that the board won't meet its goal of arranging a merger by June 30, according to thrift executives and others familiar with the board.    The Bank Board, through its investment banker, Salomon Brothers Inc., has received several general proposals to acquire Irvine, Calif.-based Financial Corp., parent of American Savings andamp; Loan Association, the nation's largest thrift.    Potential buyers include Ford Motor Co., Great Western Financial Corp. and an investor group led by former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon and former Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Preston Martin, according to officials familiar with the Bank Board's effort.    Those officials, however, also warned that it seems unlikely that a complex agreement to acquire the troubled company can be reached by June 30, when the term of Bank Board Chairman Edwin J. Gray ends.    Mr. Gray has been eager to resolve the problems of Financial Corp. before leaving office. And though Mr. Gray will serve until his successor, congressional staffer M. Danny Wall, is confirmed, he isn't expected to remain in office much longer than June 30.    Before last week, Bank Board officials had told potential buyers that the board planned to narrow the field of bidders by the end of last week to one, with which it would begin serious negotiations. However, the Bank Board hadn't notified the bidders of a choice by last Friday, people familiar with the talks said.    In recent weeks, Mr. Gray and other top Bank Board officials have devoted increasing amounts of time to Financial Corp. and have met frequently in New York with Salomon bankers and representatives of potential buyers, thrift industry executives and investment bankers said.    Ford already owns San Francisco-based First Nationwide Bank, the nation's sixth-largest thrift. Ford also recently agreed to acquire a major San Francisco-based mortgage insurer from Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. Anthony M. Frank, First Nationwide's chairman, declined to comment on Ford's possible interest in Financial Corp.    Great Western Financial, based in Beverly Hills, Calif., owns the nation's third-largest thrift, Great Western Bank. A Great Western spokesman confirmed that the company is talking with the Bank Board about acquiring Financial Corp. and has submitted an outline of how it would structure the transaction.    The Simon-Martin group, which has attracted foreign capital to acquire troubled thrifts in Hawaii and Southern California, also is negotiating to take over an insolvent Northern California thrift with Bank Board assistance. The group previously indicated its interest in Financial Corp.    William J. Popejoy, chairman of Financial Corp., said at least five possible buyers are engaged in talks with the Bank Board. He wouldn't identify any of them except the Simon-Martin group. Mr. Popejoy also said he believes it would be &quot;very optimistic&quot; to have anything completed before June 30.    Mr. Gray and other Bank Board officials have declined to comment on their efforts, except to say that the Bank Board has hired Salomon Brothers to represent its interests in any negotiations concerning Financial Corp. Salomon Brothers officials involved in the Financial Corp. talks couldn't be reached for comment.    Officials familiar with the Bank Board's efforts also said that several bank holding companies, including New York-based Citicorp and Wells Fargo andamp; Co., San Francisco, have expressed interest in Financial Corp., but it isn't clear whether those companies are still actively pursuing bids. Citicorp officials didn't return telephone calls last week seeking comment.    The Bank Board is asking potential buyers to pump about $1 billion of capital into Financial Corp.'s main unit, American Savings, which currently is $1.1 billion short of the capital level required by the Bank Board. American Savings' major attraction is its network of 172 branches in California.    But for any buyer, Financial Corp. could pose serious digestion problems. For example, its $34 billion of assets includes about $1.7 billion of delinquent loans and foreclosed real estate, an additional $1.2 billion of renegotiated loans yielding below-market rates, and $500 million of loans yielding little or no interest.    In addition, Financial Corp.'s stated assets include $1 billion of good will, which is an accounting entry with no tangible value representing the amount above market value that Financial Corp. paid for a major acquisition in 1983. Amortizing the good will currently reduces Financial Corp.'s net income by about $50 million a year. The good will also would be unattractive to banks because banking regulators deduct good will when calculating a bank's capital position.    For those reasons, the Bank Board has offered to indemnify a buyer against certain future losses. According to a confidential document sent to potential bidders by Salomon Brothers, &quot;In recognition of the substantial amounts of underperforming assets and the existence of $1 billion of good will, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board is willing to negotiate a 'stop loss' agreement with a potential acquirer in return for substantial infusion into American Savings of new equity.&quot;    It isn't clear how much of the potential losses the Bank Board would be willing to absorb.    A buyer of Financial Corp. could realize substantial tax benefits by writing down the company's troubled loans and real estate. However, people familiar with the negotiations said the Bank Board has said it wouldn't want a buyer to take such write-downs immediately because that would again reduce American Savings' stated capital level.    Shareholders of Financial Corp., who would have to approve any recapitalization, probably wouldn't be bought out by a buyer, but would have their ownership of the company severely diluted. Financial Corp. common shares closed at $5.75 on Friday, down 12.5 cents in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. </TEXT></DOC>