<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870915-0142 </DOCNO><HL> Fight for Human Rights May Fire Political Reform---By Natan Sharansky</HL><DD> 09/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   At 11 one night in 1982, my wife, Avital, called a friend of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's. It was my fifth year in the gulag and she had just heard through the grapevine ominous reports about my health. She wanted Mrs. Thatcher to bring up my case with a Soviet official scheduled to meet with the prime minister the next morning.    Obviously peeved at being awakened, Mrs. Thatcher's friend demanded, &quot;Do you think the whole world revolves around your husband?&quot; Avital retorted: &quot;You should thank God for the opportunity to participate in this struggle. Without freedom for people like my husband, there is no freedom for anyone. Not for you, not for me.&quot; He seemed to agree. And so did Mrs. Thatcher, whose efforts for Soviet Jewry and human rights in the Soviet Union have been consistent and forceful.    Yet the question of the primacy of the human-rights issue in dealing with totalitarian countries is nevertheless a nagging one -- and one that is highlighted this week by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze's visit to the U.S.    The Soviet treatment of human rights is so much a part of its policy toward the West that it is impossible to view it as a separate issue. Throughout Soviet history there have been periodic &quot;openings&quot; to the West, dictated by the need to salvage a chronically tottering economy by harnessing Western resources. They are usually accompanied by internal reforms, whose aim is to make Soviet bureaucracy less corrupt and inefficient, and Soviet society more palatable to the free world. But Soviet leaders are always careful to restrict reforms to the superstructure. Free access to Western ideas and real freedom of speech, action and movement are viewed as threats to the foundations of the system.    Regardless of the degree of &quot;openness&quot; toward the West at any given time, the Soviet Union has supported violent movements and regimes. It is as comfortable with such regimes as it is uneasy with democracies. In this, nothing has changed.    In other areas there have been some dramatic changes. Mikhail Gorbachev has instituted reforms intended to decimate the bureaucracy and increase productivity. And in an effort to forestall American strategic superiority and eliminate the threat of the Strategic Defense Initiative, he has adopted a conciliatory attitude in arms talks.    He has recognized the need to placate artists and intellectuals, chafing at the sight of fewer restrictions in other communist countries, and has allowed the publication of some of the books formerly on the Soviet Index. Most of these are, however, by dead authors. The dissenting living are still banned.    Some political prisoners have been released, but unlike their predecessors in Khrushchev's time, they have not been rehabilitated; others still linger in prisons and psychiatric wards. The emigration of Jews has increased from less than a hundred a month in recent years to 500, but it is still a fraction of the annual rate of 50,000 in 1979, and a trickle when measured against the 400,000 who have expressed their desire to leave. A new draconian emigration law restricts applicants to those with relatives of the first degree living abroad. It thus disqualifies more than 90% of potential Jewish emigrants.    Image-building is enjoying top priority today. Soviet officials are no longer evasive and elusive. They seek the press with Madison Avenue savvy, with protestations of friendship and flexibility.    Image-building was also a primary concern in the detente of the 1970s. It permitted the Soviets to exploit public pressures created in the open societies of the West while nipping in the bud any such pressures at home. And while the West was preaching and implementing disarmament and disengagement, the Soviet Union was making violent forays into Ethiopia, Angola, the Middle East, Afghanistan and Nicaragua. When such groups as Helsinki Watch, Amnesty International and Free Trade Unions, supporters of nuclear-free zones inside the Soviet orbit, and Eurocommunists began to sprout in the Soviet Union, the KGB arrested them with ruthless dispatch. One of my fellow prisoners then named us &quot;the hostages of detente,&quot; predicting that we would be used as bargaining chips and released at the next detente.    It was during the detente of the '70s that the U.S. Congress recognized the need to link adherence to human-rights agreements with trade agreements. In 1973 it passed the Jackson Amendment, which is based on the premise that liberalization of Soviet human-rights policies is an indication of Soviet good faith and that the absence of such good faith makes helping the Soviet economy unacceptably risky.    This concept of &quot;linkage&quot; was expanded in the 1975 Helsinki accords, which packaged commitments to human rights with security arrangements in Europe and Western recognition of the postwar borders. Not surprisingly, the Soviets have been trying to unlink these ever since. Now, in the euphoria of &quot;glasnost,&quot; they are trying to implement their own version of linkage: extorting concessions on policy in exchange for releasing some of the hostages of detente. If the West permits itself to fall into this trap, there will be no end to it; the political price for each hostage will rise with each transaction.    The West must realize that Soviet non-adherence to human-rights contracts is not merely a humanitarian problem. On the simplest and most pragmatic level, it raises the question of credibility. Is it wise to rely on any agreements with a government that has shown nothing but contempt for its own signature on numerous agreements? Just as questionable is the West's readiness to do business with a regime whose trampling of human rights is inseparable from its global anti-Western aggression. Under such circumstances, when business dealings, technology transfers and scientific exchanges are separated from the human-rights issue, it is indeed a case of selling the Soviets the rope with which to hang the democracies.    Fighting for human rights in the Soviet Union is as politically prudent as it is morally right. It can give an impetus to the carefully controlled reforms until they acquire a momentum of their own and bring about real change, and it can ultimately moderate Soviet foreign policy to a point where cooperation between the superpowers will be safer than playing Russian roulette.    ---   Mr. Sharansky was imprisoned for nine years in the Soviet Union. He now lives in Jerusalem. </TEXT></DOC>