<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871123-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Fading Prospects?Mexico's TurnaroundOf Sagging EconomyNow Seems Imperiled---Stock-Market Crash in U.S.May Dim Hope CountryCan 'Grow' Out of Debt---Effects of the Plunging Peso---By Matt Moffett and Peter TruellStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Just a little over a month ago, Mexico seemed well on the way to an impressive economic turnaround.    The apparent recovery delighted Western banks and governments holding some $110 billion of Mexican debt. And it was a relief to the U.S., which has unintentionally become the employer of last resort for jobless Mexicans.    The resurgence began two years ago, when Mexico's government scrapped its policy of sheltering Mexican industry in a protected domestic market and began a successful push for economic growth by exporting manufactured goods.    But the crash on Wall Street and the possibility that it presages a slump in the U.S. economy have imperiled Mexico's prospects for &quot;growing&quot; out of its debt problems. Because two-thirds of Mexican exports go to the U.S., a recession in the U.S. or even a decline in its economic growth would squeeze Mexican industry between a shrinking export market and a still-depressed domestic market.    &quot;It's ominous,&quot; says Rogelio Ramirez de la O, the director general of Ecanal, an economic consulting firm here. &quot;Mexico is going to suffer as badly, or maybe worse, than anyone else if the U.S. gets hit.&quot;    The suffering started last week. Mexicans who are worried about the country's bleaker economic prospects have recently been transferring their assets from pesos to the safer currency of dollars. The Mexican central bank, reluctant to expend its reserves propping up the peso against the dollar, last Wednesday withdrew its support for the peso on Mexico's secondary, &quot;free&quot; exchange market and watched in horror as the peso's value plummeted 25% or more against the dollar.    Though the free-market peso is used in only about one-fifth of transactions in Mexico's system of dual exchange rates, its collapse is likely to force the government to increase the pace of the steady devaluations it has been making in the &quot;controlled&quot; peso used by businesses in exporting. The peso's fall is also certain to worsen Mexico's already-painful 140% inflation rate. Worst of all, the shock caused by the abrupt plunge of the peso is likely to accelerate capital flight, which had been on the wane the past couple of years.    &quot;A fall this sudden damages the confidence that has been so painfully built up since 1985, and creates a climate of psychological expectations that turns capital flight into a sort of self-fulfilling prophecy,&quot; says M. Delal Baer, a fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.    The drop in the peso was an outgrowth of the panic caused by the recent collapse of the Mexican stock market. After the crash on Wall Street, Mexico's stock market went from the world's fastest-rising market to the fastest-falling one. Much of the trading involves shares of Mexico's most internationally competitive companies, whose newfound success in exporting helped fuel the stupendous 330% growth in the stock index in the first nine months of this year. But in early October, the market began a slide that turned into a full-scale collapse after the Oct. 19 crash on Wall Street. Following &quot;Black Monday,&quot; the Mexican stock index plunged as much as 75%.    &quot;The boom in the stock exchange reflected the continuing opening of Mexico to the world economy,&quot; Mr. Ramirez de la O says. &quot;Now we're seeing a reflection of its sensitivity to problems in the world economy.&quot;    Curiously, last week's blow to the peso buoyed the Mexican stock market, as investors hurried to put money in companies with assets in dollars or precious metals, rather than in pesos.    When leaders from Mexico and seven other Latin American debtor nations meet this week in Acapulco, the world's gloomy economic outlook is likely to galvanize them into a tougher stance against creditors. Luiz Carlos Bresser Pereira, Brazil's finance minister, expects the three largest debtors -- Brazil, Mexico and Argentina -- to &quot;take certain positions&quot; on servicing their debts. The most significant of these would be to limit payments to creditors to a specified percentage of a debtor country's gross domestic product and to demand that lenders provide new loans to cover the major portion of debtor countries' interest payments.    Mexico's leaders are bitter about the inability of the U.S. to follow the advice it has long given debtor countries: Keep the government deficit low and make industry competitive. &quot;It's beginning to look like the medicine that has usually been prescribed to developing countries should have wider application,&quot; says Alfredo Phillips Olmedo, who heads Mexico's export-import bank, Banco Nacional de Commercio Exterior S.A.    But Western bankers contend that the Mexican government is using the market crash as an excuse for its own failings. They say the government is losing the political will to follow through with economic reform as it approaches the final year of President Miguel de la Madrid's term, a period in which inefficiency and corruption traditionally flourish. &quot;They always spend money in that year and let things go,&quot; says an official at one bank.    And some Mexican exporters are criticizing the government's slowdown during most of this year in the &quot;controlled&quot; currency devaluations that have fueled Mexico's export drive. While businessmen stress how devaluations help make Mexico's exports competitive, the government has recently been more concerned about the way they make imports expensive and accelerate Mexico's record inflation. &quot;We cannot just disregard inflation for the sake of exporters, says Miguel Mancera, the head of Mexico's central bank.    Trying to cool inflation, Mexican central bankers had allowed the peso to rise against the dollar in relative terms since late 1986, when the peso was the most undervalued ever. In the weeks since the stock-market crash, they have again accelerated the devaluations to discourage capital flight. But exporters say this year's slowdown in the devaluations had already damaged their competitiveness before they could become firmly established in the export market.    Concern about inflation also caused Mexico to suspend its highly touted debt &quot;swap&quot; program, under which the government and its lenders transferred hundreds of millions of dollars of debt to investors, who in return took equity stakes in Mexican companies. &quot;We suffer from a legitimate schizophrenia,&quot; says Angel Gurria, Mexico's director of public credit, &quot;with one eye on inflation and the other on economic recovery.&quot;    Perhaps no one is more frustrated by the sudden reversal in Mexico's prospects than Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the former budget minister and the architect of Mexico's economic reforms, who only two weeks before the crash was designated as the ruling party's presidential candidate. The investment community so applauded his selection that the Mexican stock market jumped 8% in 90 minutes the morning after he was named. But that was the peak for the market and perhaps for Mr. Salinas as well.    &quot;His job has suddenly gotten 10 times more difficult,&quot; a Mexican banker says. &quot;Salinas lost a lot of his room to maneuver before he was even able to use it.&quot;    If the international economy does slump, Mexico at least will enter the tough times in a stronger economic position than any other major debtor. Before the recent resurgence in capital flight, Mexico had amassed foreign-exchange and gold reserves of roughly $15 billion, the highest level of any Latin debtor. Mexico's current-account surplus -- its favorable balance of foreign trade in goods, services and certain financial transactions -- is expected to top $3 billion this year, against a $1.6 billion deficit in 1986.    In addition, Mexico will benefit from the considerable economic acumen of the Harvard-educated Mr. Salinas, who was largely responsible for rewriting four decades of Mexico's economic history in only two years. Mexico had begun its protectionist policy after World War II, and for 30 years that policy helped create the so-called Mexican Miracle -- a period of economic growth unrivaled in the developing world. But by the 1970s, many long-protected Mexican industries had grown fat, lazy and inefficient. The turning point was the 1985-86 collapse of oil prices, which sapped Mexico's major source of foreign exchange and forced the country to emphasize manufactured exports.    Under the new policy, Mexico did more than just aggressively devalue its currency. It also shed protectionist barriers with the determination of a Harry Houdini escaping life-threatening bonds. Only two years ago, more than 5,000 items were subject to restrictive import licenses. Now, fewer than 500 are. Meanwhile, government subsidies have been reduced and tariffs slashed from as high as 100% to a maximum of 40%.    The decision to open the country's borders to competition and to promote exports has pained some Mexican manufacturers and people who have had to deal with costlier imports and higher inflation. But the increased competition has forced Mexican manufacturers to improve their products. Mexican-made refrigerators, for instance, used to break down so often that overworked repairmen took five days to answer a service call. The major reason: The best Mexican refrigerator was only as good as a Mexican-made ventilator, an important $2 part that lets heat escape from the motor. The recent opening of the Mexican market has allowed refrigerator makers to import ventilators.    &quot;Quality has gone up,&quot; says Francisco Berrondo, the sales manager of Mabe, a large appliance maker. Its exports have risen 50% this year alone.    The new policies have brought boom times to manufacturers who learned to compete. Motor-vehicle exports to the U.S. leaped an astonishing 185% in the first half to $543 million. Exports of engines, electrical equipment and cement also surged. Overall manufactured exports in the first nine months jumped 45% to $7.12 billion.    &quot;We are now playing the game and finding we can compete with anybody,&quot; says Benito Gutierrez, the director of foreign trade for Serponder, a particleboard maker whose exports have increased 60% in just two years.    The effects of opening up Mexico's economy can be seen in both the U.S. and Mexico. Mexican-made glass and hardware goods now line the shelves of New York department stores, and Japanese-made motor scooters now putt-putt through Mexico City boulevards.    But the economic rumblings in the U.S. are worrying even the most robust Mexican exporters. Before the crash, Grupo Industrial Desc was preparing to expand its auto-gear production facilities, which were operating close to capacity because of strong U.S. demand. But because of the sudden uncertainty shrouding the U.S. market, the big conglomerate may turn conservative, shelve the expansion and use its cash to pay down debt.    &quot;The world doesn't look nearly as good for exporters as it did a few weeks ago,&quot; says Ernesto Vega Velasco, Desc's finance and administrative director. Investors agree: Desc's stock has plunged 70%.    Other Mexican businessmen are more concerned about the political repercussions of Wall Street's crash than the economic ones. &quot;What will happen with {American} protectionism now?&quot; asks Luis Martinez Arguello, an executive of Cementos Apasco, a cement maker that exports to the U.S. Mr. Martinez's secretary interrupts a meeting with a telex from the company's Washington law firm about the congressional conference committee's work on the U.S. trade bill. &quot;If they close the doors,&quot; he says, waving the telex in the air, &quot;what can we do?&quot;    The bitter irony for Mexican industrialists is that their herculean efforts to become competitive in international markets have left them more than ever at the mercy of economic forces beyond their control. And after six painful years, Mexico's prospects are still uncertain. </TEXT></DOC>