<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871218-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Idyllic, Palmy FloridaHas a Few SurprisesFor Winter Visitors---Flying Cockroaches, for One,Termites That Eat MetalAnd Toads That Kill Dogs---By Ken SlocumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This is a story for those of you who can't afford a Florida vacation this winter. It is about why you wouldn't have had a good time here anyway.    As most people know, much of Florida is a balmy, palmy subtropical land that long has offered a soothing escape from Northern winters. What people sometimes overlook, however, is that human beings aren't the only things that are attracted to balmy, palmy subtropical lands.    So are exploding trees, walking catfish, poisonous toads the size of footballs and termites that penetrate metal. Those and other dubious Florida arrivals have been joined recently by the Asian cockroach, which made its Western Hemisphere debut in central Florida two years ago. It flies, travels in herds, doesn't shy from people -- and, at the rate it is spreading, may well be in your neighborhood before long.    &quot;This,&quot; warns University of Florida entomologist Philip Koehler, &quot;could be the end of the outdoor barbecue.&quot;    Such news doesn't change the fact that Florida is an exceedingly nice place in winter. Most tourists don't meet the weirder wildlife except on trips to such places as the Everglades, and natives have grown accustomed to life with snakes and alligators and grasshoppers the size of Tampa cigars.    But this story isn't intended to be fair. It's supposed to make you feel good about spending your winter shoveling snow. So let's move on.    To killer toads.    They are known as Bufo marinus. They come from South America, but many now call Florida home. A Bufo (Latin for toad) is normally about the size of a softball, but it can approach football dimensions if it has regular access to back-yard pet feed bowls, a favorite source of food.    When threatened, a Bufo secretes a toxic substance from glands on its neck. Among the creatures that regularly threaten it are small dogs. A lot of small dogs have died that way. Lt. John West, wildlife inspector for the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission, says the victims include a valued pair of Yorkshire terriers owned by his friend.    Next, termites.    The good news in Hallandale, Fla., just south of Fort Lauderdale, is that the local termites are being run off. The bad news is they are being pushed out by something meaner: the Formosan termite.    Unlike domestic varieties that confine themselves mostly to untreated deadwood, Formosan termites eat 15 varieties of live trees as well as utility poles and railroad ties. They even penetrate soft metals like copper and lead. The average colony contains up to three million termites, 10 times the number in an average native colony.    The extra-strength bugs are found in other parts of Florida, as well as in Texas and Louisiana, but they have taken a special liking to Hallandale. Nan-Yao Su, assistant professor of entomology at the University of Florida, estimates that they have moved into 75% of the high-rises in Hallandale and says that in a one-acre area, a single colony of termites has encircled four high-rises. Though buildings can be treated against the pests, before or after infestations, chemicals to destroy a colony would contaminate the water supply, Mr. Su says. &quot;With present technology, they'll be there forever,&quot; he concludes.    Which brings us to trees.    The biggest plant pest in Florida may be the Melaleuca, an Australian tree that crowds out everything in its path and thrives on fire. &quot;The Melaleuca forms a canopy so thick there's nothing but Melaleuca, no native plants and very little wildlife,&quot; says Mark Robson, a Florida Game biologist. The flowers are described as &quot;rotten, nauseating,&quot; and many people are allergic to the tree, biologists say. It is a constant battle to keep the tree from taking over parks and the Everglades.    Eerily, when ignited, the tree literally explodes, feeding the flames with a volatile fuel in its leaves, biologists say. Fire doesn't kill the tree, but it provokes release of millions of seeds, which remain viable for 10 years and spread the tree over nearby areas where the fire has destroyed other varieties.    &quot;I could not imagine how I would change the design of this tree to make it worse for us,&quot; complains Ronald Hofstetter, a University of Miami biologist.    One way would be to adapt it to attract walking catfish.    Walking catfish, as every tabloid reader knows, have been making their way up the Florida peninsula for some time. That upsets the state's important ornamental, or tropical, fish industry, as walking catfish eat ornamental fish. At Thomas Kitts's fish farm near Palm Beach, a 16-inch-high fence encircles 50 pools to keep out the marauders.    &quot;They're carnivorous and voracious eaters, and they're so prolific they crowd out everything,&quot; Mr. Kitts says.    When the catfish decide to change territory, they simply heave themselves out of the water, supported by their fins and propelled by their tails. They can cover considerable territory that way. Although they are vulnerable to sun and cold, a walking catfish lived 80 days out of water in an experiment at the state's Non-Native Fish Research Lab in Boca Raton, says director Paul Shafland.    Finally, back to cockroaches.    &quot;Americans have a real stigma about cockroaches,&quot; says a University of Florida extension agent, Jemy Hinton. &quot;It's like asking them if they have the mange.&quot;    No one is sure how South Florida's newest exotic, the Asian cockroach, got here, but it was first reported in a six-square-mile area near Lakeland in 1985. The infestation now is put at 5,000 square miles, having been confirmed as far away as Fort Myers on the west coast. And it is spreading fast.    &quot;We assume it's already in Miami and will be reported within a year when numbers are built up,&quot; says Richard Patterson, research leader at the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Insects Affecting Man and Animals Laboratory at Gainesville, Fla. Researchers expect it eventually to spread beyond Florida, with potential distribution in all of the South, the West Coast from Mexico through Washington state, and the East Coast into Long Island.    The new cockroach isn't a significant health or agricultural hazard. However, Mr. Patterson says, it &quot;aesthetically is more of a nuisance&quot; than the old variety &quot;because instead of hiding in a crack it flies and is visible -- it lands on walls, lampshades and people.&quot;    Researchers report populations of 250,000 per acre, or about six per square foot. At rest during the day, the cockroaches become explosively active at dusk and move around all night, making camping, among other things, almost impossible. They adapt nicely to indoor living. They crossbreed easily with the common German cockroach, a variety that is immune to most pesticides -- yielding an &quot;offspring that flies and is resistant to pesticides,&quot; Mr. Koehler notes. &quot;We have the worst of everything,&quot; he adds.    Well, not everything. Despite the wildness of its wildlife, there is reason to tough it out in Florida. Today, for instance, while much of the country is covered with snow and ice, Florida will be balmy as usual, and the forecast in Miami is for sunny skies and high temperatures in the 70s. </TEXT></DOC>