<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881018-0082 </DOCNO><HL> Flying Dinosaurs: Pan Am and TWA, Battered by Rivals, Struggle to Survive --- Big Changes at Two Carriers May Spark Realignment Of the Airline Industry --- Possible Upshot: Rising Fares </HL><AUTHOR> Judith Valente (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TWA PN LABOR </CO><IN> AIR TNM PRO </IN><TEXT>   Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines were once America's two flag carriers -- blazing new trails across the skies throughout the first 35 years of commercial aviation.    Pam Am's Clipper flights to Europe and the Pacific were the stuff of romance: white-jacketed stewards, private dressing rooms and freshly cooked meals. Pan Am engineers invented such procedures as plane de-icing; its crews piloted the first jetliners. Pan Am also helped develop the first jumbo jet, the Boeing 747.    TWA launched the era of transcontinental air travel. Under Howard Hughes, who controlled TWA for 20 years, it branched out overseas, inaugurating U.S. passenger service to Rome, Cairo and Bombay. It was the first to show in-flight movies and offer a separate first-class section.    Today, however, these once-proud airlines appear outclassed by flashy foreign carriers. They are outgunned by U.S. rivals with huge domestic route networks. And they have lost much of their competitive clout.    On the heavily traveled North Atlantic, their combined market share, at 30.6% in the first seven months of this year, is down sharply from 45% as recently as 1972. Both carriers, with the industry's two oldest fleets, desperately need new planes to compete with other lines.    In surveys of customer satisfaction, they now rank at the bottom of the list. From March through August, TWA lost more bags than any other U.S. airline. Pan Am has turned in the worst domestic on-time performances in four of the past five months, according to Department of Transportation records. Neither made the top 10 of international airlines preferred by frequent fliers in a 1987 survey by the International Foundation of Airline Passenger Associations. Some U.S. airline executives concede that many foreign carriers, with their hefty government subsidies, provide newer aircraft, more flight attendants per passenger and more freebies than Pan Am and TWA do.    Despite turnaround efforts at both carriers, experts doubt that either will survive much longer, at least in their current form. Pan Am is facing its seventh year of operating losses since 1980. Carl Icahn's plan to take TWA private will leave that carrier so overloaded with debt that many think he will have to sell it soon unless its cash flow -- net income before depreciation -- rises sharply.    Some analysts see Mr. Icahn's discussions about buying part of Texas Air Corp.'s troubled Eastern Airlines as a long-shot bid to get more domestic passengers fed into TWA's international flights. Texas Air has already agreed to sell the Eastern Shuttle to Donald Trump. Mr. Icahn has talked with Texas Air Chairman Frank Lorenzo about buying the rest of Eastern, but the talks were called off last weekend. Even if the talks resume, the obstacles to a TWA-Eastern combination are immense. And Mr. Icahn also is rumored to be thinking about selling TWA itself.    Major changes at Pan Am and TWA could set off a sweeping restructuring of the airline industry, especially on international routes. For passengers, it could reduce competition and raise fares on many international flights. Pan Am, after all, triggered the latest fare war over the Atlantic, offering a New York-to-London round-trip ticket for $298.    Although both carriers have been losing altitude for years, they recently have shown some gains. Pan Am's North Atlantic market share has risen to 16.2% from 14.8% in 1986 and TWA's to 14.4% from 13.7%. For 1987, TWA reported a profit after losses in four of the five prior years, and an official says 1988 net income should be about $135 million, up from $106.2 million last year. And although Pan Am isn't likely to get all the labor concessions it says it needs to remain in business, it probably will have new cost-saving contracts with all its unions by year end.    Despite the carriers' problems, they are attractive takeover candidates in some ways. If one of them were sold to another airline, the purchaser could be transformed overnight into an international powerhouse; both TWA and Pan Am still control valuable routes. Getting a route to London's Heathrow Airport is virtually impossible nowadays, and arranging routes to other large European cities requires tedious negotiations.    But if, for instance, Northwest Airlines acquired either Pan Am's or TWA's European routes, the NWA Inc. subsidiary could become the dominant U.S. carrier in both the North Atlantic and the Pacific. Some believe that American Airlines, which recently expanded in the Caribbean and Southeastern U.S., appears poised to purchase Pan Am's South American routes if they become available. The financially powerful AMR Corp. subsidiary could demolish the only other U.S. carrier in Latin America, loss-ridden Eastern.    United Airlines, which doesn't fly to Europe now, would also stand to gain from Pan Am's or TWA's demise, analysts say. Adding either of those lines' European air rights to its vast domestic and Pacific route system could well make the UAL Corp. unit even more of a juggernaut.    What turned Pan Am and TWA into candidates for takeover or even dismemberment? What went wrong at the two once-proud carriers?    To some extent, both have suffered from their historic roles. As U.S. flag carriers operating internationally, their fuel costs tend to be higher because of longer flights and the large amounts of fuel they buy abroad. They are also subject to the fluctuations of the dollar and the vagaries of foreign governments. Pan Am, for example, had to abandon its service to Nigeria because the Nigerian government regulated how much money could be taken out of the country. Both airlines pay nearly five times as much per passenger in user fees at Heathrow than the British government charges European carriers. Both lines have been terrorist targets.    The U.S. government also shares some blame for the carriers' problems. Even before deregulation, it wounded them by awarding U.S. routes to foreign carriers in exchange for foreign-trade concessions. In 1978, British Airways flew to nine U.S. cities; today, it flies to 18. Foreign carriers now command 54.7% of the trans-Atlantic business, even though most of the passengers are Americans.    The U.S. government particularly hobbled Pan Am. While the industry was regulated, Pan Am was barred from flying any domestic routes. After deregulation in 1978, the carrier, with no domestic system to feed its international routes, was caught unprepared. It faced new low-cost carriers, such as People Express, in international markets.    For the first time, the Pan Am Corp. subsidiary also had to compete against airlines, such as American, that had flown mainly domestic routes. Such carriers, with bases all across the country, had a big advantage; Pan Am and TWA, by contrast, operated largely out of New York's badly congested Kennedy International Airport. And once smaller carriers, such as Piedmont Airlines, began flying their own international routes, they fed fewer passengers from their hubs to New York to catch Pan Am or TWA flights abroad.    In addition, Pan Am and TWA also suffered for years from management misjudgments. As deregulation took hold, both airlines sat back while competitors moved aggressively into new markets. TWA didn't try hard to bolster its U.S. route system until 1986, when its acquisition of Ozark Airlines gave it a monopoly at the St. Louis airport as well as additional planes. But the acquisition didn't significantly help increase the feed to its international routes or modernize its fleet.    Pan Am's 1980 merger with National Airlines turned out to be a disaster. It did give Pan Am some more cost-efficient aircraft, but National was mainly a North-South carrier operating on the East Coast. What Pan Am needed was to feed passengers from interior cities to New York.    Analysts cite other lapses by Pan Am's management:   --When Pan Am began flying from Newark, N.J., to Puerto Rico, it inadvertently showed how efficiency can elude a carrier that has operated as a monopoly on so many routes for so many years. Pan Am put a director of operations, two managers, several clerks and two shifts of ground crews at Newark Airport -- all for one flight a day in and out of Newark.    --Pan Am sold its Pacific division to United in 1985. Although Pan Am was then so strapped for cash that it had little choice, the routes now generate substantial income for United, and double-digit growth is forecast for many of them.    --Pan Am failed to persuade United to feed passengers from United's domestic routes to Pan Am's European ones. United has since reached a similar agreement with British Airways, Pan Am's biggest foreign competitor.    Now, Pan Am is trying to upgrade its service. After operating most of its flights last year with an average of one less flight attendant, it recently hired about 700 more. And it has begun a program under which its frequent fliers can pre-order meals from a more varied menu.    TWA is also planning improvements in its transcontinental and trans-Atlantic coach meals. But it has cut back the flight attendants on many international routes. On one flight, an attendant says, passengers seated in the back of a 747 waited as long as five hours for a meal. Mr. Icahn acknowledges such problems and says the airline recently added one more flight attendant to some European flights.    Mechanics at both airlines talk about constant shortages of spare parts. Herbert Johnson, a veteran TWA mechanic, says Mr. Icahn reduced TWA's spare-parts inventory about 75% to raise cash, and, as a result, flights often have to be delayed until a part is located. &quot;Parts, work benches, saws, nuts, bolts, screws, he's sold them all,&quot; Mr. Johnson complains.    Mark A. Buckstein, TWA's general counsel, says the spare parts were sold in a lease-back arrangement and &quot;haven't just disappeared.&quot; Nonetheless, Mr. Johnson says many bins where parts were stored in TWA's Kansas City maintenance base remain empty.    Of the two airlines, now-profitable TWA is financially stronger. It has $1.3 billion in cash and marketable securities on hand.    However, Mr. Icahn's privatization proposal is casting a cloud of uncertainty over TWA's future, creating tension with its unions and diverting management's attention to the resulting legal disputes. As part of the complex transaction, TWA would pay Mr. Icahn $469 million for all his shares, enabling him to recoup most of his original investment and gain 90% control of the company. He also would get preferred shares that in five years are expected to be worth about $415 million. TWA's public shareholders would get a package of cash and debentures.    Mr. Icahn's own filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission shows that following privatization, TWA would be left about $2.8 billion in debt and annually paying out $466 million in interest. The filing concedes that TWA's cash flow probably wouldn't cover the debt service.    TWA's unions also wonder what will happen to the $1.3 billion, which is mostly in the form of stock TWA owns in USX Corp. and Texaco Inc., two companies that Mr. Icahn tried to take over. The privatization plan would allow Mr. Icahn to transfer that stock to a separate Icahn-controlled company. He says that, contrary to union claims, he would have to compensate TWA if he did move the stock.    Three of TWA's unions have begun court and Department of Transportation proceedings to force Mr. Icahn to abandon his plans. They want him to use TWA's cash to buy airplanes and upgrade airline operations. With such capital investment, TWA might well continue its rebound of the past 18 months. It has chosen new routes carefully, doubling flights within Europe in the past six months. It also has built a healthy New York-to-Florida market to compensate for the slow European market during winter months.    With merger talks with Eastern ended, at least temporarily, many in the industry believe that Mr. Icahn will soon be inclined to sell TWA. The man who donned a pilot's jacket the day he took control of TWA is clearly wearying of the barrage of union attacks.    &quot;It's always been my intention to make TWA the premier airline again. But if I have to spend the next five years constantly fighting labor problems, it makes me wonder if it's worth it,&quot; he says.    Pan Am's woes may prove even harder to cure. Pan Am's new chairman, Thomas Plaskett, still hasn't got all the labor concessions he terms essential to its survival. The company also is under pressure to make payments to its pension plans, now $504.3 million underfunded.    Until recently, Mr. Plaskett had been seeking buyers for Pan Am's Latin American routes and for options it holds on new planes. Such moves would only buy time. For the long term, a merger with a strong airline seems the easiest solution, if a buyer could be found. Talks with Braniff Airlines collapsed earlier this year.    Mr. Plaskett, Pan Am's third chairman since 1981, insists that the airline is moving slowly in the right direction. He points to recent efforts to add flights to Pan Am's New York and Miami hubs from cities without direct service to Europe and the Caribbean. He also cites progress with labor. Three of five unions have granted concessions. Of the other two, one has reached a tentative agreement with the company, and one has agreed to arbitration.    In the end, Mr. Plaskett probably won't get the $180 million in annual concessions he had been seeking, but he says he will get enough to raise about $400 million in capital within the next 18 months. That will allow him to spend about $17.5 million refurbishing old planes and upgrade customer service, a company spokesman says.    &quot;We're clearly in an uphill fight,&quot; Mr. Plaskett says. Paraphrasing Mark Twain, he adds, &quot;But reports of our death have been greatly exaggerated.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>