<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870429-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SECORD HAS AGREED to testify without immunity about the Iran-Contra affair.    The retired Air Force officer, viewed as a central figure in the sale of arms to Iran and the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels, is to testify voluntarily at congressional hearings scheduled to begin Tuesday. His decision to cooperate is considered a breakthrough for the Iran-Contra investigators. Meanwhile, independent counsel Walsh released a status report showing that his inquiry is focusing on allegations that former government aides manipulated senior officials, and that &quot;large sums of public money are unaccounted for.&quot;    Reagan called Poindexter &quot;an honorable man&quot; and speculated that his former adviser was being &quot;protective&quot; by withholding certain Iran-Contra data.    ---   A Soviet arms negotiator said Moscow's proposal to eliminate medium-range missiles from Europe included &quot;rigorous&quot; verification provisions. The plan, presented Monday in Geneva, also included proposals to scrap short-range arms in Europe, including the dismantling of nuclear missiles in West Germany as part of a treaty.    ---   Waldheim said he had a &quot;clear conscience&quot; about his World War II service in the German army. In a speech in Vienna, the Austrian president faulted Monday's Justice Department order barring him from entering the U.S. because of his alleged role in Nazi war crimes, saying there wasn't any &quot;evidence of culpable behavior.&quot;    ---   The Supreme Court upheld part of a 50-year-old federal law that permits the Justice Department to label various forms of expression, including some films, as &quot;political propaganda.&quot; The ruling came in a case of three Canadian films on acid rain and nuclear war. The court said the label isn't intended as censorship.    ---   Moral Majority leader Falwell said the new PTL board terminated evangelist Jim Bakker's $1.6 million salary and banished Bakker and his deputies from the ministry. Falwell also said the board ended payments to Jessica Hahn, a former church secretary whose brief liaison with Bakker seven years ago is central to the PTL scandal.    ---   Students in South Korea clashed with police on campuses across the country and Roman Catholic clergy participated in fasts to protest President Chun's refusal to consider constitutional changes. Officials in Seoul said that more than 40,000 students conducted rallies at 18 universities, and that most of the protests ended in violence.    ---   Italy's president dissolved Parliament after Prime Minister Fanfani lost a confidence vote for his 10-day-old minority government. President Cossiga called for general elections June 14, a year ahead of schedule. The moves came amid an eight-week political deadlock caused by the March 3 resignation of Socialist Premier Craxi.    ---   Portuguese President Soares scheduled legislative elections for July 19, two years early. The move followed the dissolution of Parliament in an attempt to resolve a crisis caused by the collapse this month of the minority Social Democrat government.    ---   South African police dispersed a multiracial group of students at an anti-apartheid protest at the University of Cape Town. The Pretoria government said 18 students were arrested. There weren't any injuries reported in the incident, in which police wielded whips to break up the rally.    ---   A House subcommittee accused the State Department of withholding information about security problems at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. The panel voted 6-0, with three absent, to subpoena department files on the matter as part of an investigation into the sex-spy scandal at the embassy.    ---   India plans to send its foreign minister to Washington to urge the U.S. to stop supplying arms to Pakistan and begin pressuring Islamabad to end its reported nuclear-arms program. Separately, diplomatic sources said President Zia had urged Reagan to lease to Pakistan U.S. radar planes following a series of raids from Afghanistan.    ---   Iceland's prime minister resigned after his center-right coalition government lost Saturday's general elections. The results from the balloting gave the balance of power to the leftist Women's Alliance, which hasn't yet decided whether to join the Social Democrats in forming a new coalition.    ---   Nicaragua announced that an American volunteer working as a mechanical engineer was killed by Contra rebels in a village 85 miles northeast of Managua. It was the first reported death of an American working for Managua in the war between the Sandinistas and the U.S.-backed rebels.    ---   Senior Israeli officials met secretly with Jordan's Hussein this month and agreed on a framework for a U.N.-sponsored forum that would lead to direct talks between Israel and Jordan and Palestinian delegates. An official confirmed that Israel's foreign and defense ministers had reached an accord with Hussein and won U.S. support.    ---   The Common Market agreed on measures to stem the influx of refugees from developing countries seeking political asylum for what the 12-nation European bloc said are often economic reasons. The ministers also agreed to improve exchanges of information in an effort to combat terrorism.    ---   A man described as a drifter pleaded guilty to 12 murder, robbery and kidnapping charges in connection with a bungled jewel robbery last June. The attempted theft led to a 13-hour siege at a Beverly Hills jewelry store, in which three people were killed. </TEXT></DOC>