<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0075 </DOCNO><HL> By Des Moore</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><DATELINE> Much of Australia's present overriding economic problem  </DATELINE><TEXT>   its massive overseas debt of 42% of gross domestic product -- reflects the expansionary policies pursued in 1982-1983 to 1984-1985. The Labor government, only recently re-elected with an increased majority for its third successive term, just the other day presented a budget for 1987-1988 that again risks exacerbating the existing debt problem in the same way. In presenting his second budget for 1987-1988, Treasurer Paul Keating argued that Australia has &quot;turned the corner&quot; and &quot;begun to close . . . the big gaps in our trade accounts.&quot; But the budget itself speaks of further small increases in debt and debt servicing ratios, and its remaining optimistic forecasts would need to be only a little off to convert those small increases to a large increase, possibly even worsening currency problems.    After lambasting those who as recently as three weeks ago pressed for at least a balanced budget, Mr. Keating now claims credit for doing just that! But this balance has not come from increased spending cuts since May: In fact, expenditure decisions since then have actually added to the deficit. What Mr. Keating suddenly discovered was a whole lot more revenue from various sources, including the booming financial markets. Even then, as this &quot;balanced budget&quot; included $1 billion ($734 million U.S.) from proceeds of major asset sales, there is actually a deficit equivalent to that amount in terms of the net call on savings. That is still a welcome reduction on last year's outcome of $2.7 billion, as is the real reduction of 1.2% in outlays (excluding asset proceeds). The lower Commonwealth deficit will also contribute to reducing the all-important net public sector borrowing requirement, although that could still be a high 3% to 3.5% of GDP.    Financial markets have given the so-called balanced budget an almost euphoric initial welcome, pushing up the Aussie dollar and pushing down interest rates, despite predictions of a continued high external deficit and higher price and wage inflation than overseas competitors. Nor have markets been fazed by the fact that the economic strategy of the budget is to provide for Australia to grow in 1987-1988 by 2.75% in real terms, faster than the latest forecasts for the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development area of 2.25%. Neither is there apparent concern that much of the greater part of the 1987-1988 growth (1.75 percentage points) is to come from domestic spending. Notwithstanding this relatively sharp recovery now forecast for domestic spending, Treasurer Keating says he expects the infamous J-curve to produce a further reduction in the current account deficit: from $13.5 billion, or 5% of GDP, to $11.5 billion, still historically high at 4% of GDP. Even if that is achieved it would contribute only one percentage point to economic growth. Thus it is clear the government is cutting its emphasis on external adjustment.    The stimulus to a recovery in domestic spending is expected to come from a number of quarters. After falling 1% last year, real household disposable income is forecast to increase 2% in 1987-1988, mainly because the expected slight reduction in real wages will be more than offset by the personal income tax reductions introduced last year. Most important, however, there has been a significant easing of monetary policy, starting a few months before the July election. Since then, the yield curve has moved from negative to positive with short-term interest rates allowed to fall by no less than five percentage points and long-term bond rates by 1.5 points. Ominously, there has been a jump in total borrowings from financial intermediaries to annual rates of 17% to 19%.    Most people had hoped that at the start of a new term, the government would bite the bullet and try to achieve a much greater reduction in the current account deficit. Australia's large overseas debt and the uncertain international economic outlook suggested the need for such action, along with the need to insure against the risk that continued sluggish overseas growth could again push down the terms of trade. Why, then, has the government adopted this highly risky approach?    What is sometimes overlooked in assessing budgets is that they are political as well as economic documents. It may be relevant that the right-wing state Labor government in New South Wales is coming up for re-election next year. As the NSW Labor Party is the power base of the present federal government in Canberra, it is a political imperative that it be returned to office. Prime Minister Bob Hawke and Treasurer Keating may well have judged it important in these circumstances to ensure sufficient economic growth to prevent any rise in unemployment, which is what Mr. Keating's budget predicts. Mr. Keating, moreover, is reportedly trying to soften his image before taking over the leadership of the Labor Party, a role for which he has received the blessing of none other than Mr. Hawke himself, timing unspecified. Prospective leaders and statesmen would doubtless prefer to risk rising debt to rising unemployment.    Of course, the government has been under heavy pressure to allow interest rates to fall as the Aussie dollar has been pushed upward in circumstances where foreign investors, notably Japanese, have been seeking an alternative to the greenback. The resultant appreciation of the Australian dollar has eroded some of the earlier needed gains in international competitiveness and has contributed to a crisis in Australia's coal industry, a major source of exports. The continued faster growth in Australia's wage costs compared with those of its major competitors has emphasized the heavy irony of the appreciating currency. Continued appreciation has further raised the question of how long Australia can allow its exchange rate and interest rate settings to be excessively influenced by the irresponsible monetary (and other) policies pursued by some countries.    Leaving aside such complex issues, the key point is that the more the government felt it had to succumb to lower interest rates the more it should have taken action to tighten fiscal policy. That would have allowed room for an expansion in private sector spending, including the all-important business investment, without risking external problems. Business investment is in fact scheduled to increase by only 4% in real terms -- barely enough to maintain the existing capital stock given that the forecast is on a gross basis, let alone provide the investment needed to generate import replacement and exports.    In sum the budget is most disappointing not only because it pursues a high-risk economic strategy but also because it has missed the opportunity, open to a new government in its first term, to make much greater progress in reducing Australia's underlying structural problems. The budget papers acknowledge that &quot;a good deal of the task remains ahead and virtually all assessments point to a long hard haul.&quot; A less &quot;gradualist&quot; adjustment strategy would have still allowed economic activity and employment to increase through greater adjustment on external account, but would have avoided the now risky approach of a dash for growth in domestic spending combined with little (if any) external account improvement.    ---   Mr. Moore, former deputy secretary of the Australian Treasury, is a senior fellow with the Institute of Public Affairs. </TEXT></DOC>