<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870106-0117 </DOCNO><HL> A Long Celebration to Do Right by the Constitution---By Lynne V. Cheney</HL><DD> 01/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Before this new year is over, the U.S. Constitution will be celebrated by conferences on college campuses and essay contests in the schools. In honor of the 200th anniversary of our founding document, there will be reading programs in public libraries and poster exhibits in shopping malls. On television and radio there will be short spots and long programs. Newspapers across the nation will reprint the Constitution.    While almost all our lives will be touched by the bicentennial in 1987, it is important to keep in mind that the commemorations will actually occur over several years. Nineteen eighty-seven is just the start -- because 1787 was just the start. The Constitution was created that year but not ratified until the next, and it wasn't until 1789 that the government it set forth came into reality. Only in 1791 was the Bill of Rights added.    Keeping this long process in mind is important to full understanding of what was achieved with the Constitution. As the framers were well aware, 39 men in Philadelphia could not put into effect a compact that begins, &quot;We the People.&quot; If the Constitution was to be what it claimed to be -- a document expressing the will of the population -- then it had to be validated by the citizenry. And so after the signing on Sept. 17, 1787, the document was put on a stagecoach to New York for delivery to the Continental Congress. Accompanying it was a request that the Congress submit the Constitution for approval to special state conventions.    A fierce national debate ensued, with rumors of Anti-Federalist plots to undo the Constitution fueling Federalist passions. In Philadelphia, pro-Constitution forces became so frustrated at legislative dallying that they broke into a boarding house and hauled two recalcitrant legislators through the streets to the Statehouse so the Assembly could schedule a ratifying convention.    The first conventions to meet ratified the Constitution quickly, but it was by no means certain that Virginia and New York, two of the most powerful states, would follow along. In Virginia, in June 1788, Patrick Henry and George Mason opposed the Constitution with such fire and eloquence that ratification was achieved by a margin of only 10 votes out of 168. In New York, later that month, it was even closer. If two delegates to the ratifying convention there had voted differently, the Constitution -- and probably the union -- would have failed.    Even after ratification, success was not assured. Opponents of the Constitution argued powerfully that a republic on the scale being attempted could not hope to endure; proponents had no historical examples with which to counter. The framers of the Constitution, who had often looked to the Roman republic for inspiration, were only too well aware of the ultimate fate of Rome. In 1789, when George Washington, newly sworn president of the United States, addressed the dignitaries assembled in New York's Federal Hall, he spoke tentatively of the new form of government, calling it an &quot;experiment intrusted to the hands of the American people.&quot;    Still, the peaceful manner in which the new government was launched, after reflective and deliberate process, excited the wonder of the world. &quot;That which is new in the history of societies,&quot; Alexis de Tocqueville wrote, &quot;is to see a great people, warned by its lawgivers that the wheels of government are stopping, turn its attention on itself without haste or fear, sound the depth of the ill, and then wait two years to find the remedy at leisure, and then finally, when the remedy has been indicated, submit to it voluntarily without its costing humanity a single tear or drop of blood.&quot;    Equally astonishing was the new government's display of flexibility. Congress almost immediately turned its attention to altering the document that delineated the republic. The Bill of Rights, dealing with many of the issues that had troubled the Anti-Federalists, was passed and sent to the states for ratification.    While the task of the Commission of the Bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution would be easier if all these events were to be recognized on a single day, a longer commemoration will do greater justice to the deliberate process by which constitutional government was achieved. And it will have the added advantage of adding luster to the reputation of James Madison, the man most responsible for our founding document.    As a recent article in this newspaper noted, most Americans have no idea of Madison's contributions to the American republic, but as we celebrate the stages involved in its creation, awareness of his importance is sure to grow. At every step of the way, he was the crucial player. In fact, he was at work long before the convention, studying ancient and modern governments to gather ideas. Drawing on his knowledge, he became the chief architect of the Virginia Plan, which would ultimately form the basis for the Constitution. Once the convention was under way, he was constantly in the midst of the debate -- and at the same time he was keeping the careful notes that are our most complete record of what happened in Philadelphia.    When it came time for ratification, he wrote letters to every part of the union to encourage and advise pro-Constitution forces. He joined with Alexander Hamilton and John Jay to produce The Federalist, a series of essays aimed primarily at persuading the people of New York to support the Constitution. He was present at the Virginia ratifying convention, countering the arguments of Henry and Mason and securing the necessary votes from uncommitted delegates to squeak out a victory.    When the new government was organized, Madison was there, a key adviser to President Washington. More important, he was a member of the House of Representatives, and when the Bill of Rights was presented, Madison was the chief sponsor.    Those who know his career call Madison the &quot;Father of the Constitution.&quot; By 1991, when the bicentennial celebration closes, a nation that owes him much should be more aware of its debt.    ---   Mrs. Cheney is chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities and a member of the Constitution's Bicentennial Commission. </TEXT></DOC>