<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880422-0114 </DOCNO><HL> ANC: Apartheid's Foes -- The Long Struggle: The ANC Is Banned, But It Is in the Hearts Of a Nation's Blacks --- In South Africa, the Group Survives Assassinations, Government Crackdowns --- The Black, Green and Gold </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Thurow (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>      {Last of a Series}   CRADOCK, South Africa -- &quot;Where is the African National Congress?&quot; the old woman says, repeating a question she has just been asked. She hesitates, carefully weighing her answer, for the ANC is an illegal organization in South Africa, banned since 1960.    &quot;It is here,&quot; she whispers conspiratorially, touching her breast and then her head. &quot;And,&quot; she says, opening her arms to embrace her living room, &quot;it is here.&quot;    It was in this room in June 1983, Gertrude Calata recalls, that her ailing father, the Rev. James Calata, convened a meeting of the ANC, just as he had done many times as the organization's secretary general in the 1940s. But this time, he and his daughter were the only people in the room. &quot;He was talking to ANC colleagues who were already dead,&quot; the daughter recalls. &quot;He was telling them to plead with the people to shed the yoke of oppression.&quot;    Two days later, Mr. Calata died, but the mystical spirit of the ANC he had conjured up survived; it spread from his house to inhabit the entire township. Residents say the funeral, held on the local soccer field, inspired a wave of political activism that made this rural community one of the most tumultuous places in the country during the turmoil of the past several years. In February, the Cradock Residents Association was one of 17 organizations banned from further political activity, apparently because the government thinks it is influenced by the ANC.    It is, of course. &quot;We know the ANC is our national organization. We know it represents our wishes and dreams,&quot; Nyameka Goniwe, the widow of slain community leader Matthew Goniwe, said before the banning. &quot;We may bow down, but we will never go into submission.&quot;    So far, neither banning nor death has worked. At the Cradock cemetery, the graves of Matthew Goniwe and three other young leaders, all killed by unknown assailants in 1985, are marked defiantly by decals of the ANC flag.    The spirit of resistance that pervades Cradock is proof that the ANC still has a powerful presence in South Africa nearly three decades after it was outlawed. In fact, the harder the government cracks down on its black opposition, the more influential the ANC becomes.    &quot;When the chips are down,&quot; says the Rev. Frank Chikane of the South African Council of Churches, &quot;the oppressed people know that the liberation movement must take care of them.&quot;    Anti-apartheid activists within South Africa immediately turned to the ANC's exiled headquarters in Lusaka, Zambia, for advice on how to counter the Feb. 24 bannings. Should we move underground, they ask, or should we shift our activities to other legal organizations unaffected by the edict? The more militant activists are making plans to leave the country and become ANC guerrillas, as thousands of young people did following a government crackdown in 1976. Even those who had shunned violence are looking to the ANC to step up its armed struggle.    &quot;The ANC is our army,&quot; says a 22-yearold Christian youth-group leader known as Comrade Lesley. &quot;It gives us hope and strength that we are not alone.&quot;    To most of the world, the ANC is an exiled liberation movement claiming the moral high ground in South Africa from such faraway places as Lusaka, London and Stockholm. It is known for its international conventions condemning apartheid, for its strident calls for economic sanctions against the Pretoria government and for its sporadic terrorist strikes within South Africa.    But to know those things alone is to know only a part of the ANC. &quot;The ANC is almost a folk organization in South Africa. Its roots are very deep,&quot; says Reginald September, a member of the ANC's National Executive Committee in Lusaka. Adds Jackie Selebi, the exiled secretary of youth: &quot;The ANC is living among the people back home.&quot;    The ANC is certainly present every Christmas at the Johannesburg home of Helen Joseph, an 83-year-old white woman who has long championed black rights. Anti-apartheid activists gather on her front lawn and observe a two-minute silence followed by a toast to their colleagues absent because of exile, jail or death. &quot;I don't mention the ANC, but everybody knows what I'm talking about,&quot; says Mrs. Joseph. &quot;They can ban an organization, but they can't ban ideas.&quot;    The government, however, is trying to do that. Pretoria, which portrays the ANC as Moscow-controlled terrorists, is determined to eliminate every vestige of the organization. Last year, the security police scored some big successes against the armed struggle, arresting and killing more ANC cadres and confiscating more weapons than ever before. And the February actions against the 17 anti-apartheid groups, including the large United Democratic Front, or UDF, were clearly attempts to sever the ANC's internal arms.    Undoubtedly, such repression has severely retarded the struggle for liberation. But the ANC continues to be a presence in South Africa. &quot;Since the government can't put its finger on the spirit of the ANC, it tries to crystallize the organization by saying, 'Let's get the UDF, they're the ANC,'&quot; says Aubrey Mokoena, a UDF patron. &quot;What the government doesn't realize is that the ANC has transcended organizations. It has overflowed its banks. It is supported by many tributaries.&quot;    One of the tributaries particularly troubling to the government flows through white South Africa. Although few whites actually embrace the liberation movement (the white response to the recent bannings was fairly muted), more and more of them are coming to the realization that the ANC must be included in negotiations to solve the country's problems.    White businessmen, professors and preachers have gone to Lusaka to consult with the ANC. Within South Africa, there is hardly an academic exercise dealing with post-apartheid questions that doesn't involve the ANC, be it a study on the role of religion by Afrikaner theologians, a book initiated by corporate executives on strategies for change, or efforts by administrators and students at the University of Cape Town to &quot;Africanize&quot; its European-style curriculum.    &quot;They realize that the ANC is central to the solution of South Africa,&quot; says Thabo Mbeki, the ANC's director of information in Lusaka.    It wasn't always so. Following the banning of the ANC and the arrest of many of its leaders in the early 1960s, black opposition went into eclipse. No one dared mention the ANC or its imprisoned leaders, and the movement's spirit seemed to be broken.    Dan Cindi, a member of the ANC's international division in Lusaka, remembers as a teen-ager rummaging through his house and coming across his grandfather's ANC membership card. &quot;I showed it to my mother and asked, 'What's this?' &quot; he says. &quot;My mother said, 'Here, give me that. We must put that away.'&quot;    Mr. Chikane, the secretary general of the South African Council of Churches, recalls that when he was 12, no one would explain to him why military vehicles were patrolling his township. &quot;It was only in January 1986, when there was talk of Nelson Mandela's release, that my mother told me for the first time that they had attended ANC meetings in the 1950s,&quot; he says. &quot;For years, nobody talked about these things.&quot;    The ANC's comeback in the public consciousness began in the mid-1970s, with the uprising of Soweto students and the increasing radicalization of township youths. The Black Consciousness movement, which called upon blacks to assert themselves, shocked blacks into an awareness of the struggle, which led them to the discovery of the long and illustrious history of the ANC. Suddenly, the ANC colors -- black, green and gold -- were appearing at rallies across the country.    The renaissance was completed in 1983 with the formation of the UDF to oppose the new tricameral parliament, which created separate chambers for whites, Indians and people of mixed race but none for the black majority. &quot;The UDF provided the channel for people to express themselves. And it so happens that they expressed their feelings for the ANC,&quot; says Mr. Chikane. &quot;You could hear it in their songs and slogans.&quot;    There are, of course, rivals to the ANC. In exile, the Pan-Africanist Congress claims to be leading the liberation struggle, despite its low profile. In South Africa, the Azanian People's Organization represents the Black Consciousness movement, and the more moderate Inkatha, headed by Mangosuthu Buthelezi, has strong support among the Zulus. Differences between these groups and the ANC -- particularly over the ANC's insistence that it be the undisputed leader of the opposition forces -- have hampered black unity, often erupting into violence among blacks.    But the ANC is far and away the most popular liberation organization. Countless schools, streets and subdivisions in the black townships are unofficially named after ANC leaders such as the imprisoned Nelson Mandela and Walter Sisulu, and the exiled Oliver Tambo. A number of anti-apartheid organizations, labor unions and church groups have adopted the Freedom Charter, a list of demands for a nondiscriminatory society, which was adopted by the Congress Alliance, led by the ANC, in 1955. Even some police officials estimate that 40% of the black population supports the ANC.    &quot;The people of South Africa, by their actions and utterances, have in fact unbanned the ANC,&quot; says the Rev. Smangaliso Mkhatshwa, a prominent church leader and activist against apartheid.    Township children learn the name Nelson Mandela before they know the names of their neighbors. Mr. Mokoena, who heads the Release Mandela Committee, one of the 17 newly banned organizations, tells the story of a Soweto kindergarten where the children refused to eat their porridge until they saw Mr. Mandela: &quot;The teachers finally went out to the street and got an old man who was nicely dressed, and they told the children, 'This is Nelson Mandela.' Then, the children ate.&quot;    Mr. Mokoena, who named his son Mandela, says the strength of the ANC within South Africa comes from the number of followers who are willing to believe though they have never seen. &quot;Many of us have never had an encounter with the ANC. It's like asking when did you have an encounter with Jesus Christ,&quot; says Mr. Mokoena, who was 12 years old in 1960, when the ANC was banned. &quot;For those of us too young to really know the ANC, it's just sheer inspiration.&quot;    Such inspiration is to be found among the oppressed throughout South Africa: in Christian youth groups and in socialist unions, in the streets of the townships and in prison cells. If it is illegal to overtly support the ANC, then they will unabashedly support the Freedom Charter.    &quot;One of our priorities is to link the values of the Freedom Charter, the values of the ANC, with the values of Jesus Christ,&quot; says Comrade Lesley, the leader of a Christian students' group.    &quot;It is our role in the struggle, as a Christian organization, to show that the Freedom Charter is not a Communist document,&quot; he says. &quot;The Freedom Charter says exactly what Jesus said. It is clear Jesus was on the side of the poor, of the oppressed.&quot; Thus, Lesley asks, can there be any doubt that Jesus is also on the side of the ANC?    There is no doubt where the country's largest labor federation, the Congress of South African Trade Unions, or Cosatu, stands. Although it remains strictly separated organizationally from the ANC, Cosatu has adopted the Freedom Charter as &quot;the workers' weapon in the struggle for democracy and socialism.&quot; Despite the recent bannings, which prohibit Cosatu from conducting any political campaigns, the federation's efforts to educate workers about the Freedom Charter will probably continue unabated on shop floors and in mine shafts around the country. At Cosatu's national convention last July, the meeting hall reverberated with cries of &quot;Viva ANC, Viva Freedom Charter.&quot;    Cries of solidarity also ring through the country's prisons wherever two or more convicted ANC members or captured guerrillas are held. &quot;You want to know what makes the ANC tick, how it keeps itself alive?&quot; asks Thami Mkhwanazi, a journalist who spent seven years in prison for conspiring to help people leave the country illegally. &quot;The prisons are very important, for prison is the best place to cultivate political views.&quot;    Mr. Mkhwanazi says that in many prisons, new arrivals are quickly quizzed about their level of political knowledge and then assigned to one of several informal &quot;classes&quot; in which the ANC and Freedom Charter are studied in detail and political issues are vigorously debated. In Cape Town's Pollsmoor Prison and on Robben Island, where Mr. Mkhwanazi spent three years, the &quot;teachers&quot; are ANC leaders like Messrs. Mandela and Sisulu.    &quot;Although we are separated by walls and sections, our views are debated all over prison,&quot; Mr. Mkhwanazi says. &quot;You've got to know the history of the ANC on your fingertips. Then you need to know how to translate and interpret the politics of the day according to this history.&quot;    Under the state of emergency, more than 25,000 detainees have been so schooled. &quot;When you come out of prison, you are armed to the teeth with revolutionary theory,&quot; says Mr. Mkhwanazi, who notes that political prisoners coming out of jail in the mid-1970s played a big role in the revival of activism then. &quot;You are a strategist, a vanguard in the struggle.&quot;    In the townships near the Indian Ocean town of Port Elizabeth, the vanguards remain in detention. But a second generation of leaders has arisen to pick up where they left off.    &quot;What inspires us is the sacrifices that the others are making,&quot; says a young man named Bongani, a local student leader. &quot;The ANC is in our blood,&quot; says his friend, Mvelisi. &quot;We can't run away from it. We have a role to play in the struggle.&quot;    They are joined by a third youth leader, whom they call Wiseman. &quot;Those who have joined the ANC in exile are our brothers and sisters. Their spirit still lives with us,&quot; he says. &quot;The state repression has disciplined us not to ignore them, not to forget what they are saying.&quot;    Thus, when the call went out from Lusaka in 1985 to make South Africa ungovernable, the people of the townships, particularly those in Port Elizabeth, responded with months of sustained unrest. &quot;We know the big strategy is to mobilize all the people in the country. We know we have a place in that strategy,&quot; says Bongani. He raises his fist and repeats the popular youth slogan: &quot;Freedom or death. Victory is certain.&quot;    ---   Lee Lescaze contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>