<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Monetary Grip on a Firmer Dollar </HL><AUTHOR> Lawrence A. Kudlow </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN EUROP </CO><IN> MON FIN ECO </IN><G> TRE </G><TEXT>   The nattering nabobs of negativism again are out in force, bashing the dollar and the Reagan administration's economic policy. But as usual they have overstated their point and overstayed their welcome. The underlying factors of the dollar -- particularly monetary factors -- are gradually turning positive, though until yesterday no one seemed to be noticing. Better U.S. trade figures are coming, and when they do, a sustained dollar rally could be the first surprise of the new year.    Leading academics from the banks of the Charles River and its international tributaries, in a mighty effort to revive Keynesian theory, are joined in battle by a number of well-known newspaper columnists and editorialists, a few prominent investment bankers and CEOs, a garden variety of reporters and market analysts who follow the latest fashionable drumbeat, the so-called Group of 33, and the OECD as well. Although their cacophony is couched in terms of &quot;saving&quot; the dollar and the world economy, their hidden policy agenda is to reverse the Reagan tax-rate reductions, or institute a massive value-added tax, as the principal means of narrowing the dreaded budget and trade deficits.    Day after day it is argued that adequate fiscal-policy adjustments to improve the international-payments situation and stabilize currency values have not yet been taken. But this view is predicated on excessive, indeed one might argue obsessive, emphasis on the U.S. budget deficit as the root cause of overstimulated consumer demand for foreign imports and the foreign borrowing requirement that has allegedly sated international portfolio holdings with too many dollars. This is, of course, the standard Keynesian aggregate demand-side view of how economies work.    Extending this argument, its proponents believe that foreigners will not acquire additional dollar holdings unless the dollar's value declines further and dollar interest rates rise. Indeed, the constant refrain stresses the inevitability of higher interest rates and a lower dollar, unless taxes are raised to reduce the deficit. But in a stable-currency environment with restrained growth, rates actually could fall.    Curiously, in their obsession with deficits, the critics have ignored significant changes in monetary policy during the past year. This Keynesian preoccupation with fiscal policy and ignorance of monetary policy is nothing new. However, classical economic theory teaches that the value of money is primarily a function of monetary policy, not fiscal policy. Insofar as economic stimulus or restraint is concerned, money matters much more than deficits.    If central banks expand money supply at a faster rate than money demand, the marginal utility or purchasing power of money declines both at home (higher inflation) and on foreign-exchange markets (lower dollar). Indeed, because of excessive monetary stimulus from the Federal Reserve in 1986 and early 1987, investment portfolios increasingly shifted out of dollar financial assets into commodities, gold and foreign currencies. This decline in the portfolio demand for money led to a whiff of reflation, higher interest rates, a lower dollar exchange-rate, and ultimately to the stock-market crash. Market forces were not responding to the budget deficit, which actually declined, nor to the trade deficit, which has gotten no worse, but to the excessive volume of dollars created by the Federal Reserve.    The key point is that while everyone complains about fiscal policy, significant changes in monetary policy have occurred in 1987, adjustments that bode well for the future value of the dollar both at home and on foreign-exchange markets. Federal Reserve policy is steadily moving in the direction of a commodity price standard that will sustain low domestic inflation and a steadier, perhaps stronger dollar on international markets.    By measuring the value of money in terms of real goods, even as an informal, judgmental or discretionary guide, the Fed will better regulate the money supply in order to avoid major deflationary or inflationary pressures. A few weeks ago at the Lehrman Institute, Fed governor Wayne D. Angell indicated that monetary policy in 1987 was not out of keeping with a commodity price rule approach. Alan Greenspan told Congress last month he was impressed with Mr. Angell's research of appropriate commodity indexes to guide policy. Fed governor H. Robert Heller has advocated use of a broad-based commodity basket as a reference point for national monetary policies and a suitable anchor for the international monetary system.    The Fed is moving correctly to provide a credible noninflationary policy, and positive results of the Fed's new thinking are beginning to show. Growth of the high-powered monetary base reached an inflationary rate of 11% early last year, but it had gradually descended to an appropriate pace of 6.5% by year-end. M1 and M2 growth also declined substantially. In response to this monetary restraint, commodity indexes have essentially moved sideways during the past six months, following a sharp run-up during the first half of 1987. That could herald a revival in money demand.    After rising at an annual rate of 4.5% from December 1986 through June 1987, producer prices during the next five months advanced at only a 0.6% annual rate. The rate of consumer price increase measured during the same intervals decelerated from 5.4% to 3.8%. Interest rates on short- and long-term Treasury securities have fallen a full percentage point or more in recent months, with the prospect of further interest-rate declines in 1988 so long as Federal Reserve policy continues to stabilize the value of money.    Meanwhile, as the U.S. has restrained its production of dollars, Frankfurt and Tokyo have been inflating their money supplies. Since mid-1986, German monetary-base growth has accelerated from 6% to over 8%, while Japanese M2 growth has increased from below 8% to over 12%.    By the end of 1987, year-to-year comparisons show German monetary-base growth at 8.2% vs. U.S. base growth of only 6.5%. Japanese M2 growth stands at 12.4%, contrasted with U.S. M2 growth of only 4.2%. Relative M1 growth tells a similar story. The supposedly free-spending, pump-priming U.S. now has the stingiest monetary policy of the three major currency nations.    In the U.S., the aftereffects of monetary restraint will lead to slower 1988 GNP growth, softer consumer spending, reduced demand for foreign imports and a narrowing of the trade deficit. The absence of an inverted yield curve suggests that no recessionary credit crunch has been induced by the Fed's adjustment. Commodity market price signals suggest a subdued inflation rate. Low unit labor costs for business and a depreciated currency provide enhanced competitiveness necessary for continued export improvement. These factors point to a stronger dollar exchange rate with lower domestic interest rates.    For Germany and Japan, monetary stimulus will generate faster 1988 GNP growth, stronger consumer spending and increased demand for imports. Significant currency appreciation has left their exports less competitive, and hence trade surpluses will decline. Prices and interest rates appear stable.    Ironically, with all the squabbling and wrangling, G-7 policy coordination is working; if not sufficiently from the fiscal side, certainly from the monetary side. Treasury Secretary Baker wanted Germany and Japan to stimulate, and they have done so. The rest of G-7 wanted the U.S. to restrain, and that is exactly what the Federal Reserve has done. Since money is more powerful than deficits, the policy adjustments will reduce the payments imbalance and stabilize currency values.    My New Year's advice to the Reagan administration is simple: stay on the present course. Ignore advice for higher tax rates and a lower dollar. Maintain the low rate of spending growth achieved during the past two years. Support the Fed's new approach for price stability. Oppose protectionist legislation from Congress. As for the nattering nabobs, they were wrong in the past and their guidance is hardly a sure ticket for the future.    ---   Mr. Kudlow is chief economist of Bear Stearns andamp; Co. and was associate U.S. budget director, 1981-83. </TEXT></DOC>