<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881006-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Credit Markets: Bond Prices Remain Stuck in Narrow Groove, Ending Little Changed for Third Straight Day </HL><AUTHOR> Tom Herman and Andrew Bary (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT EUROP JAPAN JR UIL GE FNM </CO><IN> BON FIN BNK REL CON ECO </IN><G> TRE </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Bonds remained stuck in a narrow groove again yesterday, finishing little changed for the third day in a row.    Falling oil prices sparked a mild bond rally in the morning, but it didn't last long. As of late yesterday, the U.S. government's benchmark 30-year bonds yielded 8.95%, unchanged from late Tuesday.    Most short-term interest rates also hardly budged. Rates on short-term Treasury bills and bank certificates of deposit finished at about the same levels as late Tuesday. For example, the rate on three-month Treasury bills closed at 7.22% bid, down from 7.23% Tuesday.    Traders said elation over lower oil prices, considered an important inflation barometer, was offset by continued fears that the Federal Reserve Board may raise short-term interest rates further to keep the economy from overheating. Some money managers also worry that the oil price declines will prove short-lived.    Moreover, Treasury officials say they still don't know if they will sell any new long-term bonds in the government's quarterly financing next month. That's because Congress hasn't yet raised the government's authority to sell new long-term debt. While the bond issue isn't controversial, it has become ensnarled in a lengthy Senate debate over a tax bill.    Interest rates may rise slightly further in coming weeks, but probably will drop sharply next year, contended James L. Kochan, chief fixed-income strategist at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. At a meeting with reporters yesterday, he and other Merrill Lynch officials reiterated their forecast that rates will drop because the economy will slow and inflation will remain subdued.    Also, bond yields already are at such lofty levels that they represent highly attractive investments, Mr. Kochan said. He contended that yields of 9% or more on long-term Treasury bonds &quot;have been rare in the U.S. during the postwar period.&quot;    Still, traders fear bond yields will rise even further, at least temporarily, because of a government report to be released tomorrow. The report is expected to show the number of workers on business payrolls rose 291,000 last month, according to the average estimate of 19 economists surveyed by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report. That would follow an August gain of 219,000.    But few analysts have had much success predicting the employment figures, and estimates for the September number vary enormously, ranging from 220,000 to 375,000. The report also is expected to show the nation's civilian unemployment rate fell to 5.5% last month from 5.6%.    The figures command intense scrutiny among bond investors because they represent the first government report for all of last month. Also, Fed officials have been paying especially close attention to employment data in setting credit policy.    Wayne Wong, a managing director at Marinvest Inc., said long-term Treasury bond yields could &quot;easily&quot; rise as much as one-fourth of a percentage point if September nonfarm payrolls grew much more than 275,000 and if Congress acts speedily to allow the Treasury to sell new long-term bonds.    Treasury, Agency Securities   The government's benchmark 30-year bonds rose slightly to 101 25/32 from 101 24/32. But the latest 10-year Treasury notes dipped 1/32 of a point to 102 18/32 to yield 8.85%.    Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.'s index of long-term Treasury bonds declined 0.30 point to 1249.33 from 1249.63. The low was 1245.67, and the high was 1253.69. That was a slightly wider spread than Tuesday but still relatively narrow.    Yields also were little changed on shorter-term issues. The Treasury's new two-year notes auctioned last week stood at 8.40%, down from 8.41%. The new four-year notes yielded 8.56%, unchanged from Tuesday.    The rate on new six-month Treasury bills rose slightly to 7.49% bid from 7.48%.    The Treasury said yesterday it plans to sell $6.75 billion of seven-year notes Wednesday. In when-issued trading yesterday, these notes were quoted at a yield of 8.75%.    Separately, analysts said yesterday the Federal National Mortgage Association, after an uncertain start, appears to have found success with an innovative financing technique for its huge mortgage portfolio.    Fannie Mae's second issue of indexed sinking-fund debentures, priced Tuesday afternoon, traded well in the secondary market amid indications that the bonds have been placed with institutional investors.    The 9.05% debentures, with a final maturity of five years and an average life of 3.1 years, assuming no changes in interest rates, traded late yesterday at 100 2/32 bid, up slightly from the issue price of par, after having been freed to trade yesterday morning.    The $500 million issue has matched the slight price advance in the three-year Treasury note since Tuesday afternoon, as the yield spread above the three-year note has held at about 56 basis points.    &quot;Fannie Mae has succeeded in establishing a new source of funds and a new method of matching their assets to their liabilities,&quot; said Thomas Parker, a managing director and head of federal agency debt trading at Bear, Stearns andamp; Co.    Fannie Mae officials have said they plan to make the sinking-fund debentures a regular part of the company's funding strategy if market conditions are right.    &quot;Our reaction is quite favorable. We're getting good feedback from the Street,&quot; said Linda Knight, assistant treasurer at Fannie Mae.    &quot;The debentures were well distributed to a reasonably diversified investor base, and they were markedly better distributed across the selling group&quot; than was the first $500 million issue in July, Mr. Parker said.    The initial issue suffered from investor unfamiliarity with the complicated sinking-fund structure, which had never been used for an agency debt offering. In addition, some investors and dealers thought the debentures compared unfavorably to some mortgage-backed securities.    The initial issue was priced at a spread of 0.53 percentage point above the three-year Treasury note, but the margin widened to 0.60 percentage point after it was freed as some firms unloaded unsold positions onto the secondary market. The spread soon tightened to the original differential, but it took the intervention of some big firms in the selling group to stabilize the price.    The sinking-fund debentures are designed to mimic the characteristics of the fixed-rate mortgages in Fannie Mae's $102 billion portfolio. When interest rates rise, the sinking-fund payments decline, resulting in a longer average life, and when rates fall, the sinking-fund payments rise, producing a shorter average life.    This feature matches the characteristics of fixed-rate mortgages, which get prepaid infrequently when rates rise because homeowners have incentive to hold below-market rate loans. When rates fall, mortgage prepayments rise as homeowners refinance their loans.    The sinking-fund feature on the debentures is unfavorable to investors because investors want to hold onto their bonds for a longer time when rates fall and for a shorter time when rates rise.    For this reason, Fannie Mae had to pay a yield premium for the issue. The rate on the sinking-fund debentures is about 30 basis points more than the yield on Fannie Mae's standard three-year debentures and 20 basis points more than the rate on its five-year debentures.    With a sinking-fund structure, periodic principal payments by the issuer retire the debt issue. This differs from a standard bond, on which principal is paid in a lump sum at maturity. The Fannie Mae sinking-fund is pegged to any movement in the 10-year Treasury note.    Until the first $500 million sinking-fund offering in July, Fannie Mae relied exclusively on noncallable debentures to fund its mortgage portfolio. This left it open to the danger of an asset-liability mismatch if rates moved sharply in either direction.    Municipals   Municipal bonds advanced slightly, although they finished off their intrasession highs.    The New Jersey Turnpike Authority's 7.20% issue due 2018 rose 1/8 point to 93 3/4 bid, 93 7/8 offered. During the session, the bonds were bid for as much as 94, the first time they've reached that high a level since March.    At yesterday's offered level, the Turnpike Authority bonds yielded 7.73%, down from 7.75% late Tuesday.    Oil price swings were the primary catalyst for movement in tax-exempts yesterday. Municipals firmed from price levels established in early activity as it became clear that the week-long plunge in oil prices was continuing. But as oil rebounded from its early lows yesterday afternoon, municipals and Treasurys slipped from their peaks.    Corporate Issues   Corporate bond prices finished little changed in light dealings.    On the new-issue front, two issues that underwriters began marketing earlier this week met different successes at pricing yesterday.    United Illuminating Co.'s $150 million of seven-year debentures came to market at a spread of 178 basis points above the rate of the Treasury seven-year note and sold out quickly. That spread was 22 basis points below the expected spread that was circulated earlier in the week.    James River Corp.'s $250 million of 30-year debentures came to market at a spread slightly wider than originally expected.    The debentures were priced at par to yield 10 3/4%, a spread of 174 basis points above the rate of the Treasury 8 7/8% issue of 2017. The original price talk had been for a rate 165 basis points over Treasurys.    Late in the session, General Electric Capital Corp. sold $250 million of four-year notes through competitive bidding. The 8 3/4% issue, won by Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., will be reoffered at 99.574 to yield 8.88%, a spread of 31 basis points above the rate of the Treasury four-year note.    Goldman won the issue with a bid that set the net interest cost at 8.9467%. The second-place bid came from Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., which set the net interest cost at 8.953%.    Mortgage-Backed Securities   Ginnie Maes and other mortgage issues gave up small early gains and ended mostly unchanged after light trading.    Ginnie Mae 9% securities for October delivery finished at 95 2/32 bid, unchanged; 10% securities were at 100 18/32 bid, unchanged; and Freddie Mac 10% securities were at 100 bid, also flat.    The Ginnie Mae 10% issue was yielding 10.04% to a 12-year average life assumption, as the spread above the 10-year Treasury note was unchanged at 120 basis points.    Activity in derivative markets also was light. There have been no significant real estate mortgage investment conduit offerings priced so far this week. Traders said the lack of Remic activity reflects skittishness among dealers ahead of tomorrow's report on September employment.    Many firms don't want to risk being caught with sizable new-issue inventories if the bond market drops sharply after the employment data are reported.    Foreign Bonds   British government bonds staged a small rally yesterday, helped by the pound's strength.    Japanese government bonds ended slightly lower in light activity. West German government issues were little changed, along with Eurodollar bond prices.    In London, prices of benchmark British bonds advanced just over 1/4 point, or slightly more than $2.50 for each $1,000 face amount. For example, the government's benchmark 11 3/4% bonds due 2003/2007 were quoted late in the day at 116 3/32, up 10/32, to yield 9.64%.    Shorter-term issues posted smaller gains. Britain's 11 3/4% issue due 1991 rose 1/8 to 102 29/32 to yield 10.24%, while the 12% issue due 1995 advanced 7/32 to 108 7/32 to yield 10.18%.    Dealers reported fairly low activity during the day but said a round of European buying helped to set the market in a firm trend early in the day.    Malcolm Holliday, head of trading at Daiwa (Europe) Gilts Ltd., said domestic institutions appear to be getting a little more nervous about the bond shortage being created by the lack of new issues and the Bank of England's recent purchases. Some traders expect additional purchases by the central bank soon.    Separately, a 200 million Dutch guilder ($95.2 million) issue for a West German bank came to market, representing another sign that new-issue activity in the Euroguilder sector is picking up after months of sluggish activity.    LandesKreditbank Baden-Wurttemberg Finance B.V., a unit of the West German bank, offered a 6% five-year issue. That brought total issuance in the straight Euroguilder sector over the last two weeks to 775 million guilders.    In Tokyo, trading in Japanese government bonds was light. The market received a temporary boost in the morning session from central bank outright purchases of 10-year bonds. The Bank of Japan bought 53 billion yen ($397.5 million) of No. 89, No. 90 and No. 99 bonds from 10 dealers.    Nonetheless, the government's benchmark No. 105 5% issue due 1997 closed in the interdealer market at a price of 100.25, down 0.16 yen per 100 yen face value from Tuesday. The yield rose to 4.96% from 4.935%. The range during the session was 4.935% to 4.965%.    In West Germany, traders said volume was light, as investors awaited the U.S. unemployment statistics to be released tomorrow. Bonn's benchmark 6 3/4% issue due 1998 ended the day at 101.35 to yield 6.556%, unchanged from Tuesday's close. The price on the benchmark dipped 0.10 point during the morning and then recovered.    West German government bond futures prices on the London International Financial Futures Exchange regained most of Tuesday's small losses. The December contract for the 10-year West German government bond ended at 95.75, and the March contract at 95.15, both up 0.03 point.    Separately, the Deutsche Bundesbank's central bank council meets today and is expected to leave its monetary policy unchanged. </TEXT></DOC>