<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0156 </DOCNO><HL> One of India's Leading Firms Is Beset by Investigations---Reliance Industries Rose RapidlyWith the Help of Government Favors---By Matt MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTTEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN><DATELINE> BOMBAY, India  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On May 7, the Indian Finance Ministry lowered the consumption tax on purified terephthalic acid, a substance used to make polyester fiber. Only one Indian company is a major consumer: Reliance Industries Ltd. The tax change will save it 225 million rupees ($17.5 million) a year.    Government policies that appear tailor-made to benefit Reliance aren't new. India's third-largest private corporation, Reliance rose from humble beginnings with the help of numerous official favors.    Yet while Reliance continues to show remarkable powers of survival, it has sustained setbacks in the past year, including official investigations of questionable activities and the threat of a devastating customs assessment.    Indeed, the controversial company is seen as a root cause of the government's recent leadership and credibility problems. The ruling party has suffered a number of setbacks, including an overwhelming loss last month in state-assembly elections in the northern Indian state of Haryana.    In the past decade, the textile and petrochemicals company has been granted industrial licenses by the government while others waited in vain. Reliance, more than any other company, profited when duties were raised or lowered, or when imports were restricted. Since it went public in 1977, the company's assets have grown 33-fold and now top 11 billion rupees ($850 million). A string of annual profit increases was broken only last year.    Since the late 1970s, government officials have been accused in the press and by the opposition in Parliament of bending the rules to suit Reliance. The company and its chairman and founder, Dhirubhai Ambani, have been accused of making secret contributions to the ruling Congress (I) Party and distributing shares, gifts and loans to reporters, bureaucrats and government officials. The company and the Congress Party deny the allegations.    Mr. Ambani wouldn't be interviewed, saying a stroke last year has left him in poor health. A company spokesman answered questions in writing.    A Calcutta newspaper reported in 1983 that 225 million rupees of Reliance shares supposedly bought by overseas Indians were, in fact, illegally held by nominee companies registered in the Isle of Man. But the finance minister at the time refused to investigate, stating that if companies already had hid money abroad, &quot;nothing extra can be done.&quot;    Mr. Gandhi came to power in 1984 after his mother's assassination and appointed former Defense Minister Vishwanath Pratap Singh as finance minister, with orders to weed out corruption and tax evasion. The ministry started several investigations against companies, including Reliance.    That started a chain of events, including the ministry's hiring of a U.S. detective agency to investigate Reliance activities abroad, that led to Mr. Singh's forced resignation this year. The investigations haven't resulted in prosecution.    The two principal Finance Ministry officials who had been investigating Reliance have been transferred; one is being harassed by authorities for his role in hiring the U.S. detective agency. In fact, the question of any Reliance wrongdoing has been lost in the hue and cry over the fact that the ministry hired American detectives to investigate an Indian company.    Both the central bank and the Central Bureau of Investigation, or CBI, have been investigating allegations that Reliance opened letters of credit valued at 1.14 billion rupees to import a five-year supply of terephthalic acid -- two days before the government restricted import of the material in May 1985. Documents submitted to the Indian courts indicate that Reliance asked the bank involved to pre-date the letters of credit.    The CBI's investigation of the letters of credit and how the company knew of the rule change before it was announced was completed more than a year ago; no action has been announced.    The Customs Department also is investigating allegations that Reliance underdeclared the value of an imported polyester-yarn plant. It is demanding an additional duty of 1.2 billion rupees, but the total assessment, including penalties, could exceed six billion rupees. The matter could be tied up in the courts for years.    Reliance's profit in 1986 dropped 80% from the previous year, to 140 million rupees. In the year up to May, the company's share price dropped more than 60% and took the stock market down with it. But on May 8, the day after the favorable tax decision on terephthalic acid was announced, it gained 25%.    Behind this resilient company is the 54-year-old Mr. Ambani, son of a rural schoolteacher. He founded Reliance Textiles Pvt. in 1967 with four knitting machines in the industrial city of Naroda.    Reliance got its first break in the so-called emergency period of 1975-77, when then-Prime Minister Indira Gandhi suspended democratic rule. The company quickly grew to control 50% of the country's yarn-processing capacity, thanks to a minister's decision to approve expansion by Reliance while denying approval to five other manufacturers.    The company also persuaded the government to allow manufacturers to import scarce polyester-filament yarn if they were able to export nylon fabric. This decision helped only Reliance, the sole Indian exporter of the material. In early 1977, the government again favored Reliance by exempting the imports from a 125% duty. Reliance gained almost a monopoly on the imported yarn and could charge exorbitant prices, customers say.    Reliance went public in 1977. In the next several years, it acquired manufacturing licenses to produce not only synthetic yarn and fiber, but also the raw materials used in those products. Other companies consistently failed to get licenses, which in India are required before manufacturing can begin.    In 1981, more than 400 companies applied for a license to produce polyester filament yarn. Reliance was given the major license of 10,000 tons annually. Another company got the only other license granted, for 6,000 tons.    The other company, Orkay Silk Mills Ltd., had to import polyester chips, used to make the yarn. But after twice raising the duty on chips, the government banned imports, crippling Orkay's production.    Many decisions that favored Reliance were made by ministers over the objections of bureaucrats. And in a country where the simplest request takes years to get through the bureaucracy, Reliance could obtain action in weeks.    While all this was going on, Reliance became the investor's hero. Reliance dividends were high and the share price kept climbing even as the company distributed bonus shares. Even investors who had shunned the country's volatile market flocked to buy the stock.    Brokers, merchant bankers and other industry observers have long accused the Ambani family of intervening in the stock market to keep Reliance's share price high. A confidential central bank report on bank loans to Reliance-associated concerns substantiates the charge. It says 11 Reliance associates bought nearly 7% of total Reliance shares in the stock market in 1984 alone. This doesn't include substantial purchases by so-called trading associates, many of whom appear linked to Reliance or the Ambani family. </TEXT></DOC>