<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880627-0099 </DOCNO><HL> The Dry Spell: Drought Has Dashed Hopes on Many Farms Of Recovery This Year --- Minnesota's Marlin Nadgwick Is Mowing Stunted Wheat For Use as Cattle Feed --- Trepidations in Elbow Lake </HL><AUTHOR> Scott Kilman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD BNK REL ECO </IN><DATELINE> HOFFMAN, Minn.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like a Mississippi River paddle boat bellowing through pale green waters, the mower slashes Marlin Nadgwick's dying wheat crop into rows of straw.    &quot;It ain't hardly worth the effort,&quot; the lanky 48-year-old farmer shouts to a listener seated next to him as he drives his &quot;swather&quot; through the dusty fields.    In a futile effort to reproduce before it dies, the drought-stunted wheat has formed sickly heads of grain just a few inches above the ground. But the wheat, which would have been more than one-sixth of Mr. Nadgwick's harvest, is barely chaff, and the farmer has decided to cut his losses and feed it to his cattle. His corn, soybean and oat crops are in grave danger, too.    The drought has cut a broad swath through Mr. Nadgwick's hope that things would get better for him this year. Just weeks ago, he was bursting with plans. He had completed the restructuring of his six-figure debt last year and felt that he was on firm financial footing for the first time in years. But now, his plans to buy back 360 acres of land from his lender, Farm Credit Services, and to expand his cattle herd on his 520-acre operation all are stalled. &quot;I'm numb,&quot; Mr. Nadgwick says. &quot;The future is so uncertain.&quot;    While crop problems are having their effects throughout the economy, on food prices and inflation fears, the real suffering is here, at the epicenter of the broadest drought since 1936. From Canada to the Mississippi Delta, from Montana to Ohio, the three-month-old drought has put the nascent recovery from a six-year rural recession on hold.    Although it's too early to know how devastating the drought will ultimately be, some experts say that as many as 10% of farmers in hard-hit areas could be forced back to the brink of failure by the persistent dry weather. The damage so far to major crops is most extreme in the upper Great Plains, where a foot or more of rain would be needed just to return to normal. For this week, meteorologists forecast hot and dry weather in the Great Plains and in the Midwest west of the Mississippi River; east of the river, lower temperatures and dry conditions are expected to prevail.    Already, land prices near Hoffman have stopped climbing, and church collections are falling. Feed shortages have brought the distress sale of cattle, with prices down by 20% in just two weeks.    &quot;It's the most rapid falloff I've seen in 30 years,&quot; says livestock auctioneer Ed Bilden. &quot;You could stand on your head and whistle 'Yankee Doodle' and not get any more money.&quot;    The drought couldn't have come at a worse time for America's rural towns. Good crops last year and a renaissance in overseas demand for U.S. commodities had convinced Main Street business that 1988 would be the year of recovery. Merchants began to replenish their stocks of everything from dresses to combines.    Nowhere had the turnaround seemed more certain than here in Grant County, Minn., a rolling plain near the South Dakota-North Dakota border with a largely Scandinavian-American population. During the long farm crisis, one in every six farmers in the county fell behind on his debt payments. There were many foreclosures and refinancings. One of the two banks in Elbow Lake, the county seat, failed last year and has reopened under new auspices.    Then a miniboom started in the winter as farmers began spending their fall-harvest money. In Elbow Lake (population 1,300), Mohagen's Hardware had its best Christmas ever. Amundson Equipment Inc. ran short of new tractors as spring sales jumped by one-third. Schroeder's Department Store bought goods in the expectation that sales would increase by one-fifth over 1987.    But now, the widespread destruction of the wheat crop, which generates about 30% of farm income in the county, has sunk the optimism. As many farmers mowed their crop last week, townspeople's spirits have fallen, too. Some see a second wave of business failures in town. &quot;The farm wives are too scared to buy much of anything,&quot; says Valerie Ricks, the manager of Schroeder's. &quot;Some businesses are on a very rocky road.&quot; At Schroeder's, sales this month are down 20% from a year ago. Farm women just aren't buying fashionable dresses, Mrs. Ricks says. &quot;There's no wheat out there, and people are getting panicky.&quot;    Along Elbow Lake's three-block main drag, Central Avenue, no one has seen a dry spell of such duration and intensity. Behind the old-fashioned brick and wood storefronts, businesspeople are nervous about the mood on the farm. Glenda Stokes, who owns the Knot 'n Vane gift shop, says business is so bad she checks the front door three times a day to make sure it isn't locked. &quot;I haven't seen a farm wife since May 15,&quot; she says.    Harold Mohagen, the owner of the Elbow Lake hardware store, sees business tumbling around harvest time. Alan Olson, a Century 21 real-estate agent in nearby Fergus Falls, expects Grant County land prices to stall this fall after rising 20% in the past year. Without cash from the harvest, few farmers will be able to buy land.    At Amundson Equipment, the strong sales of spring now have dried up, too. &quot;We thought we were going to have an excellent year. Six weeks ago, it cut off,&quot; says owner Terry Amundson. The slump is particularly disheartening, he says, because &quot;We were out of the woods. It looked like everybody was about to make money again,&quot; he says. &quot;It would be nice if we could put it together for one whole year.&quot;    The Bank of Elbow Lake refinanced loans for about 30% of its farm clients in the past few years; now it expects more refinancings for many of the same people. &quot;But it's more difficult because we already reworked them once,&quot; says Donald E. Matteson, a senior loan officer, as he looks out on the lobby of his tiny bank. &quot;We're in a real predicament.&quot;    Lawyers in town also expect more farm-refinancing business. &quot;The lenders are queuing up for another round,&quot; says Dennis J. Helseth, an Elbow Lake attorney. &quot;They're expecting a wave of problems this fall.&quot;    A few miles to the southeast, Mr. Nadgwick, sits on the brown lawn of his farmhouse with his morning coffee and watches the sky. A thunderstorm threatens, as lightning streaks from a bank of low black clouds.    All around him, the once-lush, rolling farmland is balding in the desert-like weather. The leaves of his 170 acres of corn are curling and spiking upward.    Mr. Nadgwick absent-mindedly rubs the ears of the family dog, Bandit, who is cowering before the thunder, and smiles as a promising burst of cool wind scatters the chickens near the barn.    The mere sight of rain clouds is encouraging. Since early May, a wall of high pressure towering some five miles over this farm had been deflecting storms far to the north. The storm is evidence that the wall is crumbling. But the rains are erratic; the jet stream, a highway in the sky that guides rainmaking low-pressure systems, is still unusually far to the north.    Slowly, the storm fades away to the east. &quot;Nope,&quot; Mr. Nadgwick says, rising abruptly from his chair. &quot;It ain't going to rain.&quot;    He trudges to the machine shed, the youngest of his six sons following him on a bicycle, and begins moving out equipment to destroy his 80-acre spring-wheat crop.    Like many farmers, Mr. Nadgwick's troubles began with the decision he made to expand in 1980, just as commodity prices peaked and interest rates took off. He has been trying to recover ever since. &quot;It really put the hammer on us,&quot; he says.    As part of a refinancing of his operations, he relinquished to his lender the 200 acres he bought in 1980, and the 160 acres he put up as collateral. Then he used most of his 1987 profit to catch up on his debt payments, postponing a planned remodeling of the farmhouse and other personal expenses. He made plans to buy back the land he deeded back to Farm Credit Services, which is willing to give him first crack at buying it back.    Now, the drought has him hobbled in several ways, cutting subsidies here and erasing profits there. Just a few miles down the road, a grain elevator is offering boom-town prices for grain. Spring wheat has jumped 35% this month, to $4.20 a bushel, and corn is up by 50%, to $3 a bushel -- and in just three weeks. Soybeans have soared to about $10 a bushel, the highest level since the early 1970s.    But the prices benefit only those with something to sell. Mr. Nadgwick can't sell the 10,000 bushels of corn he does have in storage for fear that he will need it as cattle feed. And he is afraid to sell this year's crop to the local elevator for future delivery; he might not have grain to deliver.    In an unlucky twist, current farm law may force him to return money he has already received from the government. He got a $4,000 check in the spring as an advance on the price-support subsidies he was promised for his fall crop. But now that prices have gone up so sharply, he may no longer qualify for the subsidy. In that event, he may not just have to return his spring check, but also wouldn't be eligible for the usual post-harvest money.    Soaring cattle-feed costs will help reduce profit from Mr. Nadgwick's dairy operation by 15% to 20% from last year. Because of the heat, his 50 cows are already giving less milk. Mr. Nadgwick has ditched plans to expand his herd; he wonders, rather, whether he should have sold some of the animals three weeks ago.    And the failed spring-wheat crop will yield only about six bushels an acre, less than one-sixth what he got last year.    Farmer Nadgwick still hopes that some of his sons (the oldest is 16) will follow him into farming. But his plans to buy back his lost acreage are fading, at least for the time being. For now, he will just reseed the dry wheat fields to soybeans on the chance it will rain. But soon it will be too late for the seeds to sprout and too late to replant.    Despite his setbacks, the blue-eyed Mr. Nadgwick can still joke with his sons, dodging water balloons slung at him by six-year-old Matthew and threatening revenge with a full bucket.    But when the subject is farming, he can't mask his disappointment. &quot;I thought I'd be in a heck of a lot better position&quot; by now, he says. &quot;Before the drought, I thought we had a good shot at a good year.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>