<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871019-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Off Guard:Election Commission,Set Up as a Watchdog,Has Become a Pussycat---GOP Members Block ActionIn Several Partisan Cases,Encouraging More Abuses---But a Subpoena for Reporters---By Brooks JacksonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Republicans are getting the government off the backs of another industry -- politics.    GOP members of the Federal Election Commission recently blocked a staff recommendation to investigate a $258,995 campaign by the American Medical Association's political-action committee against Democratic Rep. Fortney Stark of California, one of the doctor lobby's strongest critics.    In a separate move, the Republican commissioners blocked enforcement action against the National Republican Congressional Committee, which the FEC's lawyers said was skirting spending limits in an advertising campaign attacking Democratic Rep. Fernand St Germain of Rhode Island.    These and other cases suggest that enforcement of campaign-finance laws is at its lowest ebb since before the Watergate scandals, largely reflecting Republican hostility toward regulating money in politics. The six-member FEC needs four votes to take action, but in case after case the three GOP members have voted down enforcement actions against PACs, political parties and candidates. The result is partisan paralysis at the enforcement agency and a scoff-law attitude among politicians.    &quot;People take the attitude that the commission is never going to get four votes, and so they can do anything they want,&quot; says Daniel Swillinger, a Republican lawyer who was an assistant general counsel of the FEC in its less passive days. &quot;It is undercutting what was anyway a rather weak enforcement system and making it even more toothless.&quot;    Both parties are benefiting from the free-and-easy atmosphere. Post-Watergate reforms are now so eroded that secret contributions from corporations and labor unions are once again flowing, and the era of the $1 million fat-cat contribution has returned. Presidential candidates cheat flagrantly on spending limits in Iowa and New Hampshire, and banks finance candidates by making uncollateralized loans that sometimes aren't repaid.    In fact, the election commission now seems more intent on pinching off disclosure of campaign-money abuses than investigating them. Acting on Republican complaints, it attempted to subpoena story proposals by investigative reporters. Currently, it is trying to punish two groups for selling computerized public data on campaign donors to newspapers and others.    Republicans have long been suspicious of limits on campaign money; their party has more of it than the Democrats. &quot;I find the whole idea of regulating this stuff repugnant,&quot; says Jan Baran, a GOP electionlaw expert who advises Vice President George Bush's presidential campaign and the GOP House and Senate campaign committees. &quot;To the extent that we have decided that government ought to regulate this, I want to keep the intrusion to a minimum.&quot;    The FEC's unwillingness to act outrages some. Rep. Stark, for instance, is suing the commission, seeking a federal court order to reopen the AMA case. He accused Republican Commissioner Lee Ann Elliott, a former official of an AMA political-action committee, of unethical conduct for voting against an investigation of her former employer. But the Reagan administration, nonetheless, reappointed her to a new six-year term, and the Senate confirmed the appointment.    &quot;There isn't anyone we could put on the commission who doesn't carry baggage,&quot; says Republican Rep. Bill Frenzel of Minnesota, who supported her. &quot;In fact, we look for baggage because we want people with political experience.&quot;    In a number of cases, federal courts are ordering the commission to reopen some inquiries that GOP commissioners killed. Judge Stanley Sporkin last year ruled that the FEC acted &quot;contrary to law&quot; when GOP commissioners stopped action against the National Republican Congressional Committee. FEC lawyers said the party's spending in the campaign against Rep. St Germain should count against the legal limit on its support for his Republican opponent. Another 3-3 partisan deadlock shut the case. The commission currently is appealing Judge Sporkin's order to reconsider the matter.    This summer, Judge Thomas Flannery ordered the commission to tighten regulations governing &quot;soft money&quot; -- corporate, union and oversize gifts for state-level political activities that indirectly benefit federal candidates. Republican commissioners had refused to write new rules, as recommended by the legal staff.    For months, Republicans also held up selection of a new general counsel to replace Charles Steele, who departed in March for private practice. Last week, the commission finally promoted Mr. Steele's former deputy, Lawrence Noble, to replace him. During the lengthy selection period, the commission completed only a trickle of minor cases.    The commission was established in 1974 after Watergate revelations of $1 million political gifts, illegal corporate campaign donations and unreported cash hoards. The Senate Watergate Committee envisioned it as a tough agency running vigorous investigations &quot;with the confidence of the public.&quot; But Congress failed to give the panel a strong chairman and made sure it didn't become truly independent. When the FEC conducted audits that disclosed widespread discrepancies in the reports of House and Senate members, Congress simply outlawed random audits of candidates.    Punishment for serious violations is weaker now than during the Watergate prosecutions, when several corporations were convicted of criminal charges for making illegal donations. Then, a few donors went to jail. But the commission got rid of all its trained investigators long ago. Today, it seldom uses its subpoena power and only rarely takes sworn testimony from witnesses. It hasn't recommended a criminal prosecution in years, and it settles practically all its cases through a sort of civil plea-bargaining called &quot;conciliation.&quot;    The result is a scornful attitude among many hard-nosed political operatives. &quot;The price of doing what they want to do is to pay a fine,&quot; says political scientist Herbert Alexander. &quot;They just consider it part of campaigning. If they catch up with you, you pay a couple of thousand dollars and you go scot-free.&quot;    Walter Mondale's presidential campaign paid the biggest penalty in the history of the FEC -- $368,500 -- for evading spending and donation limits through supposed grass-roots &quot;delegate committees&quot; in 1984. His campaign also paid separate penalties totaling $94,000 for other election-law violations. But the total was less than 2% of the campaign's budget.    Such impotence emboldens others. Last year the National Republican Senatorial Committee circumvented spending limits by funneling millions of dollars into key states, claiming it was acting merely as a forwarding agent for its thousands of individual donors. But party officials effectively controlled where the money went, and even some Republican lawyers privately believe the practice was probably illegal. The FEC still hasn't resolved that case.    Meanwhile, the Reagan administration has declined to reappoint commissioners who were seen as too enforcement-minded, including Democrat Thomas Harris and Republican Frank Reiche. And GOP senators killed any chance of enacting an overhaul of campaign-finance laws this year by mounting a filibuster against a Democratic bill to put limits for the first time on spending by Senate candidates and on the totals they may accept from PACs.    Republicans who oppose regulation often insist that the cure for abuses is full disclosure. But Mr. Baran, acting for the Republican congressional committee, asked the FEC to take action against Washington On-Line, a unit of the McClatchy newspaper chain, and Public Data Access. The two firms use computers to analyze publicly available data drawn from the commission's seven million pages of reports and say they sell their services principally to news reporters, academic researchers and consultants. (The Wall Street Journal subscribes to Washington On-Line.) Republicans, however, fear that free-lance fund-raisers will illegally use computerized donor lists to solicit money from the party faithful, reducing the GOP's income. The commission has ruled tentatively in the GOP's favor.    Michael Tanzer, the president of Public Data Access, vows to fight the commission in court if it persists. &quot;Instead of investigating us, they should be congratulating us,&quot; he says. Meanwhile, to twit the FEC, a list of lobbyists and their donations to lawmakers co-published by Mr. Tanzer carries a red-letter alert: &quot;Warning, the Federal Election Commission has determined that possession of this information is prohibited by law.&quot;    While the FEC pursues Mr. Tanzer, it has been less vigorous in regulating soft money. It has declined to tighten regulatory loopholes such as the one that allowed the Democratic National Committee to receive a check for $1 million from Joan Kroc, the wealthy widow of McDonald's Corp. founder Ray Kroc. The Democratic Party admits it also received $900,000 in donations from corporations this year but won't identify the donors; under the FEC's interpretation of disclosure laws, it doesn't have to. Republicans stopped making full disclosure of party finances in 1980, and they don't issue press releases when big checks roll in.    Lately, even some Republicans are upset at the commission's performance. A federal judge last year ordered the FEC to close a loophole allowing political-action committees to raise money using a candidate's name without his authority. But last summer, the three GOP commissioners, joined by one Democrat, voted down a complaint by Republican presidential candidate Jack Kemp against a right-wing PAC raising money under the name &quot;Kemp's First Fund&quot; without giving any to him. &quot;I am truly disappointed in the apparent lack of investigation,&quot; Rep. Kemp's lawyer wrote later in a letter to the commission. &quot;No one from the general counsel's office bothered to call me, and so far as I can ascertain, no calls were made to any donors to this 'fund.'&quot;    The commission did move aggressively, however, after a complaint from former GOP Rep. George Hansen of Idaho, sentenced to federal prison for covering up embarrassing personal gifts and loans. Mr. Hansen charged that a liberal philanthropist's grants to the reporters pursuing stories about financial abuses by politicians were, in effect, campaign expenditures against subjects of unflattering stories. The FEC even issued a subpoena for investigative reporters' confidential story proposals. But the commission dropped the case last year after a federal judge quashed the subpoena. </TEXT></DOC>