<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0159 </DOCNO><HL> Chips and Defense: What America Needs---By Daniel Okimoto and Henry Rowen</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Not long ago, the U.S. semiconductor industry dominated the world. Today, it faces a dwindling share of world markets, loss of leadership in such commodity products as dynamic random access memory chips (DRAMs), an eroding domestic manufacturing infrastructure, and a prolonged slump. How the industry -- and government -- responds could have far-reaching consequences not only for the industry's long-term commercial viability but perhaps also for U.S. national security.    These developments have caused the Reagan administration to intervene in the semiconductor market. Until last year, its role was largely limited to supporting technology development. Then it coerced Japan into agreeing to a price maintenance cartel for DRAMs and a commitment to absorb more U.S. chips. (That the U.S. industry's market share is 8% in Japan vs. 39% in the rest of the non-U.S. market has been a source of great concern.)    Charging that Japanese companies haven't abided by the agreement, the administration has imposed punitive tariffs on a range of Japanese electronics products. Recently it scared off Fujitsu Ltd. by signaling that the company's purchase of money-losing Fairchild Semiconductor from Schlumberger Ltd. would be unwelcome. It is now considering a Defense Science Board report that recommends $300 million a year of Defense Department spending to bolster the industry's lagging technical competitiveness.    These events raise troubling questions about both the means and the ends of U.S. actions. They suggest that clear and sensible goals and a strategy for achieving them have yet to be developed.    The Fairchild-Fujitsu case and the Defense Science Board report center on the issue of national security. Whenever that topic is raised, taxpayers should hang onto their wallets; hardly an industry doesn't have some claim, however far-fetched, to contributing to defense. But in the semiconductor case the claim should get our attention. The Defense Science Board says:    --U.S. military forces depend on technological superiority.    --Electronics provide the basis for America's technological edge.    --Semiconductors are the key to leadership in electronics.    --High-volume production, the foundation of U.S. strength in semiconductors, is sustained by commercial (not defense) demand, and America's dominance in high-volume markets is being lost.    --Leadership in semiconductor technology will soon reside outside the U.S.    According to the board, the loss of market share (mostly in DRAMs) is due to Japanese advantages in greater investment; their focus on long-term payoffs; interfirm cooperation under the aegis of the government; a vertically integrated industrial structure; lower costs of capital; higher productivity and standards of quality; a nonadversarial relationship among management, labor, academia and government; the development of an exceptionally skilled, technical manpower base; and greater priority to manufacturing.    It needs to be understood that the U.S. semiconductor industry, along with much of American manufacturing, has also been hurt by a domestic fiscal deficit that forces the U.S. to import Japanese savings and, consequently, Japanese products, on a massive scale. It is no small irony that the U.S. is now strong-arming people whose savings it needs because of its own fiscal fecklessness.    The array of points made by the Defense Science Board should give pause to those who believe that Uncle Sam should now rush in with money. And more than just financial help has been proposed: The semiconductor industry has announced the creation of a manufacturing technology institute -- Sematech. On Tuesday, the Semiconductor Industry Association said it will spend $125 million a year for six years -- if the U.S. government will match this sum. This instititute, along with Randamp;D support for materials and processes, is designed to strengthen U.S. manufacturing competence by developing and making advanced devices. Though appealing -- and maybe worth trying -- there are several issues that need to be addressed.    For one, the defense payoffs would be indirect. The long lead times for the development of weapons assure that most weapons use semiconductors that are not state-of-the-art. Moreover, many chips used in weapons differ -- sometimes needlessly -- from those used commercially. The solution to this problem lies in changing the defense procurement process.    Second, consider the prediction that technological leadership will soon reside outside the U.S. The U.S. industry has maintained vitality in innovative new products (which are often easily copied) and systems applications; the Japanese have demonstrated superiority in production processes (which are harder to copy). The U.S. needs to improve its process skills, the mission proposed for Sematech. But it is not yet clear how the know-how developed by Sematech will be diffused throughout the American industry.    Third, of greatest defense concern is deepening dependence on foreign sources. The U.S already is dependent on foreign sources for some products, such as gallium arsenide devices. There is little doubt that the U.S. share of a growing world market (now about 50% including IBM and ATandamp;T) will continue to decline. The Japanese are too good, the Europeans are too determined to stay in this game, and the South Koreans (and soon others) are coming on too strongly for any other result. It is inevitable that if the U.S. is to have the best of certain products for its weapons, it will find them in Japan -- or in Europe. Are the risks of doing so acceptable?    The answer ought to be that they are acceptable if the Japanese make their products available to the U.S. -- so long as they do not also make them available to the Soviets. After all, the adversary is not Japan but the Soviet Union. Moreover, shouldn't the U.S. encourage closer defense cooperation with such talented people? A start has been made with Japanese participation in research on the Strategic Defense Initiative.    There are two opposing points of view in the current debate. One holds that market forces, along with our alliance with Japan and Europe, will meet U.S. needs. The other holds that the U.S. should have the full range of technological capabilities at home under American ownership. In truth, the U.S. ought to strike a balance. In addition to drawing on superior products from Japan and Europe, the U.S. also needs at home an industry doing leading-edge research, design and manufacturing; companies strong in world competition; a varied set of firms, and a good educational system that feeds the overall system.    The Defense Science Board is correct: The U.S. has a strong defense interest in a healthy semiconductor industry. If the unique ecology of America's electronics industry -- the combination of big captive suppliers, innovative merchant houses, small front-end equipment producers, and military-systems houses -- is disrupted, the structural linkages broken and the dynamic interaction interrupted, then the U.S. will be in the kind of trouble the board correctly says it must avoid.    Does it matter if part of this domestic industry is owned by Japanese firms? Critics of relying on the Japanese say that they will keep the most advanced semiconductor products for their own systems. Perhaps so. On the other hand, these firms also have an interest in serving customers with state-of-the-art products. And Japan's security rests directly on American protection. (Of course, there are some defense products where secrecy is so important that the U.S. should have carefully screened domestic firms doing the work.)    This suggests that the Defense Department should determine:    1) what technologies, products and processes need to be carried out in the U.S.    2) and which ones need to be in firms owned by U.S. nationals.    An objectively done review likely would conclude that it is not too risky for the U.S. to use some foreign products in its weapons and that few products must be made in American-owned firms.    The case for support of the industry rests not only on defense; government support of science and technology research that has wide economic benefits is warranted. Proposed support for advances in process equipment, new and better materials, new academic centers and new types of devices arguably fits this criterion. There is also scope for more imaginative approaches to risk reduction, such as putting a guaranteed sum of money up for the first U.S. producer of, for instance, an advanced 64-megabit DRAM.    Fortunately, industry prospects are not as bleak as often portrayed -- which is not an argument for complacency. The dollar has fallen 40% against the yen in the past two years, the Japanese capital market is now more open, Japanese semiconductor manufacturers are investing in the U.S., and shifts toward application-specific chips suggest that closeness to customers is becoming more important than long production runs (a notable Japanese strength).    There is a valid national-security argument -- up to a point -- and there is a case for basic science and generic Randamp;D support of this industry. America needs to determine how much Randamp;D money to invest and in what ways, and which activities need to be at home and which of them should be under complete U.S. control. And it needs to figure out better ways for the Japanese and Europeans to contribute their skills to our common defense. America should not engage in damaging efforts to cartelize this vibrant industry -- perhaps the most dynamic one of our era -- or to frighten off foreign firms that can bring the U.S. capital, technology and good management.    ---   Prof. Okimoto is in the political science department and Prof. Rowen is in the business school of Hoover Institution at Stanford University. </TEXT></DOC>