<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861212-0015 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/12/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   U.S. OFFICIALS SIDETRACKED an inquiry on Nicaraguan rebels.    Law enforcement officials said senior Justice Department aides, citing &quot;delicate hostage negotiations&quot; in the Mideast, asked in October or early November that the FBI delay an investigation of the rebels and their American backers. The delay is under scrutiny by congressional investigators. The FBI began the probe after a cargo plane carrying arms to the rebels was downed Oct. 5 by Managua's troops. Separately, according to sources and public records, two Canadians agreed to provide as much as $40 million in credit to Saudi financier Adnan Khashoggi. Sources said the businessmen agreed to provide him with at least partial backing for Iran arms dealings.    Reagan didn't inform some top aides about his Jan. 17 authorization to sell arms to Iran as part of a &quot;deliberate arrangement,&quot; a spokesman said.    ---   SOUTH AFRICA IMPOSED tighter restrictions on news organizations.    The curbs go beyond those imposed with the June 12 state of emergency, and require reporters to seek government clearance for stories and film about security-force action, banned meetings, boycotts and &quot;subversive statements.&quot; Pretoria also has the power to ban for as long as three months any publication that &quot;persists with the publishing of prohibited material.&quot; The rules apparently are aimed at censoring news relating to a 10-day anti-apartheid campaign that is to begin Tuesday.    The Reagan administration expressed regret over the restrictions issued by Botha and rejected South Africa's claim that they were necessary.    ---   Researchers in San Francisco said some people infected with the AIDS virus don't develop the disease because they are protected by a natural immunity. The research team at the University of California said doctors eventually may be able to exploit the finding as a possible AIDS therapy.    State insurance regulators endorsed model state guidelines that would bar insurance companies from asking about or making decisions based on applicants' sexual orientation. The action followed recommendations of an advisory committee on AIDS.    ---   West Germany charged a former secretary in the president's office with treason and with spying for the Soviet Union since 1971. Authorities said she had access to secret data and detailed knowledge of longterm military planning. Bonn also announced the arrest of a senior Defense Ministry aide for alleged espionage.    ---   Communist insurgents brandished assault rifles during a march in the Philippines. Armed forces chief Ramos denounced the display as provocative and warned that a flagrant showing of weapons would violate a day-old cease-fire accord. Meanwhile, Aquino visited a Manila slum district and said she would halt the razing of shacks.    ---   A Nicaraguan appeals court confirmed the guilty verdict and 30-year prison sentence imposed on U.S. mercenary Eugene Hasenfus. The decision upheld the Nov. 15 decision by a three-member tribunal convicting Hasenfus of helping to airlift arms to U.S.-backed anti-Sandinista rebels.    ---   Israeli warplanes attacked Palestinian targets in Syrian-controlled northern Lebanon, and police said at least five people were killed and 12 wounded. The assault came as Iranian efforts to end fighting in Lebanon failed. Renewed shelling between PLO guerrillas and Shiite Moslems was reported in Beirut and near Tyre.    Anti-Israeli unrest entered a second week as troops fired tear gas to rout Arab protesters in the occupied Gaza Strip. At least four Palestinians have been killed and more than 25 wounded by Israeli soldiers in clashes in the occupied territories.    ---   Federal budget officials resolved a dispute with health officials by agreeing to a fiscal 1988 budget plan that would include only a small percentage of doctors in a new Medicare hospital plan. Officials also agreed to seek a boost in the deductible that Medicare patients pay for physician services to $125 from $75 a year.    ---   NRC investigators found that managers in the commission's Texas regional office pressured agency inspectors to downgrade or delete findings of violations at the Comanche Peak nuclear power plant. The regional office's reports on its own inspections were found to be sometimes inaccurate or flatly false.    ---   NATO proposed new East-West talks on troop reductions in Europe. The proposal by the alliance, which apparently is concerned about superior Soviet bloc conventional forces if nuclear arms are cut, was similar to one offered in June by the Warsaw Pact that calls for troop cuts totaling one million soldiers by the early 1990s.    ---   Afghan leader Najibullah arrived in Moscow, where he was expected to meet with Gorbachev to review Afghanistan's war with Moslem rebels and discuss prospects for a settlement. Najibullah's trip was his first official visit to the Soviet Union since he succeeded Babrak Karmal as Afghanistan's Communist Party chief in May.    ---   Zambian President Kaunda canceled an increase in the price of corn meal after four days of food riots in several towns in the country's northern copper-mining region. At least 11 people were killed. The government had proposed a 120% boost in the price of corn meal, a staple food in Zambia.    ---   A U.S. cardiologist was arrested by authorities in Pakistan and charged with killing 13 people. The Pakistani-born doctor, who returned to Lahore in 1981 after serving as a fellow at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, has admitted to nine of the murders, authorities said. </TEXT></DOC>