<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0169 </DOCNO><HL> Medical Aid:Ethics Experts HelpMore Doctors HandleHard Moral Decisions---Liability Fears, Rapid ChangeSpur Growth of Panels;Many Life-Support Cases---A Dartmouth Body at Work---By Alan L. OttenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> HANOVER, N.H.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   An elderly man has major skin cancer -- widespread, painful, incurable. Although surgery might reduce the pain and prolong life a few months, the man just wants to go home to die. But his physician worries that a recent slight stroke, which left some mental impairment, might have rendered him incompetent to make that decision.    So Charles M. Culver talks with the patient. He finds him a little fuzzy in remembering things but perfectly clear about his current situation. &quot;The man didn't have to be able to do sums in his head to be competent to make this decision,&quot; Dr. Culver says. &quot;He understood the probable consequences, and his refusal of treatment seemed quite rational to me.&quot; The patient gets his wish.    Chuck Culver, a 52-year-old psychiatry professor at the Dartmouth Medical School and the head of the Ethics Advisory Committee at Dartmouth's Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital, is a pioneer practitioner in a specialty that has been growing during the past decade: medical-ethics counseling. His job is to educate and advise doctors, nurses and other health professionals on the ethical dilemmas that they face in dealing with &quot;Do Not Resuscitate&quot; orders, withdrawing life-support measures, abortion, in vitro fertilization and other problems.    &quot;The medical world has become so complex, is changing so fast,&quot; Dr. Culver says, &quot;that it's useful to have people who have some well-defined concepts and who keep up with the literature and court decisions -- people doctors can call up and say, 'What's the current thinking on this?'&quot;    A combination of developments has spurred the recent rise of hospital ethicists and ethics advisory committees. &quot;It's a pretty even mixture of concern about liability and general uncertainty about what steps to take in particular situations,&quot; says Judith Areen, a Georgetown University law professor. &quot;Until recently, doctors thought they were competent to cover everything. Now, they are aware that things they once thought medical are no longer solely medical.&quot;    The American Hospital Association estimates that ethics consultants or committees now are working at 60% of acute-care institutions and 80% to 90% of major medical centers. But the ethicists' role and powers vary considerably from place to place. Some simply train and seek to make hospital personnel more sensitive, some review hospital policies, some offer ethical guidance for individual doctors. About two-thirds of full-time ethicists are philosophers or theologians, although doctors are becoming more common in the role.    The parents of a newborn spina bifida baby want to let it die, but the hospital staff believes that an operation might offer a good chance of survival and a 50-50 chance that the child won't be mentally retarded. Dr. Culver explains to the parents that federal Baby Doe and child-abuse regulations require treatment unless a baby is terminally ill; if the couple persist, he says, the hospital must ask a court order for the operation. Ultimately, the couple give in. &quot;We can't be guilty of civil disobedience to the government,&quot; Dr. Culver says. &quot;Anyhow, with that prognosis, a majority of the committee felt we couldn't let this baby die even if there had been no federal rules.&quot;    Dr. Culver, a slender, elfin-faced man nicknamed &quot;Captain Ethics&quot; by associates, has been teaching and consulting on ethics at the school and hospital for more than 15 years. Several years ago, Louis Matthews, the Mary Hitchcock medical director, decided to make the ethics role somewhat more formal. He set up a small committee to &quot;be a conscience and a think tank,&quot; advising him on broad policy and available for doctors and hospital staffers to consult on specific cases.    Dr. Culver was the obvious choice for the chairmanship, and membership has gradually expanded to 14, including other doctors, nurses, lawyers, a philosophy professor and a chaplain. (Names and some details of the cases cited have been omitted to protect patients' privacy.)    Like most hospitals, Mary Hitchcock doesn't require doctors to take cases to the ethics committee, and some resistance lingers on. &quot;Yet even the most skeptical physician is glad to have it there when he comes up against a problem,&quot; Dr. Matthews says. Several times a week, some doctor -- or occasionally a nurse or intern -- telephones Dr. Culver or stops him in the hall and says, &quot;I have an interesting case; let me run it by you.&quot; As at other hospitals, most problems involve forgoing or withdrawing life-support measures.    The most experienced and most available committee member, Dr. Culver handles more than 90% of the requests himself, though occasionally, if he has any doubts, he consults several committee members by phone. He also rehashes the two or three most important cases at his committee's monthly meetings. On a &quot;very few&quot; occasions, he has called the group into emergency session on what looks like a precedent-setting issue -- for example, the first time a doctor sought to withdraw food and water from a terminally ill patient.    He never intervenes in a case unasked. &quot;It's important not to get into that kind of watchdogging,&quot; he says. As in most hospitals across the country, the final decision remains with the attending physician and the patient. &quot;We shy away from making our recommendations mandatory, or the doctors won't come back,&quot; he says.    Doctors usually want instant guidance, Dr. Culver says, but, barring a true emergency, he prefers to investigate a little more deeply -- talking with the nurses and residents involved and perhaps even to the patient before going back to the doctor for a final conversation. &quot;You kind of teach as you go along,&quot; he says. &quot;I try to avoid saying, 'Do this.'&quot;    Andrew Gettinger, who heads the hospital's critical-care unit and frequently seeks Dr. Culver's help, observes: &quot;Chuck Culver is able, in a relatively nonthreatening way, to identify central issues and mediate effectively between parties who disagree.&quot;    An anxious intern is on the phone. He is to prepare a patient for an exploratory operation to diagnose a persistent stomach pain, but now the patient has changed her mind and says she doesn't want the operation. The surgeon is unreachable. Dr. Culver asks a few questions to determine the patient's symptoms and general attitude, then tells the intern to do what the woman wants. Informed, mentally competent people have a basic right to call the shots on their own treatment, he says.    Dr. Culver says the general ethical principles that he and most fellow practitioners follow are a relatively simple mixture of experience, common sense and &quot;a few useful concepts -- the rules that most rational people would agree should determine their conduct,&quot; such as the right to make decisions about one's own life. But applying this mixture in specific cases can be difficult, he adds.    A constant problem is deciding when a doctor should act paternalistically, ignoring a patient's wishes. &quot;The answer,&quot; Dr. Culver says, &quot;is hardly ever. If it would prevent major harm and the patient's decision is irrational, then maybe.&quot;    For example, a young college student, deeply depressed by her fiance's death in an auto accident, takes an overdose of sleeping pills. A roommate discovers her still conscious and rushes her to the hospital, but the student insists that she doesn't want to be stomach-pumped because &quot;life isn't worth living.&quot; A quick consultation with Dr. Culver assures the staff member on duty that the pumping should proceed. &quot;She may have been alert and even competent, but her decision was seriously irrational,&quot; the ethicist concludes.    An infertile couple want to use artificial insemination by the husband's brother. But the gynecologist demurs, and the ethicists oppose the idea. &quot;The interest of the child-to-be is paramount,&quot; Dr. Culver says. &quot;Nowadays, kids want to know who their biological parents are. Imagine how that kid is going to be thrown for a loop when he finds out his uncle is really his father.&quot; The couple drop their plan.    Much of an ethicist's work is reassurance. &quot;Frequently, the doctor has pretty much already made his decision and, by and large, made it right,&quot; says Bernard Gert, a Dartmouth philosophy professor who has long taught and written about ethics with Dr. Culver and serves on the advisory committee. &quot;He just feels a little ill at ease about it. What we do is make him feel better about it, show him there were good reasons for what he was going to do.&quot;    Often, the problem is less one of applying ethical concepts than one of finding out the facts. Not long ago, the Mary Hitchcock ethics panel heard a psychiatrist present the question of whether to continue treating a terminally ill patient; the committee decided that it was probably right to continue. At its next meeting, the committee reviewed a similar case presented by an intern and concluded that, in this instance, treatment probably should be stopped. A few days later, Dr. Culver by chance discovered that the two cases were one; the two medical men had, without any intent to deceive, simply seen the case very differently.    &quot;That really brought home how important it is to get all the facts straight,&quot; Mr. Gert says. &quot;Once the facts are determined, it's much easier to reach moral agreement.&quot;    An 11-year-old boy has the same fatal illness that killed an older brother several years earlier. Should he be kept on a ventilator to gain a few more years of life or should the ventilator be withdrawn and he be allowed to die without further suffering? The parents, about to be divorced, can't agree, and the boy's physician turns to the ethicist. Why not discuss it with the boy? Dr. Culver suggests. Though initially reluctant, the boy does talk with his parents and the physician; he has indeed been thinking about his tenuous future and wants to hang on as long as he can. &quot;Kids have more idea of what's going on than most people think,&quot; Dr. Culver observes.    The surge in hospital ethicists and ethics advisory committees hasn't escaped criticism and its own unsolved dilemmas. Many doctors worry that these specialists will gradually undermine traditional doctor-patient relationships and, despite the advisory title, become too powerful.    There is a growing debate over whether hospitals should require doctors to consult ethicists in certain cases -- sterilization of the mentally retarded, for instance, or ending life support for a defective newborn -- and whether ethicists' advice should ever be binding on a medical team. Ethicists themselves differ on whether they should meet with patients and their families and on just how far to go in whistle-blowing if a doctor acts wrongly.    Yet no matter how these debates proceed, medical ethicists and advisory committees are certain to increase in number and probably in power. A new Society for Bioethics Consultants is being organized. John Fletcher, its president and the resident ethicist at the National Institutes of Health in Washington, is confident that soon the society will be sponsoring regular conferences to explore emerging problems, suggesting steps to improve training of future consultants, and perhaps even setting &quot;rough standards&quot; for working ethicists.    Meanwhile, the demands on ethicists continue to grow. Besides his work on specific cases, Dr. Culver gives seminars and other training for nurses or individual departments such as intensive care. He teaches ethics at the law school and college as well as the medical school. He has tutored small New Hampshire and Vermont hospitals on starting ethics programs. And he frequently gets calls from doctors around the state. By and large, he says, he finds it all &quot;stimulating&quot; and even &quot;enjoyable.&quot;    How can he enjoy playing God?    &quot;I don't see myself as playing God,&quot; Dr. Culver says. &quot;I see myself as reporting what is relevant in moral philosophy and health law, and then talking things through so the doctor sees his choices more clearly.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>