<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870706-0080 </DOCNO><HL> The Interrogators:Iran-Contra HearingsPush Some LawmakersInto National Spotlight---Members of the CommitteesProbing the Scandal LearnValuable Political Lessons---Getting Ready for Col. North---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Democratic Rep. Edgar Jenkins is a poker-faced possum of a man, nurtured in the small-town order of the Georgia foothills. &quot;Chaos!&quot; he says, rummaging for the word to describe the Iran-Contra scandal. &quot;Like the old West . . . you made up your rules as you went along.&quot;    Republican Sen. Paul Trible is younger, more urbane, a modern Virginian with the close-cropped smoothness of a suburban lawn. &quot;It's my experience that money trails lead to truth,&quot; he says. &quot;They tell us everything about people and events.&quot;    Beginning tomorrow, all trails lead to the White House. Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North and former National Security Adviser John Poindexter end months of public silence when they testify this week and next before House and Senate investigative committees on which Rep. Jenkins and Sen. Trible sit. Former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan will follow, with cabinet secretaries from the Justice, State and Defense departments in the days after.    &quot;It takes the testimony to a higher level of responsibility,&quot; says House Majority Leader Thomas Foley. &quot;Questions will probe the knowledge and involvement of the president.&quot;    It puts the focus, too, on the 26 men who sit as judges and jurors in a public trial of the administration's secret arms sales to Iran and covert military aid to Nicaraguan insurgents.    Sen. Trible and Rep. Jenkins will be the center of attention; both have been selected to be among the chief questioners of Col. North. More broadly, political pressures will test bipartisan alliances in the committees, which have grown more cohesive in seven weeks of hearings.    Impeachment isn't in the air, but neither is acquittal. The record of lies and lawlessness in the government is too great, and few any longer believe that the only issue is what Mr. Reagan's aides told him of arms profits diverted to the Contras.    &quot;The consequence of not telling him is just as serious as having told him,&quot; says Maine Republican Sen. William Cohen. &quot;He is responsible for the excesses.&quot;    Having learned this lesson, the committees must now struggle to punch it home. So far, the hearings have been most effective in detailing a pattern of deceit and clumsy supervision during the president's tenure. They have documented the web of private companies run from the White House that functioned as a second government, enriching itself and its private operators even as it undercut Congress and Mr. Reagan's own cabinet. Now, Col. North, the central character of the plot, will add new drama. Elements of Adm. Poindexter's testimony about Mr. Reagan are described as deeply disturbing.    The impact of the Iran-Contra affair on U.S. allies goes far beyond anything in Watergate, but still it lacks the raw power that so riveted attention on that domestic scandal in the 1970s. Vulgar and vindictive, Watergate's revelations exposed the flaws of a man whom Democrats hungered to drive from office. By contrast, Mr. Reagan, more popular and near retirement, doesn't stir the same fire. His scandal is one of governance as much as character.    &quot;In Watergate, people were . . . concerned with gut issues -- a president lying not to Congress but to them,&quot; says New Hampshire GOP Sen. Warren Rudman, vice chairman of the Senate Iran-Contra panel.    As the investigation draws closer to Mr. Reagan, the political strength of the committees lies in their moderate to conservative character, personified by Rep. Jenkins and Sen. Trible.    Like the two Southerners, nearly half the members of the two panels came to Congress after the bitterness of Watergate and Vietnam had been spent. And, again like Rep. Jenkins and Sen. Trible, most are past supporters of U.S. military aid to the Nicaraguan guerrillas.    The decision to hold joint hearings has further smoothed over partisan tensions. Left to itself, the 15-member House panel would have been bitterly fractured. Joined with 11 senators, the Democratic majority can bide its time as Republicans from the two chambers pass notes and fight among themselves.    GOP Sens. Rudman, Cohen and Trible have been the target of barbs from the House GOP for their aggressiveness. Now, though, these complaints have been muted by the mounting evidence of abuses.    &quot;They have been more correct than those of us who have been perhaps too credulous in accepting the scenario as painted by Ollie North and his supporters,&quot; says Rep. Henry Hyde, an Illinois Republican. &quot;Some of us may have been too ready to defend everybody and everything that happened.&quot;    No dominant personality has emerged from committees to match Watergate's Sen. Sam Ervin. The unwieldy size of the panels -- compared with the seven-man Senate Watergate investigation -- robs members of individuality; the format of five-minute segments gives witnesses the upper hand in deflecting questions.    Senate Chairman Daniel Inouye, himself a veteran of the Watergate committee, might have been an exception, but the Hawaii Democrat prefers to submerge himself in behind-the-scenes proceedings. House Chairman Lee Hamilton conveys immense authority; but the scholarly Indiana attorney husbands his energy, delivering intermittent lectures like thunderclaps from the mountain.    The stage is often left to Sen. Rudman, a garrulous personality who sometimes seems to be reliving his days as New Hampshire's attorney general. Two Maine neighbors, Sen. Cohen and Democrat Sen. George Mitchell, join him, and the personal ties among the three men make them an unusual force in the inquiry.    Unlike Watergate, the joint Iran-Contra hearings put the House on equal footing with the Senate. But not all members of the House have taken advantage of that. To the surprise of senators, House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin has scarcely attended; Majority Leader Foley, a former prosecutor, has won respect for his skill but is often pulled away by duties on the floor. The most consistent questioner may prove to be the often unnoticed Intelligence Chairman Louis Stokes.    What the House brings most is ballast and an institutional investment in the Contra debate. The House Democratic roster includes many of the most senior members of the committees and resisted concessions to Col. North on such issues of process as the conditions under which he would testify. It has the growl of Texas Rep. Jack Brooks, the chairman of the Government Operations Committee. It has the memory of Rep. Edward Boland, the careful county registrar from Massachusetts, who was the point man against the president as House Intelligence chairman in early debate over the war in Nicaragua.    Elected to Congress in the same year a decade ago, Rep. Jenkins and Sen. Trible typify the approaches of both their houses and their parties to the inquiry. More junior than most of their colleagues, they nevertheless are significant to the administration as it seeks to minimize the damage and salvage its policies abroad.    The Baptist son of a small-town barber, the 54-year-old Rep. Jenkins might be kin to one of Faulkner's shrewd rural-traveling merchants. He sees more than he says and moves easily between the circles of power in Washington and the more down-home ways of his constituents. His venture into foreign policy is his own &quot;diversion,&quot; he jokes; in a newsletter back home, he announced his appointment to the Iran-Contra panel on page three, between reports on a veterans' dividend hoax and Internal Revenue Service collections.    Rep. Jenkins's lead role in questioning Col. North now gives him an opportunity to show the skills that many have expected of him. He displayed a gently barbed wit in questioning retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and businessman Albert Hakim. His most dramatic exchange came with former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, when Rep. Jenkins demonstrated that $2 million in Taiwanese contributions for the Contras came within months of Mr. Reagan's veto of textile quotas. In a single stroke, that confrontation brought the Iran-Contra affair home to Georgia, where textile quotas are an issue of pressing concern.    However passing, the moment illustrated the president's vulnerability in the region. Southern Democrats like Rep. Jenkins and fellow Georgian Sam Nunn on the Senate panel are crucial to Mr. Reagan's hopes of retaining military aid to the Contras; the scandal is forcing a reexamination of this commitment.    &quot;Credibility is sort of gone from this administration as far as I'm concerned,&quot; says Rep. Jenkins. &quot;This is an opportunity . . . in trying to force a dialogue, to find a peaceful solution.&quot;    If Rep. Jenkins played down his appointment on the panel, Sen. Trible was quick to seize it as an opportunity. The son of a corporate executive, Sen. Trible, 40, is a young man still on the move. &quot;The challenge for any first-term senator is to be seen and heard,&quot; he says of his committee assignment. &quot;This gives me the opportunity to do both.&quot;    With almost boyish enthusiasm, he has thrown himself into the investigation, and with his hard work has won the favor of the bipartisan Senate committee leadership. He reads a handwritten note from Chairman Inouye: &quot;Dan says, 'Your questions were brilliant and courageous. Voters of Virginia are certainly proud of your service in the Senate.' That just boggles my mind. It just shows what a neat guy he is.&quot;    So far, his energy and aggressive stance have surprised critics and earned favorable reviews at home. Virginia's voters are much on Sen. Trible's mind; up for reelection next year, he is walking a line between loyalty to the president and the new independence he needs to survive. On the one hand, he declares that &quot;the best way to serve this president is to get the truth out.&quot; But he quickly draws back to Mr. Reagan's defense: &quot;There's no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of the president.&quot;    Sen. Trible's stance has drawn fire from conservatives like the National Conservative Political Action Committee, which accuses him of insufficient loyalty to the Reagan administration, and it irritates some Republicans on the House side, where he himself served through 1982. It also underscores a genuine torment in the party over how to deal with the scandal. House Republicans tend to see themselves as more ideologically committed than their Senate counterparts, and those on the investigative committee have invested immense political capital in trying to minimize the damage to the Contra cause.    Having done so, they have a sense of almost double betrayal at the revelations of abuses. As the hearings now move to the White House and away from the Contra network, these defenders may well turn on those they feel are responsible for their embarrassment.    As Sen. Trible prepares for his interrogation of Col. North, there is irony in the confrontation. The two men face one another nearly 20 years after the Tet offensive of 1968, the year they both graduated from college. The Marine went to Vietnam. The future senator escaped the draft and war because of a minor medical condition that prevents him from fully straightening his right arm.    &quot;Oliver North is an outstanding warrior,&quot; declares Sen. Trible. &quot;He's a man prepared to fight and die for his country. . . . But like a lot of great warriors, he wasn't prepared to run the NSC.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>