<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870211-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Who's News:Diamond Shamrock's Spinoff Will TestMettle of Blackburn and Hemminghaus---By Karen BlumenthalStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DIADIVIDENDS (DIV)PETROLEUM (PET)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG) </IN><TEXT>   When Charles L. Blackburn took over Diamond Shamrock Corp.'s exploration unit last summer, he made a point of telling lower-level managers that they would be making more decisions in the future.    Similarly, his counterpart at the company's refining unit, Roger R. Hemminghaus, spent his first few months visiting each division office to shake hands with about two-thirds of its 3,600 employees.    Hardly novel management techniques, you might say. But for a company that has earned a reputation as one of the biggest oil-industry duds of the 1980s, those were huge changes in a culture where decisions often were made at Dallas headquarters and merely carried out by underlings in the field.    Now Messrs. Blackburn and Hemminghaus are being called on to work magic for the embattled company. As part of an effort to repel corporate raider T. Boone Pickens Jr., Diamond Shamrock plans to spin off its refining unit during the next 90 days. As previously reported, Mr. Pickens, at least for now, has dropped his bid to acquire Diamond Shamrock.    Mr. Blackburn, 59 years old, already president and chief executive officer of Diamond Shamrock, will take on the chairman's role when the spinoff is completed. Mr. Hemminghaus, 50, will become chairman and chief executive of the new company.    They have their work cut out for them. Diamond's stock has fallen from the mid-30s to the low teens over the last four years. But the company has told investors it expects that splitting the company and buying back shares will push the stock value back up to at least $17 a share, meaning both companies will have to win investors' confidence.    Messrs. Blackburn and Hemminghaus also will have to distance themselves from William H. Bricker, Diamond's chairman and chief executive. A distant, somewhat autocratic manager who rose through the ranks as a chemicals executive before plunging the company into the oil and natural gas business, Mr. Bricker was considered by many to be responsible for many of Diamond Shamrock's problems.    Last week, the market gave them a brief vote of confidence. Diamond Shamrock's stock jumped above $15 a share for a while after the executives made their pitch at a breakfast meeting with financial analysts. &quot;They were solid, knowledgeable guys who came across really well,&quot; said Warren Shimmerlik, a Merrill Lynch analyst who attended the meeting.    In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, the stock closed at $14.375, down 12.5 cents, on heavy volume amid rumors that Mr. Pickens was a big seller.    While the new executives bring a change in style to Diamond Shamrock, the company's operations aren't expected to change much. Mr. Blackburn, for instance, said last week that he intends to take advantage of an experienced staff and lower costs for land, drilling and seismic data by pouring much of his company's cash flow into exploration and production.    But while Diamond Shamrock previously made large investments in its international reserves, Mr. Blackburn said he intends to explore primarily in proven basins in North America.    That is a risky endeavor, but industry specialists say the strategy plays to his strengths. Between 1976 and 1986, he was in charge of exploration and production at Shell Oil Co., the industry's leader at replacing reserves at low cost. In 1985, for instance, Shell's average replacement cost was about $6.60 a barrel, while the six largest oil companies had a combined average cost of $11.47 a barrel.    He retired from Shell last March, saying he ran out of new goals after 10 years in the same job. Then last spring, while fly-fishing in Wyoming with his second wife and their new baby, an old friend called to ask him to join Diamond Shamrock's board. &quot;He also said, 'We'd like to see if you would like to run our exploration company,'&quot; Mr. Blackburn recalled. &quot;I said, 'Ugh.'&quot;    But Mr. Bricker convinced Mr. Blackburn to change his mind, and he joined the company in August to turn around its exploration business. He now plans to sell the company's coal and geothermal business if he can get the right price. He said he believes overhead can be reduced, but he wouldn't elaborate on how.    In contrast, Mr. Hemminghaus, who has been running Diamond's refining business for almost two years, has fewer changes in mind. The unit has been selling its farthest-flung marketing operations to concentrate on gasoline stations in the Southwest, and a few assets still are for sale.    The company will have to become more cost conscious as an independent entity because it won't be able to siphon cash flow from the exploration and production business. Mr. Hemminghaus said the new company may consider leasing instead of owning its new gasoline stations as one way to conserve cash.    Associates say his &quot;walking around&quot; management style already has improved morale at the company and helped make it reasonably profitable. He lunches with employees once a week to hear their ideas and visits at least 10 Diamond Shamrock gas stations a month. He also declared Fridays as casual-clothing days for employees tired of ties and dresses; that practice has since spread to corporate headquarters.    Paul Hesse, Diamond's vice president for planning, said Mr. Hemminghaus took several executives to the company's refinery in South Texas last year. Employees were amazed that they had seen Mr. Hemminghaus four or five times that year. &quot;They said they never saw anybody before,&quot; Mr. Hesse said.    While analysts laud the two executives' credentials -- even Mr. Pickens' lieutenants can hardly find fault with Messrs. Blackburn and Hemminghaus -- they still are skeptical that the two can bring about dramatic changes in Diamond Shamrock's value. &quot;Their strategy seems to be awfully well conceived, but whether that makes me a believer is another issue,&quot; said Mark Gilman, E.F. Hutton senior oil analyst, who values the two parts at less than $17 a combined share.    To improve the value, analysts say, Mr. Blackburn will have to replace Diamond Shamrock's production at a low cost over several years. Mr. Hemminghaus will have to show that the refinery business can operate profitably as an independent concern. And doing those two things will take much more than the campaigning that the executives have been doing among the financial community for the last week.    Said Mr. Blackburn, &quot;What we have here is a couple of chicks hatching, and nobody knows it they are going to grow up to be eagles or turkeys.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>