<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870415-0053 </DOCNO><HL> On the Spot:Trade Picture DarkensAnd So Does the ImageOf Treasury Secretary---Baker's Policies Fail to StemDeficits, as Dollar, StocksAnd Bonds Keep Sliding---Are Bush's Prospects Hurt?---By Alan Murray and Paul BlusteinStaf Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In September 1985, Treasury Secretary James Baker told the dollar to fall, and it did. Now he is telling it to stop, and it won't.    Instead, the dollar continues to decline on foreign-exchange markets, in blithe defiance of the billions of dollars that the world's central banks are spending to prop it up. Its plunge poses serious risks for the U.S. economy and serious problems for Secretary Baker, the architect of the administration's dollar policy.    Already, interest rates are rising, and the stock-market boom seems, at the moment, to have collapsed. If the dollar keeps sliding, the Federal Reserve is likely to push interest rates up even further in an attempt to stem the decline. But such a move would endanger the Treasury's policies toward the Third World debtor nations, would create new political problems for Secretary Baker's Republican Party and could even set off a recession.    For six years, Mr. Baker has been the administration's golden boy. As chief of staff in President Reagan's first term, he helped pull off victories -- a major tax-rate cut, budget compromises and Social Security changes -- that few thought possible. And in his first two years as Treasury secretary, he helped push through Congress a landmark tax-overhaul bill and launched the widely acclaimed policy to bring down the dollar.    But the dollar's unruly slump now threatens to sully that reputation. &quot;Baker's a man with a lot of concerns these days,&quot; says Robert Solomon, a scholar at the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank.    Yesterday, the dollar plunged largely because of a government report that the U.S. trade deficit had widened to $15.06 billion in February from $12.27 billion in January. In the credit markets, bond prices fell -- and interest rates rose -- in response to the news. And the stock market slumped on heavy volume. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was down as much as 65 points and ended off 34.09. Closing at 2252.98, it was well below its April 6 high of 2405.54.    All of this adds up to an extremely unpleasant economic and political scene. Mr. Baker launched his dollar policy two years ago in an effort to bring down record U.S. trade deficits, forestall protectionist legislation and help brighten his party's political prospects in 1988. But the trade deficit has been unyielding, and Congress continues its march toward tough trade legislation, dragging the White House with it.    Meanwhile, Mr. Baker is &quot;sort of helpless,&quot; says Paul Krugman, an economist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. &quot;It's hard to see what he can do. The extent to which Baker or anyone else has any control over this is pretty limited.&quot; Mr. Baker wasn't available for comment yesterday.    The dollar's plunge over the past two years has begun to increase U.S. exports, which become more competitive on world markets, and ultimately that will help reduce the trade deficit. But the process is proving painfully slow. Moreover, Americans have become hooked on imports and won't quickly change their habits even though import prices are rising.    Furthermore, foreign investors are losing confidence in the ability of the U.S. to manage its economic problems. Worried by the lack of progress against the budget and trade deficits and by the prospect of a trade war, they are pulling their money out of the country -- and thus helping push down the dollar. Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker has threatened to act to defend the dollar, partly out of fear that a sliding dollar and rising import prices will accelerate inflation in the U.S. But so far, the Fed has shied away from a major move to raise interest rates.    Contributing to the market jitters is the equivocal nature of Mr. Baker's statements on the dollar. He has said he favors keeping the dollar &quot;around current levels&quot; and has approved some intervention in foreign-exchange markets to prop up the dollar. But given the huge flows of capital in the international markets, such actions have only fleeting impact. Faced with continuing downward pressure on the dollar, Mr. Volcker and Mr. Baker may have no choice but to let interest rates rise, even if the higher rates threaten to spark a recession.    The threat of rising interest rates poses particularly acute worries for Mr. Baker as the 1988 elections approach. The Treasury chief, a close friend of Vice President George Bush, is well aware that higher rates could severely damage the presidential prospects of Mr. Bush and other GOP candidates. Lance Tarrance, a Republican pollster, believes that American voters now focus on interest rates as &quot;the issue that drives their perception of whether the economy is being well managed or not.&quot;    Moreover, Mr. Baker recently lost the services of Richard Darman, his long-time deputy and one of the administration's ablest policy strategists; Mr. Darman left the Treasury for an investment-banking job. Mr. Baker himself is known as an astute politician but has less experience in economic policy.    In the past, of course, Mr. Baker has maneuvered his way out of difficult situations, and the current crisis may abate. The currency, credit and stock markets have staged astonishing turnabouts and rallies in recent months, and some analysts, noting that much of the recent decline in the dollar has been against the yen, predict that the dollar will soon stabilize at its new low level. Moreover, most economists predict that the trade deficit will decline in coming months.    The Treasury chief may get some help from Japan and West Germany, which have been running huge trade surpluses. He has strongly urged both nations to stimulate their flagging economies in an effort to step up world economic growth. Faced with a lower dollar, which hurts their exports, Tokyo and Bonn may be forced to cut their interest rates. That would make the greenback relatively more attractive to investors and help stem the dollar's decline.    Right now, though, Secretary Baker is the victim of his own public-relations campaign. He managed to convince the markets and the public that the agreement he engineered among the so-called Group of Five industrial nations at the Plaza Hotel in September 1985 was responsible for the dollar's decline. In fact, the dollar had been falling since February of that year. The Plaza accord may have added fuel to the decline, but its lasting effect is far from clear.    &quot;He played it very clever&quot; in 1985, says Martin Feldstein, a former chairman of President Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers. &quot;He was simply getting on a moving train and saying he liked the direction it was going.&quot;    At the start of this year, however, the falling dollar seemed to be going overboard. News reports quoted unidentified administration officials as saying they wanted it still lower. Secretary Baker insisted that he wasn't the source for the rumors, but he also refused to say he opposed a further drop. Fed Chairman Volcker warned that the dollar had reached a dangerous point and that if it fell further, it could reignite inflation. But it kept falling.    Then, in February, Secretary Baker agreed to call at least a temporary halt to efforts to drive down the dollar. At a meeting in Paris, the finance ministers of the five leading industrial nations agreed to try to stabilize exchange rates. At the time, the dollar was quoted at 154 yen; since then, it has slid to about 141 yen.    &quot;At the Plaza, Baker was leaning with the wind,&quot; says Fred Bergsten, the director of the Institute for International Economics in Washington. &quot;Now, he's leaning against the wind. Neither Baker nor anybody else can, for any sustained period, lean against the wind.&quot;    But if the wind continues to blow in its current direction, trouble almost certainly lies ahead. A rapid plunge in the dollar, Mr. Baker fears, could cripple the economies of Japan and Western Europe by hurting their exports and thus could spark a global slump. Nevertheless, he has resisted the U.S. trading partners' pleas for an unequivocal public statement that the dollar shouldn't fall further. In part, administration advisers say, he has done so because he thinks that a further, gradual drop in the dollar may be necessary to reverse the trade deficit.    Mr. Baker and Federal Reserve officials hope that Japan and West Germany will stimulate their economies. They argue that that would strengthen world economic growth and increase demand for exports from the U.S. and developing nations. That would reduce the U.S. trade deficit, help prop up the dollar, and ameliorate the debt burden of the Third World.    But in the absence of such a development, the dollar is likely to come under additional pressure. Already, the Fed appears to be allowing interest rates to rise and could be forced to push rates up further in a more assertive move to defend the dollar.    Fed Governor Robert Heller says that raising U.S. interest rates now would court disaster because it would slow down the only engine of growth the world economy has -- the U.S. economy. But another senior Fed official warns that the central bank will have little choice if the dollar &quot;is really getting away from you.&quot;    In a way, Mr. Baker's dilemma reflects the U.S. budget deficit coming home to roost. The nation has managed to finance record budget deficits during most of the 1980s by borrowing heavily from abroad. That borrowing drove up the dollar's value, and the high dollar, in turn, encouraged imports, discouraged exports and created huge trade deficits.    The dollar's drop, however, may indicate that foreign investors are now less willing to lend money to the U.S. So unless the budget deficit is substantially reduced, interest rates may have to rise to entice foreign investors to continue financing U.S. profligacy.    &quot;When you spend beyond your means, you can have a few good years,&quot; Prof. Krugman says. &quot;But trying to work your way down from that is bound to be painful.&quot;    Ultimately, Mr. Baker's success may depend on his ability to ensure reasonable progress toward a budget agreement. Since becoming Treasury secretary, Mr. Baker has tried to steer clear of the sticky budget debate, and he still seems reluctant to become involved in the issue in light of President Reagan's resistance to a tax increase. But to rescue his policies, he may find he has no choice.    &quot;There's nothing the Treasury can do except reduce the budget deficit,&quot; Prof. Krugman says, &quot;and there's no way to do that except a tax increase.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>