<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870709-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Landlubber ReporterSails the AtlanticAnd Survives, Barely---The 27 Days Before the MastWere Marked by TerrorAnd Make for a Good Yarn---By Paul B. CarrollStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Call me Schlemiel.    With just two days' sailing experience, I blithely accepted a friend's invitation to join the crew on a 42-foot sailboat in the transatlantic Constitution Race, which began May 16.    It seemed like a good idea at the time.    Starting my first watch at 3 a.m. in the English Channel, however, I wasn't so certain. As I stepped into the cockpit, the first mate told me: &quot;If you go overboard, the water is so cold you'll only last 15 minutes, and in the dark we'll never find you. If you go overboard, just take a couple of big gulps of water and go under. You'll save yourself a lot of time and trouble.&quot;    As the 4,000-mile trip progressed across the North Atlantic, we sailed into two weeks of storms so severe they nearly banged the boat apart. The bulkheads cracked, and the sails tore. Most ominous, the mast seemed to be pounding its way through the bottom of the hull as we were 1,500 miles from the U.S., heading into our third gale in less than a week and unable to raise help on the radio.    Some of the four European boats in the race -- we were the sole U.S. entry -- had it even worse than we did, and it isn't uncommon for sailors to be seriously injured or even to die in transatlantic races. Yet, for some reason, thousands of people, so they say, cross the ocean this way each year.    Back on land, where there's plenty of dry underwear and where beds don't move, I find it hard to explain the grim fascination that gripped the six of us in the crew. Bill Salvesen, the first mate, describes it as &quot;a madness that afflicts me when I'm on land. . . . I kept a journal during my first two Atlantic crossings, but if I had read anything I wrote, there's no way I'd be here.&quot;    This race was to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the U.S. Constitution and the 30th anniversary of the treaty that established the European Community, and it began pleasantly enough, with a party.    But shortly after we put off from Nieuwpoort, Belgium, a spectator boat got a bit cozy with us and punched a hole through our hull, and that forced us back into port for 10 hours of repairs. By the time we got under way again, at around midnight, the crowd that had seen us off was long gone. We slunk away into the dark, and reality began to set in.    Long-distance sailboat racing, I quickly learned, is largely about realities -- sometimes harsh, dangerous realities, but mainly just annoying, little ones. Take sleeping, for instance. The boat leans at a 25- to 30-degree angle much of the time, so crew members, who sleep on the high side of the vessel in order to minimize the leaning, must be strapped into their berths. Everything smells like a locker room, loose shackles bang, and leaks in the deck seem to be strategically positioned to drip on the sleeper's forehead. In the early going, I would often lose my grip getting out of my berth and go flying across the cabin.    Wetness was a constant. For anyone who would like to get a feel for this at home, I suggest a steering simulation: Sit in a rocking chair and wrestle with a truck tire, while every couple of minutes a friend throws a bucket of cold water in your face. If, after five hours of this, you find that you are enjoying yourself, then ocean sailboat racing is for you.    Eventually, we became jaded. At one point, in heavy seas, we needed sea water to wash vegetables for dinner. So Bill &quot;B.T.&quot; Tattersall, our 21-year-old cook, who was at the helm, pointed the bow into a couple of big waves. Pierre Brihay, a 30-year-old Belgian doctor, caught the spray in a bucket.    Still, there were many amazements. One overcast night, though the clouds blocked all light from the moon and stars, the whitecaps seemed to flash light and the sea glowed an eerie green. Plankton, the old salts explained. The microscopic creatures glow when they move, and this was the one time each year when they flower and glow the brightest. Bob Cook, 43, our radio operator, hauled up some water and poured it into the cockpit; it was as if he had poured out embers on a dark night.    Later, a couple of packs of pilot whales swam lazily by, and dozens of dolphins would swim up to the boat to play with us. We had one warm, sunny day early on, with so little wind that we took down the sails and went swimming a thousand miles from the nearest land.    Then, two weeks of bad weather started. We headed south to avoid the worst of an approaching gale, but we still wound up in a 2 1/2-day storm, with huge waves coming at us from all directions.    John Kalish, our 47-year-old skipper, had crossed the Atlantic twice before and once survived a capsizing that threw him overboard and knocked him unconscious. This time, he was worried. &quot;There's only one word for these seas, and that's terrifying,&quot; he said. &quot;I suppose that if I live to see seas like this 50 more times, they'll still terrify me.&quot;    I, at 29, spent an hour and a half of terror in the middle of the night in that storm as I fought the wheel and tried to keep us upright. I persuaded Bob, my watch partner, to sit right behind me for the first half-hour so he could offer advice and grab the wheel if I made a murderous mistake.    That first storm was just a prelude. The second, which arrived after a day of mild weather, dished out its worst in the middle of the night, battering us with 55-knot winds and waves as high as 35 feet from the tip to the middle. (We later learned that the crew of the QE2 said the storm caused the ocean liner's worst crossing in 15 years.)    Bill Salvesen, a 30-year-old Belgian who is Scandinavian by birth and who looks -- sails -- like a Viking, began, uncharacteristically, to complain, yelling down into the cabin every few minutes to find out how soon his watch would end. He bellowed that the wind was blowing so hard he couldn't breathe and demanded that I not be one second late in relieving him. When I took over at midnight, the rain felt like birdshot in my face, and I took so many waves over the bow that the spray blinded me.    But then strange things began to happen. The rain stopped, and the wind slowed some. Next, stars appeared and the moon blinked on and off as clouds thundered past. When the moon was hidden, I couldn't see the waves until the whitecaps loomed a few feet from the boat, but that didn't seem to matter. The crazy, confused, conflicting patterns I had seen in the seas suddenly made sense, and so did all the advice people had given me about sailing. I developed the irrational but overpowering sense that I had conquered this huge storm. I felt that I had become part of the sea surrounding me and that I somehow was controlling it. This, I thought vaguely, makes it all worthwhile.    At 1:45 a.m., Bob brought me some soup and took the wheel. As my mind settled down, I realized I was exhausted. I went below. Within a few minutes, the wind had picked up again and a cold rain began to fall, and reality set in once more.    For one thing, the boat had begun to fall apart. The mainsail was ripped so badly that we had to take it down for two days of resewing. Cracks developed in the bulkheads; laminations in the hull separated, and the mast began vibrating ominously. We were also hearing a mysterious second bang when the boat pounded down off a wave, and Bob was convinced the mast was banging through the hull.    &quot;I went to bed that night expecting to wake up dead,&quot; he says.    We had been rationing liquid since the fourth day at sea because we had inadvertently dumped three-quarters of the fresh water from our tanks, and now we found that some of our bottles of emergency water had cracked. Our main supply of cooking gas also ran out at this point. And we were about to hit another gale. Our skipper, ever the optimist, finally acknowledged that our three-week trip was becoming a four-week trip.    Our depression was such that if a glitch developed during a sail change, we would sit on our haunches on the deck, hoods pulled well down over our faces, staring at our hands until someone addressed the problem. Finally, John reached race officials on the radio and said that if the weather didn't improve quickly, we were going to quit the race and head for Bermuda, the nearest land. I liked that idea.    At that point, a rogue wave knocked Bob into the rigging hard enough that he suffered deep cuts in his forehead, nose and lip. Pierre ruled that the lip needed stitches; he sat there with a needle just below Bob's lip, trying (without anesthetic) to get into synch with the rhythm of the bouncing boat and then jabbing the needle into him.    That was the low point. Afterward, the weather cleared a bit, we missed a storm front we had been expecting, and the mysterious second bang disappeared. We pressed on, and each day became a little easier. Eventually, the sun came out, and finally we limped into Cape May.    As it happened, we finished third, but that no longer mattered much. We were just glad to be safe and dry after 27 days at sea, and to be able to eat something other than sausage and Snickers bars.    I have tried to put the trip out of mind, but every time I do I remember the orange moon rising large over the horizon. I feel a warm breeze coming up. I picture dolphins splashing through the moonlight. And I think I might try it again. </TEXT></DOC>