<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880804-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Reconstituting ANC Is Too Good an Idea for U.S. Politics </HL><AUTHOR> Max Singer </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   In Atlanta the Democrats had to choose between helping the blacks of South Africa or helping their own political interests. It was no contest. They chose a pretense of helping the blacks -- in ways that would actually hurt them -- over the political costs of challenging the prescriptions that are insisted on by Transafrica, the Congressional Black Caucus and Jesse Jackson.    There is no dispute in America about whether the U.S. should oppose apartheid. The only real issue is which U.S. action will actually help South African blacks in their struggle. And whether we will choose to display our moral zeal or do what will actually help the blacks.    The U.S. can influence South Africa in two ways: by affecting its economy, and by strengthening or weakening the efforts of the African National Congress (ANC) to become the dominant element of the opposition to apartheid. In Atlanta the Democrats confirmed they are on the wrong side of both these issues.    The choice about how to influence the South African economy is between the Democrats' scorched-earth approach and a policy of &quot;black empowerment&quot; -- which means avoiding actions that will damage black workers more than white owners, and taking actions that will strengthen the position of black workers, black consumers and black small business.    The last U.S. Congress enacted economic sanctions, the main effect of which has been to put blacks out of work and enrich some wealthy South Africans by letting them snap up at low prices businesses that had been owned by Americans. The result: weaker black unions and consumer groups, and a slowing of the movement of relatively prosperous blacks into theoretically all-white neighborhoods.    The sanctions policy is out of step with black thinking in South Africa. Washington Post correspondent William Claiborne reports that South Africa's black townships &quot;are undergoing a collective metamorphosis, one that seeks to supplant the street battle against overwhelming military might with a new, revolutionary strategy of denying whites the vast black majority's most valuable commodities -- its labor and its enormous purchasing power.&quot; He notes that, while economic power is not a key part of the rhetoric of the ANC or of leaders such as Archbishop Desmond Tutu, it is a strategy that appears to be moving from the bottom up -- spontaneously.    Despite the failure and unpopularity of sanctions with the mass of South African blacks, Rep. Ronald Dellums (D., Calif.) has proposed strengthening and expanding them. He is unmoved by testimony such as that of James Ncgoya, the head of the black taxi-owners association of South Africa, begging Congress to &quot;listen to our voices before you decide what is good for us -- before you decide that black children should go hungry so you can be on the right side of history.&quot; Nevertheless, the Democratic platform commits itself to the Dellums-Jackson line by calling for &quot;comprehensive sanctions&quot; and &quot;a date certain by which U.S. corporations must leave South Africa.&quot;    The other major choice the U.S. has is whether to help or hinder the ANC in its struggle to dominate the opposition movement. Transafrica, the Congressional Black Caucus and their allies have largely succeeded in making it the conventional wisdom here that the ANC is the principal black organization opposing apartheid -- overcoming the testimony of such enemies of apartheid as the late Bayard Rustin, as well as the dynamic black candidate for the Senate in Maryland, Alan Keyes, who as a recent assistant secretary of state is well-informed on South Africa.    The ANC's advocates have made it seem as if one cannot oppose the ANC without supporting apartheid, and that opposing apartheid means supporting the ANC. This is a triumph of public relations and political maneuver over fact. While it is true that the former head of the ANC, Nelson Mandela, who has been in prison 26 years, is probably the most important and widely supported symbol of black opposition to apartheid, other opposition organizations have many times as many members as the ANC and much stronger organizations.    The power of the ANC's American supporters is shown for example in the near invisibility here of Bishop B.E. Lekganyane, head of the Zion Christian Church, which has five million members and is fervently and outspokenly opposed to both apartheid and sanctions. Similarly invisible here are the dozens of other democratic (non-ANC) organizations in the opposition movement, many of which are followed by Project South Africa, which is sponsored by the black unionists of the A. Philip Randolph Institute.    While the ANC started over 75 years ago as a group that was genuinely devoted to fighting for the rights of black South Africans, in 1962 effective control shifted to a small group of communists -- that is, members of the Moscow-affiliated South African Communist Party (SACP) -- who won an internal struggle for power partly because Chief Albert Luthuli, the great leader of the ANC, was under house arrest.    American black leaders who were engaged in the struggle against apartheid in the '60s and '70s were well aware the dominant role in ANC had been taken over by a small group that cared less about the interests of South African blacks than about the world-wide revolution led by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. But such older, serious black leaders do not have the power to stand up to a new generation of black politicians who either don't know or don't care about communist power in the ANC.    Of course, the overwhelming majority of the ANC's members and supporters are not communists. But the small group of communists that runs the ANC and the SACP -- so that one can't say that either organization runs the other -- controls the money, military and much of the access to foreign supporters. It is the most cohesive, determined and organizationally sophisticated part of the leadership. The objection to such communist influence is not that it is anti-American or bad for us; the objection is that the communists don't care about South African blacks and will use their power to destroy South Africa if they cannot get control themselves.    The main reason the ANC is so important in South Africa is that it is seen by foreigners, especially Americans, as the primary spokesman for the black opposition. This gives it an effective veto over the foreign legitimacy of any negotiations or agreement between the government and black leaders. It also can usually determine which opposition leaders get prominent attention in the West.    The thing that would most increase the chance of success of the black struggle in South Africa would be the formation of a new African National Congress, the same as the old one, except for excluding from all positions of power the dozen or so communists now in the leadership, who are able to bend the organization to their destructive purposes. This is one of the few things in South Africa for which U.S. support could be decisive. Instead, those Americans who know the facts are making calculations about how their personal political position would be hurt if they challenged the ANC's defenders in the U.S.    ---   Mr. Singer, a Washington public-policy consultant, spent two weeks with a fact-finding group in South Africa last year. </TEXT></DOC>