<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880607-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Pros and Cons of Corporate Takeovers </HL><SO> </SO><IN> TNM </IN><TEXT>   With due respect for Irving Kristol, whose usual perspicacity is known to me by the fact that I agree with him most of the time, I think he's missed the forest for the trees in his recent piece &quot;A Cure for Takeovers' Social Ills&quot; (editorial page, May 13). The social cost of corporate restructurings is the same, whether undertaken by incumbent managements and characterized as painful but necessary &quot;asset redeployments,&quot; or resulting from hostile takeovers and stigmatized as &quot;dismemberment&quot; or &quot;bust-up.&quot;    Our economic system assumes that the long-term benefit to society from more efficient employment of resources will greatly exceed the shorter-term social cost of the attendant dislocation. The main point is not whether business changes instituted by incumbent management are likely for some reason to be more benign than such changes when brought about by new management installed in a hostile takeover. The main point is the nature of the process by which the decisions for such changes are to be made.    The private-enterprise system assumes that such decisions will be better over the long run when they result from the free play of market forces, including individual investment decisions. Anything that restricts the exercise of equity ownership rights, including the basic right to vote, places a clog on the operation of these economic mechanisms and tends to insulate the decision makers (management) from responsiveness to the free market. Society does indeed place various &quot;clogs&quot; on complete economic laissez faire (e.g., antitrust laws) to serve other policy interests, but a policy of protecting incumbent managements from responsibility to equity investors would appear to serve no other interest than that of the managers themselves.    Carroll D. French   Alstead, N.H.    ---   Regardless of a person's position on corporate takeovers, he will agree that stocks with full voting rights usually have higher values than others with voting limits. Mr. Kristol's proposal to save corporate democracy by limiting voting rights to people who have owned stocks for a year is illogical.    On one hand, it would reduce the yield of corporate stock offerings and force corporations to seek capital elsewhere. On the other hand, it would send investors to other markets for stocks with full voting rights. Thus, his proposal would hurt both Wall Street and Main Street at the same time.    Lawrence M. Stratton Jr.    Institute for Political Economy   Washington   ---   Mr. Kristol's distinction between speculators and stockholders is not meaningful. Where did the speculators obtain their shares? Most likely, they purchased them in the efficient market from stockholders who, after holding their shares for a long time, realized they could not force management to maximize shareholder value, and who found it more profitable to sell their shares. Since management is favored in most proxy battles, voting with your feet (selling your stock) is often more effective than voting with your proxy.    Richard Dine   Riverdale, N.Y.    ---   Solutions to the takeover question can come only through the internal rules of each corporation. It is perfectly acceptable for a corporation to issue nonvoting shares or to issue shares with delayed voting rights. There is also nothing wrong with a corporation giving labor unions or the local city council decision-making authority.    However, it is essential that such actions be made clear to investors before stocks are sold, and that each corporation remain free to choose its own method of ownership. Investors will then adjust the value of each stock according to the rights inherent in it. But changing the rules in the middle of the game will greatly reduce investor confidence in the stock market and will make it much more difficult for businesses to raise capital in the future.    Ramin H. Siahpoosh   Boca Raton, Fla.   ---   Corporate &quot;dismemberments&quot; are neither a necessary nor undesirable consequence of takeovers. If I take over a corporation and sell off its parts, I must find buyers who consider the productive ability and value of these dismembered parts to exceed the price they pay. It cannot be true that the productive ability of the economy declines on the aggregate. Such dismemberments usually lead to more efficient utilization of assets.    The argument that takovers act as a disincentive to capital improvements and technological risk-taking rests on the purported inability of the capital markets to correctly value such activities. Capital markets richly reward the bearers of such risks and innovators as seen in the price performance of many drug, bio-tech and high-tech stocks.    Takeovers also lead to the leveraging of corporate financial structure, but it is believed that increased debt acts as a deterrent against managerial slack.    Takeovers, and especially the threat of potential takeovers, are strong incentives for managerial performance. The increasing need for global competitiveness of American industries makes it abundantly clear that any restrictions on takeovers will be ultimately counterproductive.    LaLatendu Misra   Assistant Professor of Finance   College of Business   University of Texas   San Antonio, Texas   ---   Mr. Kristol suggests that no reason exists to allow arbitragers to vote shares of stock. Their votes are the key to the success of takeovers, which Mr. Kristol views as bad things. His solution is to require that shareholders own their own shares for one year before being allowed to vote.    Contrary to his assertions, no principled distinction can be made between arbitragers and other shareholders. Each group may have an interest in, affection for and loyalty to the corporation. Indeed, arbitragers may have far more of these qualities than a shareholder who years ago inherited shares or purchased them on a broker's recommendation. Both groups are presumably interested in profit, quick or otherwise, although arbitragers are less likely to be satisfied by the opiate of dividends instead of efficient management.    Finally, it would be wrong to distinguish between arbitragers and other shareholders because both groups have done exactly the same thing: parted with money in return for ownership of a fraction of a corporation. That similiarity alone justifies treating both groups equally.    Perhaps most ironically, Prof. Kristol's solution would require at least as much political interference as he hopes to avoid by his proposal. While staving off congressional regulation of takeovers, his solution can be effected only by each state's legislature amending its corporations code.    Eric A. Chiappinelli   Assistant Professor of Law   School of Law   University of Puget Sound   Tacoma, Wash.   ---   Mr. Kristol is quite right in his estimate of speculators' loyalties in regards to the best interests of their target companies. However, if he truly desires to encourage corporate America to return to a long-term view of investment by discouraging raiders, he should attack what is nearest and dearest to the heart of a raider. This would be profits, not equity rights.    James F. Kirk   Cambridge, Mass.</TEXT></DOC>