<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880715-0162 </DOCNO><HL> A Vision of a European Central Bank </HL><AUTHOR> Karl Otto Poehl </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><TEXT>   Movement toward a European central bank cannot occur before some important questions are answered. The first is a definition of the task involved. It should agree with the aim of the Deutsche Bundesbank Act -- &quot;safeguarding the currency&quot; -- which in practice means a policy ensuring stable prices. This may seem self-evident for a central bank. But there is the tendency to allot monetary policy additional tasks -- helping regional structural policy, creating full employment, and, notably in recent years, stabilizing exchange rates.    Priority for price stability does not mean a European central bank would have a deflationary bias. Experience gained in the 1970s showed one cannot trade a little bit less unemployment for a little bit more inflation. On the contrary, countries with low inflation usually have low unemployment and vice versa. Most Germans, with traumatic memories of two hyperinflations, would not accept a central-bank system that attributed this goal less significance than does the Bundesbank Act.    The task of ensuring price stability would be facilitated, if not enabled, by a European central-bank system being free to formulate objectives and make decisions -- independent not only of national governments but European Community institutions, such as the EC Commission and the Council of Ministers. In some countries -- probably including Germany -- this would require a change in the constitution of the central bank. Also, our regulatory conceptions would suggest monetary-policy tools of the European central bank be designed so that they enabled effective targeting of the monetary variables without recourse to quantitative controls (or other direct interventions in financial markets). These tools would thus have to provide for both interest-rate and liquidity-policy measures sufficient for the global management and fine-tuning of the European money market.    A European central-bank system probably can be organized only in a decentralized federal fashion, where one centralizes only whatever is absolutely necessary and as many powers as possible remain at the national level. A European central bank should resemble more the Bundesbank system or the Federal Reserve system in America than the central banks in most European countries. Further, a European central-bank system should not be authorized to finance government deficits through money creation. Though the Bundesbank Act prevents the Bundesbank from so doing, this is by no means accepted in all countries.    Another question is the extent to which a European central bank is supposed to be responsible for exchange-rate policy toward other currencies, principally the dollar and yen. Monetary stability requires safeguarding against external influences, as in the Bretton Woods system. Nevertheless, stabilizing exchange rates cannot and must not be the primary goal of monetary policy, particularly in an inflationary environment.    There is, however, scope for monetary-policy cooperation with countries outside the Community. It may also include interventions in the exchange markets. A European central bank responsible for such operations would thus have to acquire and administer at least some of the monetary reserves now in national hands. This was originally envisaged in the European Monetary System, but hardly any country was prepared to transfer reserves irrevocably to a supra-national institution (the Bundesbank was prepared, but wanted statutory footing).    The list of questions can be lengthened. One derives from the fact that four Community countries -- Britain, Spain, Portugal and Greece -- do not belong to the exchange-rate mechanism of the EMS at all, and Italy belongs only with a widened margin of fluctuation for the lira. So one does not have to be defeatist about European integration to doubt whether there is enough political scope for such fundamental decisions and waiving of national sovereignty as would be required for a European central bank and currency.    Meantime, things are moving ahead. Monetary-policy cooperation in Europe has intensified since the EMS was founded. The Bundesbank has made a basic contribution, by agreeing to two extensions of the EMS rules, most recently in the agreements of Basle and Nyborg in September 1987. Economic trends in the member countries have reached a high level of convergence, and EMS exchange rates are relatively stable. Coordination of interventions against the dollar is also fairly welladvanced today, at any rate among those countries participating in the exchange-rate mechanism of the EMS.    The Committee of Governors of the European central banks plays an important role in monetary-policy cooperation, and could be given further powers in managing the monetary system, especially as the system is constructed on an agreement between central banks. For example, necessary exchange-rate corrections could be carried out by EC central-bank governors professionally, in good time and without straying into the limelight. Suggestions to this end, however, have been rejected by the finance ministers.    On the other hand, the European Monetary Cooperation Fund, the EMCF, is not suited to be the nucleus of a European central-bank system. The fund lacks an important quality-independence of European Community institutions. It is a creation of the EC Council of Ministers and would thus depend on decisions taken by this body.    The commitment to keep the European monetary system functioning has increased the need for closer cooperation. In the nine years since the EMS was set up, the Bundesbank has made essential contributions to its discreet and successful functioning. It was not intended that the deutsche mark grow into the role of the major intervention and key currency. But it has developed into the stability benchmark for the EMS, enabling the system to work. The German economy has contributed to this in so far as the German economic and monetary policy has succeeded keeping the mark the most stable currency in the EMS. It would be fateful not only for the Federal Republic but also for other European countries were the mooring of the EMS to be loosened without knowing what would take its place.    Some of our partners are pointing out that their hands are being tied in the area of economic and monetary policy because they have to accept the mark as dominant in the EMS. To the extent that they have accepted their currencies being pegged to the mark, they see themselves restrained in their pursuit of autonomously set targets for growth, employment and stability. They are calling for a more symmetrical sharing of burdens in the defense of exchange rates.    This debate has been going on since the EMS was founded. At the time, the agreements between central banks contained clear rulings on intervention requirements, the result of long-drawn-out negotiations. Both countries whose currencies have reached the lower intervention point, and countries whose currencies have reached the upper limit are required to sell or purchase currency. To this extent, the system is symmetrical. There are no contractual requirements for so-called intramarginal interventions. However, they depend on the agreement of the central bank whose currency is being used for interventions. The Bundesbank has agreed to the use of the mark, where this did not clash with its monetary policy objectives.    The Basle and Nyborg agreements have extended what were already generous lending facilities to intramarginal interventions. This can strain monetary policy heavily, especially as the Bundesbank may be expected to make considerable interventions in the course of its cooperation with the U.S. Our declining to assume intervention commitments beyond those already agreed is, therefore, not an unwillingness to cooperate.    Were the Bundesbank to begin including the EMS currencies in its reserves, as is being suggested, it would weaken rather than strengthen the EMS, because the requirement to adjust would no longer be incurred by soft-currency countries. Germany, too, has an obligation to contribute to equilibrium in the global monetary order -- to reduce its current-account surpluses. This, however, should not occur through softening monetary-policy discipline but via strengthening domestic demand, as with the recent tax cuts. Interventions cannot replace timely exchange-rate adjustments over the long term.    European monetary union is a desirable political and economic goal. We have already taken some large steps. The directive on liberalizing capital transactions in the European Community, which was adopted at the meeting of the Council of Finance Ministers on June 13, is a milestone. The participation of all EC countries in the exchange-rate mechanism of the EMS would be a further important step. It is up to governments and parliaments to decide whether further institutional progress toward monetary union is possible.    ---   Mr. Poehl is president of the Deutsche Bundesbank. </TEXT></DOC>