<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861231-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/31/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   MOSCOW REJECTED an exchange of New Year's messages with the U.S.    A Kremlin spokesman said superpower disputes over arms control, treaty commitments and nuclear-weapons testing made a televised exchange of messages by Reagan and Gorbachev impossible. The spokesman said that both nations &quot;should make joint efforts to correct the situation,&quot; and that the Soviets planned to &quot;democratize and restructure our society.&quot; He refused to elaborate, but mentioned that Moscow was allowing more returnees from the West.    Reagan plans to deliver a message to the Soviet people over the Voice of America broadcast service, despite the Kremlin's rebuff of the U.S. proposal.    ---   THE U.S. WILL IMPOSE higher duties on certain EC agricultural products.    The Reagan administration announced that it will impose 200% duties late next month on about $400 million of certain cheese, white wine, brandy, gin and other agricultural products from Common Market nations. While officials said they expected the Europeans to propose a settlement that could preclude the tariffs from taking effect, the U.S. trade representative denied that the announcement of the duties was a negotiating ploy.    Common Market officials expressed regret over the U.S. decision to impose the higher tariffs and threatened to retaliate with duties on U.S. goods.    ---   French railway workers demonstrated in Paris and other cities as talks began in an effort to end the two-week-old rail strike. The workers rejected a government bid on wage-scale negotiations, as seamen and miners continued separate walkouts. Auto makers, steel firms and retailers predicted strike-related losses.    ---   A senior Peking official blamed non-student agitators and students with &quot;radical feelings&quot; for the recent spate of pro-democracy demonstrations in nearly a dozen cities in China. The remarks came as about 500 students staged a march in Peking to demand greater freedom. It was the second consecutive day of protest in the capital.    ---   U.S. and Iranian officials reported progress in talks in The Hague aimed at returning $500 million in blocked assets to Tehran. The State Department, however, said a final agreement isn't expected during the current round of talks. Return of Iran's U.S.-held assets has been linked to possible Iranian help to free American hostages in Lebanon.    A former Israeli official denied that he suggested to Lt. Col. North the diversion of Iran arms sales profits to Nicaragua rebels. Meese told Congress last month that North had said the Israeli proposed the idea. David Kimche, a former Foreign Ministry aide, said North could be seeking to take pressure off himself.    ---   The White House is preparing for a new diplomatic survey of the Mideast to determine if the Arabs and Israelis are willing to revive the region's stalled peace process. Assistant Secretary of State Murphy will travel to the area next month to meet with the leaders of Israel, Jordan and Egypt.    ---   Jordan's King Hussein met with Roman Catholic Cardinal John O'Connor of New York to discuss peace efforts in the Mideast and the fight for a Palestinian homeland. O'Connor, on a 10-day tour of the region, said after the meeting that a strong Israel was needed, but that Palestinians had a right to self-determination.    ---   Honduran soldiers joined about 3,000 U.S. troops Monday for the start of a four-month military exercise. In addition, the first of 4,500 National Guardsmen from eight states and Puerto Rico will be arriving in Honduras next week for separate maneuvers.    ---   Afghan leader Najibullah ordered the arrest of top military officers for failing to capture Moslem rebel strongholds during an offensive this month in southern Afghanistan, Western diplomats said. About 300 Soviet-backed Afghan soldiers were killed and about 400 others wounded in the fighting.    ---   North Korea's president called for high-level political and military talks to reunify the divided Korean peninsula. Speaking before a session of the Supreme People's Assembly, Kim Il Sung also predicted a doubling of factory production and a 40% increase in agricultural output by 1994.    ---   Florida eclipsed Illinois to become the nation's fifth-most-populous state during the year ended July 1, the Census Bureau estimated. Florida's steady population gains have moved it from 10th place since 1960. California, New York, Texas and Pennsylvania remained in the top four spots.    ---   A presidential panel suggested establishing a federal trust fund that would spend at least $1 billion a year to buy, improve and maintain park and recreational lands. The President's Commission on Americans Outdoors made the recommendation in a summary of its final report, which is to be completed next month.    ---   The EPA proposed new restrictions on uses of the herbicide cyanazine because it may cause birth defects. Cyanazine is used mostly to control weeds in cornfields. Use of the chemical already is limited to certified applicators. The proposed restrictions stem from an EPA review, launched in 1985, of the chemical's health effects.    ---   South African police confirmed that a white army officer had been arrested for subversive activity. The Johannesburg Star newspaper said the officer was likely to face charges of spying for the banned African National Congress, the main group fighting white domination in South Africa.    ---   A Sudanese army spokesman said Khartoum's troops killed 22 rebels as they lay wounded after an ambush on a convoy of Nile River barges. The spokesman said the guerrillas were slain because they couldn't be evacuated for medical treatment.    ---   Died: Philip B. Hofmann, 77, former chairman of Johnson andamp; Johnson, in Miami. . . . John T. (Terry) Dolan, 36, founder of the National Conservative Political Action Committee, Sunday, in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>