<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Supreme Court Nominees: A Look at the Precedents---By Forrest McDonald</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   I quote the senior senator from Massachusetts: The nominee to the Supreme Court &quot;may be keen of intellect . . . but his record impeaches him on far higher grounds than those of intellectual ability.&quot; And the New York Times: His confirmation would &quot;undo the work of John Marshall and strip the Constitution of its defenses.&quot;    The subject of these observations is not Judge Robert Bork but Louis Brandeis, on the occasion of his nomination by President Wilson in 1916. During a bitter four months of hearings, it was repeatedly charged that Brandeis lacked a proper &quot;judicial temperament.&quot; The then-president of the American Bar Association and six of its former presidents pronounced him &quot;not a fit person to be a member of the Supreme Court.&quot; Yet it is the verdict of history that Brandeis proved to be one of the great justices.    I mention the case of Brandeis because, as a historian, I believe I can place the qualifications of Judge Bork in historical perspective. There is a strong consensus among scholars as to the merits of past justices. In 1970, 65 experts on the Supreme Court were asked to evaluate the performance of the 96 justices who had served on the court from 1789 to 1969. Of the 12 classified as great, eight were appointed and served during the 20th century: Oliver Wendell Holmes, Charles Evans Hughes, Louis Brandeis, Harlan Fiske Stone, Benjamin Cardozo, Hugo Black, Felix Frankfurter and Earl Warren. Materials are at hand for making a fair comparison of Judge Bork's credentials with those of these great justices at the time of their nominations.    The first criterion -- after integrity, intelligence and lucidity -- should be a nominee's depth and breadth of learning in the law. In a comparison of writings, Judge Bork ranks below both Holmes and Cardozo. Holmes's book on the common law still stands as a classic, as do three of Cardozo's books. Frankfurter was also a very learned student of the law; he and Judge Bork rank roughly on a par. As for the other five -- none, with the possible exception of Stone (who was dean of Columbia Law School), had any pretentions to great legal learning. All were inferior to Judge Bork in this respect.    Another criterion by which nominees can be appraised is judicial experience. The standard measure of the quality of a lower court judge's performance is the frequency with which his decisions are overturned. Judge Bork, who has served on the Circuit Court for the District of Columbia for five years, has written about 100 majority opinions and none has been overruled. He has also written six dissenting opinions that, on appeal, were upheld against the majority opinion.    Comparing that record with those of the great 20th-century justices, we find again that Holmes and Cardozo were better qualified. Holmes had served with distinction on the Supreme Court of Massachusetts; Cardozo had served with equal distinction on the New York Court of Appeals. Five of the other six had had no previous judicial experience; Black had served briefly as a police court judge in Birmingham, Ala.    What additional criteria can, have been and should be applied? Constitutionally, the president and the Senate are at liberty to employ any standards they please. Historically, presidents have usually taken politics into account -- naming justices occasionally as rewards for political service; often with a view toward appealing to ethnic, religious or other voting blocs; and nearly 90% of the time with regard to party affiliation.    Some of the stronger presidents -- Jefferson, Jackson, Lincoln and both Roosevelts -- have been guided by what Theodore Roosevelt described as &quot;the real politics of the man,&quot; meaning his political philosophy or even his expected stand on specific policy issues. That has generally been accepted as legitimate, but it has the signal disadvantage of being unreliable.    Lincoln appointed Salmon Chase as chief justice at least in part to ensure that the court would uphold the wartime legal tender laws, which Chase had fashioned as Treasury secretary. But the Chase court promptly declared the acts unconstitutional. Theodore Roosevelt appointed Holmes as a prospective trustbuster; a year later Holmes voted against the government in its antitrust suit to break up Northern Securities Co., inspiring the president to declare that he could carve out of a banana a backbone firmer than Holmes's. Brandeis, chosen in large measure for his strong antitrust convictions, never wrote an antitrust decision.    The Senate has used various criteria in determining whether to confirm a nominee. The only nominee of Washington's to be rejected was John Rutledge because of rumors that he had become insane. During the 19th century, the Senate rejected 22 of 67 nominees. Some of the rejections were on grounds of gross incompetence, though most were political in nature. This century the Senate has rejected only four nominees.    Most scholars regard the first rejection as having been a mistake. In 1930, President Hoover nominated Chief Judge John J. Parker of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. Parker was attacked vehemently by the AFL and the NAACP as being anti-labor and racist and was turned down by a two-vote margin. Continuing to sit on the Fourth Circuit, he subsequently handed down a number of landmark decisions favoring the rights of blacks.    The second not to be confirmed was Justice Abe Fortas, nominated by Lyndon Johnson as chief justice in 1968. Fortas was not specifically rejected. Instead, after three months of acrimonious debate he withdrew his name from consideration. The third and fourth rejectees, Richard Nixon's back-to-back nominees, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell, were refused confirmation on grounds of racism, incompetence and questionable ethics.    Most scholars agree that another quality that should be taken into account in appointing a justice is that elusive something called judicial temperament. This quality is almost impossible to evaluate except on the basis of performance as a judge. Lawyers, by the nature of their calling, engage in adversarial activity. Quickness, shrewdness, combativeness and ruthlessness are at a premium among them. Brandeis, before he was appointed to the court, had these qualities in abundance. On the bench, however, he proved to be a model of evenhandedness and propriety.    In the case of Judge Bork we have definitive evidence in advance. At the bar, in the classroom and as a legal scholar, Judge Bork was every bit as fiery and combative as Brandeis was. He was acting as advocate, as he should. But when he took off his advocate's hat and put on his judicial robes, he behaved differently. On the bench he has been the epitome of decorum, moderation and restraint.    A more reliable indicator in appointing justices than either political ideology or temperament is judicial philosophy, or the nominee's understanding of the principles that should govern his behavior on the bench. Judge Bork has made his judicial philosophy clear. It can be described in three interrelated propositions: that judges must exercise restraint, that in all doubtful cases they should defer to the democratic branches of government, and that they should be guided by the law as prescribed by the Constitution, legislative enactments, and judicial precedent -- in that order of priority.    Never in our history has the Senate rejected the nomination of a justice for the reason that he will take seriously his oath to uphold the Constitution. It would be an irony and a tragedy if it were to do so in this, the Constitution's bicentennial year.    ---   Mr. McDonald is a professor of history at the University of Alabama. </TEXT></DOC>