<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870406-0083 </DOCNO><HL> In Airbus Line---Tentative $2.5 Billion PactLands Carrier in MiddleOf a Trade Controversy---By John KotenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NWA EUROP MD BA GE UTXAIRLINES (AIR)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Northwest Airlines stepped into the middle of a trade controversy by placing a tentative $2.5 billion order with Airbus Industrie for wide-bodied jets.    St. Paul, Minn.-based Northwest said an agreement it signed last week with the European consortium will allow it to purchase as many as 20 of Airbus's proposed A-340 long-range airliners for delivery starting in 1992. Northwest, a unit of NWA Inc., also said it obtained an option to purchase as many as 10 of the planned A-330 medium-range jets.    The Airbus plan to build the two new jumbo-jet models has come under fire from U.S. aircraft makers and the Reagan administration. Most of the objections by U.S interests pertain to subsidies paid to Airbus by European governments. The controversy over the two new models, at issue in recent trade talks, has been amplified by concern over whether the market for jumbo jets can support another entry without government backing.    &quot;We haven't been competing on an equal footing,&quot; an official of McDonnell Douglas Corp. complained recently. In December, St. Louis-based McDonnell announced plans to launch a successor to its wide-bodied DC-10. The McDonnell MD-11 is considered within the aircraft industry to be the most directly competitive with the proposed Airbus jets.    The Northwest contract, the first from a U.S.-based carrier, could be a major boost for Airbus's efforts to finance its proposed jumbo jets. The consortium, made up of aircraft companies in Britain, France, Spain and West Germany, has yet to convince European governments to provide the estimated $3 billion it needs to build the first A-330 and A-340 models.    Northwest said it was attracted to the Airbus jets by their range, their cargo capabilities and their low operating costs. It also cited the similarity of their components with those of the Airbus A-320. Last October, Northwest ordered 10 of those short-range A-320s and took options to acquire 90 more.    Northwest said that its latest agreement with Airbus calls for it to confirm the order by April 30, 1988. It said that a one-year delay is possible at Northwest's option, but that such a delay would result in less favorable terms.    The airline also said it would use the Airbus models either as replacements for existing aircraft or to expand its fleet, depending upon the growth of its business.    Airbus's proposed A-340 is a long-range, four-engine aircraft that would be built in two models -- the A-340-200, carrying as many as 262 passengers, and the A-340-300, carrying as many as 295 passengers -- with a range of up to 9,000 miles. The A-330 is a twin-engine airplane designed to carry as many as 328 passengers over medium ranges. Both jets would incorporate advanced technologies, including electronic fly-by-wire flight controls (by which the stick is connected electronically, rather than mechanically, to the plane's moving parts), a center of gravity management system and a variable camber wing.    So far, Airbus has received commitments for more than 100 of the A-340 and A-330 models from carriers.    McDonnell also has received orders for more than 100 of its new MD-11 models, scheduled to go into service a year before the first Airbus jumbos. McDonnell so far has been unable to obtain a single order from a major U.S. passenger airline.    Some industry analysts believe the market for jumbo jets might not be big enough to profitably sustain entries from both McDonnell and Airbus. They say longer-term success is more assured for the multiple entries in the market from Seattle-based Boeing Co., which has been able to carve out a wider niche than its two rivals.    ---   Airbus to Get Engine Bid   LONDON -- Airbus Industrie expects to receive a new proposal soon for an engine for its planned A-340 long-distance jet aircraft.    CFM International, a consortium formed by Fairfield, Conn.-based General Electric Co. and Societe Nationale d'Etude andamp; de Construction de Moteurs d'Aviations of France, is expected to present the proposal &quot;in the next couple of weeks,&quot; according to a spokesman for British Aerospace PLC, which is a member of Europe's four-nation Airbus group.    Airbus initially had favored a CFM-made CFM-56 engine for the jets, which it plans to introduce in 1992. But it decided in December to use the V-2500 Superfan engine being developed by International Aero Engines AG, of Hartford, Conn.    Meanwhile, International Aero Engines could decide against supplying Airbus with that Superfan engine, according to a spokesman for United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt andamp; Whitney unit, which is a partner in International Aero Engines. The viability of supplying the Superfan engine is expected to be discussed at tomorrow's board meeting of International Aero Engines, the Pratt andamp; Whitney spokesman said. The other partners in the consortium are Rolls Royce Ltd. of the U.K., Japanese Aero Engines Corp., Italy's Fiat Aviazione S.p.A. and MTU Motoren andamp; Turbinen Union Muenchen G.m.b.H. of West Germany.    The Superfan engine offered higher thrust and lower fuel consumption than the CFM-56. But the new CFM engine could entail higher thrust, higher fuel consumption but lighter weight than the Superfan, the British Aerospace spokesman said. </TEXT></DOC>