<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870203-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CASEY RESIGNED as director of central intelligence, the White House said.    Reagan, who accepted the resignation with regret, will nominate Robert Gates, a career intelligence analyst, to succeed Casey, who underwent surgery Dec. 18 to remove a cancerous brain tumor. Separately, a spokesman said Reagan is willing to release &quot;relevant excerpts&quot; of his private notes on the Iran-Contra affair if sought by congressional investigators. In Saudi Arabia, Treasury Secretary Baker said the U.S. won't sell additional arms to Iran and that it will remain neutral in the Persian Gulf war.    A Knesset panel plans to conduct hearings on whether Israel had a role in diverting funds to Nicaraguan rebels. Israel has denied such activities.    ---   FILIPINOS ENDORSED Aquino's proposed constitution, early returns showed.    According to an unofficial count by the private National Movement for Free Elections, the draft charter was backed by a 4-to-1 margin. Final, official returns aren't expected before next week. The new Philippine constitution, which gives Aquino a six-year term, also restores a bicameral legislature, bans the military from political activity and expands human rights guarantees.    It was estimated that about 80% of the country's 25 million voters participated in the balloting, which was seen as a crucial test of Aquino's strength.    ---   A Lebanese militia leader said Anglican envoy Terry Waite had been &quot;arrested&quot; by kidnappers, and the archbishop of Canterbury asked Iran to help find Waite and win his release. Meanwhile, as the U.S. continued a military buildup in the Mediterranean, Islamic Jihad threatened to kill two captives if the U.S. launched an assault.    ---   Iranian authorities continued holding Wall Street Journal reporter Gerald Seib. U.S. officials said neither they nor the Swiss government, which represents Washington in Iran, had received any word from Iranian officials concerning Seib's whereabouts or whether any charges had been brought against him.    ---   Iraqi warplanes bombarded civilian targets in Iran, and Tehran reported that 68 schoolchildren were killed and about 150 wounded in a raid on Mianeh. In Washington, the State Department said that Iraqi counterattacks over the weekend appeared to push back Iranian forces from positions captured near the Iraqi port of Basra.    ---   A special three-judge panel appointed a Washington lawyer as an independent counsel to determine whether former White House aide Lyn Nofziger violated federal conflict-of-interest laws. James C. McKay will investigate efforts by Nofziger to help a New York City company get a $31 million Army contract for small engines.    ---   A South African opposition leader said Pretoria's state-of-emergency restrictions, including censorship rules, would make it impossible to have a free and fair whites-only election May 6. The date for the balloting was announced last week by Botha.    ---   The FAA said its top medical officer was reassigned at his request. Frank Austin, federal air surgeon since October 1984, has been faulted by doctors representing several airlines for granting medical waivers to pilots they contend shouldn't be allowed to fly.    ---   The Interior Department proposed selling oil and gas leases in most of the commercially promising waters off California that have been closed due to congressional moratoriums. The agency sent congressional leaders a plan for five standard lease sales off California in the five years starting early in 1989.    ---   Guerrillas in El Salvador freed an army colonel held captive for 15 months in exchange for the Duarte government's release of 57 prisoners named by the leftist insurgents, government and rebel sources said.    ---   The U.N. Human Rights panel opened its 1987 session in Geneva, and the U.S. indicated that it planned to aggressively push allegations of human rights abuses in Cuba. West European sources, however, said the 43-nation commission probably would focus its debate on abuses in southern Africa, Chile and Israeli-occupied territories.    ---   Moslem guerrillas attacked a military air base in Afghanistan, destroying seven Soviet and Afghan warplanes, guerrilla officials said. In Kabul, security forces erected roadblocks as authorities searched for those responsible for a car bombing Sunday in which at least four people were killed.    ---   Prince Sihanouk said China and the Khmer Rouge had rejected direct peace talks with the leader of Cambodia's Vietnam-backed administration. Sihanouk said the situation in Cambodia was at an &quot;impasse,&quot; and he called for U.N.-sponsored talks to discuss the withdrawal of about 140,000 Vietnamese troops from the nation.    ---   Anti-nuclear protesters raided 50 freight cars in Cologne and destroyed a shipment of powdered milk that West German officials said had been contaminated by fallout from last year's Chernobyl nuclear accident. A private company that owns the milk had intended to ship it to Egypt.    ---   Vanuatu's prime minister was admitted to a Washington hospital with what was believed to be a cerebral hemorrhage. Walter Lini was to have met with Shultz to discuss U.S. ties with the South Pacific island.    ---   Died: Alistair MacLean, 64, Scottish-born writer, in Munich, West Germany. </TEXT></DOC>