<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870520-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Corporate Giant Fights the Specter of a Robber Baron---Burlington Northern Seeks toRemove J.P. Morgan's Liens on Its Land---By Michael W. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BNIREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON) </IN><TEXT>   There are two billion acres of real estate in this country. This is a story about 1.9 million of them.    They stretch west from Glendive, Mont., to the Pacific coast, along a trail touched by a couple of centuries of drama and struggle. The Lewis and Clark expedition cut through this land 182 years ago. As the Civil War drew to a close, Abraham Lincoln, seeking to settle the continent's wild outer reaches, granted the land to the newborn Northern Pacific Railroad Co.    Today the land is the center of a high-stakes battle in a New York City federal court. There, a giant conglomerate is fighting the specter of a man who used the land in a turn-of-the-century financial rescue: J.P. Morgan. If it prevails, it could unlock billions of dollars in land, oil, coal and timber that are out of its reach because of a yellowing document crafted by Mr. Morgan.    The conglomerate is Seattle-based Burlington Northern Inc., which owns some of the nation's biggest energy companies and railroads, including the old Northern Pacific. For the past six years, it has been quietly trying to shake off Mr. Morgan's ancient liens.    Now the company is on the brink of succeeding. It has found a way to placate a group of bondholders who fought to block Burlington Northern from tampering with the terms Mr. Morgan devised for their bonds. In two months, a New York judge could end the dispute by approving a proposed settlement. But the company faces one last antagonist who just stepped into the fray this year: the 26-year-old scion of a New York retailing empire.    The saga has its roots in the Northern Pacific's tumultuous failure at the end of the 19th century. Looted by rapacious railroad tycoons, the company fell into receivership in 1893. Several other railroads were collapsing at about the same time, and the prospects of getting the Northern Pacific back on track seemed bleak.    Into the wreckage stepped J.P. Morgan. The financier cast about for ways to raise funds for the ruined railroad and lighted on Northern Pacific's immense real estate. By the 1890s, the railroad's federal land grants totaled 39 million acres -- a holding the size of the state of Michigan -- sprinkled in checkerboard fashion from the Great Lakes to the Pacific Ocean.    The land was still mostly wilderness, but it was exactly what J.P. was looking for: a solid asset that would comfort jittery investors. He made it the cornerstone of a $181.6 million package of Northern Pacific bonds loaded with unusual enticements and stabilizing gimmicks.    One was their long schedule: One issue would pay interest for a century, until 1997, the other until 2047. They would bear annual interest at junk-bond rates for that era, 3% and 4%, double the level of contemporary gilt-edged bonds.    The most airtight security of all came from the railroad's land grants. Under Mr. Morgan's terms, while the bonds were still outstanding, any proceeds from the land would have to go toward improving the Northern Pacific railroad.    &quot;Morgan had to come up with some rather stringent conditions,&quot; says Hans Jacobson, a railroad bond analyst at Herzog, Heine, Geduld Inc., a New York securities firm. &quot;Nobody realized those land grant properties would ever be so valuable.&quot;    Over the years Northern Pacific disposed of most of its original holdings. It sold some, putting the profits back into railroad operations. Some went back to the government, for creation of Yellowstone National Park and Mt. Rainier National Park. And a small part suddenly blew up one day in May 1980: the top of Washington's Mount St. Helens.    The remaining land grants are still protected by Mr. Morgan's covenants: 1.9 million acres of land and 2.4 million acres of mineral rights. But today, the property is no longer a remote Timbuktu; it straddles four states filled with hungry real estate developers. It runs in square-mile sections over range land and the Rocky Mountains in Montana, across Idaho's panhandle, and into farm land in Washington and Oregon.    Its value has become far richer than even J.P. Morgan could have dreamed. And it is worth far more than Burlington Northern needs to keep up the Northern Pacific lines. In Burlington Northern's recent words, the land &quot;may be worth billions, for it contains large reserves of oil, gas, coal and other minerals, as well as enormous stands of timber.&quot;    At the start of the 1980s, Burlington Northern grew restless about the treasure trove it was sitting on. The company's new president, Richard Bressler, was an aggressive oil man from Atlantic Richfield Co. who longed to expand Burlington Northern's energy holdings. &quot;We have to work on those bond indentures,&quot; he said in 1980, according to the court papers. &quot;It is not an unsolvable problem, it just hasn't been done.&quot;    Burlington Northern's first stab at a solution quickly flopped. In April 1985, it persuaded the bond issues' trustees -- Citibank and Bankers Trust -- to free up the land and let the company secure the bonds with government securities instead.    A group of bondholders promptly sued to block that plan. They argued that Burlington Northern couldn't legally rewrite the terms of the bond issues. Many people, including the judge who heard the case, assumed that the holders' real goal was to extract a rich price for their bonds.    Lawyers for both sides plowed into dusty archives and leafed through crumbling railroad records to build their cases. The bondholders unearthed an 1889 railroad mortgage squabble and declared, &quot;The Court's reasoning is equally applicable here.&quot; Burlington Northern fired back with an 1849 timber dispute. In June 1985, U.S. District Judge Robert L. Carter, citing a 1915 decision about the Colorado andamp; Southern Railway, halted Burlington Northern's plan.    The two sides huddled and this spring came up with a settlement. Burlington Northern agreed to pay the bondholders $35.5 million if they would go along with the move to unleash the land. That amounts to roughly $14.75 per $100 face value of one bond series, and about $45.63 per $100 of the other. The bonds -- there are about $115 million still outstanding today -- also would keep earning interest on their original schedules.    Lawyers will present the settlement to Judge Carter at a hearing on July 15. If he blesses it, and nobody appeals his decision, J.P. Morgan's liens would finally break.    A settlement would raise the value of assets already heavily undervalued on Burlington Northern's books. The company carries the land on its balance sheets at its cost, plus the money it put into the property over the years. It won't disclose that figure, but Burlington Northern says it is a tiny fraction of the land's market value because the property's original cost was nothing, thanks to the land grants.    That hidden value could breathe life into the takeover rumors that periodically swirl around Burlington Northern. Last year, for instance, T. Boone Pickens Jr. fueled takeover talk by picking up a 2.4% stake in the company. He has since sold most of the stock.    &quot;Every once in a while when there's been a lot of asset-play euphoria, people have looked at Burlington,&quot; says Graeme Lidgerwood, an analyst who follows the company at First Boston Corp. &quot;What's going on with these bonds has rekindled the interest.&quot;    Burlington Northern won't comment on takeover speculation. It says it doesn't yet have any specific plans for the land. And it maintains that any moves to sell or develop the property would be gradual and wouldn't dramatically change the company's revenue or stock price.    The only remaining objection to a settlement is coming from an unlikely quarter: a reconverted loft in Manhattan's chic Soho neighborhood, above a Norma Kamali fashion outlet. It is the office of Andrew Farkas, a wealthy young man whose grandfather founded the Alexander's chain of department stores.    Last month, Mr. Farkas came forward and said he represented a large group of bondholders who think the settlement is too paltry. He has been issuing angry press releases and vowing to make loud objections at Judge Carter's July hearing.    Mr. Farkas, who runs a private investment company, claims that he has the power to derail the settlement. He says holders of about one-sixth of the bonds outstanding are in his camp, chiefly institutions, traders and brokers. That doesn't seem to faze Burlington Northern, which has ignored two requests from Mr. Farkas to negotiate.    Mr. Farkas has another ball in the air in the Burlington Northern affair. He says investment companies he runs have been accumulating Burlington Northern common for about two months, at an average cost &quot;substantially&quot; below $68.50, the company's closing price yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange. (The stock had been hovering above $70 over the past two weeks, reaching its 52-week high of $77 on May 8.) Mr. Farkas says he currently controls 100,000 shares of Burlington Northern.    The company argues that Mr. Farkas is getting in the way of a settlement that would help Burlington Northern shareholders. Mr. Farkas contends he's helping the company reach a settlement by bringing together lots of dissident bondholders, who would otherwise be pursuing their own disparate objections.    At the very least, Mr. Farkas provides a certain historical symmetry to the story of the land grants, which lit up dollar signs in the eyes of an 1890s robber baron, and now have done the same for a 1980s young urban professional.    &quot;J.P. Morgan has always been a hero of mine,&quot; Mr. Farkas says. &quot;Of course,&quot; he quickly adds, &quot;I don't see myself as a robber baron in any way, shape or form.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>