<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Waste Management Faces More Inquiries;Antitrust Cases Could Dim Prospects---By Bill RichardsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WMXENVIRONMENT (ENV)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> OAK BROOK, Ill.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   What several hundred stockholders expected when they gathered here for Waste Management Inc.'s annual meeting in May was a recitation by Chairman Dean L. Buntrock of the company's latest successes.    What they got was straight out of &quot;Saturday Night Live.&quot;    As Waste Management's white-haired chairman launched into his speech, a loud voice interrupted from the audience. The taped sound came from a black briefcase chained to a seat by the environmental group Greenpeace. As the flustered Mr. Buntrock leaned close to the microphone and plowed on with his list of Waste Management's achievements, the briefcase reeled off a string of the company's legal and environmental problems. The bizarre face-off ended only after an employee cut the chain and carried off the babbling briefcase.    The outburst soured Waste Management's celebration of what Mr. Buntrock called &quot;a year so good it's hard to describe,&quot; with the company's earnings and stock price at a record high. But it also touched a sore spot at the sleek suburban headquarters of the nation's largest waste hauler.    Swarms of federal, state and local prosecutors around the country are investigating allegations of bid rigging, price fixing and other illegal activities in the $15 billion waste-hauling industry. At least seven federal grand juries, two state attorneys general and the county of Los Angeles are probing Waste Management's operations in one of the stiffest antitrust onslaughts against any major corporation today.    In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing this summer, Browning-Ferris Industries Inc., the nation's No. 2 waste hauler, disclosed that its subsidiaries have supplied documents and witnesses to federal grand juries investigating the waste hauling business in several cities. The Houston-based company is under investigation by federal grand juries in at least five states and by state authorities in Ohio, according to people familiar with the investigations. A Browning-Ferris spokesman declined to comment on the SEC filing.    In the latest action, federal prosecutors charged a Waste Management subsidiary on Thursday with conspiring to violate antitrust law in South Florida. The government's case mirrors federal and state grand jury investigations under way elsewhere and may foreshadow future indictments in the industry, according to some familiar with the investigations.    A Waste Management spokesman yesterday called the Florida charge &quot;a procedural matter&quot; and said it was a continuation of an earlier federal antitrust case. In that case a court last year convicted two senior officials of one of the company's largest Florida subsidiaries of antitrust violations. Waste Management wasn't named in the earlier cases.    This surge in prosecutorial attention comes at an otherwise promising time for Waste Management. Demand for waste disposal service has reached near-panic levels in such fast-growing areas such as South Florida and big waste haulers are flourishing. Analysts are predicting Waste Management's earnings could climb 20% or more a year over the next few years. Moreover, Waste Management appears to have weathered earlier environmental battles and is moving into several sensitive and potentially lucrative new areas such as asbestos removal and energy production.    Waste Management's spokesman said pending litigation wouldn't have any material effect on the company. &quot;The company's track record and its overall business conduct is exemplary, and we expect the company will perform exceptionally well,&quot; he said. Waste Management's stock rose 37.5 cents Friday to close at $47.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.    But antitrust problems could tarnish the company's bright plans. Federal prosecutors are pressing for tougher sentences for antitrust violators. At least 14 states have laws that make it possible for corporations convicted of antitrust activity to be barred from doing business within the states' boundaries. They include California, Florida and Ohio, three of Waste Management's major business territories. State authorities in Florida and Ohio are pressing antitrust cases against Waste Management units and say they are studying statutes that could bar those units from operating.    In Los Angeles County, where Waste Management and two other garbage haulers are charged with a conspiracy to restrict competition, District Attorney Ira Reiner says the state law that could bar a company from doing business is &quot;a corporate death penalty.&quot; Mr. Reiner said he intends to try to have Waste Management tossed out of the state if the company is convicted.    Federal prosecutors turned up the heat in Miami Thursday when they charged that Waste Management of Florida, one of the company's major subsidiaries doing business as United Sanitation Services, conspired with other unnamed haulers to allocate customers, fix prices and gouge customers in the Miami and Fort Lauderdale metropolitan areas between 1980 and 1985.    The government's felony charge, filed in the form of a criminal information, a legal device used when a defendant waives a grand jury indictment, gives only a barebones view of the government's case against Waste Management. But individuals familiar with the case confirm it is based on the government's antitrust cases against Lewis R. Goodman and David Hoopengardner, senior executives of Waste Management's South Florida operations during the early 1980s.    Both men were convicted of antitrust violations in federal court last year and have appealed. A Waste Management spokesman said Mr. Goodman is no longer employed by the company and Mr. Hoopengardner's company responsibilities have been reduced and he has been transferred to its international division.    Documents in the government's case against the two men provide an inside look at an intricate and illegal customer allocation scheme that people familiar with the investigations said crops up in the waste hauling business throughout the nation and appears to allow big haulers like Waste Management to consolidate their dominant position in cities around the country. Federal prosecutors said the South Florida scheme was based on &quot;property rights&quot;industry jargon for permanent control of trash pickup stops by a handful of haulers led by Waste Management's Miami-based unit. In return for those &quot;rights,&quot; haulers agreed not to raid each other's stops and, in some instances, to keep out interlopers. Federal prosecutors are looking at variations on the scheme in a number of cities around the U.S., according to people familiar with the probes.    According to a court memorandum filed by federal prosecutors, United Sanitation and other, smaller Miami-area haulers divided up the area's commercial waste stops with Mr. Goodman, United Sanitation's chief operating officer, directing the allocation of business and acting as arbiter in disputes between haulers. Once a hauler in the group placed a garbage container on a customer's property, no other member of the group would serve the site.    &quot;Property rights,&quot; Anthony Caparelli, United Sanitation's Miami-area sales manager testified in Mr. Hoopengardner's case, &quot;means that if we (service) this particular piece of property, we are totally the owners. . . . At no time can anyone else solicit that piece of property while our container is there or while we have records indicating we once serviced that.&quot;    Mr. Caparelli, who appeared as a government witness under a grant of immunity, described the arrangement as &quot;a happy family.&quot;    But federal prosecutors say the scheme was designed to eliminate competition and make &quot;captives&quot; out of customers. &quot;The companies were free to, and did, raise their prices to any level, knowing the customer would be unable to switch his service to another company, no matter how dissatisfied he became with either the service or the price,&quot; prosecutors said in a court document.    In recent interviews with this newspaper, former United Sanitation Services customers in Miami said the hauler boosted their disposal fees as much as sixfold in three years. &quot;I told them they were a bunch of thieves,&quot; said Daniel Avila, manager of a drug wholesaling company whose fee went from $30 to $158 a month. Another restaurant owner said he tried to switch haulers after United Sanitation raised his trash fee to $1,000 a month from $300, but haulers in on the property rights scheme refused to deal with him or quoted even higher rates. &quot;You're caught in a circle where everyone's telling you the same lie,&quot; he said.    United Sanitation records, which were seized by federal investigators, showed that some of the hauler's clients, including a Catholic missionary group organized by Mother Theresa and an animal rescue shelter, apparently ended up hauling their own garbage after hefty fee increases.    Federal prosecutors, in a court memorandum, called the antitrust scheme &quot;financially devastating&quot; to United Sanitation's customers, costing them millions of dollars between 1982 and 1984.    Ohio and California prosecutors said in court documents that Waste Management units used similar price-fixing and customer-gouging tactics in those states. An indictment in a state antitrust case in Ohio claims Waste Management and Browning-Ferris split 70% of the commercial waste-hauling market around Toledo, fixing prices and rigging bids for local factories, stores and schools. A Los Angeles County prosecutor says Waste Management's local unit directed a similar scheme that was &quot;straight out of the recipe book.&quot;    Federal grand juries in Birmingham, Ala.; Orlando and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Memphis, Tenn.; Phoenix, Ariz.; Cleveland and Los Angeles are looking into allegations that Waste Management units have violated antitrust laws, according to individuals close to the investigations. Federal investigators are looking into similar allegations involving Browning-Ferris at all those locations except Florida. A Justice Department spokesman declined to comment about specific investigations.    Waste Management, which operates in 37 states, acknowledged the government is looking into the waste-hauling business in some of its markets. But it denied that it is a subject of any investigations except in Memphis. The company said the government is scutinizing activities of a Memphis subsidiary that occurred before Waste Management acquired the unit. Browning-Ferris has declined to comment on any federal investigation.    Waste Management officials also called the Los Angeles case &quot;isolated and alleged&quot; and denied anyone above the local level was aware of any customer allocation scheme in Miami. But those close to the investigations say federal prosecutors are attempting to determine whether corporate-level officials at Waste Management and other haulers knew of and approved &quot;property rights&quot; schemes on a widespread basis.    Investigators, for example, are known to have reviewed two cases in Wisconsin involving charges of illegal customer allocation against Waste Management or its officials going all the way back to the 1960s. </TEXT></DOC>