<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861211-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Some Value in Letting Others Be the Judge---By G. Roger McDonald</HL><DD> 12/11/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Chief Justice William Rehnquist and his colleagues will reconsider this term a 125-year-old Supreme Court decision, Kentucky vs. Dennison, that embodies a thoroughly discredited constitutional philosophy -- dubbed &quot;dual federalism&quot; by scholar Edward S. Corwin. It holds that the nation and states are -- to the greatest extent feasible -- independent, equal sovereignties created for fundamentally different and distinct purposes.    But before the 1861 decision -- that federal authority cannot compel a state governor to return a fugitive charged with crime to the state from which he fled -- is most likely interred, it deserves reflection.    The simple facts of the holding invite our sympathy: a Mr. Lago aided a slave to escape from Kentucky and then himself fled to Ohio when he was indicted. Ohio's Gov. Dennison refused to return Lago when Kentucky sought his extradition, despite the governor's apparent obligation to do so under Art. IV no. 2 of the U.S. Constitution and attendant national legislation of 1793. Kentucky brought suit in the Supreme Court for a mandatory order against the governor. The court ruled unanimously in favor of Dennison.    Kentucky vs. Dennison is a classic statement of the dual federalism doctrine. Despite the Constitution's mandates, the court essentially grounded its holding on &quot;the relations which the United States and the several States bear to each other,&quot; relations that do not allow the federal government to &quot;impose on (a state official) duties of a character incompatible with the rank and dignity to which he was elevated by the State.&quot; The opinion bluntly asserts that the federal government cannot force a state official to do anything -- a blanket proposition belied by the court's unvarying prior assertions of federal judicial supremacy over the states on questions of constitutional interpretation.    I suspect that Dennison is not long for this world, except as historical curio. Three or four members of the present court must have found the decision problematic in order to review the new case (a fugitive from Puerto Rico sheltered in Iowa), and it probably won't be difficult to pick up an additional vote or two. For one, as noted, it is at odds with the constitutional text, whose language is as binding on a governor as any member of the federal government. Second, dual federalism's tenet that state officers may not be compelled or coerced by the national government was discarded long ago. Finally, with the passage of the 14th Amendment in 1868 and its extension as a control over the states in our own century, the substantive good often gained by allowing governors discretion in these matters has become less imperative.    However, while it is still around, reflection upon Dennison can serve as antidote to two blinding prejudices, pervasive among students and faculty, that I've encountered as a teacher of constitutional law.    When we think today of civil liberties and rights and how they are secured in our country, we tend to think exclusively of courts and judicial decisions. Should religious liberty be discussed, the First Amendment and accompanying Supreme Court interpretation spring to mind. Forgotten is James Madison's subtle argument that such freedom is best preserved by a large or extensive republic with a commercial economy, accommodating a copious diversity of religious beliefs. In our apparent willingness to relinquish security of our liberty to judicial solicitude alone, we have radically truncated the teaching of the Framers. For them, judicial review, however important, was always one of the &quot;auxiliary precautions&quot; (Federalist, No. 51) in a republic, subordinate to the accountability that elected officials must bear to a vigilant people, and conjoined to the whole, profoundly complex structure of our governments -- involving separated, checked and enumerated powers together with federalism.    Kentucky vs. Dennison, by allowing governors an independent evaluation of the character of justice in the other states, reminds us of this broader understanding of the safeguards for liberty. Governors, unconstrained by the perhaps mistaken doctrines of a central court, can exercise a statesmanlike deliberation and judgment on the claims of fugitives. Their political visibility provides a prominent forum for the airing of grievances. And no governor has abused this discretionary power precisely because retaliation would assuredly follow.    In two respects, Dennison's disappearance would prove particularly untimely. Should liberal fears prove true and the Rehnquist court curtail federal defense of civil liberties, then discretionary extradition would supplement, in its small way, Justice Brennan's proposed &quot;federalism&quot; solution: enhanced reliance on the state judiciaries. Also, at a time when there is movement afoot to prune the Senate's role in impeachments, we need to be reminded of the capacity of political leaders for &quot;judicial&quot; reflection.    The second error that remembrance of this old case can help us combat concerns the sources and character of judgment in our government. Dominant today is a corrosive cynicism that all decisions are arbitrary, that reason is completely at the service of interest and bias. The court's opinion in Dennison was authored by Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, universally execrated as the writer of the infamous decision of Dred Scott vs. Sanford, handed down four years earlier. As chief justice, Taney was no friend to blacks: He chastised Gov. Dennison for an abolitionist-type appeal to higher law. His argument in Dred Scott flagrantly misconceived the Framers' understanding of blacks' status as human beings and citizens.    But both decisions, difficult to reconcile on the grounds of bigotry, were rooted in Taney's constitutional philosophy of dual federalism, a flawed, but nevertheless sustained, coherent constitutional vision that guided his jurisprudence. Judges are human, with all the foibles of that condition, and the court was certainly also aware (in 1861) of severe constraints on its ability to compel enforcement of its decrees.    Thus the presence, either in law or thought, of this ancient anomaly can elevate and deepen our constitutional horizon. Kentucky vs. Dennison, requiescat in pace.    ---   Mr. McDonald is a doctoral candidate in political science at The New School for Social Research in New York. </TEXT></DOC>