<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870924-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Boesky Ex-AideCould ProvideData on Milken---He Settles SEC Case; GrantOf Immunity May HelpInquiry About Drexel---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A key potential witness about the activities of Michael R. Milken, head of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s junk bond operations, has been granted immunity from federal criminal prosecution, according to people familiar with the government's insider-trading investigation.    In a related development, the potential witness -- a former record-keeper for abitrager Ivan F. Boesky -- agreed to settle Securities and Exchange Commission civil charges for his role in an alleged takeover conspiracy.    Setrag Mooradian, 56 years old, principal accountant and vice president of Mr. Boesky's Seemala Corp., neither admitted nor denied guilt, but agreed to be suspended from the securities business for 12 months, the SEC announced in Washington.    Mr. Mooradian was charged with maintaining false records to disguise the true ownership of Fischbach Corp. stock and other unnamed securities in violation of securities laws and regulations. The SEC provided few details, but described an arrangement in which Fischbach shares and other stocks were parked with Mr. Boesky's Seemala by others who had &quot;beneficial interests&quot; in the stocks.    In return for being granted immunity from prosecution of related criminal charges, Mr. Mooradian is cooperating fully in the government's continuing probe, according to people familiar with the investigation. Besides information about Mr. Milken, he may be able to testify about others with possibly illegal financial dealings with Mr. Boesky.    The terms of Mr. Mooradian's settlement were viewed as exceptionally favorable, given his pivotal role as a recordkeeper for Mr. Boesky and the fact that Mr. Mooradian has twice before been suspended after being charged with infractions of SEC and industry regulations. People familiar with the investigation said the terms of the settlement reflect the value of his cooperation to the government.    They said Mr. Mooradian is uniquely situated to corroborate testimony by Mr. Boesky and to implicate others. The people also said that Mr. Mooradian has been cooperating extensively with government investigators for many months.    Mr. Mooradian's lawyer, Robert Romano, a partner at Morgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius, declined comment. He refused to confirm that immunity had been granted to Mr. Mooradian.    Gary Lynch, the SEC director of enforcement, declined comment, as did a spokesman for the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office, which is handling the criminal aspect of the insider-trading investigation.    Granting of immunity to Mr. Mooradian indicates that the government has now secured the cooperation of four of the most important participants in events culminating in a $5.3 million payment from Mr. Boesky to Drexel in March 1986.    As previously reported, people familiar with the investigation have alleged that the payment may have been part of an illegal stock parking scheme between Messrs. Boesky and Milken that, among other things, helped financier Victor Posner take over Fischbach.    Stock parking arrangements, in which stock ownership is concealed, may enable firms to violate federal and stock exchange net capital requirements without detection, or may enable corporate raiders and their allies to accumulate stock without complying with SEC disclosure requirements.    Drexel again maintained yesterday that the $5.3 million fee was for legitimate investment banking services, and Drexel and Mr. Milken have denied any wrongdoing.    Mr. Mooradian was the record-keeper in Mr. Boesky's office for matters related to that payment, and is intimately familiar with how and why the payment was calculated, according to people familiar with the workings of Mr. Boesky's office. Mr. Mooradian supervised the bookkeepers who issued the $5.3 million check to Drexel, they said.    These people said that Mr. Mooradian spoke directly about record-keeping for the $5.3 million payment to Charles Thurnher, the employee in Drexel's Beverly Hills, Calif., office who kept similar records for Mr. Milken. As previously reported, Mr. Thurnher is also cooperating with the government, although the terms of any agreement he has reached with the government haven't been made public. Thus, Mr. Mooradian may also be in a position to corroborate any testimony by Mr. Thurnher concerning the payment.    In addition, the people said, Mr. Mooradian traveled to Drexel's Beverly Hills office to work on the calculations for what ultimately became the $5.3 million payment.    Mr. Boesky last year paid a record $100 million fine in settling, without admitting guilt, SEC charges related to the insider-trading probe, and agreed to plead guilty to a single criminal charge related to the Fischbach aspect of the probe.    Also cooperating with the government is Michael Davidoff, former head trader for Mr. Boesky, who earlier this year pleaded guilty to one count of securities fraud and settled related SEC charges.    Fischbach is one of the stocks allegedly parked with Mr. Boesky that figured in the calculation of the $5.3 million payment.    Fischbach, a New York-based electrical contractor, was taken over in 1985 by Mr. Posner, now Fischbach's chairman, who also is under investigation. Mr. Posner has denied any wrongdoing. Last December, this newspaper reported that Drexel was also being investigated for its role in the Fischbach takeover, and people familiar with the investigation have said that Mr. Milken is one of the unnamed conspirators referred to in the government's charges against Mr. Boesky.    The reference to Fischbach in the charges against Mr. Mooradian suggests that the Fischbach takeover remains important in the government's investigation of an alleged illegal scheme between Drexel officials and Mr. Boesky to profit from corporate takeovers.    Yesterday's SEC announcement seems likely to dispel impressions on Wall Street that the government's investigation of Drexel -- the largest such inquiry in Wall Street's history -- is floundering.    Mr. Mooradian was a longtime associate of Mr. Boesky and an employee when Mr. Boesky set up his arbitrage operation in the 1970s. However, people familiar with the government investigation say that Mr. Mooradian was &quot;basically following orders&quot; when he helped falsify Seemala's records, and that he never ranked as a top decision-maker in the Boesky organization.    The SEC didn't subject Mr. Mooradian to any financial penalty, which lawyers said is a sign that he didn't directly profit from Mr. Boesky's illegal activities. </TEXT></DOC>