<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0032 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   World oil prices sank below $17 a barrel amid continuing pessimism about the oil cartel's ability to keep its production and pricing pact afloat.    Since the beginning of the month, prices on spot and futures markets have skidded about $2, or more than 10%, as traders increasingly have focused on production quota violations by several members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    &quot;The sentiment in the market is that the cheating (on quotas) will get worse,&quot; said William McKinley, energy specialist at Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. in New York.    And with a growing number of oil companies declining to buy OPEC crude at fixed prices, the cartel's December agreement to cut output 7% and return to a fixed price of about $18 appears slowly to be unraveling, some analysts say.    That pessimism, along with bulging supplies of refined products and slackening demand, has cast a widening bearish shadow on the market and prompted chart-guided technical selling that accelerates the losses.    &quot;The market's momentum is just pushing prices lower under their own weight,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director at Elders Futures Inc. in New York.    Crude oil for April delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange skidded 35 cents, to $16.73, its lowest level since Dec. 19, when it traded at $16.21. Unleaded gasoline contracts for March delivery slipped 1.1 cents a gallon, to 45.89 cents, and March heating oil contracts slipped 0.82 cent a gallon, to 45.01 cents.    The spot, or noncontract, price of West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, tumbled 30 cents, to $16.70 a barrel. And the March price of North Sea Brent, the bellwether European crude blend, sank 50 cents in late trading, to $16.50.    Some traders expect further steady price declines. John Azarow, chief oil trader at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York, said prices likely will slide to $15.80 soon because of technical factors.    But Mr. Azarow and many other traders don't foresee a free fall. &quot;Though the price movement indicates volatility, we've been trading slowly down, functioning more from a lack of buying rather than from aggressive selling,&quot; Mr. Azarow said.    Also, some analysts and traders caution that OPEC isn't likely to stand idle if prices continue to plunge. If prices fall to $16 a barrel, some traders say, the cartel would announce an emergency meeting to stem the decline.    Saudi Arabia, the world's largest exporter and OPEC's largest producer, won't let the pact crumble easily, some traders say. &quot;The Saudis have to save face and keep some semblance of order,&quot; a Chicago-based oil trader said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    INTEREST RATES: Prices climbed, helped by oil's continued slide. Treasury bonds for March delivery on the Chicago Board of Trade opened above Monday's close and remained higher throughout the session. They closed at 101 7/32, up more than half a point on the day. The advance continued a technical rally that began Monday afternoon, said Karen Gibbs, senior financial futures analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. March futures face short-term price resistance between 101 1/2 and 101 5/8, she said. With currency futures relatively stable and the government's report on durable-goods orders postponed to Thursday, the most important news yesterday for interest-rate futures traders was oil's decline and the hopes of subdued inflation that come with it.    ORANGE JUICE: Demand for concentrate contracts was boosted by the growing perception that the season's Florida orange crop may be lagging the U.S. Department of Agriculture forecast. The contract for March delivery on the New York Cotton Exchange, up more than two cents a pound at one point during the session, settled at $1.2465, a gain of 1.75 cents. As Florida's midseason harvest winds up, the crop appears about five million boxes short of the USDA October forecast, says Judy Weissman, analyst for Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York. A box weighs 90 pounds. The USDA estimated midseason output of 72 million boxes. A five million box shortage would cut juice supply about 7.3 million gallons, Ms. Weissman said, and leave the supply at season's end at between 22 million and 29 million gallons, the lowest level since the early 1970's. A 25 million gallon supply would represent only 5 1/2 weeks' supply, she said. &quot;Since there wasn't any frost damage to the crop this winter, we have to assume&quot; that any crop shortage will stem from &quot;overestimating the crop&quot; Ms. Weissman said. The USDA forecast a 129 million box crop in the 1986-1987 season, up from 119 million a year earlier. The estimate included 57 million boxes of Valencias, a later-maturing orange that just now is being harvested. It is too early to tell if the Valencia crop also will be short, analysts and industry sources said.    SUGAR: Prices recovered from early weakness to close higher. The contract for March delivery on the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange in New York fell as low as 7.09 cents a pound but rebounded to close at 7.46 cents, up 0.17 of a cent. Heavy liquidation of March positions is obscuring fundamental upward price pressure, which encompasses strong demand in the world market and crop problems, particularly in Cuba, said William O'Neill, research director at Elders Futures, in New York. The March selling stems from a large open-interest position in the contract, which fell 4,549 contracts Monday to end at 14,460. The March contract won't be traded after this Friday. Yesterday's heavy March selling was accompanied by the buying of May and other later contracts. So, although traders were getting out of the imminent contract, they were staying invested in sugar. Selling pressure on the March contract may be easing somewhat, Mr. O'Neill said, citing indications of some trade buying late yesterday. With technical resistance just above seven cents a pound in the March contract, a possible turning point or at least a short-term bottoming of the market is indicated, Mr. O'Neill said. </TEXT></DOC>