<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0133 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- In Concert: Bach to the Future </HL><AUTHOR> Raymond Sokolov </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Santa Fe, N.M.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At the world premiere of Morton Subotnick's new chamber piece for keyboard and strings, Ursula Oppens was, as usual, in control of 88 keys and a strong technique built on 20 years of tackling thorny contemporary piano parts. But on this occasion, which was the high point of the 16th Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival, as Ms. Oppens leaned over the keyboard and attacked with her usual spirit of adventure, she was controlling much more than her instrument. And yet she was also herself controlled, by the same computer software that allowed her to control and alter the performances of the string players and Mr. Subotnick's score.    &quot;And the butterflies begin to sing&quot; was a new departure for Ms. Oppens and the string quintet seated across from her behind two big blue sound monitors that let them hear their own performance as it emerged from contact with the electronic apparatus. But this piece, whose effect on the ear was as direct and clear as its cybernetic underpinnings were abstruse, was also a new departure for Mr. Subotnick, who has made his name in electronic music. The new part of this new piece was the way it gave instantaneous control of a digital mixer to Ms. Oppens. At her Yamaha electronic keyboard, she could alter the volume of sound and other effects. Meanwhile, a mac+ computer was simultaneously interacting with her, with the string players and with Mr. Subotnick's score.    Much of this wired complexity was not, of course, a direct part of the experience of the capacity crowd sitting underneath the corbeled hand-hewn beams of the adobe-style New Mexico Museum of Fine Arts's St. Francis Auditorium. Yet the apparatus obviously was playing its part. Ms. Oppens would raise her hands from the keyboard, but notes she had just played would repeat and go through changes of rhythm and volume as if they were sheep let loose from the fold. So one thought at first, but then it soon turned out that these riffs were not free gambols set in perpetual motion as simpler musical computers run bossa nova beats ad infinitum. Something cut them off in a way that made musical sense with the strings and with the new sounds from the keyboard and from the mixer. That something was the score acting in tandem with the mac+, other electronic equipment -- and Ms. Oppens.    I suppose it would be possible to ignore what might be called the cybermusical aspects of this music, if, for example, one heard it on tape and didn't know how it was produced. Then one would hear a most lively composition, with strings sawing away like gypsies, and with a percussive keyboard instrument sounding something like the clangorous Hungarian-gypsy cimbalom. But really the sounds that Ms. Oppens fingers were eliciting from the Yamaha/apparatus were like those of no normal instrument. Yet they were not of the spooky sort so familiar to habitues of experimental Theremin and early synthesizer concerts. Ms. Oppens's sound mixed, in the old and the new sense, with the strings and with Mr. Subotnick's musical ideas.    Mr. Subotnick, the 1988 composer-in-residence for the Santa Fe festival, meant it this way. But he also meant that listeners should be able to apprehend the back-and-forth action between the strings and keyboard and the electronic participants in his specially commissioned piece. To an important degree it was this ricochet, this tennis rally of musical ideas, that gave the work its point.    As Robert Green put it in the program notes for last week's concert, &quot;These contrasts take place rapidly, requiring the utmost concentration on the part of the listener to follow them. At the same time, the work has a tunefulness which is immediately appealing.&quot; Mr. Green actually was describing Bach's third Brandenburg concerto, which followed the Subotnick piece after an intermission, but the rough similarity between the two compositions, as athletic displays of manipulative interactions of musical ideas between the various members of an ensemble, was, I imagine, the reason for the juxtaposition of the Bach and the Subotnick on the program. Mr. Green also wrote: &quot;Sometimes the three string groups are set off against each other; sometimes a figure works its way from top to bottom played by each instrument in turn.&quot;    Anyone who read that after hearing the Subotnick had no trouble substituting in his mind the Yamaha keyboard, the string group and the electronic apparatus of the 1988 composition for the three string groups of Bach's early 18th-century classic. The two pieces were worlds apart, but distant cousins nonetheless. This was the program's implication, and its subtle audacity was typical of the other programs woven together from the entire history of music by the Santa Fe festival's artistic director, Alicia Schachter.    You could detect her hand also in the witty selection and casting of the evening's other &quot;act,&quot; the Brahms trio for violin, French horn and piano. Amid so much structural density, here was lyrical simplicity based in part on a folk song, and Ms. Oppens returned to play the keyboard part. But this time, as Ms. Schachter said later with a wink, that keyboard was the &quot;acoustic&quot; piano.    In the course of some 40 concerts during July and August, Ms. Schachter has many opportunities to &quot;compose&quot; similar thought-provoking contrasts of style and performance. Indeed, one imagines her taking almost malicious pleasure in her cleverness at assigning Ms. Oppens to play harpsichord, an instrument she had barely touched before, in the &quot;Concerto for harpsichord, flute, oboe, clarinet, violin and cello&quot; that Manuel de Falla wrote for Wanda Landowska in 1923. Only two days before the Subotnick premiere (and in a concert that included his earlier piece &quot;Trembling,&quot; in which James Tocco played piano), Ms. Oppens appeared at an unfamiliar pre-modern keyboard in a modern piece that looked back to classic Spanish music. Phillip Huscher's program note called attention to an instrumental pellmell akin to the Bach and Subotnick works to come later that weekend. The instruments, he wrote, &quot;constantly cross into the spotlight, sharing thematic material, engaging in musical dialogue, and, ultimately, earning their place in the lineup of solo bows at the end.&quot;    Even if Ms. Schachter's programs did not stimulate the mind in this way, the 42 musicians (including Ms. Schachter on piano) who rotate through her festival's concerts would make this one of the most appealing venues in a world glutted with summer musical events. The Mendelssohn String Quartet (Ida Levin, Nicholas Mann, Ira Weller and Marcy Rosen) is on hand for all six weeks. There are many other top-flight performers, including violinist James Buswell and the young bassist/ composer Edgar Meyer. The woodwinds are particularly strong.    Take for example the performance of Poulenc's rollicking woodwind sextet, which brought together Ransom Wilson (flute), Allan Vogel (oboe), Michele Zukovsky (clarinet), Lynette Diers Cohen (bassoon), Alice Render (French horn) and Ms. Oppens (acoustic piano). This virtuoso romp from Paris in the '30s is the musical equivalent of a Chaplin film. It got a very good ride here last Wednesday.    The Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival continues on most days through Aug. 22, and will include Joel Nascimento and the Brazilian Sextet tonight and later this week. The Festival rematerializes at the end of August in Seattle and can be heard in a 13-week broadcast series on National Public Radio next winter and spring. </TEXT></DOC>