<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890801-0120 </DOCNO><DD> = 890801 </DD><AN> 890801-0120. </AN><HL> Shearson Fined@  By Big Board@  Over Records@  ----@  By William Power@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/01/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> SLH AXP </CO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The New York Stock Exchange censured Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and fined it $50,000 for allegedly failing to respond on time to requests for records and information in the months after the October 1987 market crash.    The Big Board action, which Shearson settled without admitting or denying wrongdoing, was one of 37 disciplinary actions announced by the exchange's enforcement division yesterday. Eight firms and 29 individuals were cited for alleged violations of Big Board rules and federal securities laws.    In the Shearson matter, the Big Board found that the firm, 62%-owned by American Express Co., &quot;failed to comply in a timely manner with 22 requests&quot; for records from November 1987 to October 1988. This was a time when the firm had received hundreds of document requests from the exchange. Because of its slow paper work, the exchange said, Shearson &quot;imposed an administrative burden on the resources of the NYSE and may have prolonged certain investigations.&quot;    Shearson blames the records problem on the takeover of E.F. Hutton Group Inc. just after the crash, as well as on the large number of inquiries from regulatory agencies investigating the crash. &quot;We had a system in place for handling one firm, and then all of a sudden we're combined with a firm of comparable size,&quot; said a Shearson spokesman. Nevertheless, he said Shearson has formed a new regulatory unit in its law department, dedicated solely to handle regulatory inquiries. It also has instituted &quot;additional training&quot; for employees charged with responding to Big Board requests.    In other cases, Big Board hearing panels censured and fined the following seven firms for federal securities-laws violations and exchange rules: Baker, Watts and Co.; BHF Securities Corp.; Anthony T. DeCarlo Securities Inc.; Laidlaw Adams andamp; Peck Inc.; Laidlaw Ansbacher Inc.; McLeod Young Weir Inc.; and Oppenheimer andamp; Co. Baker Watts in Baltimore, currently named Ferris, Baker Watts Inc., consented to a censure and a $35,000 fine, and BHF Securities, New York, to a censure, both without admitting or denying wrongdoing. The separate cases involved alleged failures to maintain required reserves for customers' benefit. Baker Watts declined to comment. A BHF spokesman said, &quot;It is important to note that the firm initiated the reports of the violations to the exchange, which took place over three years ago.&quot; The penalty originally also called for a $5,000 fine but was reduced to just a censure.    Anthony T. DeCarlo Securities, an exchange floor broker, consented without admitting or denying wrongdoing to a censure and a $2,500 fine for allegedly failing in 1985 to compute its net capital at least once a month and to keep accurate books and records. The firm, based in Parlin, N.J., couldn't be reached for comment.    Laidlaw Adams andamp; Peck and Laidlaw Ansbacher collectively consented to a censure and a $15,000 fine, without admitting or denying wrongdoing. The New York firms allegedly violated federal securities laws by failing to maintain required reserves for customers, and by commingling customer and firm securities in connection with collateral used to obtain bank loans in December 1984. Firm representatives couldn't be reached.    McLeod Young Weir and the firm's then-finance director, Dominic R. Caliendo of New York, allegedly violated federal securities laws by failing, after a conversion of the firm's computer system, to properly compute net capital and the amounts required to be on reserve. The firm, since absorbed by Canada's Scotia-McLeod Inc., agreed to be censured and fined $40,000, and Mr. Caliendo agreed to be censured, with neither admitting nor denying wrongdoing. Firm officials and Mr. Caliendo, currently corporate secretary of Scotia-McLeod U.S.A. Inc., declined to comment.    Oppenheimer, New York, consented to a censure and a $25,000 fine, without admitting or denying wrongdoing, for allegedly failing to properly compute required reserves, and for allegedly violating laws requiring it to obtain physical possession of all fully paid securities held for customers. Oppenheimer said it has instituted new procedures to correct the alleged problem.    Other cases announced by the Big Board:    McKenna Cloud andamp; Co., an exchange specialist firm, consented to findings that it improperly processed orders and altered order tickets. The firm agreed to a censure and a $25,000 fine without admitting or denying wrongdoing. Firm officials weren't available for comment.    Also, exchange member William Alexander Nevitt III, of Florham Park, N.J., consented to a censure and a $1,000 fine without admitting or denying wrongdoing after the exchange accused him of failing to stay with two guests on the Big Board trading floor, &quot;thereby enabling (the guests) to engage in disruptive behavior.&quot; Mr. Nevitt couldn't be reached for comment.    In three separate cases, the exchange censured three chief financial officers of their former firms for alleged failure to supervise and other matters. The three are Michael Hilton from Rooney, Pace Inc.; David C. Masterson from Newhard Cook and Co.; and Warren C. Nachmann from D.H. Wallach Inc. All settled without admitting or denying wrongdoing. Mr. Hilton, of Richfield, Conn., was barred from membership for a month and from employment in a supervisory capacity for a year. Mr. Masterson, of St. Louis, was permanently barred from a supervisory job. Mr. Nachmann, of Cheltenham, Pa., was fined $10,000 and barred from membership for 60 days. None could be reached for comment.    Peter Hall Partridge of Massachusetts, a former branch manager of Moseley Securities Corp., agreed without admitting or denying wrongdoing to be censured and barred from a supervisory job for 30 days for allegedly failing to supervise. He couldn't be reached for comment.    Four brokers were charged with violations of options rules in their dealings with customers: Suresh Chandra of Grand Prairie, Texas, formerly with Institutional Equity Corp. and Southwest Securities Inc.; Raymond Cifani of Westlake, Ohio, formerly with E.F. Hutton; Harold S. Monashefsky of Kingston, N.Y., formerly with Merrill Lynch and Co.; and Stuart V. Reynolds Sr. of Pensacola Beach, Fla., formerly with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., a unit of Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. All consented to censures without admitting or denying wrongdoing. Messrs. Chandra and Cifani were barred from membership for five years, Mr. Monashefsky for 12 months and Mr. Reynolds for nine years. Mr. Chandra, who is working as an investment adviser, said, &quot;I deny the allegations; you can't win against people who have power and authority.&quot; He said he can't afford an appeal. The other men couldn't be reached for comment.    Christina Louise Zuniga, of Carmel, Calif., a former Dean Witter broker, was censured and permanently barred from membership for allegedly falsifying account statements, misappropriating securities of Dean Witter customers and making material misstatements to the Big Board. The exchange's directors denied her appeal of the penalty. She couldn't be reached for comment.    In separate cases, seven brokers were sanctioned for violating rules by exercising discretionary authority in accounts without prior customer approval. The seven are former Merrill Lynch brokers Enrico G. Adelman of Natick, Mass., Eric Keith Carr of San Antonio, Texas, and Joseph J. Wysocki of Falls Church, Va.; Thomas J. Hanlon of Yonkers, N.Y., formerly with Baird Patrick and Co.; former Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. brokers James Matthew Hodges of Baltimore and Nickolas Louvros of Greece; and James Michael Pancratz of Colorado Springs, Colo., formerly with PaineWebber Inc. Prudential-Bache is a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America. Mr. Pancratz declined to comment and the other brokers couldn't be reached.    Gary Milotta of New York, a former E.F. Hutton municipal bond trader, was censured, permanently barred from being a trader and fined $25,000 for allegedly exceeding authorized position limits and entering fictitious sales transactions in 1985. He couldn't be reached for comment.    Anthony Joseph Calabrese of Garden City, N.Y., formerly with Advest Inc., consented without admitting or denying wrongdoing to a censure and a $2,500 fine for allegedly mailing false customer confirmations of a trade. He couldn't be reached for comment.    Two people were cited for allegedly unsuitable trading for customers. John Stanley Barnett of Raleigh, N.C., formerly with E.F. Hutton and PaineWebber, consented to a censure, a $10,000 fine and a one-year membership ban; William H. White of Portland, Ore., formerly with Merrill Lynch, consented to a censure, a $15,000 fine and a three-week suspension. Mr. Barnett couldn't be reached and Mr. White declined to comment.    Five brokers were permanently barred for allegedly misappropriating customers' funds: John DeLong Buecking of Glens Falls, N.Y., formerly with E.F. Hutton; Mark Matthew Cuthbert from Buffalo, N.Y., formerly with PaineWebber; John Davis Labelle from Hinton, W.Va., formerly with Wheat First Securities Inc.; Kent Willis Latham from La Jolla, Calif., formerly with Merrill Lynch; and Sloane Shevrin from New York, a former officer with Ochsenhaut andamp; Co. None could be reached for comment.    Barred for &quot;failing to cooperate&quot; with exchange hearing panels were Wesley McGuire Bybel of Dix Hills, N.Y., formerly with Muriel Siebert andamp; Co., and Timothy Lee Cook of Phoenix, formerly with Shearson Lehman Brothers, the predecessor firm of Shearson Lehman Hutton. Neither could be reached for comment. </TEXT></DOC>