<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870114-0025 </DOCNO><HL> Looking for Cash:Khashoggi's Bid to SellEdgington Oil ShowsHow He Does Business---Creditors Say Saudi PromoterRisks Very Little Himself;Role in Iran Arms Deal---Two Canadians and a Swami---By John J. FialkaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST TIC AET ITTTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)PETROLEUM (PET)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG) </IN><DATELINE> LONG BEACH, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last spring Adnan Khashoggi, the Saudi Arabian deal maker who has cultivated a reputation as &quot;the richest man in the world,&quot; approved a complex plan to meet his desperate need for cash.    Plagued by heavy mortgages, unpaid bills and a growing list of lawsuits, he decided to sell Edgington Oil Co. Creditors believe that Edgington, which runs a refinery here, is the one remaining U.S. asset of Mr. Khashoggi's that continues to generate substantial profits, and they hope that he will use the sale's proceeds to pay off his growing debts in the U.S. Mr. Khashoggi's creditors are suing to recover more than $150 million in notes guaranteed by him or his companies.    But the Edgington sale may not generate much cash. A federal judge in Salt Lake City has temporarily halted the sale on behalf of a creditor of Mr. Khashoggi's main U.S. company, Triad America Corp. Now a second creditor wants to satisfy a $3 million judgment against Edgington's stock. Meanwhile, a complex Canadian stock-trading transaction, which had been engineered to provide Mr. Khashoggi with a pile of cash and a continuing ownership interest in Edgington, appears to be on the verge of collapse.    Pieced together from court records and the recollections of associates, the Edgington deal illustrates what businessmen who have dealt with the Saudi promoter have come to regard as the Khashoggi style: He risks very little of his own money in his ventures while finding imaginative ways to squeeze cash out.    Financial records show that Mr. Khashoggi has sucked at least $110 million of cash out of his U.S. companies, most of it for unspecified uses abroad. One of his accountants values his holdings of real estate and other companies in the U.S. at about $350 million, but most of that has been put up as collateral for various loans.    The Edgington deal involves a cast of characters who are new to Mr. Khashoggi's U.S. businesses. They include two Canadian businessmen, Donald Fraser and Walter E. Miller, and an Indian holy man, Swamiji Maharaj. (These are also the men suspected by government investigators in Washington and Ottawa of having provided, either knowingly or unknowingly, the cash that Mr. Khashoggi used to finance the U.S. arms sale to Iran.)    Mr. Khashoggi refuses to discuss his business dealings with The Wall Street Journal. Neither Canadian could be reached for comment, and the swami -- who serves as Mr. Khashoggi's &quot;spiritual adviser,&quot; according to one of the Saudi's former associates -- was said to be &quot;somewhere in Europe.&quot;    Most of Mr. Khashoggi's creditors also decline to talk openly about Triad America's problems. Mr. Fraser spent much of the summer soothing creditors, promising that they would be given a portion of the proceeds of the Edgington sale if they refrained from pushing Triad America into bankruptcy proceedings. Now the creditors don't want to say anything that might upset the sale.    But Mr. Khashoggi has given his U.S. creditors cold comfort. &quot;I am not going to bring in cash from other businesses to pay the bankers,&quot; he recently told Time magazine. &quot;The collateral is all they will get if they persist.&quot;    Among the major holders of Mr. Khashoggi's paper are two insurance companies -- Travelers Corp. and Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co. -- and the U.S. Department of Energy, which guaranteed a $79 million loan by a consortium of banks to Agrifuels Refining Corp., a Khashoggi-owned subsidiary, to build an ethanol refinery in Louisiana.    The first suggestion that Edgington would be sold to ease Mr. Khashoggi's credit squeeze came last spring, shortly after Mr. Fraser became the president and a director of Triad America and Mr. Miller became a director. The nature of Mr. Khashoggi's business relationship with the two Canadians remains unclear, but other Khashoggi associates believe that the swami, who dresses in white and espouses world peace, is an important connection.    Steven A. Martindale, a Washington, D.C., lawyer, says he introduced Mr. Khashoggi to the Indian holy man in Toronto two years ago. Accompanying the swami, Mr. Martindale recalls, were Messrs. Miller and Fraser, who were also introduced to Mr. Khashoggi. Mr. Martindale says that the swami was receiving considerable financial support from followers around the world but, as a holy man, wasn't allowed to hold the money. Mr. Martindale says he got the impression that Mr. Miller was a follower of the swami and kept the swami's money for him.    Timothy Kahn, Mr. Khashoggi's Canadian business consultant for four years, ending in the spring of 1986, says, &quot;I've never seen the swami with cash, but I've been told that he has money and that these guys {Mr. Miller and Mr. Fraser} are managing it.&quot;    After meeting Mr. Khashoggi, according to Mr. Khan, the swami moved from a Toronto lodge owned by Mr. Miller to Mr. Khashoggi's luxurious Manhattan apartment. A picture of the swami standing with Mr. and Mrs. Khashoggi and actors George Hamilton and Elizabeth Taylor appeared in a Dec. 2, 1986, National Enquirer article entitled &quot;Liz Tells Pals: Indian Swami Saved My Life.&quot;    Over time Mr. Khashoggi transferred his Canadian business dealings to Messrs. Miller and Fraser from Mr. Khan. Mr. Khan says that the subject of Edgington came up last March when Mr. Fraser asked him and Mr. Khashoggi to join the board of Skyhigh Resources Ltd., an obscure Vancouver company that was then selling for about 50 cents a share on the Vancouver Stock Exchange. Mr. Fraser was a Skyhigh director and its major stockholder.    &quot;The scenario they presented to me was 'we think Mr. Khashoggi should take Edgington Oil and have Skyhigh Resources acquire it,'&quot; he says. Triad America's creditors, Mr. Khan was told, would then be paid off with stock in Skyhigh.    Mr. Khan says that Messrs. Fraser and Miller told him that the two of them had already invested $35 million to get an &quot;equity interest&quot; in Triad America.    Land records in Salt Lake City show that two Cayman Island companies controlled by Mr. Miller and Mr. Fraser lent Mr. Khashoggi and Triad America $30 million in a series of payments running from November 1985 through March 1986. As collateral, Triad America put up lots in one of its developments.    A former Khashoggi associate asserts that the two Canadians also arranged an additional unexplained $10 million loan to Mr. Khashoggi and that only $1.5 million of the total of $40 million from the Cayman companies ever reached Triad America. (U.S. investigators suspect that the $10 million loan went to finance the U.S.-Iran arms deal, but Mr. Khashoggi denies that. In an interview last month with the Canadian Broadcasting Corp., Mr. Khashoggi explained: &quot;I raised money and gave it to the Americans and that's all. The Canadians {Messrs. Miller and Fraser} were employees working for me to help me arrange the paper work.&quot;)    Whatever their relationship, Messrs. Miller and Fraser were certainly helpful to Mr. Khashoggi. As directors of Skyhigh, they voted to sell Mr. Khashoggi and Triad America 1.1 million shares of Skyhigh for $2.75 (Canadian) a share with an option to buy an additional 400,000 shares for the same price, according to federal court records in Salt Lake City. The package gave Mr. Khashoggi a large, but not controlling, interest in Skyhigh, according to the company's lawyers.    In July, after it was announced that Mr. Khashoggi had agreed to become a director of Skyhigh, the stock began to skyrocket on the Vancouver exchange, eventually hitting $16.25 (Canadian) a share after a four-for-one split. An article in the Financial Times, a Toronto weekly, asked: &quot;Which dormant resource company will next be electrified by the touch of billionaire arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi?&quot; (Mr. Khashoggi has since been promoted to chairman of Skyhigh.)    Meanwhile, back in the U.S., Mr. Fraser was telling Triad America's major creditors that Triad was planning to sell Edgington. According to three analysts who studied Edgington's financial statements for potential investors, Mr. Khashoggi appears to have purchased Edgington in 1983 with little more than the stroke of a pen. A Triad America subsidiary, called Newedge, put down $25 million for the company and immediately sold the concern's marine terminal for $25 million. Then, Edgington's annual financial statements show, Triad America began to draw large amounts of cash out of the company. Clayton Corwin, Edgington's general counsel, confirms reports that Edgington has &quot;advanced&quot; a total of $86 million to Triad America.    In turn, according to court records in Salt Lake City, Triad America's books show an $84 million &quot;advance&quot; to two offshore companies controlled by Mr. Khashoggi; $40 million went to Sigma X Ltd., a company described as being involved in oil exploration in Sudan, and $44 million went to Triad International Group, a company in the Cayman Islands.    Edgington also pumped cash to its new owner in other ways. For $5 million it purchased a subsidiary of Triad America called Triad Aviation. According to analysts for several of the prospective bidders, one of the chief &quot;assets&quot; listed by Triad Aviation is a debt of $3 million owed to it by Handlingair Ltd.    Asked about the matter, Mr. Corwin, Edgington's lawyer, confirms reports that Handlingair Ltd. is the company that Mr. Khashoggi uses to control his airplanes, including an ultra-posh DC-8 that has been widely featured in the media. While he says that Triad Aviation provided jet fuel and other supplies to Mr. Khashoggi's planes, Mr. Corwin and other Edgington officials say that they can neither confirm nor deny that Mr. Khashoggi has run up a $3 million bill. &quot;The status of that relationship is not something that can be disclosed,&quot; Mr. Corwin says.    Edgington was also persuaded to pay $2 million for another troubled Triad America entity -- Agrifuels Refining Corp. This is a Louisiana refinery that is being constructed to produce ethanol, a gasoline substitute made from sugar cane. The company's chief asset is the refinery, backed up by the $79 million federal loan guarantee. With oil prices so low, there is little market for ethanol.    Despite Edgington's shortcomings, at least three U.S. bidders made serious offers for it. The highest was reportedly just under $100 million in cash. But the winner was Skyhigh, which offered only $35 million in cash as part of a total bid of $125 million. The rest of the purchase price was to consist of the assumption of $35 million of Edgington's debts and $55 million in Skyhigh stocks and bonds.    Skyhigh's emergence shocked the U.S. bidders. &quot;We had spent so much darn time on this thing and then we find out that it was sold to the seller,&quot; grumbled a potential buyer.    &quot;As a businessman, I can't see it any other way but a conflict of interest,&quot; asserts Mr. Khan, who says he has withdrawn from Skyhigh and no longer consults with Mr. Khashoggi on business deals.    The value of Skyhigh's bid deteriorated sharply this week when trading in Skyhigh's stock resumed after being halted in December. The stock dropped from $16.25 to $6.50 (Canadian) a share on the Vancouver Stock Exchange on Monday and closed at $5 yesterday. Ronald H. Philp, the president of Skyhigh, says that the company now plans to replace the stock portion of its offer for Edgington with a higher percentage of borrowed money. He wouldn't elaborate.    Meanwhile, two U.S. creditors are jockeying to get a piece of Edgington before it is sold. Sheraton Corp., which is not among the Triad America creditors who were promised proceeds from the refinery sale, has persuaded a federal judge in Salt Lake City to issue a temporary injunction barring the sale. Sheraton's lawyers argue that the sale is a fraud that would turn Mr. Khashoggi's remaining U.S. assets into a &quot;hollow shell.&quot;    Last week, Crest Tankers Inc., a St. Louis company that has won a $3 million federal court judgment against Triad America, asked a second federal judge in Salt Lake City to order the Khashoggi company to surrender $3 million of Edgington's stock because it appears to be the last remaining asset of Triad America. &quot;All the real estate is encumbered from now until doomsday,&quot; says Thomas R. Karrenberg, an attorney for Crest, who adds that he has searched the country for Triad assets.    But Ronald E. Nehring, a Triad attorney, predicts that the sale will pay Triad America's creditors and make the company a &quot;productive enterprise&quot; again. &quot;This is a very, very serious event,&quot; he says.    Another imponderable bothering Mr. Khashoggi's creditors and former associates is the Saudi businessman's current worth and the source of what his lawyers admit is a &quot;severe cash problem&quot; that puts heavy demands on his U.S. holdings.    According to Mr. Khan, Mr. Khashoggi blames his cash problems on falling oil prices, the Saudi government's failure to pay him money it owes him, and the loss of $50 million in an oil venture in Sudan.    Manny Floor, Triad America's chief operating officer until last spring, when he was replaced by Mr. Fraser, says he believes that Mr. Khashoggi may have lost a large amount of money on oil exploration and other ventures in Sudan. Mr. Khashoggi's major patron there, President Gafaar Nimeiri, was overthrown in April 1985, ending Mr. Khashoggi's Sudanese ventures.    Mansour Khalid, a Sudanese lawyer who held several positions in Mr. Nimeiri's cabinet, has written a book about Mr. Khashoggi's financial deals with Sudan. According to his view, what Mr. Khashoggi did in Sudan bears a similarity to the Edgington deal. Mr. Khalid says Mr. Khashoggi put &quot;next to nothing&quot; in the oil-exploration project, hoping to attract money from other investors.    Mr. Khashoggi's main Sudan enterprise, he asserts, was &quot;parachuting&quot; into ongoing projects as a middleman to extract large fees, many from the Saudi government, which has had a substantial program to aid the Sudan's poverty-stricken economy. His only real investment in the Sudan &quot;was his airplane,&quot; Mr. Khalid says.    ---   Also contributing to this article were Edward T. Pound, Michael T. Malloy, Leonard Zehr and Alan Bayless. </TEXT></DOC>