<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881014-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Law: Tyson-Givens Divorce Case Puts Spotlight On Problems Involved in Splitting Up </HL><AUTHOR> Martha Brannigan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Spectators can easily follow the Mike Tyson-Robin Givens legal bout without a scorecard -- but they may need a law book or two.    Ms. Givens, the actress, filed for divorce in Los Angeles last week, claiming the benefits of California's community-property law. Mr. Tyson, the world heavyweight boxing champion, is ready to seek an annulment to keep her from sharing his considerable wealth.    What does it all mean? For those without a law book handy, answers to some of the questions raised in the dispute give some idea of the complexities of divorce law.    The couple has a home in New Jersey and an apartment in New York. Does it matter where the case is heard?    Because divorce laws vary widely from state to state, the place of trial could make a big difference in how Mr. Tyson's fortune is divided. The two most likely arenas for the Tyson-Givens bout are New Jersey and California.    Why is California the best place for Ms. Givens to file?    California is a community-property state, under which marital property -- that acquired during the marriage -- is divided evenly. This is true no matter how long the couple has been married.    What would happen if the case were heard in New Jersey?    New Jersey is an equitable-distribution state. That means marital property is divided by the court based on various factors, including the length of the marriage and the contributions of each partner. So, Ms. Givens probably would get a much smaller award in New Jersey, especially considering the eight-month duration of the marriage, her age, her professional prospects and her ability to support herself.    Martin Johnson, a matrimonial law specialist in Pearl River, N.Y., says: &quot;It presses the imagination to say how much one's contribution would have been to the other&quot; in just eight months.    What would be included in the couple's marital property in California?    The biggest chunk would be the $21 million purse from Mr. Tyson's fight with Michael Spinks in June. It could also include income from advertisements, such as Diet Pepsi commercials, for which Mr. Tyson reportedly received more than $1 million.    But years of training and boxing by Mr. Tyson went into the Spinks fight. Should all of the winnings from it be regarded as community property?    &quot;The interesting legal question is how you would treat the money he won during the fight when obviously he spent considerable time before it to get ready,&quot; says Sandra Morris, a family-law specialist in San Diego. &quot;In my opinion, it seems a portion of the funds would be attributed to marital efforts and a portion attributed to the separate property -- the preparation that happened before the marriage.&quot;    How would jurisdiction be decided?    Jurisdiction is generally based on where a person resides or is domiciled. Raoul Felder, a New York matrimonial attorney representing Ms. Givens, says that the Tysons' primary residence is in California and that the case belongs there. He says that Ms. Givens has lived in California for 2 1/2 years and that the couple spent &quot;70% of their time there.&quot; Marvin Mitchelson, the Beverly Hills divorce lawyer who filed the divorce petition before turning over the case to Mr. Felder, says her attorneys will fight for California jurisdiction because &quot;she'd fare better, frankly, under this system.&quot;    But Howard Weitzman, a Los Angeles attorney for Mr. Tyson, says, &quot;New Jersey is the proper jurisdiction. That's where they lived.&quot;    Can a divorce be granted in one state, but the division of assets resolved in another?    Yes. If, for example, Ms. Givens proves her domicile is in California, she could get the marriage dissolved there. But if Mr. Tyson proves that his domicile is elsewhere and that the California court lacks jurisdiction over him, the division of assets, support awards and other issues could end up in, say, New Jersey.    How long must someone reside in a state to get a divorce?    Again, state laws vary. California has a six-month residency requirement for either spouse, New Jersey a one-year requirement.    Mr. Tyson's assistant manager says the boxer has lived in New Jersey only since March. Gary Newman, a West Orange, N.J., lawyer who is affiliated with Mr. Felder and expects to be local counsel to Ms. Givens, says under New Jersey law, that would mean he couldn't file for divorce until next year, but &quot;he could seek an annulment before then.&quot; Mr. Weitzman, Mr. Tyson's lawyer, says an annulment filing &quot;is definitely in the game plan.&quot;    How does an annulment differ from a divorce?    In New Jersey, where Mr. Tyson probably would file, a divorce would result in an equitable distribution of marital property, while an annulment would prevent Ms. Givens from sharing in the marital property at all, says Alan Grosman, a Short Hills, N.J., lawyer. The concept of an annulment, he explains, is that the marriage never existed. Ms. Givens could, however, seek alimony.    What are grounds for annulment?    Annulments are hard to get. Generally, one must prove that a marriage never legitimately occurred because, for example, one party was underage or already married, or because the marriage involved fraud.    Mr. Tyson is expected to claim that Ms. Givens fraudulently induced him to marry her by falsely saying she was pregnant. But her attorney, Mr. Felder, says: &quot;It's fantasy. He urged her to get married. She became pregnant and really was pregnant, but the pregnancy played no role&quot; in their getting married. The idea that it did &quot;is an afterthought created in the last week,&quot; he says.    Many matrimonial lawyers doubt that the pregnancy argument will suffice. James T. Friedman, a Chicago lawyer and president of the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers, says: &quot;There must be a fraud that goes to the essence of the relationship. No law says he has to marry her if she's pregnant.&quot;    Ms. Morris, a San Diego attorney, says the timing of an annulment action now could hurt Mr. Tyson. If in fact Ms. Givens wasn't pregnant, he would have found out before now, Ms. Morris says, adding: &quot;If that ever was the inducement, one would have to think he made the decision to stay married anyway.&quot;    What is the likelihood of a settlement?    Mr. Felder says that at the request of Ms. Givens, he is seeking a reconciliation -- which Mr. Weitzman doesn't consider a possibility. &quot;Failing that,&quot; Mr. Felder says, &quot;we'll try to settle.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>