<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861222-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Money Moves:Nations' DevaluationsOf Currencies SparkA Global Trade War---Domino Effect of Dollar DropHas Been Hurting JapanBut Helping South Korea---New Dangers of 'Cascading'---By Michael R. SesitStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/22/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNFOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Pressed by 21% unemployment and shrinking export markets, Britain began the fracas by putting its currency on sale. It abandoned the gold standard, and sterling, which many had deemed overvalued, plunged 25%. Then 25 other nations, in self-defense, also devalued.    That was in September 1931, shortly after the global depression began. More than 50 years later, another beggar-thy-neighbor trade war is breaking out. Trying to increase exports at others' expense and reduce imports, many nations are cheapening their currencies.    Since early 1982, Brazil has devalued its currency by 99%, Mexico by 97% and Indonesia by 62%. More recently, the U.S. has engineered a record plunge in the dollar -- only to have European nations and Japan strike back by intervening in foreign-exchange markets to stall its slide. Many European countries have also been fighting among themselves over exchange rates.    In addition, some nations, such as Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, have essentially pegged their currencies to the dollar; so, as it dropped, they have, in effect, devalued against Europe and Japan. Moreover, the South Korean won has fallen even against the dollar.    &quot;We have domino devaluations that started in the Southern Hemisphere and are now spreading to the Northern,&quot; says David D. Hale, the chief economist at Kemper Financial Services Inc. in Chicago. &quot;The risk is that this could keep cascading.&quot;    Although few economists see a '30s-style depression, they say several national economies -- Japan's, for example -- have already been hurt. The stakes in the struggle are high, involving economic growth, jobs and standards of living. For politicians, they can spell the difference between being in or out of office. And economists warn that unless major trading nations can reach an exchange-rate truce, the conflict eventually could depress trade and investment, reignite inflation and shake confidence in the international financial system.    On the most basic level, the competitive devaluations are being sparked by unsound economic policies in many countries. On top of that, economists cite several broad trends: falling commodity prices, stagnant world trade, the Latin American debt crisis and the internationalization of securities markets.    The first significant devaluations began in 1982 in Latin America, where many countries were hobbled by vastly overvalued currencies, falling prices for their commodity exports and huge foreign debts. The devaluations were desperate attempts -- some mandated bythe International Monetary Fund -- to expand exports so as to sustain economic growth and service the loans.    To some extent, high inflation forced the devaluations in Latin America. In theory, a currency's value should reflect its buying power in world trade, and the currency of a country with high inflation should fall to reflect the currency's diminished purchasing power. But Kemper's Mr. Hale estimates that, based on purchasing power, the currencies of most Southern Hemisphere countries are undervalued, after the devaluations, by 30% to 40%.    The other fundamental influence on exchange rates is trade. The currency of a country with a trade surplus should rise to reflect foreign demand for that currency, and the currency of a country with a big deficit should fall. But, says Nicholas P. Sargen, a vice president at Salomon Brothers Inc., &quot;the internationalization of capital markets means that the old-fashioned fundamentals of inflation and trade no longer necessarily call the shots on exchange rates.&quot;    That's because a lot more than goods and services are bought and sold these days. Investors buy securities, and they care much more about interest rates than about trade deficits. With the explosion in global investing and in speculative trading on currency movements, world-wide foreign-exchange trading is running 15 to 20 times the amount needed to finance imports and exports. In the early 1980s, the dollar soared because investors were attracted by high U.S. interest rates and were willing to ignore the huge U.S. trade deficits.    Such distortions are a major reason domino devaluations have spread to industrialized nations, economists say. Most industrial countries would find it difficult to devalue in the traditional sense -- by government declaration -- because their currencies float according to supply and demand in the foreign-exchange market. But there are other ways to achieve the same results.    For example, the most significant &quot;devaluation&quot; -- the U.S. campaign to lower the dollar -- has largely been carried out through interest-rate cuts and what Aloys Schwietert, the chief economist for Swiss Bank Corp. in Basel, calls the Reagan administration's &quot;open-mouth policy&quot; of talking down the greenback.    In September 1985, the U.S. persuaded West Germany and Japan and the two other members of the so-called Group of Five -- France and Britain -- to join in a coordinated effort to drive down the dollar in the foreign-exchange markets. It was largely an attempt to defuse protectionist sentiment in the U.S.    Although the Group of Five initially agreed that the dollar should be lower, the international cooperation soon degenerated into a beggar-thy-neighbor squabble. The dollar did fall, but the U.S. trade deficit stayed stubbornly high. Meanwhile, exporters in Japan and Germany were losing profits because their dollar sales were worth less in their own currencies.    U.S. officials threatened to keep pushing down the dollar unless Germany and Japan stimulated their economies to absorb more imports, particularly from the U.S. and the Third World. In addition, the Federal Reserve Board twice lowered its discount rate without corresponding moves by Germany and Japan.    In the past 15 months, the dollar has dropped 32% against the yen and 29% against the German mark. Of course, market forces played a role: The dollar was long considered overvalued and due for a drop. Even so, many economists say Washington accelerated the plunge into one of the fastest in history.    To stem that drop, Japan and Germany, plus several other European countries, have responded with their own jawboning plus major intervention -- buying dollars to bolster the price. In the second quarter, net foreign-government purchases of U.S. government securities surged to a $52 billion annual rate from $10 billion in the first quarter and from net sales in 1985. The figures, say economists, are evidence of the high degree of foreign intervention.    Meanwhile, Europe has fought internal battles. Last April, for example, France pushed for an 8% devaluation of the franc against the German mark in a realignment of the European Monetary System, a joint float of eight currencies. Though France got less, the move was widely considered an attempt to increase French exports at its trading partners' expense.    In August, Ireland successfully negotiated an 8% drop in its currency against its EMS partners, mostly as a response to the British pound's plunge. Some analysts accuse Britain of, in effect, depreciating its currency by not vigorously defending it with interest-rate increases. They also note Britain's reluctance to join the EMS exchange-rate mechanism, a step that even London concedes would force it to defend the pound.    So far, the big winners in the global struggle have been Asian nations such as South Korea and Taiwan, which have indirectly devalued their currencies by pegging them to the dollar. That policy has helped sharply increase their exports to the U.S. at the expense of Japan and Europe. Taiwan now has a trade surplus with the U.S. almost as large as Germany's, a country with an economy more than 10 times as big.    &quot;The Japanese and Europeans want to retain market share, the less developed countries want to gain it, and the U.S. wants to regain it,&quot; sums up Mr. Sargen of Salomon Brothers. Adds Albert M. Wojnilower, a managing director at First Boston Corp.: &quot;In nonnuclear days, those hostilities carried the risk of war.&quot;    Of course, the economic situation today is very different from the 1930s, when protectionist trade policies fueled a global depression. Now, the industrial world's economies aren't on the verge of collapse, the world's banking system is much stronger, and the U.S. is pushing Germany and Japan to expand their economies as an alternative to facing a falling dollar and a consequent loss of competitiveness world-wide.    Yet economists note some ominous developments. Protectionism is spreading. So are export subsidies. Total world exports -- having fallen in 1981, 1982 and 1983, having edged up moderately in 1984 and having barely held even in 1985 -- are still below 1981 levels; much of this decline is due to a drop in prices of oil and other commodities, which are valued overall at only 70% of their 1980 level. Unemployment is high, especially throughout most of Europe. Robert Z. Aliber, a professor of international economics and finance at the University of Chicago, suspects that the youth unemployment rate in Europe probably equals that of the 1930s.    What economists and some central bankers fear most is a global recession that might set exporters to battling for shrinking markets. They note that economic growth is weak in the U.S., is falling in Japan and Canada, and is spotty in Europe. Moreover, America's effort to reduce its budget deficit without offsetting growth in other countries is, in itself, deflationary for the world economy.    Analysts also worry that despite pleas for international economic cooperation, the persistence of trade tensions could prompt politicians to resort to more competitive devaluations and other curbs on trade rather than adopt corrective economic policies at home. Adjustments in trade patterns to currency changes &quot;are very long, and the patience of politicians is very short,&quot; comments an official at the Bundesbank, West Germany's central bank.    Although the U.S. trade deficit, for example, may be bottoming out, few economists expect it to improve significantly in 1987 from the estimated $170 billion this year. They note that U.S. export growth this year has been anemic. Moreover, export markets in Latin America, where the U.S. once held sway, have contracted severely since the debt crisis plunged most of the continent into recession. Similarly, overseas markets for U.S. agricultural products have shrunk as nations that were once major importers became self-sufficient and even competitors.    Richard O'Brien, the chief economist at American Express Bank in London, thinks that the dollar is still too high. He argues that for the U.S. to be competitive against Europe and Japan, the dollar must fall another 27% against the mark and 17% against the yen. That's because, in comparison with other industrial nations, U.S. inflation has grown much faster and productivity much more slowly since the late 1970s.    But &quot;the risk is that any battle being fought through exchange rates gets out of hand,&quot; Mr. O'Brien warns.    The biggest danger, economists say, is a free fall of the dollar. That would force the U.S. to raise interest rates to attract the foreign capital needed to finance its current-account deficit and, indirectly, its budget deficit. Higher rates, in turn, could plunge the U.S. -- and possibly the world -- into a recession that could threaten the international financial system.    &quot;The prospect of the three biggest world economies engaged in a {currency war} is not conducive to world investment and the growth that would be promoted by such investment,&quot; says Lawrence J. Brainard, the chief international economist at Bankers Trust Co.    More devaluations also could damage international cooperation in dealing with the Third World debt crisis and could reignite inflation in the devaluing nations. Inflation could speed up because imported goods become more expensive, permitting domestic manufacturers to raise their own prices. Many analysts contend that U.S. inflation would already be higher today if it weren't for the drop in oil prices.    Kemper's Mr. Hale says the major industrial countries need &quot;an exchange-rate disarmament agreement.&quot; In late October, Tokyo and Washington approached something like that when they hinted that they would like the yen-dollar exchange rate to stabilize near current levels.    Nevertheless, Mr. Wojnilower of First Boston recently warned that the U.S. could again resort to devaluing its currency and with it the billions of dollars that Japanese institutions and individuals annually invest in the U.S. &quot;Americans are and show every sign of remaining, in contrast with Japan, a short-term-oriented, mercurial, polyglot, multi-ethnic, mobile and heavily armed people,&quot; he said. &quot;Claims on such a people need to be accumulated and exercised with care.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>