<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881027-0005 </DOCNO><HL> Politics andamp; Policy -- Campaign '88: Bush Thrives on One-A-Day TV-Message Capsules Prescribed by His Skilled Poli-Tech Image Makers </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Perry and Monica Langley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When pollster Robert Teeter arrives at his office in George Bush's campaign headquarters at 7 each morning, the polling data from the night before are already on his desk.    &quot;We make at least 1,000 telephone calls every night,&quot; says Mr. Teeter. &quot;We can run off a national poll or do two statewide polls, or do both together, or we can poll special groups. We can do almost anything on less than 24 hours' notice. We can do it faster and cheaper than any campaign has been able to do it before.&quot;    At 7:30, polling data in hand, Mr. Teeter attends a meeting of the campaign's top staff in chairman James Baker's office. &quot;We decide what we're going to do, for the day, for the next three days and maybe for the following week.&quot;    Everything is coordinated. The campaign message may be scheduled for a single day, or for three days, or even for a week. It could be the environment, or crime, or national defense. But whatever it is, it is always driven by the numbers from the polls. Mr. Bush's presidential campaign schedule is designed to emphasize the message. Stump appearances are chosen to highlight the message visually and to look good on the night's network television-news shows. Snappy lines are inserted in the speeches, some of them tested in advance, that are almost guaranteed to become &quot;sound bites.&quot;    It is a triumph of the Bush image makers employing modern political technology over the open discourse of old-time politics. Democratic nominee Michael Dukakis has his own image painters, of course, but they have been no match for the highly skilled Bush crew.    In the Bush campaign, news conferences with the long-suffering traveling media representatives are almost always discouraged: They're far too spontaneous and they tend to clutter the message.    The TV ads back up the message. They are tested in front of &quot;focus groups&quot; and looked over by a senior panel that includes the chairmen of Interpublic Group of Cos. and Ogilvy andamp; Mather Advertising, and the former chairman of Young andamp; Rubicam Inc. People recruited for the focus groups use little hand-held meters to register what they like and don't like. For every message, there is almost always one positive commercial and one negative one.    Ads supporting the national message and reflecting national polls go on national TV; special messages focusing on regional or local concerns -- as measured by statewide or regional polls -- are scheduled for local and regional TV stations.    Last week, national security was the message. The negative ad -- a mischievous one created by media guru Roger Ailes himself -- makes fun of Mr. Dukakis riding in a tank wearing a helmet. Soon, right on schedule, the Bush message will switch to taxes. The positive line will be that Mr. Bush won't raise taxes; the negative one will be that taxes have gone up faster under Mr. Dukakis in Massachusetts than they have in the nation generally.    &quot;We are running a campaign that is designed for network TV,&quot; says Roger Stone, a senior Bush adviser. &quot;That means only one message a day, and getting it out early enough to get on the networks and major media markets that night. It means not allowing anything unplanned {to happen}.&quot;    So far, the focus mostly has been on the negative messages. &quot;Overall, in terms of fairness and accuracy, Bush is running the dirtiest campaign that I've seen since 1964,&quot; says Kathleen Hall Jamieson, a political-communications expert at the University of Texas and author of the book &quot;Packaging the Presidency.&quot;    &quot;All this new technology can make a terrific difference when you have two weak candidates,&quot; says Kevin Phillips, a GOP theoretician. The Bush campaign, with its stable of professionals, has the technology. The Dukakis campaign, staffed largely by beginners, hasn't.    &quot;The difference between the two campaigns is like the difference between traveling across the country by railroad or by jet,&quot; says John Merriam, chairman of the Conference on Issues and Media. &quot;Dukakis is still on the ground; Bush is in the air.&quot;    By keeping on the move in what is essentially a negative campaign, George Bush, widely heralded six months ago as a wimp, has surged from a 16-point deficit in some polls taken early on to a 17-point advantage in others published recently. Of course, it isn't all thanks to technology. The continuing stability of the economy and the generally improved outlook for world peace have provided an environment favoring the incumbent Republicans. Plus, Mr. Bush has been a better campaigner and a better debater than most people had anticipated (and Mr. Dukakis has been a lot worse).    But Mr. Bush's state-of-the-art technology has turned out to be a significant advantage, and one that has been compounded by the Democrats' failure to make any kind of showing of their own.    The Bush campaign began concentrating on Mr. Dukakis last June, browsing through bales of negative material collected by research director James Pinkerton. Campaign manager Lee Atwater flew out to California and informally talked to voters in an effort to get a &quot;feel&quot; for what people were thinking. What they were thinking was crime, drugs and street gangs, a theme the campaign would address again and again.    &quot;Conceptually,&quot; says Mr. Teeter, who began working in presidential campaigns 20 years ago, &quot;this one turned out to be easier than most.&quot;    It divided into two parts, one positive, one negative. The positive theme pictures grandfather Bush as a decent man, seeking a &quot;kinder, gentler nation.&quot; The negative message, notes Mr. Teeter, portrays Michael Dukakis as &quot;a typical liberal Democrat. If you took Bush and his values and his ideology and you laid them alongside Dukakis's, you had the feeling they were very different, and that the veep {Mr. Bush} was on the side of the American majority.&quot;    The senior staff and the image makers led by Mr. Ailes had lunch with Mr. Bush in June. All of the negative material gathered by the research staff was spelled out, including bits about Mr. Dukakis vetoing a bill that would have required school teachers to lead their pupils daily in a recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance; his support of a program that allowed convicts serving time for murder to take furloughs; and the polluted condition of Boston harbor.    Senior staff says Mr. Bush constantly expressed astonishment at what he was hearing, saying things like, &quot;You're kidding?&quot; and &quot;He really did that?&quot; Others attending the luncheon can remember no such responses. Clearly, though, Mr. Bush from the outset knew about the negative thrust the campaign would take.    By the time of the June luncheon, Mr. Ailes already had chosen Frankenberry, Laughlin andamp; Constable Inc., an advertising agency based in Milwaukee (and up until then best known for its efforts on behalf of Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc., a manufacturer of kids' overalls) to produce the campaign ads.    Keeping in mind that the polls indicated that the best issue for Mr. Dukakis might turn out to be the environment and that the worst one might turn out to be crime, the Milwaukee agency was told to come up with two ads -- one about the pollution in Boston harbor and one about the failures in the furlough program.    The story boards were finished in July and the commercials themselves, little changed from the agency's original work, were ready to go on the air by Labor Day.    These ads, like all the others, were pretested in front of focus groups, most of them big ones, with 50 or more people seated in a theater-like room holding the little meters to register positive and negative reactions.    The furlough ad, says Mr. Teeter, smiling just a little, &quot;tested very well.&quot; It was tested in both color and black-and-white. The black-and-white version tested best.    In it, actors are shown going through a revolving door with a prison looming ominously in the background. The prison is a real one -- Utah State. It was chosen, says Dennis Frankenberry, the Milwaukee ad man, because it is &quot;film friendly.&quot; The off-screen announcer intones, accompanied by lugubrious music, that Mr. Dukakis's &quot;revolving-door prison policy gave weekend furloughs to first-degree murderers not eligible for parole. While out, many committed other crimes like kidnap and rape, and many are still at large.&quot;    Democrats call foul on almost all counts. They say the Massachusetts furlough program was initiated by a Republican governor, Francis Sargent, and that other states -- indeed, the federal government -- have furlough programs. But it wasn't until a few days ago, more than six weeks late, that the Dukakis strategists finally answered the allegations in a commercial of their own. And now, led by the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Democratic leaders are charging that the attacks on the governor's furlough program may encourage racial tension because Willie Horton, who is usually singled out as evidence of how the program went wrong, is a black man who raped a white woman while he was on furlough.    They say, too, the legislation on the Pledge was vetoed because it was unconstitutional, and they say Mr. Dukakis is the first governor in Massachusetts history to try to clean up Boston harbor -- without much help from the federal government.    The Bush ads may be rough -- but they have been effective. Hardly anyone denies that.    &quot;You've got to give Ailes an A-plus,&quot; says Robert Squier, the Democratic media consultant who has been used sparingly in the Dukakis campaign. &quot;With the Boston harbor and furlough commercials, they {the Bush strategists} took the campaign straight at Dukakis, and the charges went unanswered for more than a month. It is a truism in politics: An attack unanswered eventually becomes an attack agreed to.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>