<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870429-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Warfare:Tobacco Firms DefendSmoker Liability SuitsWith Heavy Artillery---As 3 Cases Are Slated for Trial,They Press Tough TacticsTo Avoid First Loss Ever---Bringing Up a Family Suicide---By Patricia Bellew GrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MO RJR UBO AMB CUC LTRFOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   During the last months of her husband's life, when he was gasping for every breath, Dollie Root rarely slept or left the house. She nursed the retired construction worker until he died of congestive heart failure and lung cancer shortly before Christmas in 1983.    Thank God, Mrs. Root recalls thinking, the ordeal is over. She couldn't have been more wrong.    About a year after her husband's death, Mrs. Root filed a lawsuit against General Cigar andamp; Tobacco Co., whose pipe tobacco her husband had smoked. She claimed in her lawsuit that tobacco was far more toxic than any warning had suggested. General Cigar knew of the dangers, Mrs. Root charged, but didn't do anything to warn its customers.    Thus began a two-year legal battle that ended only when she gave up and dropped her lawsuit in February. The 73-year-old widow says she could no longer stand grueling interrogations by the tobacco-company lawyers, who spent days grilling her on such topics as her infertility and her adopted son's suicide a year ago.    &quot;They asked me if my feelings about my daughter-in-law changed after I found out she was three or four weeks pregnant when she married my son,&quot; Mrs. Root, who lives in Concord, Calif., recalls tearfully. &quot;I didn't know what to say. I didn't know she was. Besides, they were married 25 years ago. What does any of this have to do with my husband's death?&quot;    Tactics like that have everything to do with the tobacco industry's extraordinary success in defeating lawsuits brought by smokers or their bereaved families.    The tobacco industry has been fighting such claims since the early 1950s, and though it came perilously close to losing twice, the industry can still boast of never having paid a dime in damages or settlement for illnesses related to smoking. Its secret is a lavishly financed and brutally aggressive defense that scares off or exhausts many plaintiffs long before their cases get to trial.    The industry's strategy is about to be put to its most serious test. As anti-smoking sentiment has grown, the number of lawsuits against tobacco companies has risen to more than 125, of which three are expected to go to trial this fall. All the major tobacco companies have been drawn into the battle, including Philip Morris Cos., RJR Nabisco Inc., U.S. Tobacco Co., and American Tobacco Co., a unit of American Brands Inc.    Even a single verdict against a tobacco company would be considered a disaster for the industry because it could stimulate thousands of other lawsuits seeking compensation for smoking-related deaths or diseases. The threat has already caused jittery investors to back away from the companies' stock. Wall Street analysts estimate the litigation has depressed tobacco stock by 20%.    So the industry is hastening to fortify its defenses. Tobacco companies have put a legion of lawyers on their payrolls. At last count, more than 70 law firms had been hired, including some of the most prominent in the country. Tobacco companies also have retained psychologists, economists, physicians and medical researchers to testify at trials. No one knows the size of the bill for all this, but U.S. Tobacco recently complained that the cost of lawyers' sifting through documents and copying them for one trial alone was $3 million.    Indeed, the industry's forces resemble an army perpetually on red alert. Investigators comb plaintiffs' neighborhoods and workplaces for gossipy tidbits that might be useful to the lawyers. Lawyers stage secret full-dress mock trials to test the reactions of lay people to the industry's legal arguments. Before actual trials, pollsters take the public pulse on issues such as cigarette advertising, information that might be helpful to the lawyers in picking a jury. After trials, interviewers grill jurors for hours in an effort to reconstruct deliberations minute by minute.    Litigation experts say they have never seen a bigger or better-coordinated mobilization of legal firepower. &quot;The industry is displaying an awesome show of force,&quot; says Calvert Crary, a litigation analyst with Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. &quot;At stake is the most profitable consumer product ever sold -- the cigarette.&quot; (Mr. Crary says he bases his statement on a cost-of-goods analysis.)    Plaintiffs' lawyers concede the tobacco industry is rich and powerful, but they are gambling that it isn't invincible. Clearly, the odds are against the plaintiffs, who are going to court with novel legal theories that test the outer limits of product-liability law.    In many lawsuits, plaintiffs contend that the familiar warnings on cigarette packages and advertisements didn't adequately advise them of the true dangers of smoking. Moreover, plaintiffs assert that the companies' advertisements undermine or even directly challenge the warnings. Some plaintiffs also argue that cigarettes are so addictive that though warned of the risks of cancer and heart disease, they couldn't break their habits.    The warnings are the industry's first line of defense. Congress ordered a series of mild warnings on cigarette packages and advertisements in 1965. As medical research identified more links between smoking and disease, Congress ordered even stronger language in 1971 and again in 1984. The tobacco companies argue that the federal legislation requiring the warnings shields them from liability.    The tobacco industry also is pressing the issue of &quot;personal accountability&quot; as a defense, though it steadfastly maintains that scientific research has yet to establish that smoking causes disease. John Strauch, a lawyer for RJR Nabisco, says: &quot;There has to be a point at which you say there is still something left of the idea of someone being responsible for their conduct.&quot; He equates the risks of smoking to the risks of drinking alcohol or eating high-cholesterol foods.    Plaintiffs have threatened, though not breached, industry defenses in a number of pre-trial skirmishes. The Third Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in Philadelphia ruled last year that the package warnings do protect tobacco companies from claims that they failed to warn consumers. Lower courts have disagreed. The issue is now before appeals courts in Boston, Cincinnati and Atlanta.    And in New Jersey, a judge ordered three defendants' internal files on the hazards of smoking made public, over the protests of the companies, Liggett Group Inc., Philip Morris and Loews Corp. and its Lorillard Inc. tobacco unit. If released, the files could be enormously helpful to other plaintiffs' lawyers in collecting evidence. The defendants, claiming that disclosure could be misleading and embarrassing because of the private nature of many office memos, are appealing the ruling.    Only three cases have come to trial in the past two years, and defendants won them all. In one case, a judge ruled for the tobacco company even before it presented its defense. But another case gave a clear warning to the industry of the risks in jury trials.    In Santa Barbara, Calif., a jury deliberated almost two days before deciding, 9-3, in favor of the defendant, RJR Nabisco, in late 1985. The margin is the slimmest allowed in civil jury trials in California. That the plaintiff got three jurors' votes was stunning to some legal experts.    The case, brought by torts lawyer Melvin Belli, was regarded by some as very weak, partly because the plaintiff, after filing the suit, had died at age 69 of heart disease, rather than a type of lung cancer clearly associated with smoking. Some lawyers also say the case was poorly prepared, pointing out, for example, that Mr. Belli didn't order an autopsy performed on the plaintiff, John Galbraith.    &quot;The tobacco industry should be scared to death by the implications&quot; of its narrow escape, says Mr. Crary, the litigation analyst. &quot;It will never get one that easy again.&quot; Mr. Crary suggests that the tobacco companies are trying to hurry the weakest cases to trial in order to establish a streak of victories that might discourage lawyers from taking on such cases.    That is unlikely. The prospect of million-dollar verdicts has lured a swarm of experienced personal-injury lawyers, many of whom made fortunes in asbestos litigation and now are hunting new targets. They are far better prepared than the ragtag band of mostly zealots and publicity seekers that dominated the litigation in its early years.    Groups of lawyers have joined forces in Texas and New Jersey to share resources and plot trial strategy. The Rockefeller Family Fund and other benefactors are helping finance the litigation. The Rockefeller Fund, for instance, has donated $55,000 to the Tobacco Products Litigation Project in Boston, a nonprofit group that helps lawyers prepare cases and publishes a journal on legal developments.    Still, the plaintiffs are vastly outgunned. The tobacco companies exert their overwhelming strength and prowess at every turn. A New Jersey judge not directly involved in tobacco litigation complains: &quot;They don't just fight the case. They fight the lawyers, the judges, and the magistrates, too.&quot;    Liggett, Loews and Philip Morris are seeking to have a federal judge, H. Lee Sarokin, removed from a case in New Jersey on the ground he is biased, after several of his pre-trial rulings favored the plaintiffs. Tobacco companies also make it hard for plaintiffs' lawyers to collect evidence. One lawyer, George Braly of Ada, Okla., had to get a court order to bar defense lawyers from the room in their offices where he was sifting through company records. Undaunted, the Oklahoma City firm knocked down a wall and installed a large window.    Most intimidating is a maneuver dubbed &quot;the wall of flesh&quot; by plaintiffs' lawyers. &quot;You go into court alone to argue some really insignificant motion on a case and 30 lawyers show up for the other side,&quot; says Daniel Childs, a Philadelphia lawyer who is handling two smokers' cases. RJR says the technique serves a different purpose: field training for scores of recruits.    Tobacco companies offer their greatest show of force at trial. For a trial last spring in Oklahoma City, Okla., for instance, U.S. Tobacco hired three law firms, including one in which the then-mayor of Oklahoma City, Andrew M. Coats, was a senior partner.    The companies insist on a cradle-to-grave investigation of plaintiffs' lives. Marriages, job histories, personal hygiene, eating habits and even church-going practices come under scrutiny. Family members aren't the only ones grilled. Investigators also seek out present and former neighbors, co-workers, supervisors, school chums, family physicians and others.    Investigators once tracked down a California plaintiff's former neighbors in Fairbanks, Alaska. &quot;We hadn't seen those people in 10 years, and I can't imagine what they thought,&quot; says Louise Sahli of Antioch, Calif. &quot;Investigators went after everyone who ever knew us -- my brother-in-law, my husband's stepmother in Little Rock. They get subpoenas, and they threaten people with jail if they don't talk.&quot;    Defense lawyers say these practices are necessary to determine what caused smokers' illnesses. But plaintiffs' lawyers contend that the inquiries are intended to harass. George Kilbourne, a lawyer in Martinez, Calif., says: &quot;They muck around in the past until they find something damaging like a family suicide or a venereal disease. Then they play on it until the suit is dropped.&quot;    Consider the recent deposition taken from Mrs. Root, the widow of the pipe smoker, by General Cigar, a unit of Culbro Corp. of New York:    LAWYER: When did you become aware of the fact that you were unable to conceive children?    MRS. ROOT: I knew before I was married I could not have children.    LAWYER: And I assume you discussed this with {your husband}?    MRS. ROOT: Yes.   LAWYER: Did you make a decision prior to your marriage, just prior to your marriage, that you would adopt children?    MRS. ROOT: No.   LAWYER: Was it your desire to have children or his desire to have children which caused you to decide to adopt children?    Charles Breyer, General Cigar's lawyer, says that &quot;it is entirely proper to ask questions about any stressful or potentially stressful situations in this family.&quot;    Stress, he says, may have caused or aggravated Mr. Root's heart disease and cancer. The lawyer also points out that Mrs. Root's lawyer didn't object to many of the questions.    Mrs. Root says now that she regrets having dropped her lawsuit, but adds: &quot;I'm far too old to spend the rest of my life answering to a tobacco company.&quot;    (Mrs. Root also named a number of asbestos companies in her lawsuit. She contended that her husband, a construction worker, had developed lung cancer and pulmonary heart disease because of the &quot;synergistic effect&quot; of exposure to asbestos on the job and tobacco from smoking. The asbestos companies settled the charges against them for an undisclosed amount.)    Anti-smoking forces pin high hopes on three cases scheduled to come to trial this September, in Mississippi, Texas and New Jersey. Each is being brought by a consortium of personal-injury lawyers, who have spent years preparing the cases. Plaintiffs in the Mississippi and Texas cases may benefit from the fact that the states have comparative-fault laws that allow juries to award damages even if the manufacturer is held minimally responsible for injuries caused by a product.    Perhaps the strongest case is being brought by the family of Nathan Horton, a housing contractor who died of lung cancer in January at age 50. The family is suing American Tobacco, whose products include Pall Mall, which Mr. Horton began smoking as a teen-ager, before the warnings appeared on cigarette packages.    In its lawsuit in state court in Lexington, Miss., the family accuses the company of &quot;grossly negligent conduct . . . to nullify the overwhelming medical evidence that cigarette smoking is addictive and causes lung cancer.&quot; Through &quot;false and misleading&quot; advertising, the family claims, American Tobacco tried to &quot;create an illusion that cigarette smoking is pleasurable, sophisticated, associated with success and glamour, sports, love and the wholesome outdoors.&quot; American Tobacco declines to comment on the case.    Among the advertisements being cited in the case is one from the 1940s. It reads: &quot;Guard against throat scratch. Smoke Pall Mall.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>