<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880524-0007 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY </HL><AUTHOR> Brenton R. Schlender and David Stipp </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> EDP ELE </IN><TEXT>      Superconductor Clears   Power-Capacity Hurdle   THIN LAYERS of a new thallium superconductor have been found to conduct enough electricity for some electronic applications.    The finding by researchers at Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, N.M., is likely to speed commercial development of superconducting electronics. The scientists reported that when a layer of the superconductor was cooled to minus 321 degrees Fahrenheit with liquid nitrogen, it conducted 110,000 amps per square centimeter -- enough for uses such as conducting electricity between electronic components.    Such capacity is crucial -- the limited current that could be carried by earlier superconductors remains one of the tallest hurdles to commercial development.    The researchers also found that the thallium superconductor shows high current-carrying capacity even though the tiny crystals comprising it are randomly jumbled. Multicrystal samples of the superconductors discovered last year carry large electrical currents only when the crystals are aligned through tricky processes not yet perfected for large-scale applications.    The Sandia team now is trying to put a thin layer of the thallium superconductor on silicon, the main component of computer chips. Prototype electronic devices using the thallium superconductors -- perhaps as electrical connectors -- may be developed within a year, says Sandia scientist David S. Ginley.    Cursor-Guiding Devices   May Trap the Mouse   MICE HAVE been multiplying, as more personal computer makers opt for the cursor-guiding devices.    Using a hand-held mouse to move the computer cursor saves the user from having to memorize or precisely type complex instructions. The user just moves the mouse across a desktop, causing the cursor to move correspondingly to point at text or commands on the screen.    To some computer users, however, the mouse is a nuisance -- mainly because it takes up too much desk space and requires taking a hand away from the keyboard. So inventors are coming up with alternative devices.    Lightgate Inc. of Emeryville, Calif., recently introduced Felix, a cursor-guiding mechanism about the size of a paperback book that is used like a videogame joystick. The Felix -- which costs $199 for International Business Machines Corp. personal computers and compatible machines, and $149 for Apple Computer Inc. Macintoshes -- takes up much less space than a mouse.    But the most promising mouse alternative, according to many analysts, is the Isopoint. The brainchild of amateur inventor Craig Culver of Woodside, Calif., the Isopoint is a sliding and rolling cylinder about the diameter of a cocktail straw that fits along the bottom of the keyboard's spacebar. Either thumb can slide the cylinder left or right to move the cursor accordingly. Rolling the cylinder moves the cursor vertically, and pressing it executes a command. Hewlett-Packard Co. has licensed the device as equipment on future computers.    Even Apple, which popularized the mouse, is getting into the act. It's expected to introduce a laptop computer next year that uses a &quot;trackball&quot; -- a large ball bearing nested in the keyboard that is rolled to move the cursor.    Maybe Laptop Just   Isn't Small Enough   PORTABLE LAPTOP personal computers haven't caught on as quickly as many had expected, but a Melbourne, Fla., company is betting that even smaller, hand-held models might be just what some computer users are looking for.    Paravant Computer Systems Inc. has squeezed a complete IBM-compatible personal computer into a package not much larger than a videocassette. The $3,995 machine, on the market for a few weeks now, can run most programs written for full-size IBM compatible machines.    Various industries use handheld data-recording computers simply to store information collected in the field for processing back in the office. &quot;Now people can process that data right at the site,&quot; says Richard McNeight, executive vice president of Paravant. &quot;We're seeing surveyors use our hand-held computers to do complicated work out there in the field.&quot; The military is turning to the tiny computers for navigation and engineering tasks, he adds.    The machine has its drawbacks. The screen is a fourth the size of a conventional screen, and the keyboard is so small it has to be punched like a calculator. Consequently, it is difficult to enter anything other than numerical data very efficiently. The price tag is a bit steep, too, considering that some laptop computers sell for under $1,000.    Now Your Computer   Can Do the Bossing   WITH THE FIRST generation of personal computer programs, users told computers what to do and when to do it. Now there's software that enables computers to tell people what to do and when to do it.    Forget-Me-Not, from Sterling Castle Software of Marina Del Rey, Calif., is one of the first &quot;timed-release&quot; programs. The $80 software is designed to pop up messages on the screen of IBM-compatible personal computers to remind the user of appointments, telephone calls or tasks.    When used in a computer network, Forget-Me-Not can deliver messages at set times, reminding workers of deadlines, for instance. &quot;The idea is to turn your computer into an agent that does things for you whether you are there or not,&quot; says Cary Harwin, Sterling president. </TEXT></DOC>