<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880516-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Split Personality: Secret-Police Chief In Nicaragua Claims Democratic Impulses --- But Tomas Borge Has a Past To Live Down and Lacks Credibility With Contras --- A Sandinista J. Edgar Hoover </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Allen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> MANAGUA, Nicaragua  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Tomas Borge Martinez, a Marxist former guerrilla and, these days, the head of the most effective secret-police force in Central America, talks about the Sandinista government's commitment to democracy.    &quot;Here, our pluralism isn't just to gain time, nor is it a smoke screen, but something real, straightforward, necessary,&quot; he says.    Then he relaxes his death grip on the fork he uses to stab the air and admits that in his role as democrat, &quot;I'm fighting against my own {Marxist-Leninist} orthodoxy.&quot;    As he and the revolution have matured, he says, he has come to realize the need for the forms of democracy -- for political diversity, for a free press.    Long accustomed to a stranglehold on power here, the regime has been under intense pressure to loosen up. That was true before the government's March 23 truce accord with the U.S.-backed Contra rebels, and it is true now. The 60-day cease-fire, which left the Contras with their guns, was one concession to that pressure. But, as Mr. Borge admits, he is conflicted; he used to say the rivers would have to flow backward before such a meeting with the Contras would take place.    Few people who know the nine &quot;comandantes&quot; who make all the important decisions here expect them to jeopardize the revolution that overthrew a 43-year right-wing dictatorship in 1979. On April 16, when the Contras tried to steer the talks to such fundamental issues as disentangling the party apparatus from the military, the Sandinistas balked.    &quot;The Sandinista Front is ready to negotiate and discuss and concede secondary things, but not the essentials,&quot; says Enrique Bolanos, a businessman and one of the regime's staunchest foes. As head of Cosep, the Superior Council of Private Enterprise, he wants an end to what is, in effect, a one-party state. That would mean a professional rather than party-run army, and a government bureaucracy that wasn't run almost exclusively by party cadres. He'd like to see a smaller army, an end to the draft, a constitutional amendment prohibiting a president's succeeding himself and an end to centralized economic planning and price controls.    Mr. Borge's career as a revolutionary illustrates why the Sandinistas are willing to go only so far in accommodating their opponents. At 57, he is the only survivor of the small group of students who founded the Sandinista Front for National Liberation (FSLN) in 1962. He is the keeper of the ideological flame and by far the government's most compelling orator. His official title is interior minister, and he is one of the most powerful men in the country, an amalgam of J. Edgar Hoover and William Casey.    The nine-month-old Central American peace plan, which gave rise to recent talks with the Contras, has made Mr. Borge's job keeping order much tougher: Nicaraguans have become more vocal in their complaints against the government -- and more prone to demonstrate -- because they realize the Sandinistas are reluctant to bear the international political costs of a crackdown. However, a high-ranking official and two government advisers say Mr. Borge has been persuaded by his colleagues to drop his initial opposition to the plan; he now feels it is the best chance for peace.    This sort of tactical retreat has been a trademark of the Sandinistas since the late 1970s, when the struggling guerrillas realized they couldn't win without enlisting the support of business and political leaders who, though conservative, also wanted to bring down dictator Anastasio Somoza. With the advent of that coalition came promises of a democratic government, not a Cuban-style revolutionary regime. But the promises, critics say, were quickly broken. What resulted was a government led by the few but dressed in the garb of Western democracy, with an elected president and national assembly.    Of all the Sandinista leaders, Mr. Borge may best exemplify the movement's two faces. He oversees the persecution of political opponents, yet he seems truly to think of himself as a champion of human rights. And, by the standards of most revolutions, the state-sponsored bloodshed in Nicaragua has been minimal. He says that he once was a doctrinaire Marxist-Leninist, but that the trials of running this beleaguered country have taught him flexibility. The man is also a radical poet whose best-known work (the lyrics to the Sandinista anthem) excoriates Americans as the &quot;enemy of humanity,&quot; but he enjoys hobnobbing with U.S. diplomats.    When, at a diplomatic reception some months ago, the interior minister discovered a prominent West German leftist chatting with U.S. Ambassador Harry Bergold, Mr. Borge asked the German: &quot;Don't you realize you're sitting face to face with American Imperialism?&quot;    But when the German explained that Mr. Bergold was a good friend, Mr. Borge replied, &quot;He's a good friend of mine, too, but if you ever tell anyone I said that, I'll deny it.&quot;    There is little in his early years that would suggest he's happy with such compromises, or compromises of any sort. The illegitimate son of a market vendor and a man who sold books, he resisted his mother's advice to study for the priesthood; instead, at the age of 13 he began organizing schoolmates against Gen. Anastasio Somoza Garcia, Nicaragua's U.S.-backed dictator of the day, the father of the Anastasio Somoza overthrown by the Sandinistas. At law school, national guardsmen once scattered Mr. Borge's student audience while he was giving a political speech, says a friend who later served time in prison with Mr. Borge. But Mr. Borge refused to yield the microphone -- or to stop talking -- even as the soldiers beat him to the ground.    A videotape produced by the interior ministry recounts the tortures he subsequently suffered in prison during the regime of the younger Mr. Somoza. Mr. Borge was incarcerated in 1974, charged with the shooting death of a national guard officer. He says the experience left him &quot;crucified with scars.&quot;    But after the Sandinistas took over Nicaragua, Mr. Borge took pains to appear conciliatory. An oft-repeated anecdote, later set to music by a revolutionary balladeer, has Mr. Borge soothing his frightened former torturers with the words, &quot;My revenge will be to pardon you.&quot; By some disputed accounts, pardon in this case meant that the men weren't executed, merely locked up.    He has taken other steps, too, designed to mollify his people. Though he freely admits he's an atheist, Mr. Borge decorated a wall of his office with crucifixes, and he laces his speeches to this overwhelmingly Catholic country with biblical quotations.    Not long ago, he swept into a party at the Uruguayan ambassador's with his entourage of bodyguards, only to find himself face to face with businessman Bolanos and Ramiro Gurdian, who heads the cattleraisers' union. He, too, is a prominent conservative opponent of the government. Guests watched breathlessly as the interior minister listened patiently to a lecture on the virtues of private enterprise -- then offered them both jobs in state-owned companies. &quot;It would be good if the revolution had some Bolanoses,&quot; he said.    For Paul Reichler, a Washington attorney who represents the Nicaraguan government in the U.S., such gestures prove a point about Mr. Borge: &quot;He's not the dogmatic, doctrinaire, inflexible man that myth has made him.&quot;    But to opponents of the regime -- including some who have worked with Mr. Borge -- all this is just theater, acted to perfection by a man who, during his days as a fugitive, once disguised a guerrilla squad as a baseball team to outwit pursuers. &quot;He's full of talk about children and flowers and birds,&quot; says Leonel Poveda, a onetime Sandinista ally now living in exile. &quot;But he has an unbounded desire for power that has become a psychosis.&quot;    Some of Mr. Borge's touches at &quot;The Ministry,&quot; as it is known here, have an Orwellian flavor to them. Designed by Cuban and Soviet-bloc secret police, his state security apparatus is considered the best in the region. He commands thousands of special-forces troops, whose activities remain largely a mystery. Human rights groups aren't allowed to check on inmates in state-security detainees because, Mr. Borge has explained, doing so might interfere with the &quot;psychological link&quot; between prisoners and interrogators.    Gilberto Cuadra is one of a dozen civilian opposition leaders who were detained recently for questioning. Mr. Cuadra, who had met with Contra officials during a visit to Guatemala, says a high-ranking Sandinista warned him, &quot;'The democracies of Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador don't have political prisoners because they make them disappear, and if that's the kind of democracy you want for Nicaragua, then that's what we'll give you.'&quot; Mr. Borge says he had reason to arrest the group because one of its members is a Sandinista informant. And yet, the Borge quotation that adorns the entrance to his headquarters in a modern office building reads: &quot;Sentinel of the Peoples' Happiness.&quot;    Political trickery seems to be an important part of Mr. Borge's portfolio; at least that is often alleged. In 1982, when relations with the Catholic Church were at a low ebb, an aide to Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo, Bismarck Carballo, was chased naked from the house of a female parishioner in view of waiting state television cameras, in what even some Sandinistas concede was an interior-ministry trap to humiliate the church.    With presidential elections scheduled for 1990 (the first in six years), opposition parties worry about interference from the interior minister. Even in day-to-day activities, Mr. Borge sometimes appears disingenuous. And when questioned in an interview about well-known allegations that he controls &quot;Heroes and Martyrs Corp.,&quot; a profitable business that imports luxury goods, Mr. Borge at first says he doesn't recognize the company's name, though its president, an interior-ministry captain named Paul Atha, is a close associate of his. Mr. Borge later concedes he knows about the company, but says it reports to the finance ministry.    An engaging conversationalist in Spanish, Mr. Borge moves nimbly from literary chitchat about the late Argentine novelist Julio Cortazar, who was a friend, to Mikhail Gorbachev's &quot;perestroika.&quot; But traces of his hard life remain. He appears somewhat absent-minded and frequently turns to his retinue, which includes many attentive young women, for help with the names of the characters populating his anecdotes.    For all his erudition, Mr. Borge sometimes seems ill at ease in company. &quot;He's not really a social guy,&quot; says one diplomat, who winces at Mr. Borge's table manners. &quot;It reminds you that these guys spent a lot of time in the mountains eating monkeys and snakes, and they never quite got over it.&quot;    Whether the Sandinistas can get over their great disdain for competing ideologies, particularly those of the right, remains to be seen. Their zeal for the Revolution (always spelled here with a capital &quot;R&quot;) has a religious intensity, and there are many who doubt they would relinquish power even if defeated in an election. Despite the recent talks with the Contras, civilian opponents are still nursing bruises from clashes with rock-throwing &quot;turbas divinas,&quot; or &quot;divine mobs,&quot; that the government sends out when threatened.    Mr. Borge, particularly, seems to have a hard time taking opponents seriously. Citing secret interior-ministry polls, he insists the Sandinistas are more popular now than they were during the 1984 elections, when they polled 62%. Few political analysts independent of the government would buy those numbers, given the country's economic collapse and war-weariness.    Mr. Borge ridicules anti-government marchers and muses about establishing a &quot;museum of political parties&quot; to show future generations what some of the more-conservative groups were like, since he expects them to wither under the forces of history. But, he says, &quot;I don't think it's possible that class war will disappear in this country.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>