<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871210-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Crude-Oil Prices Close Sharply HigherIn Volatile, Record-Setting Trading---By William PowerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   U.S. crude-oil prices spiraled to eight-month lows before turning around to close sharply higher in volatile, record-setting trading.    On a day when world oil markets gyrated to news and rumors from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries meeting in Vienna, the New York market was particularly frenetic. January-delivery crude prices opened lower and sank to $17.78 a barrel before suddenly rallying, to close at $18.55, up 47 cents.    &quot;This is crazy. These are the kinds of days we really look forward to,&quot; shouted Eric T. Bolling, a Geldermann Inc. vice president, on the floor of the New York Mercantile Exchange.    Prices might move even higher. Late yesterday, there was word from an oil analyst in Vienna that OPEC might come up with a price-supporting agreement, despite weeks of acrimony.    Heating oil for January delivery closed at 54.82 cents a gallon, up 0.75 cent; unleaded gasoline gained 0.25 cent to close at 46.74 cents a gallon.    The estimated 127,440 crude-oil contracts traded on the New York Merc broke the previous record set in October; the total 199,363 futures and options contracts traded was the most in the 115-year history of the exchange, a spokeswoman said.    Richard D. Donovan, head of E.F. Hutton andamp; Co.'s international-energy department, said that after prices fell in the morning, the market &quot;exploded in a short-covering rally.&quot; Short covering refers to traders buying contracts to offset earlier sales. Refiners and other oil companies bought heavily when prices dropped well below $18, traders said.    Although price-depressing inventory statistics helped the market start out lower yesterday morning and technical factors helped it recover, Mr. Donovan said the moves were exaggerated. Any time there's an OPEC meeting, &quot;volatility increases, anxiety increases and the swings become bigger,&quot; he said.    On the spot, or noncontract, market, prices for the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude gained 45 cents, to $18.55.    Nauman Barakat, a Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. analyst, said by telephone from Vienna that he believes there is a good chance the 13 oil ministers might, in a compromise, appease the price and production demands of Iran and Iraq by increasing OPEC's official price $1 a barrel, to $19, while allowing Iraq to substantially increase production, to just below that of Iran. (Iran has vowed that it wouldn't accept Iraq having an equal production quota.)    Analysts attending the Vienna session said there is recognition, especially by Iran, that the oil-producing countries must cooperate to stem plunging prices.    &quot;It seems like there is a total change in the mood the last couple of hours, from tremendous pessimism to optimism,&quot; Mr. Barakat said. He noted that Iran's threat that it would double its own production if an accord isn't reached reflected its recognition that OPEC has a problem that has to be addressed.    &quot;I think people have taken the Iranians very seriously, that if they don't get some sort of concessions, they are willing to sink the ship along with everybody else in it,&quot; Mr. Barakat said.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Futures prices of cattle contracts for April and June delivery jumped on growing speculation that the flood of young cattle onto the nation's feed lots is beginning to reverse itself. That will eventually lower the supply of cattle fattened for slaughter and boost cash prices. The rise in futures prices was sparked by anticipation of the U.S. Agriculture Department's November sevenstate feed-lot survey, due Tuesday. Thomas Morgan, president of Sterling Research Corp., Arlington Heights, Ill., said he expects the survey to say the number of cattle put on feed lots in November dropped 15% from November 1986, for the smallest number of cattle placed on feed since 1974. A drop would follow several months of big jumps in new cattle put on feed. William J. Arndt, a livestock analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago, said he expects the department to report an 8% to 10% drop. Although a decline in cattle placements has been anticipated, the estimates are higher than expected. Feed-lot operators are cutting back because of rising costs. They've bid up the price of available feeder cattle while feedcorn prices have begun to rise. At the same time, growing pork and poultry production is putting price pressure on beef at the supermarket. What's more, the drop in cattle futures after the Oct. 19 stock-market crash prevented feed-lot operators from selling April contracts to lock in a profit on young cattle coming onto feed lots now for slaughter next spring. Analysts expect the price of April and June contracts to gain on the December and February contracts. The near-term contracts will continue to be depressed by the large number of cattle that were put onto feed lots in the fall.    COPPER: Futures prices fell even though fundamentals remained as bullish as ever. &quot;Don't read too much into today's market,&quot; one analyst said. &quot;Every bull market pauses for breath now and then, and when it does, there is a tendency for some traders to sell it, even though nothing has changed.&quot; March-delivery copper ended 2.2 cents a pound lower at $1.039, just above the day's low. Supplies in New York Commodity Exchange warehouses fell 799 tons from Monday to 28,000 tons. For the moment, the market has moved about as much as it's going to on tight-supply news, said another analyst. &quot;It lacks fresh fundamentals to trigger strong advances. As a result, trading has become light and a single trade can cause a sharp move. That was the case on the close, when some selling appeared and there was almost no one to buy, so prices broke.&quot;    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices soared on waves of buy orders thoughout the session, traders said. Arbitrage-related trading between stocks and stock-index futures added to the advance, but weren't a dominant factor. The stock market also moved sharply higher. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 34.15 to close at 1,902.52, after being about 45 points higher at midday. Fueling the rally in stocks and stock-index futures in part was continued optimism among traders and investors over the nuclear-arms-reduction pact signed Tuesday by President Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, traders said. The pact may allow the U.S. to gradually reduce defense spending and to make larger cuts in the federal budget deficit than had been projected by a joint White House-Congress committee a few weeks ago, traders said. The bellwether Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures for December settlement was 239.65, up five points. December Major Market index futures jumped 8.75 to 389.30. </TEXT></DOC>