<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0012 </DOCNO><HL> In the Spotlight:Rash of InvestigationsIs Damaging ImageOf Northrop Corp.---Congress, Air Force ExamineKey Corporate Projects;Missing Classified Papers---Has Growth Come Too Fast?---By Eileen WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NOCAEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> HAWTHORNE, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Usually stolid, Thomas V. Jones seemed to gloat at last month's annual meeting of Northrop Corp. as he read rosy projections from financial analysts' reports.    The 67-year-old chairman and chief executive officer apparently had good reason for his excitement. He had almost singlehandedly turned Northrop from a medium-sized defense subcontractor into one of the nation's top aerospace concerns. He did that by taking some tremendous risks and by hewing to a corporate creed of always being on time and never exceeding costs on government contracts.    But even as some of Mr. Jones's lieutenants were giving shareholders reports extolling Northrop's work on the &quot;key guidance element&quot; of the MX intercontinental ballistic missile, other Northrop executives a few blocks away at the company's electronics division were getting into a shouting match with congressional investigators. A few Northrop employees had shown the investigators 80 boxes of MX project parts that they had retrieved from dumpsters -- part of between 20,000 and 30,000 apparently excess parts paid for by the Air Force that the employees claim Northrop threw out.    Along with those parts went at least some of Northrop's carefully nurtured image as the good-guy maverick of the defense establishment. &quot;To ask about Northrop in government circles these days is like poking around in a haystack,&quot; says one Justice Department attorney. &quot;There isn't just one Northrop matter&quot; under investigation, the attorney explains.    Many in the defense industry are beginning to wonder what is going on at a company that has long prided itself on producing products of superior quality, a company whose chief executive has long uttered statements such as, &quot;We have an almost religious adherence to schedule.&quot;    Northrop's problems, some say, stem from a failure to manage rapid growth carefully. The company's sales have doubled in the past five years and are expected by analysts to double again in the next five years. A related factor, they add, is the 27-year, iron-glove rule by Mr. Jones, a crackerjack, globe-trotting salesman who leaves the technology and details to others.    Northrop executives play down current problems and say that in the long run only the bottom-line performance of its products will count. &quot;We have both the fortune and misfortune to be {well} positioned on the critical programs,&quot; says Kent Kresa, Northrop's president. &quot;They're the ones that take the heat.&quot; Northrop executives may take some comfort from the fact that the company emerged from a foreign-payoff and illegal-campaign-contribution scandal in the mid-1970s with hardly a scratch.    But the problems of a decade ago didn't involve the core of Northrop's business. The current rash of investigations and charges does. Some recent developments:    --On Thursday, present and former Northrop employees took the discarded MX parts and their story to a federal grand jury in Los Angeles. The grand jury is also thought to be looking into results of some of seven separate Air Force investigations of Northrop, including Pentagon audits noting up to $14 million in labor-cost mischarging and the falsification of test results on critical MX parts.    --Earlier last week, a General Accounting Office report said Northrop couldn't account for 780 classified documents relating to the program that is its crown jewel: the secret Stealth, or advanced technology, bomber, which analysts estimate now made up half of Northrop's 1986 annual sales of $5.6 billion and employs about one-third of its 47,000 workers.    --Industrywide rumors of cost overruns swirl around the Stealth project, and Northrop has written off $214 million in costs associated with it. The growth in costs for the bombers has led the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee to introduce legislation aimed at opening the $36.6 billion project to competition.    --Late deliveries on electronic jamming equipment for the B-1 bomber have kept Northrop, a subcontractor, from collecting $1.4 million in withheld contract payments. Electronics on the bomber are months behind schedule, and the Air Force is holding 15% of contractors' monthly payments.    --The Navy discovered a design flaw in the bulkhead of its F-18 fighter. Northrop, which makes the bulkhead as a subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas Corp., made $500,000 of repairs at its own expense.    --A federal grand jury in Macon, Ga., is looking into allegations that three Northrop employees fraudulently billed the Air Force under an aircraft-electronics contract.    Despite these problems and the fact that they were surprised by last week's second unexpected write-off on the Stealth, most industry analysts continue to refer to Northrop as the &quot;best positioned&quot; defense contractor for the next decade. The company has the Stealth bomber contract all to itself -- at least for now -- and is in the lead position on teams competing for the Air Force's advanced tactical fighter and the Navy's classified advanced tactical-aircraft projects, which are budgeted at $35 billion each.    &quot;To go from selling Tinkertoys to sheiks to being the premier technology company in the industry is not an easy thing to do,&quot; says David Smith, an aerospace-industry analyst with Alex. Brown andamp; Sons Inc. in Baltimore. And although most of Northrop's recent problems have cropped up in electronics, that is an area where the company also has become one of the nation's largest suppliers. Paul Nisbet, an aerospace analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities in New York, estimates that Northop will have $550 million in revenue this year from electronic &quot;countermeasures&quot; equipment such as aircraft jammers.    But some wonder whether Northrop can maintain cruising speed if the big-budget aircraft programs are shifted into low gear after the 1988 elections. Greater reliance on risky projects is already creating volatile earnings. Last week, analysts sharply cut their estimates for this year after Northrop said a $124 million write-off on the Stealth bomber would result in a loss for the second quarter.    Despite analysts' long-term optimism about Northrop, the company's stock hasn't been a spectacular performer. It has dropped about 17% in the last three months, buffeted by negative publicity, and closed Friday in New York Stock Exchange Composite trading at $41.375, down 12 1/2 cents. The stock is off about $15 from its high-water mark in the last five years. And it is nearly 14% below its high for the past 12 months, compared to about a 5% drop in the stock of other aerospace manufacturers.    Northrop's 1986 earnings fell 81% from the year earlier, largely because of write-offs on the bomber and a terminated project; a separate $25 million charge related to development of a classified Navy missile.    Admirers of Mr. Jones's style praise his risk-taking maneuvers. David N. Ferguson, a group vice president, says Mr. Jones allowed him to build a $52 million electronics facility a year before Northrop had a contract that guaranteed recovery of its investment.    Mr. Jones also bucks the rest of the industry by having Northrop employ nonunion labor and own most of its manufacturing facilities, rather than lease them from the government.    The executive's tough-it-out image extends to his own behavior as well. Mr. Jones pleaded guilty to a felony count in 1974 for falsifying documents and lying to a grand jury and the FBI over illegal contributions to the Nixon campaign. A year later, Northrop, without admitting or denying guilt, settled with a consent decree a Securities and Exchange Commission suit charging that the company failed to disclose its slush fund for unlawful political contributions. Later, the company's own executive committee of directors saddled Mr. Jones with &quot;a heavy share of the responsibility&quot; for undertaking about $2 million in corporate foreign payoffs and accused him of not cooperating fully with the company's internal investigation.    While similar scandals at the time forced resignations of top executives at other companies such as Lockheed Corp., Mr. Jones settled a civil suit by agreeing to relinquish his title of president. He was also briefly relieved of the chairmanship but always kept his chief-executive post. Simply put, Mr. Jones was too important to sacrifice for good corporate image, said a director at the time.    But despite directors' confidence, some of Mr. Jones's bets haven't paid off. Northrop's self-financed F-20 Tigershark jet fighter cost the company about $1.2 billion but didn't bring in a single sale. Northrop began work on the F-20 project in the late 1970s. It was counting on foreign sales of the jet -- at about $15 million each -- to be its bread-and-butter program for the next several years while it poured research and development money into new aircraft projects. The timing could have been brilliant, because sales of other products the company has relied on -- including the F-18 bulkhead, the fuselage of Boeing Co.'s 747 commercial jetliner, and Northrop's stalwart F-5 fighter jet -- are slowing down.    Mr. Jones finally threw in the towel on the F-20 last year, after his struggle to sell the plane declined from cockiness in the early 1980s to near desperation. The decision also came after two of the three F-20 test models crashed.    Verne Orr, former Secretary of the Air Force and a fan of the F-20, recalls that in a competition to sell a few planes to the Navy in 1984, Northrop flatly refused to drop its price after General Dynamics Corp. came in with a much lower bid for its F-16 fighter. &quot;Mr. Jones held the price of the plane as if it had been in a Sears catalog,&quot; ultimately losing the competition, Mr. Orr recalls.    Two years and many unsuccessful sales pitches later, Mr. Jones made a final proposal to sell the F-20 to the Air Force -- even though the plane was meant for the less-demanding export market. Again, he was foiled by General Dynamics underbidding him. &quot;I think he could have recognized earlier that too many cards were stacked against him,&quot; says Mr. Orr.    In an interview in his antique-filled penthouse office overlooking Beverly Hills, Mr. Jones says he &quot;felt bad about the F-20 for about a week,&quot; then forgot about it. With Northrop's future looking so bright, he says, &quot;How can you possibly be moping about the F-20?&quot;    Northrop directors decline to talk about the F-20 decision, but a source close to the board says its members &quot;would have been content to let {the F-20} die&quot; but for Mr. Jones's &quot;dominance.&quot; Others insist the board believed in Mr. Jones's vision. Whoever is right, the Northrop board has obviously gone out of its way to hold on to Mr. Jones.    For instance, following the scandals of the mid-1970s, Mr. Jones promised to pay the board for part of the $1 million in legal and other costs of the various scandals. But generous directors deemed his share to be only $50,000, and it gave him a loan with an interest rate below the prime rate to pay it back. &quot;He was a devoted corporate manager who had developed a good company,&quot; recalls board member O. Meredith Wilson, a retired Stanford University professor.    There are some recent signs that Mr. Jones recognizes that Northrop may need some more managerial control at the top. Last year Northrop named as president Mr. Kresa, a 48-year-old engineer who oversaw the Stealth bomber development and who had become executive vice president in charge of technology development and planning. The former president, 65-year-old Frank Lynch, became vice chairman and now devotes most of his time to overseeing a management team assembled to fix the MX problems.    And where does the buck stop? Says Mr. Jones: &quot;I'm the CEO without any doubt.&quot; That, he adds, gives him &quot;ultimate responsibility.&quot;    However, just as a decade ago when he would only say of the payoff scandals, &quot;I wish the whole thing had never happened,&quot; Mr. Jones declines to offer any mea culpas for Northrop's current problems.    Although &quot;the detailed management of the administrative side {of the MX program} wasn't up to our standards,&quot; Mr. Jones says, the Air Force &quot;tends to criticize the detail of your management, without considering the hardware.&quot; The MX guidance equipment, he says, performed well in 17 Air Force tests. &quot;Forget all the rest. . . . It's the hardware that counts.&quot;    But that attitude apparently wasn't communicated to the Northrop division charged with building the inertial measurement unit (IMU), or &quot;brain,&quot; of the 10-warhead MX missile, said to be the backbone of the nation's strategic defense. The project is about $55 million over budget, deliveries are four months behind schedule, and the Air Force is withholding $25 million a month in contract payments from Northrop.    For assembly and test of the more than 19,401 parts that form each IMU, &quot;Northrop has designed and built the largest 'Class 100' clean room in the western United States,&quot; crows a report by the company's public-relations department. The room has &quot;an air circulation system comparable to the cleanest hospital operating room, virtually eliminating any possibility of contamination.&quot;    But Michael A. Hyatt, a former Northrop specialist in microelectronic engineering, has another story, which he has told to, among others, congressional investigators and congressmen on Capitol Hill and which now is the basis of a lawsuit he has filed against Northrop in a Los Angeles federal court. Mr. Hyatt claims he was harassed by supervisors and ultimately fired for pointing out that sensitive hardware that was supposed to be kept in the &quot;clean room&quot; was instead left in desk or file drawers in contaminated condition. He also claims that &quot;defective&quot; hybrid microelectronic circuitry has found its way into the IMU.    In his suit, which was filed under the federal False Claims Act and which the U.S. attorney in Los Angeles is considering taking over, Mr. Hyatt claims that one supervisor made anti-Semitic remarks and once signed &quot;A. Hitler&quot; on a birthday card for Mr. Hyatt, allegedly a reference to Mr. Hyatt's relatives who died in the Holocaust.    Other employees of the MX division have also told tales against Northrop to congressional investigators, congressmen and others. Their statements include the claim that Northrop's acceptance in 1984 of a $339 million contract to begin production of the IMUs and related test equipment occurred a full year before the division's engineering-development department had perfected a production-ready design. Even after production began, engineers were making up to 1,200 engineering changes on test equipment per month, a former employee says.    The division's procurement office, already behind on ordering and testing parts, was unable to keep up with demand for new parts required by engineering changes, the employees claim. Northrop managers, they say, set aside as much as $2 million in petty cash and created seven outside companies to procure parts, bypassing the inspection and testing procedures required when Northrop's own procurement office bought parts.    Perhaps the most disturbing of employee allegations, however, is the claim by David Peterson, the former manager of ground-systems support for the MX, that Northrop threw out up to 30,000 test-equipment parts in unprotected dumpsters. Mr. Peterson made that and other allegations to Air Force investigators and to the grand jury. An investigator with the Air Force Office of Special Investigations says the agency is concentrating on &quot;the 'big one.' Who gave the order to throw away the parts? Who directed this operation?&quot;    Mr. Peterson retrieved 80 boxes of the parts last year, quietly resigned from the company for personal reasons and took the parts to his attorney, Herbert Hafif of Claremont, Calif., where they remained until Mr. Peterson turned them over to the grand jury Thursday. &quot;Northrop is trying to portray this as an accounting screw-up,&quot; says Robert Kilborne, an attorney working with Mr. Hafif, as he holds up a computer card marked &quot;property of U.S. Air Force&quot; that was retrieved by Mr. Peterson.    Northrop has admitted setting up an outside company to buy parts but says it did so within Defense Department regulations. An internal investigation is looking into the other claims. A Northrop spokesman says it found no evidence of harassment by the supervisor named in the suit, and he remains on the job.    Northrop says it has shifted into high gear to correct any problems. It has moved a group vice president from the company's Los Angeles headquarters to Hawthorne plant tyo oversee the IMU program, and he has culled senior electronics executives from units throughout the country. Northrop is repairing IMU problems under a contract warranty provision. Several employees have been fired or demoted, although Northrop won't identify them or say how many.    But Northrop executives steadfastly maintain that, contrary to its employees' assertions, its MX equipment isn't faulty and won't damage the nation's strategic readiness. &quot;There may have been some errors in judgment,&quot; Mr. Kresa says. &quot;There could be some fraud. I don't know, but we're going to find that out.&quot;    The Air Force has found a second source for the MX equipment. Rockwell International Corp. last week received a $165.4 million contract to develop IMUs. Rockwell is also ready to put its B-1 bomber plant to work making Stealth bombers if Northrop is forced to share its sole-source contract.    Meanwhile, the swirl of allegations surrounding Northrop has raised questions about the military's candor in dealing with Capitol Hill. An Air Force audit identified &quot;serious system deficiencies&quot; at Northrop's MX plant in August 1985, and a subsequent audit found a &quot;massive loss&quot; of parts six months later. But the Air Force didn't disclose the problems to Congress and, indeed, made upbeat presentations about the MX program during the past two years, congressional aides say. The Air Force even gave Northrop a &quot;contractor productivity award&quot; for reducing labor costs on the MX program in 1985.    &quot;The Air Force has been less than frank quite a few times about how the programs they're overseeing are coming along,&quot; says Democratic Rep. Les Aspin of Wisconsin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. &quot;If they came clean about problems earlier in the process, we'd be a lot less likely to have a mess like the MX on our hands now.&quot;    ---   Northrop Corp.   1986 (Year ended Dec. 31)   Sales:   $5.6 billion   Net income:   $41.2 million   Employees:   46,800 1986 orders .......... $5.16 billion Total backlog ........ $4.17 billion Capital expenditures   $364.2 million Research and development .......... $378.3 million</TEXT></DOC>