<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0021 </DOCNO><HL> Delays Snag Illegal Workers' Amnesty Bid---Near-Riot RevealsImmigrants' Deadline Panic---By Dianna Solis and Tony CantuStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Processing and documentation problems are causing frustration and some outright panic among thousands of illegal immigrants seeking legal residency, as a deadline approaches for getting authorization to work legally in the U.S.    Faced with firings on Sept. 1 unless their amnesty applications have been submitted, resulting in their getting an employment authorization card, many illegal workers continue to experience snags and delays in documenting their continuous residency. They are seeking to prove that they have been in the U.S. since Jan. 1, 1982.    Employers, too, are worrying over whether their illegal workers will succeed in obtaining the necessary work authorization before the deadline.    &quot;Employers are hysterically panicking,&quot; says the Rev. Jaime Soto of Orange County Catholic Charities in Santa Ana, Calif. The logistical delays raised by the deadline, he says, have put workers and bosses alike &quot;into a vise.&quot;    The frustration among workers erupted here Tuesday when a near-riot broke out among several hundred illegals waiting at an amnesty-application center operated by the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service. With the processing center filled to capacity, INS officials told others -- some having spent all night waiting -- to go home.    When the doors were closed, locked-out applicants pounded on windows and doors until the INS's district director climbed atop a trash dumpster and calmed the crowd by shouting through a bullhorn, promising to receive all applications this week. By yesterday, the center had recruited three additional clerks and had lined up even more.    Processing centers in other cities haven't experienced such onslaughts. In Houston, extensive public-education programs by the INS, the Mexican consulate and other groups have drawn illegals' attention to the importance of applying by Sept. 1.    But everywhere, the pressure to become legal is mounting. &quot;This is really a unique situation, because it's the first time since Ellis Island that so many people want to participate in an immigration program,&quot; says Richard Rios, INS legalization director here, as he sits by a foot-high Statue of Liberty glued to the information desk.    The application pressure is imposed by the INS's rule that employers must verify their workers' legal status by Sept. 1 on what is known as an INS I-9 form. Employers don't have to verify the legal status of workers hired before President Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act on Nov. 6, 1986.    The INS is expected very soon to begin issuing citations to employers who have knowingly hired illegals who don't meet residency and other requirements for amnesty.    Spurred by the rapidly approaching Sept. 1 deadline for employers, five members of the House immigration subcommittee have urged INS Commissioner Alan Nelson to extend the Sept. 1 deadline to allow workers preparing to apply for legalization to continue working. But the INS hasn't responded to the letter yet, and an INS spokesman says there is &quot;no indication&quot; that an extension will occur.    This week's trouble in Houston, which has the nation's seventh-largest illegal population, occurred even though the amnesty center is one of the nation's most efficient. Nationwide, about 500,000 illegals have applied for legalization as of this week. At that rate, about two million immigrants would become legalized by the amnesty-application cutoff date of May 4, 1988. The INS has estimated that 1.9 million to 3.9 million people would apply.    Some illegals here have repeatedly tried to submit their applications -- a process that requires a face-to-face meeting with an INS counselor -- but to no avail. Twenty-six-year-old Atilario Sifuentes Castillo of San Luis Potosi, Mexico, has visited the Houston center five times in the last two weeks, sometimes missing work at the maintenance plant where he works, but has been unable to submit his paperwork.    Rafael Valencia, 22, fears his $5.50-an-hour construction job is at stake unless he gets his application in by Sept. 1. &quot;I'm making $5.50 an hour (in Houston); in Mexico I was making 7,000 pesos (about $5) a week.&quot; Yesterday he took his place in line at midnight.    Sept. 1 isn't just a deadline for illegals intending to live in the U.S. Foreign workers seeking legal residency in order to commute to the U.S. face the same deadline -- and their employers the same concern.    Jogbra Inc., a sports-undergarment manufacturer in Burlington, Vt., has been desperately trying to get an application submitted on behalf of Helene Baccichet, a noted Canadian designer whom the company wants to be able to travel freely to the U.S., but so far the INS has rejected the application.    Employers are playing a crucial role in assisting illegal employees with their amnesty claims, but for some workers the employers have been far from cooperative. Some employers that paid workers in cash -- and are now fearful of drawing scrutiny from the Internal Revenue Service -- are expressing reluctance to provide documentation showing that workers meet the residency requirements for amnesty, immigrants and leaders of immigrant-rights groups say. The new law stipulates that the INS will keep all such information confidential.    In addition, some employers face huge logistical problems in assisting workers' applications. Irvine, Calif.-based Murai Farms Inc. says it is providing free-of-charge residency verification for &quot;thousands&quot; of current farm workers, who can qualify for a more liberal amnesty program than other immigrant workers.    But providing such records for former workers -- many of whom worked under aliases -- is so difficult that the company has farmed out the work to its accounting firm. The accountants, in turn, are charging fees to the illegals that some workers consider too steep.    &quot;They don't have the same names,&quot; says Paul Murai, vice president of the large-scale farming concern. &quot;They don't have the same Social Security numbers. It's just a nightmare.&quot;    The snags, and in some cases the steep costs, of obtaining verification documents have even moved some cities with large immigrant populations to urge cooperation by employers and local agencies.    In Chicago, for example, the city council passed a resolution in May urging such city departments as tax and water agencies to quickly supply qualifying immigrants with documents establishing U.S. residency. In Irvine this week, the city council passed a similar resolution directed at growers and factory owners. </TEXT></DOC>