<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880201-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: America Inches Toward China </HL><AUTHOR> Martin L. Lasater </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> BEIJING  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Four recent developments seem to be changing the character of Sino-American relations: (1) the decision by Taiwan's late President Chiang Ching-kuo to allow residents of Taiwan to visit their relatives on the mainland; (2) Beijing's sale of Silkworm anti-ship missiles to Iran, despite repeated U.S. protests; (3) the confirmation in the 13th Chinese Communist Party Congress of the ideological correctness of continued economic and political reforms in China, and (4) improved Soviet-American relations, symbolized by the INF treaty and Mikhail Gorbachev's successful visit to the U.S.    Together, these developments mean that future U.S. policy toward China likely will be less sensitive to the Taiwan issue, more cautious in arms sales and defense-technology transfers, and more economic than strategic in motivation. This signals a more &quot;normalized&quot; relationship between Washington and Beijing in which the U.S. will have fewer incentives to give the mainland &quot;special consideration&quot; on bilateral issues.    First, Taipei's new policy on visits to the mainland, announced just months before Mr. Chiang's death, is resulting in a major change of China's attitudes toward the Taiwan issue in Sino-American relations. Beijing interprets Taiwan's policy as a positive move toward eventual reunification, a continuing &quot;process&quot; now proceeding along acceptable lines. More than ever before, China believes this process is one controlled by the Chinese themselves, not by outside influences. The fear that Taiwan would drift toward independence with U.S. assistance has been dissipated to a large degree. As a result, China is demonstrating greater patience and flexibility toward Taipei and less hostility toward the U.S.    Beijing's more relaxed attitude on the Taiwan issue is a strong confirmation of the correctness of existing U.S. policy. Essentially, this policy has centered on three principles: (1) maintaining friendly ties with both Beijing and Taipei; (2) ensuring that Taiwan has a sufficiently strong self-defense capability to deter a Chinese military attack; (3) encouraging both Chinese sides to work out their differences peacefully between themselves without U.S. involvement. This policy should remain in effect even as the Taiwan issue becomes less of a disruptive factor in Sino-American relations. Mr. Chiang's death should not result in a change in this policy.    Second, China's sale of Silkworm missiles to Iran, despite repeated U.S. warnings that the missiles put at risk U.S. ships in the Persian Gulf, is damping Pentagon enthusiasm to help modernize Chinese weaponry through arms sales and transfer of advanced defense technology. To demonstrate the seriousness of the issue, Washington has held up the sale of previously approved U.S. equipment and technology to modernize China's F-8B interceptor.    Two things are significant about the Silkworm controversy. The disagreement has not damaged the overall relationship between Washington and Beijing. This attests to the fact that U.S.-China relations have matured to the point where even major issues can be handled through normal diplomatic channels without degenerating into crises. Also, although the overall relationship has not been damaged, military relations between the two countries have received a significant setback. It has become clear that as China's army modernizes and China expands its role in world affairs, the probability increases that U.S. and Chinese interests will collide. In the future, the U.S. will have to consider more carefully the extent to which it wants to help modernize China's military.    Third, the success of Deng Xiaoping and Zhao Ziyang in the 13th Party Congress to commit China to a course of continued economic and political reform is highly significant to Sino-American relations. Although the success of the reforms remains problematic, the adoption of the theory that China is in the &quot;primary stage of socialism&quot; means that Beijing has freed itself ideologically from the contradiction of having to adopt capitalist measures to improve productivity while at the same time claiming to be a socialist country.    For the foreseeable future, Beijing will place priority on the expansion of China's &quot;productive forces.&quot; This means that the economic aspects of Sino-American relations will increase in importance. Vast new opportunities for commercial cooperation thus exist, particularly if private U.S. business and academic sectors take advantage of China's open policy. It is in U.S. interests to encourage China's reforms, because they probably will lead to a more moderate regime in Beijing and an improved life style for the Chinese people.    Fourth, it is of significance to Sino-American relations that China does not view improved Soviet-American relations with much apprehension. For the first time, all sides of the triangular U.S.-U.S.S.R.-China relationship are characterized by improving relations. The much heralded &quot;China card&quot; has been removed from the table, and Washington's handling of Sino-American relations in the future will not be as determined by strategic considerations. This means that U.S. concessions to China on political and economic issues will be less frequent and that the relationship will be more reciprocal.    Washington and Beijing are able to improve relations with the Soviet Union, without threatening the other's strategic interests, because both countries have reached similar conclusions about glasnost: Mr. Gorbachev has not forsaken Soviet ambitions for world hegemony, but the economic crisis within the U.S.S.R. has forced him to rely more on political means rather than military might to achieve Soviet international objectives. As a result, the Soviet military threat has diminished somewhat, giving the U.S. and China an opportunity to reduce both their defense budgets and tensions with Moscow.    However, in this new international environment the policies pursued by the U.S. and China on regional issues such as Afghanistan and Cambodia have grown in importance. These policies are seen as indicators that Washington and Beijing have not altered their perceptions of ultimate Soviet intentions and that both countries intend to maintain parallel policies opposing Soviet hegemony. A major change in U.S. or Chinese policies on either of these regional issues would be viewed seriously by the other country as an indication of a possible shift in strategic policy. For its part, Washington should increase its support of Cambodia's non-communist resistance forces to match efforts taken by Beijing to assist the Khmer Rouge.    Overall and in view of the above developments, it would appear that economic aspects of Sino-American relations offer the greatest opportunities for the U.S. in the near future. The Taiwan issue has become less of a threat to U.S.-China relations, and the military/strategic dimensions of the relationship seem to have reached a plateau requiring no major initiative on the U.S.'s part -- save perhaps to give greater assistance to the Cambodian resistance. Politically, the relationship seems to have been normalized completely. The U.S. should welcome this new stage of Sino-American relations as one in which U.S. interests will be well served.    ---   Mr. Lasater is a Washington-based policy analyst specializing in Asia. </TEXT></DOC>