<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Asia's Industrial Waste Could Spell Profit for U.S. Firms---Makers of Cleanup Gear CapitalizingOn an Environmental Awakening---By Douglas R. SeaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST WMXENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><DATELINE> KAOHSIUNG, Taiwan  </DATELINE><TEXT>    For U.S. manufacturers ofwater-pollution control equipment, the Love River here mightbetter be named the Money River.   As it flows out of the hills of southern Taiwan, Love River picks up first the noxious effluents of the big steel mills and the chemical and cement plants clustered along its banks. Then comes the liquid wastes of this city of 1.3 million. Finally, the world's largest ship-breaking operation adds its own brew of sludge oil, asbestos insulation and toxic bottom paints to be carried into the South China Sea.    Like other newly industrialized countries, Taiwan has paid a heavy environmental price for its remarkable manufacturing successes and the Love River is but one example of the nation's pollution problems. But now Taiwan appears to be getting serious about cleaning up. Public demonstrations protesting pollution are on the rise. The Bureau of Environmental Protection was recently elevated to the status of a ministry and funding for pollution control is one of the fastest growing items in Taiwan's budget.    Estimates for cleaning up the Love River and disposing of hazardous wastes in Kaohsiung alone run into the hundreds of millions of dollars. And Taiwan is only the first among a dozen or so other Asian nations, including South Korea, Hong Kong, China, Malaysia, the Philippines and India, that experts expect to spend heavily over the next decade to clean up their environments.    American companies, using techniques and equipment developed over the past 20 years in U.S. cleanup efforts, expect to win a big chunk of that Asian business. Indeed, for many of these companies the Asian market may well fill a gap left by a waning interest in strict environmental controls in the U.S. Successes abroad also could narrow the nation's gaping trade deficit as millions of dollars of equipment -- from big electrostatic precipitators and hazardous-waste incinerators to delicate and sensitive monitoring instruments -- are shipped abroad from U.S. factories.    &quot;This is something we're good at,&quot; says Richard Ellis, president of Advanced Waste Management Systems Inc., an environmental consulting firm with contracts in Asia. &quot;There isn't any reason Americans can't win a big part of the contracts coming out of the region if they just try for them.&quot;    American executives with experience in Asia warn that while the market for equipment there looks promising, the pickings won't be easy. Competition from Japanese and European companies is expected to be fierce. Financing difficulties could crimp some ambitious cleanup plans in places like South Korea, which is heavily in debt. In addition, environmental projects tend to be long-term undertakings subject to many modifications before they are completed.    &quot;You may be looking at five years or more between the time a project is proposed and it's finally built,&quot; says Robert Byrne, manager of international development for Research-Cottrell Inc. &quot;You're not going to see someone going to Taiwan this summer and coming back with a significant amount of business. You've got to be patient.&quot;    Nonetheless, the market for pollution control and waste management in Asia is certain to be enormous. Environmental projects cover a broad range of services and hardware, from street sweeping contracts to complicated and costly incinerators that convert trash to electricity. Robert McIlvaine, a consultant in Northbrook, Ill., estimates that annual world-wide spending for air pollution gear alone will more than double to $13.6 billion by 1997, with more than half of that amount being spent outside the U.S. and Europe.    Waste management will be another big area as small, densely populated countries like Taiwan cope with ever increasing amounts of garbage. David Haines, manager of international sales for Westinghouse Corp.'s waste-to-energy incinerators, says Taiwan alone plans to build 23 such projects, each of which could cost more than $100 million, and Korea is talking about 15 plants. India's ambitious plans to spend as much as $15 billion to increase its electrical generating capacity over the next decade will include a big portion for air-pollution control equipment.    The expected burst of business from Asia can't come too soon. With a few exceptions, most environmental regulations have been met in the U.S. and the business isn't growing nearly as fast there as it once was.    &quot;In general, you'd have to say the international market is more active than the domestic market,&quot; says Jerome Schnee, president of Research-Cottrell's Engineering Products andamp; Systems Group, speaking about the U.S. &quot;We basically have taken care of the major requirements in this country and until some new thrust comes along, the market here will be flat.&quot;    U.S. companies are getting some help from Washington in their bid to break into the Asian environmental arena. The State Department's Trade Development Program has identified pollution control as a promising field for exports and has budgeted more than $2 million for seminars and feasibility studies in various countries, including $900,000 in Taiwan and $500,000 in both Thailand and Malaysia.    &quot;We started getting requests for help from Asian countries about a year ago and we're providing funds now to almost every government in Asia,&quot; says Jack Williamson, a regional director for the Trade Development Program. &quot;All these industrializing countries are interested in getting our experience and technology. They don't want to make the same environmental mistakes we did.&quot;    The pressing need for environmental cleanup in Taiwan, coupled with the country's lack of any substantial foreign debt, makes it likely that Taiwan will lead the way among industrializing countries in spending for pollution control and waste management. That's important because Taiwan is the country most likely to buy American equipment and services, and early successes there will help U.S. companies win contracts in other Asian nations.    &quot;In foreign markets, it's very important to show an international presence,&quot; says Fred Weinert, president of Waste Management Corp.'s international subsidiary. &quot;If you have international operations you can demonstrate to the governments that you're sophisticated in foreign markets and committed to the thing.&quot; Waste Management operates subsidiaries in Australia and New Zealand that it will use as examples in sales pitches to other Pacific Rim countries.    U.S. companies already have a foothold in Taiwan. Most of the country's electrical power plants, for instance, sport U.S.-made pollution control gear and American companies like Foster Wheeler Corp. have close relations with Taiwan Power, the state-owned electrical utility. Other companies, especially consultants and engineers, are actively pursuing contracts in Taiwan with the assistance of U.S. government grants.    Consultants and engineers play an especially important role in breaking into new markets. If they win contracts to identify and propose solutions for pollution problems, it's likely their solutions will be designed around American-made equipment, giving the U.S. manufacturers of that gear an edge in bidding against Japanese and European competitors.    U.S. companies also have other advantages in Taiwan. For one thing, the U.S. dollar's weakness will give American manufacturers a leg up in bidding against Japanese and European manufacturers. That's because the New Taiwan dollar is closely linked to the U.S. dollar and remains relatively weak against the Japanese yen and the major European currencies. But perhaps more importantly, U.S. manufacturers find they can play on Taiwan's fears that unless it does more to cut its $15.8 billion trade surplus with the U.S., an angry Congress may restrict Taiwan's access to the U.S. market.    &quot;The Japanese have good technologies and they're closer to Taiwan than we are,&quot; says Thomas James, president of Blount Energy Resources Corp., a unit of Blount Inc. &quot;But we have the ability to go in there and say 'remember this balance of trade thing.' At least it gets us to the table.&quot; Blount is bidding against Japanese competitors for a $50 million incinerator project to be built in Taipei, Taiwan's capital.    Other nations in Asia aren't standing still. Hong Kong, for instance, is expected to open for bidding later this year a refuse collection contract valued at between $30 million and $40 million. Waste Management, which intends to bid on the project, estimates that more than half of the contract's value would be for such equipment as trucks and compactors that Waste Management would buy in the U.S.    Asian governments increasingly are looking toward turning over such projects to private companies because there isn't sufficient local expertise in pollution control and because costs are lower. Mr. Ellis of Advanced Pollution Control Systems, for example, recently began discussions with a South Korean company aimed at establishing a $100 million centralized waste treatment facility in the Nak-dong Valley. The facility would be built with private funds and operated on a for-profit basis. The $100 million facility is a scaled-down version of a planned $300 million government operation that was too ambitious for the cash-strapped Korean government.    &quot;Korea is seriously concerned about its environmental problems, but it has a much higher debt than Taiwan and doesn't have the cash reserves,&quot; says Westinghouse's Mr. Haines.    The real question mark in Asia is China. Some U.S. executives suggest it could be the biggest market of all for pollution control and waste management equipment. Others aren't so enamored of China's potential. Research-Cottrell's Mr. Byrne says, &quot;We haven't pursued China because we've seen the amounts of time, effort and money that other companies have invested trying to do business there and we've seen how little they've gotten for it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>