<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   MCFARLANE SAID Israel gave him a list of more than 800 Iranian &quot;moderates.&quot;    The former national security adviser, in a closed-door session Monday of the House Foreign Affairs panel's hearings into the Iran-Contra initiative, said an Israeli official in 1985 gave him the list of senior Iranian officials, sources said. The list, which the Israeli said were Iranians eager to change U.S.-Iranian relations, included Tehran's speaker of Parliament.    Poindexter appeared yesterday before the same House panel, but &quot;regretfully&quot; declined to answer questions about the arms sales to Iran and diversion of profits to Nicaraguan rebels. Lt. Col. North, a Poindexter aide, also declined to testify. Meanwhile, retired Air Force Gen. Secord also invoked his Fifth Amendment right before the Senate Intelligence panel.    Justice Department aides continued talks with Swiss officials to gain access to records of two bank accounts suspected of being used in the operation.    ---   CHIRAC CANCELED plans to hold a special parliamentary session next month.    The move by the conservative French premier came in the face of widespread student protests over education legislation that critics said would increase tuition. Some legislative proposals -- including the tightening of rules on acquiring French citizenship and allowing prisons to be built and operated by private firms -- will be delayed until the regular April session because of Chirac's announcement.    A Paris volunteer group plans to act as a buffer between police and demonstrators to try to avert violence at a student-led protest march today.    ---   The Philippine government resolved a dispute with communist rebels, removing the final obstacle to a 60-day cease-fire that is to take effect today as a step toward ending a 17-year-old insurgency. Under the pact, armed guerrillas won't enter &quot;populated centers&quot; and soldiers won't confiscate rebel weapons during security patrols.    ---   About 1,000 Arab students protested Israel's closing of a university campus in the occupied West Bank, and Israeli troops wounded at least eight Arabs in clashes in the Gaza Strip. Four Palestinians have died and 26 were wounded in six days of unrest in the Israeli-held territories.    ---   Honduras deployed about 3,000 soldiers across a 30-mile stretch of its border with Nicaragua to prevent incursions by Sandinista troops. A military source in Tegucigalpa said remnants of the Nicaraguan force that crossed into Honduras over the weekend began withdrawing. Managua has denied conducting the raid.    ---   A two-year study found that almost one million teen-age girls become pregnant each year in the U.S., with about 470,000 giving birth and 400,000 obtaining abortions. The study, by the National Research Council, called for the &quot;diligent&quot; use of sex education and contraceptives.    ---   Canada protested a U.S. proposal to offer for sale some oil and gas leases in an area of the Beaufort Sea that is claimed by both Canada and the U.S. Ottawa's external affairs minister said a diplomatic note was sent to the State Department asking that the U.S. refrain from auctioning leases in the disputed area.    ---   President Mobutu of Zaire met with Reagan to discuss economic and security issues affecting central Africa. During the meeting, Reagan pledged that the U.S. will try to help Zaire win approval for extending payment on its multibillion-dollar debt.    ---   South Africa said a renewed crackdown on the media is being planned. Newspaper editors throughout the country said new publishing restrictions probably would be announced before Tuesday's planned start of a 10-day anti-apartheid campaign against the state of emergency imposed June 12.    ---   Zambia's official news agency reported that at least three people were killed in two days of riots in two copper-mining towns in the north-central part of the country. A dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed in the towns to quell the violence, which was prompted by a 120% rise in the price of cornmeal, one of Zambia's staple foods.    ---   Havana said a U.S. reconnaissance plane violated Cuban air space by flying the entire length of the island from west to east and then in the opposite direction. The Cuban government officially protested the violation to Washington. The Pentagon refused to confirm or deny the allegation.    ---   Soviet dissident Anatoly Marchenko died in prison, a friend of the writer's family said. It wasn't known when or from what causes Marchenko, 48, had died. The dissident, a member of the disbanded Helsinki Watch monitoring group, had spent more than 20 years in internal exile or in prison for &quot;anti-Soviet agitation.&quot;    ---   Moscow's envoy to Lebanon said the Soviet Union was trying to mediate a ceasefire in the fighting between Shiite Moslem militiamen and Palestinian guerrillas in Beirut and in southern Lebanon. At least 460 people have been killed in more than a month of fighting. Syria, Iran and Libya already have tried to arrange a truce.    ---   Authorities in Virginia said a water line ruptured and released hot water and steam at Virginia Power's Surry nuclear plant. Eight construction workers were injured, five of them critically burned. The accident didn't involve radioactive material.    ---   EC interior ministers adopted a paper identifying and analyzing the threat posed to the 12-nation bloc by terrorism. Greece refused to sign the Common Market document. Several of the ministers also met with Attorney General Meese to discuss U.S. policy on terrorist activities.    ---   An independent inquiry found evidence of &quot;minor tampering&quot; in the National Centers for Disease Control's AIDS research program, but said it didn't disrupt experiments. Morale problems and only moderate productivity in AIDS research also were reported, but the Institute of Medicine didn't find deliberate suppression of data.    ---   A U.S. appeals court upheld the right of Kiwanis International to revoke the license of a club that admitted women to membership in defiance of the organization's constitution. The appellate court in Philadelphia, reversing a court decision in New Jersey, said Kiwanis is a private group and isn't bound by the state's bias act. </TEXT></DOC>