<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0127 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> LATAMEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> MANAGUA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Young Rene, a few weeks short of his 18th birthday, was riding in an open truck with 24 companions last Sept. 14 when he had direct personal experience of the diversion to the contras of profits from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran. As the truck rattled along the road from Pantasma to Wiwili in northern Nicaragua, the truck hit a land mine.    Rene was blown more than 100 feet away from the road, and when he was found he was thought to be dead. He opened his eyes in a wagon carrying the bodies of four of his friends. One of his legs was amputated right away and the other shortly after his mother arrived following a two-day trip from Managua by bus.    Rene grew up in a very poor neighborhood in Managua called San Judas, and by last Christmas he was back there to recuperate after spending the previous three months in a hospital four miles north of Jinotega. Then, two weeks ago, he went to the Hospital de Rehabilitacion Alido Chavarria, which is where I saw him Monday.    Rene's legs end just about where he puts his hands in his trouser pockets. He's a few inches shorter than he used to be because the false limbs he is now perched on are designed to lower his center of gravity. On Monday he was doing well. In the previous two weeks he had graduated from beginners' stumps, low to the ground, through knee-high limbs, to his present eminence. Now he was strutting awkwardly through parallel bars to the applause of the physiotherapist, Rosa Olivares, who handles 40 patients a day.    As Rene clomped about, he crossed paths with Melba Campo, a woman in her late-30s trying out her new legs. Melba, mother of eight children ranging from four to 22 years of age, had been riding in a truck last September when she, too, had firsthand experience of the efforts of President Reagan, Lt. Col. Oliver North and others to outflank the Boland Amendment. The truck she was in drove into an ambush and a bullet went through her knee. Amputation followed soon after.    Watching Rene and Melba from the sidelines were four other Nicaraguans minus one or more of their limbs. They looked somewhat surreal since, resting after their exertions with the therapist Rosa, they had unstrapped their false legs and arms and held them casually, like soldiers at ease on the parade ground.    In fact, some of them were soldiers. Rene, for example, had been doing his two-year stint of militia duty, incumbent on all young Nicaraguans, when he was blown up. The truck Melba was in also had contained some militia people, which, in the bizarre value system of many North American observers of contra conduct, somehow makes it OK for Melba to be now less one leg as she looks after her ample family.    The rules of this particular game dictate that if Nicaraguans drive along the back roads unarmed, and not in the company of anyone who might protect them, they may die or be maimed at the hands of the contras, but they can at least be confident that in the eyes of caring North Americans their human rights were abused. Melba, on the other hand, made the fateful mistake of climbing into a truck with militiamen rather than setting off along the moonlit road, alone and on foot.    Francois Muller and Esteban Barahena, a Dutchman and a Guatemalan who run the only leg and arm factory in Nicaragua, at the Alida Chavarria Hospital, under the auspices of the Red Cross, are now working hard to train a permanent Nicaraguan staff to turn out prosthetic devices and make their country self-sufficient in this regard.    They are making good progress. A metal knee joint from the U.S. used to cost $250, and took a year to get to Managua. The locally made one now costs $25. Over in the foot shop, Juan Loche was bonding rubber and cedar wood and producing 40 prosthetic feet a week, as nice an example of import substitution as one could hope to see, at a fraction of the cost of the American product.    The arm and leg factory is already working at full tilt, and even if the U.S. Congress kills funding for the contras tomorrow, Juan and his colleagues will have lifetime employment to look forward to, since Rene and Melba and the others will need to replace their false limbs every four years. Children, some 10% of the factory's clientele, need a refit every six months.    I asked Rene how he felt about the men who had blown his legs off. He said they were dung, and he had the same view of the ultimate sponsors in Washington of his misfortune. He said he wasn't surprised though. Rene smiled so much that he almost made one overlook the mutilation of a life now back in the wheelchair.    Later that day, I drove down to the old town of Granada where, for the past few weeks, the British director Alex Cox has been filming &quot;Walker,&quot; the life of the mid-19th-century filibuster from Nashville who briefly became president of Nicaragua. It was a big night, for they were going to burn Granada, or at least the film-set edition of it erected in the main square. The flames spurted satisfactorily. A few hundred yards down the road was the church that William Walker actually had burned.    Such terrorism had been excitedly hailed in the U.S. where, for example, Leslie's magazine had said in late 1856, &quot;Walker . . . is at last drawing unwilling praise from those not heretofore disposed to believe he was a man of successful destiny. . . . We have no mawkish sympathy with any semi-barbarians, whether they live on this continent, China or Japan. The only way to purify and enlighten such people is with powder and ball: they are the great corrective and reformatory measures of the age. Walker has done more for Nicaragua, for its real independence and final success as an independent country, than could have been accomplished by the ordinary 'moral suasion means' in a century.&quot;    I had asked Rene as I left whether he had any final message for the readers of The Wall Street Journal, and he said to tell them that Nicaragua will prevail, that the moral will always outweigh the material forces. These days journalists are rambling about the Nicaraguan-Honduran border with publicity-seeking contras, and obediently sending back promotional material to foreign editors who only want pictures of contras with guns in their hands and not anything of what the contras might have in mind for the future of the country they are being paid to attack.    A visit to the leg and arm factory and a talk with Rene and Melba offered a sounder perspective on this latter-day emulation of Walker, who was finally executed in 1860 in Honduras in the town Trujillo. The town is one of the sites of the U.S. military maneuvers and rehearsals for possible invasion of Nicaragua in mid-May, around the time Rene will be leaving the hospital with his new legs.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>