<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870618-0072 </DOCNO><HL> Feud at Entertainment GiantGrows Even More Bitter;Spending Is a Prime Issue---Does Chris-Craft Make Boats?---By Laura LandroStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WCI CCNMOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX) </IN><TEXT>   In a Delaware courtroom recently, an attorney for Chris-Craft Industries Inc. was explaining that his client made a friendly investment in Warner Communications Inc. 3 1/2 years ago to rescue the company from a hostile takeover by Rupert Murdoch.    Chris-Craft's &quot;white-knight honeymoon status lasted for a while,&quot; the lawyer said, &quot;but. . . &quot;    The judge finished the sentence for him: &quot;Now they looklike a Trojan horse.&quot;   It has become one of the most famous feuds in the corporate world: Warner Communications vs. Chris-Craft Industries; Steven J. Ross, Warner's chairman, vs. his one-time friend Herbert J. Siegel, the chairman of Chris-Craft. Almost from the start, the two men have been fighting over how Mr. Ross has been running Warner, an entertainment giant that he put together after starting out 25 years ago with a chain of funeral parlors and parking lots.    In the past several months, the feud has become increasingly acrimonious; the two barely speak. But unlike many such corporate battles that end in violent takeover struggles or arduous proxy fights, this one is confounding observers because it shows no signs of resolution. Now Mr. Siegel, one of five Chris-Craft directors on the 15-member Warner board, has indicated he may not support Mr. Ross's reelection to the board at the annual meeting next Wednesday. But insiders say he has for the second time backed away from staging a full-scale proxy fight because other major shareholders have indicated they won't support him.    In any case, the contest of wills with Mr. Siegel is the latest test of the staying power of the 59-year-old Mr. Ross, a corporate survivor who has weathered a federal investigation into Warner's involvement in the Westchester Premier Theatre-scandal, the near-destruction of Warner by the Atari video-game debacle, and the onslaught of media baron Murdoch. The stakes are equally high for Mr. Siegel, also 59. He runs the risk of tearing apart Warner, whose stock is Chris-Craft's major investment.    To many people who know both men, their feud is fundamentally a clash of style. Mr. Ross is expansive and freespending. Mr. Siegel is cost-conscious and conservative. &quot;Herb is entirely expense-oriented, while Steve is revenue-oriented. He will spend to earn,&quot; says Arthur Liman, a New York attorney who is currently the chief counsel to the Senate committee investigating the Iran-Contra affair. Mr. Liman introduced the two in 1970 and brought them together again in late 1983 when Mr. Ross needed a white knight during the Murdoch battle.    But the fight is about more than just personalities. It also concerns the rights of shareholders and the question of how a creative enterprise like Warner should be run. Mr. Ross owns little stock in Warner, but he is widely given credit for turning the company around and thinks he should be allowed to run Warner as he sees fit.    Since Warner is a business that depends on creative talent, that means spending plenty of money to keep creative and talented people happy, Mr. Ross believes. Mr. Siegel, meanwhile, controls 17% of Warner's stock, the biggest individual stake, and wants his due as a property owner.    Chris-Craft executives contend that their pressure on Warner's board is responsible for the turnaround. Mr. Siegel notes that Warner's stock, trading at around $34 a share recently, is still only a few points higher than its pre-Atari peak five years ago. And the company's earnings and common-stock dividend haven't returned to earlier levels. &quot;Now that the stock price has returned to its level of five years ago,&quot; Mr. Siegel says, &quot;let's restore the dividend and earnings to their prior levels and begin to realize for shareholders the values inherent in the company.&quot;    He won't discuss the feud with Mr. Ross but asks, &quot;With over $1 billion invested, do you really think we would do anything to hurt the company?&quot; Mr. Ross says Warner has already been hurt &quot;dramatically&quot; by Mr. Siegel's constant haggling since joining the board in 1984.    Mr. Siegel never interfered in the movie or record operations, but, contrary to Mr. Ross's expectations, the Chris-Craft chairman quickly immersed himself in the details of Warner's finances. After Warner sold its money-losing Atari video-game unit in July of that year, Mr. Siegel pressed Mr. Ross to cut Warner's 400-person corporate staff in half within 30 days and to sell other assets as well. Mr. Ross refused, instead cutting back gradually and selling assets over two years.    The two men continued to clash over a variety of issues, mainly Warner's financial-disclosure practices and internal financial controls. In early 1985, the Chris-Craft representatives on Warner's board refused to sign the company's annual 10-K financial report to the Securities and Exchange Commission; Warner management had rejected their request to write off a deferred tax liability carried on the books from Atari. Also in 1985, Mr. Siegel thwarted an attempt by Mr. Ross to take the company private for $30 a share.    By last winter, the battle had become extremely bitter. Mr. Siegel, who unsuccessfully sought to require a board committee's approval for raises to anyone making over $100,000 a year, was enraged over a proposed employment contract for Mr. Ross that could be worth as much as $180 million to the Warner chairman. During an eight-hour board meeting on Feb. 25, the Chris-Craft group on Warner's board called the contract &quot;outrageous&quot; and &quot;an abomination.&quot;    Among other things the contract, which was approved, would give Mr. Ross $25 million over 10 years even if the stock fell to less than half the current level. The board majority conceded that the contract was &quot;unprecedented,&quot; but it said it was necessary to keep Mr. Ross's services despite his deteriorating relationship with Mr. Siegel.    The contract typifies Mr. Siegel's problem with Warner's management. In his view, Warner is far too loose with its shareholders' money and is thus vulnerable to another misfortune like the Atari disaster, which occurred when Warner failed to anticipate the collapse of the videogame industry in 1982. Warner's reputation for lavish spending is unsurpassed among large public companies. Its executives are well-paid even by the standards of the entertainment industry. Mr. Ross says the company must pay its top executives well to keep them from leaving, and he notes that hardly any top managers have left the company voluntarily in the past five years.    The company also spends heavily to pamper its creative talent. Three corporate jets -- maintained over Mr. Siegel's objections -- shuttle stars around the world. For example, Chevy Chase, who will be making a Warner Bros. film in Los Angeles, will be ferried back and forth between the studio and Long Island, where his family is spending the summer. Warner also keeps a villa in Acapulco, where stars are treated to all-expenses-paid vacations.    Mr. Ross doesn't get involved in picking recording artists or scripts, but he has close personal relations with such actors and producers as Steven Spielberg, Clint Eastwood and Barbra Streisand. Friends describe the Warner chairman as charismatic and a master of the personal touch, which wins him loyalty from both his troops and Warner stars. Earlier this month, in the midst of another fight with Mr. Siegel, Mr. Ross flew to Spain, where Mr. Spielberg is directing a movie for Warner, and spent two days there.    Ms. Streisand, who has produced and starred in several money-making films for Warner, says Mr. Ross is an &quot;extraordinary human being.&quot; She says she would leave Warner if Mr. Ross left the company. &quot;Who is this guy Herb Siegel?&quot; she adds. &quot;Doesn't he run a boat company?&quot; (Actually, the boat company was sold in 1980.)    Mr. Ross says the expenditure of his time and of Warner's money pays off. &quot;It's one of the reasons we're so profitable. That's the business we're in -- that's entertainment,&quot; he says. And many people in Mr. Ross's camp say that he is critical to Warner's success and that many people besides Ms. Streisand would end their association with the company if he left.    But some question whether Mr. Ross's departure would cripple the company. &quot;According to the myth, if Mr. Ross is put out to pasture, all the company's great performing talents . . . will just get up and leave out of loyalty,&quot; says Harold Vogel, a Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. analyst, in a new report. &quot;Maybe so. But one would surely hope that a corporation with $3 billion in revenues and thousands of performers under contract would be big enough to survive a few defections -- if indeed there would be any at all.&quot;    Mr. Vogel adds, &quot;It's conceivable that a few other big stars might even be attracted to Warner because they'd prefer someone else to Mr. Ross. His very generous compensation package has, of course, not been universally acclaimed.&quot;    Ironically, Mr. Siegel was involved in Hollywood long before Mr. Ross. The son of a successful Philadelphia overcoat manufacturer, he acquired in 1960 a talent agency whose clients included Perry Como and Jackie Gleason, who is still a friend. But his real love seems to be the stock market. The focus of his office is a desktop Quotron terminal, and he spends little time on Chris-Craft's operations, now primarily television stations 42.5% owned by Warner.    Although Mr. Siegel is described by some friends as a man who is reluctant to leave any money on the table in a business negotiation, he is anything but a Scrooge in his personal life. He is a regular at Le Cirque, a fashionable Manhattan restaurant, and is very active socially in the city.    Mr. Ross's background is more modest than Mr. Siegel's. The son of an oil-burner salesman who lost his money in the stock-market crash of 1929, he grew up in Brooklyn, attended a junior college and married into a wealthy family of funeral-parlor owners. He entered the family business, expanded into parking lots and cleaning services, then moved into show business in the late 1960s by buying a talent agency, Ashley Famous, and Warner Bros.-Seven Arts.    In the late 1970s, Warner was rocked by scandal over its ties to Westchester Premier Theatre Inc., a now-defunct Tarrytown, N.Y., company linked by federal prosecutors to organized-crime interests. Two Warner executives were convicted on racketeering and bribery charges in connection with Warner's investment in Westchester Premier. Mr. Ross also came under investigation, but the Justice Department eventually determined there was no basis for filing charges.    This spring, after the fight over Mr. Ross's contract, Mr. Siegel revived the Westchester Premier case by asking to see a copy of a report about the scandal that was submitted last year to a special committee of the Warner board. The report, prepared by an outside attorney, looked into whether any current Warner executives had committed wrongdoing. Warner's directors eventually voted against the request, and Mr. Siegel sued the company in a Delaware court. Late last month the court granted Mr. Siegel access to the report on the condition he keep it confidential.    Mr. Siegel's exact motives for wanting the report aren't clear. He and other directors had voted last year against having the report submitted to the full board. According to Warner executives, the report absolved current executives of any wrongdoing, and they are outraged that Mr. Siegel is dredging up an old scandal. Moreover, the report is said to contain potentially embarrassing information about personal matters, particularly the breakup of Mr. Ross's marriage to his second wife, New York socialite Amanda Burden. (He is now married for the third time, to a documentary-film maker.)    Attorneys for Mr. Siegel told the Delaware court that he wanted to see for himself &quot;what evidence there was&quot; and whether the report's conclusions &quot;were reliable.&quot; Among other things, Mr. Siegel's lawyers said he was concerned over the report's concluding there was &quot;no credible evidence&quot; that former Warner executive Solomon Weiss did anything illegal -- even though Mr. Weiss, a longtime friend of Mr. Ross's, was one of those convicted in the case. On the basis of this conclusion, Warner decided to cover Mr. Weiss's legal costs.    One Chris-Craft source says Warner's refusal to let Mr. Siegel see the report fueled his outrage at having to fight to get information about Warner even though Chris-Craft is the company's biggest shareholder. &quot;We had fights over almost every kind of disclosure,&quot; the source says. &quot;They would tell us what we were asking for was immaterial to the total picture.&quot;    Mr. Ross is much more outspoken than Mr. Siegel about their fight. Chris-Craft, he says, is frittering away his time on &quot;penny-ante, picayune&quot; matters. His business day, he says, is often interrupted by phone calls about the Chris-Craft people's latest demands. &quot;I have to disappear for an hour or take a call in the meeting and yell into the phone for a half-hour or 45 minutes,&quot; Mr. Ross says.    Robert Daly, the chairman of the Warner Bros. studio, says the last time Mr. Ross visited the studio, he could spend only two hours on business matters. &quot;We have expansion plans, things we need to discuss with Steve,&quot; he says. &quot;This thing is consuming him.&quot;    Mr. Ross notes with pride that Warner has turned around since the Atari debacle. In 1986, the company's profit from continuing operations was up 48% from 1985, to $137.4 million, and earnings have continued to increase in 1987. Once considered a disaster story on Wall Street, Warner now has many fans among securities analysts and money managers. With the company doing so well, Mr. Ross thinks Mr. Siegel doesn't have any right to second-guess him.    Warner says it offered to buy out Chris-Craft earlier this year for about $1.25 billion, or $37.75 a share. At the time, the stock was trading around $34 a share. Mr. Siegel, according to Warner, asked for $45 a share, but Chris-Craft says that there weren't any serious negotiations and that Warner's account is &quot;materially inaccurate.&quot;    The next battle arena will be Warner's annual meeting in New York next Wednesday. Warner's proxy material for the meeting says Chris-Craft has indicated it may oppose the reelection of Mr. Ross and another director who oversaw the Westchester report. If that happens, Warner says it will &quot;reevaluate&quot; its nomination of Chris-Craft director Howard Arvey and its commitment to fill with a Chris-Craft director the vacancy left by the resignation earlier this year of Abraham Ribicoff, another Chris-Craft representative.    Many observers think the only way for the battle to end is for Mr. Ross to buy out Chris-Craft at a substantial premium over the current stock price. But Mr. Ross says he won't pay &quot;greenmail,&quot; and Mr. Siegel doesn't seem in any hurry to cash out. One associate, noting that Mr. Siegel spent eight years on an ultimately unsuccessful fight to acquire Piper Aircraft, jokes that &quot;he's got 4 1/2 years to go&quot; with Warner.    Although Warner profits have soared since Mr. Siegel invested in the company, he is said to believe that the company could be even more profitable if it paid more attention to controlling costs. He may be correct, but some observers are surprised he hasn't taken his money out of Warner. Based on Warner's current stock price, Chris-Craft is sitting on a paper profit of more than $430 million.    &quot;Herb is honorable and decent, but his position is inexplicable to me considering how well {Warner} has done,&quot; says Mr. Liman, the New York attorney. At the same time, Mr. Liman says, Mr. Ross may have made the first mistake by not paying enough attention to Mr. Siegel at the outset. &quot;The marriage went bad when Steve wouldn't treat Herb as a partner,&quot; the attorney says.    Like many people who are friendly with both men, Mr. Liman thinks there is little chance of a rapprochement. The attorney -- who ended his business ties to both companies, including a Chris-Craft directorship, because of the fight -- characterizes the whole affair as a tragedy. He says ruefully, &quot;I'll never introduce two people again.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>