<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870724-0138 </DOCNO><HL> North's Abuse of Precedent---By Alton Frye</HL><DD> 07/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   Whatever George Washington said to his daddy about the cherry tree, he surely never claimed the right to lie to Congress. One might have gained the opposite impression from the way the first president's spirit was called into last week's hearing with Lt. Col. Oliver North. Col. North and his allies attempted to drape Washington's ghost over the executive branch's lamentable habit of duping the legislative branch. The sheet won't fit.    Those eager for exoneration fondly recall that President Washington once refused to convey certain secret diplomatic materials to the House of Representatives. That is less than half the truth and more than half misleading.    Washington did indeed decline a House request to see the negotiating instructions and dispatches associated with the so-called Jay Treaty of 1795, the first treaty negotiated under the Constitution. One must understand that decision, however, in the limited and special context in which Washington made it.    The House request came months after the Senate tendered advice and consent. The treaty had already become the law of the land. Washington's response to the House, which was heavily influenced by Alexander Hamilton and preoccupied with avoiding a mischievous precedent, indicated that he did so because the House's request was relevant to no constitutional function &quot;except that of an impeachment; which the resolution had not expressed.&quot; In &quot;War, Foreign Affairs and Constitutional Power: The Origins,&quot; Abraham D. Sofaer points out that Washington avoided claiming wider power to withhold material. Mr. Sofaer, a former professor and now legal adviser in the State Department, says in the book that the president deleted from his message an assertion that &quot;a discretion in the Executive Department, when and how to comply with such demands is essential to the due conduct of foreign negotiations.&quot;    The more vital precedent preceded this episode. The Jay Treaty was an embarrassment to Washington. Jay had exceeded his instructions in numerous respects and had fallen far short of the goals the president had set. Frankly, few American diplomats have ever negotiated from such a position of weakness, and it showed.    Nevertheless, Washington overrode the recommendation of his secretary of state, Edmund Randolph, and decided against withholding the awkward information from the Senate. Before the House ever raised the issue, Washington had long since transmitted to the Senate the same material -- Jay's negotiating instructions and dispatches, together with other confidential information requested by the upper chamber. Washington respected the Senate's constitutional claim to the information and the Senate in turn respected the need for secrecy. The president's good faith in sharing the papers with the Senate undoubtedly played a crucial role in winning approval by a single vote.    The current hearings have revealed stunning misconceptions about presidential power in a constitutional government. Those misconceptions are not original to Col. North, but his testimony and that of Adm. John Poindexter offer a compelling occasion to clear them up.    One of them concerns the Supreme Court's famous 1936 decision in U.S. v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp. Col. North invoked it to vindicate his assertion of sweeping presidential authority in foreign policy. It is a citation frequently favored and consistently distorted by advocates of elastic executive power.    What the court actually held in Curtiss-Wright was that Congress had acted constitutionally in a joint resolution specifically delegating authority to the president to establish and enforce an embargo against arms shipments during a war between Bolivia and Paraguay. The court concluded that Congress and the president, acting conjointly, had ample authority to employ the federal government's &quot;powers of external sovereignty.&quot;    To be sure, the court's soaring language about &quot;the very delicate, plenary and exclusive power of the President as the sole organ of the federal government in the field of international relations&quot; invited the imperial pretentions of later administrations. But Justice Sutherland surrounded that exuberant portrayal of presidential power by two critical qualifications, noting that the case presented a challenge first of all to &quot;an authority vested in the President by an exertion of legislative power. . . .&quot; He went on to point out that the president's foreign-policy power, &quot;like every other governmental power, must be exercised in subordination to the applicable provisions of the Constitution.&quot;    That decision was a major reference for another precedent commonly recalled to justify executive excess in foreign policy, President Franklin Roosevelt's trade of 50 over-age destroyers for base rights in several British territories. It was 1940, and with war raging in Europe, Roosevelt's decision was strategically sound. Though politically controversial, it was in no way comparable to the extra-constitutional actions of recent months.    The plan was thoroughly rooted in statutory authority. The question was whether the president required additional congressional authority to proceed. One of its most ardent exponents, Dean Acheson, joined other like-minded lawyers to make clear that, &quot;Whatever might be our views on the law, we would not suggest executive action without Congressional approval if we believed that a majority of the Congress was opposed to such action.&quot; That attitude bears no resemblance to one explicitly aimed at defying the expressed view of Congress, much less to a policy denying Congress information on which to base an independent view. A statute enacted some months later confirmed that Acheson and his friends correctly gauged legislative sentiment.    More important, Roosevelt did not move forward before having the benefit of a careful advisory opinion by Attorney General Robert Jackson. Jackson scrupulously circumscribed the executive authority described in the Curtiss-Wright case. &quot;The President's power over foreign relations,&quot; he wrote, &quot;while delicate, plenary and exclusive, is not unlimited. Some negotiations involve commitments as to the future which would carry an obligation to exercise powers vested in Congress.&quot;    Since the agreement with Britain disposed of military equipment the president was empowered to transfer and imposed no obligation for the United States actually to exercise the base rights it provided, Jackson found it unnecessary &quot;for the Senate to ratify an opportunity that entails no obligation.&quot; It was a measured finding, openly published to enable Congress and the country -- then weeks away from a historic presidential election -- to react as they deemed appropriate. No evasion of accountability there.    Precedents are not pretzels. The abuse of precedents is another sad dimension in the sorry tale of executive exaltation still unfolding.    ---   Mr. Frye is Washington director of the Council on Foreign Relations. </TEXT></DOC>