<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Capital Chronicle:Problems StartWhen TerroristsSet the Agenda---By Suzanne Garment</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FRESTEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   There was a Christmas card this year from Anatoly Michelson, with a handwritten message inside: &quot;It is the 31st Christmas that my family has spent in grief and desperation.&quot; This was enough to put a real dent in the holiday cheer. But it did serve as a reminder that most of the Iran-scandal talk around here about negotiating for hostages is egregiously shallow. If you want to know about hostages, ask Mr. Michelson.    In 1956 he was an engineer in Moscow with a young wife and a small child. He was trying to concoct a way for all of them to get out of the Soviet Union. The authorities would not give the family an exit visa for tourism, but he got a visa for himself and went to Austria.    He immediately started trying to get permission for his family to join him. He had not the slightest idea that any regime would stand in the way of such an elementary piece of decency as family reunification. Besides, in the Soviet Union this was the time of the thaw. Khrushchev had just made his anti-Stalin speech. Western leaders were bubbling with gratitude.    But no permission came.    Mr. Michelson kept busy. He worked in Dusseldorf, then came to the U.S. in 1963. He has 52 patents to his credit.    He also kept his campaign going. His wife applied for an exit visa 22 times. He put his case to international agencies and tribunals. High U.S. officials wrote to the Soviet authorities on his behalf.    Thirty-one years have passed. His wife is now old and legally blind. Mr. Michelson has heart trouble and diabetes. It is cruel but quite likely that the Soviets will let them die without being reunited.    What you see here is not a kidnapping by a bunch of Third World amateurs. No, the Soviets are demonstrating their ability to hold hostages for many years, even in the face of repeated exposure.    This is barbarism's major league.    Let us remember Mr. Michelson's case when we think about Ronald Reagan's hostage talks with Iran.    The president has gotten no sympathy from left or right. People on the left, who have always pressed for negotiation as the way to end hostage crises, are delighted by Mr. Reagan's troubles and not about to help douse the flames. People on the right say what they have said before: no negotiating with terrorists for hostages. It is not the job of government to put the welfare of individual hostages first. Government's job is to demonstrate strength and resolve.    Your correspondent leans heavily toward the second position, but even that one is not correct.    Yes, democratic politicians accustomed to courting the people pay too much attention to individuals who have fallen into danger or hard times. Such leaders often find hostage decisions difficult to the point of paralysis and end up acting softheaded or timorous.    But before your lip starts to curl in a sneer at this failing, remember that it is the flip side of blessed democratic compassion. You cannot have one without the other; you cannot simply choose one from Column A and one from Column B. Politics is not a Chinese menu.    It is useless to spend a lot of time berating modern democracies for being what they are and what they must be.    Critics should save their breath for the real villains of the piece: the perverse manipulators, governmental or free-lance, who deliberately create circumstances in which a democracy by doing a good deed destroys itself.    Furthermore, the most basic aim of the foreign policy of democratic nations should be to render those manipulators as powerless as possible.    This sounds like Woodrow Wilson's &quot;making the world safe for democracy.&quot; But it should also call to mind Gen. George Patton -- as played by George C. Scott, of course. No one who has seen it can forget the picture of Gen. Patton stepping out in front of that huge American flag and thundering to his troops that their job in battle is not to die for their country. Their job is to make the slob on the other side die for his country.    In the same way, we're never going to erase the democratic flaws in our leaders, though we can try to improve their behavior. We should be concentrating our energies on damaging the people and countries that want to make our own enzymes devour us.    Consider an instructive difference in this regard between the U.S. and Israel.    When the U.S. was discovered negotiating with Iran, critics said the American weakness on this particular hostage issue would cast doubt on our whole commitment to anti-terrorism.    The Israelis were in on these negotiations, too. Furthermore, Israel has bargained for hostages at other times. On one well-publicized occasion, the price they paid to get back three of their men was to release over a thousand terrorists, many of whom would soon find their way back to their bloody work.    There is fierce controversy in Israel whenever one of these bargains is struck, but people do not question Israel's basic position on terrorism. No one doubts that the country's deepest interests and principles will keep it trying to hobble terrorists as definitively as possible, even as its leaders agonize over individual hostages.    The U.S. can put itself in the same position. Our leaders do not have to be steely and perfect on the issue of whether to bargain in hostage crises. But our political elite as a whole does have to show some steady awareness that the goal we should aim at in international affairs is to keep our leaders from having to make the choices imposed on them by terrorists.    It is on this second point that observers of American politics today have real reason to despair. </TEXT></DOC>