<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870130-0137 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Nicholas King</HL><DD> 01/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> METZ, France  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The little train went down the inconspicuous valley from Aachen to Maastricht, and another train went from there to Liege: from Germany to Holland to Belgium in 1 1/2 hours. Three customs inspections, too, and three kinds of currency and three languages at least. The European Community has done much, but it remains after three decades invisible to the foreign eye. One wondered how the emissaries of Charlemagne would have put up with such annoyances as they bustled about the unencumbered European empires his governing genius had devised.    Was the reflection too facile? I was drifting southward from the mouths of the Rhine ostensibly on a retracing of wartime roads through that middle European countryside that has always separated Gauls and Allemanni, or Franks and Teutons, and that is still marked by an uneasy compromise of language and custom. South from Holland and Flanders into the old Burgundian domains of Limburg and Luxembourg and the prince-bishoprics of the Holy Roman Empire and thence to the modern battlefields of Lorraine.    Metz, Verdun, the valleys of the Meuse and the Moselle trace a stately landscape under high-arching skies, a terrain that undulates eastward toward the Rhine and the stamping grounds of the ancient foe. This is a land of bloodshed of the past 100 years, a place still in the shadow of war, a part of France strangely unknown to tourists, even French ones. Everywhere the signposts point to battle monuments and military cemeteries. On a slope on the road to Pont-a-Mousson there are ranks of strange-looking headstones that turn out to be the graves of Moslem soldiers who died here for France in the First World War. A little farther on, an arrow points to a place where thousands of American dead lie.    My companion, whom I last saw in 1944 as a child playing in a schoolyard commandeered by the Third Army and who is now an education counselor about to retire, stops the car at a mournful road junction that passes for the village square. The school where her mother was head teacher is just as it was, and so is everything else in the place, including the house next to the town hall, where my unit was lodged for a few days during the Metz campaign. There down the street is the bakery where the baker's son lived, a cheeky, blond-haired boy who used to tease the GIs about their wives and girlfriends. They didn't understand a word of what he said, but they got the idea fast enough.    The only thing in the village landscape that had changed was the granite obelisk commemorating the dead of 1914-1918. It had been moved across the road and the names of the dead of the Second World War, some of whom my friend recognized, had been added, including those of deportees and those shot in the Resistance. A young man served us beer in the cold, empty cafe, and we made conversation around his puppy.    My friend and her family had moved away after the war, so it was a rediscovery for her too. She asked a few of the passersby if they remembered her mother's tenure at the school, explaining my presence at the same time. &quot;I don't remember the war or any of that,&quot; one woman said, &quot;I was born in 1949.&quot;    But another woman, much older, remembered the teacher and everything else very well. &quot;You can't forget war if you live around here.&quot; As for the daughter of the district supervisor who gave herself big-city airs and flirted with the division staff officers, she had married a French colonel after the war and gone off to live as an army wife in Strasbourg.    After that we drove off up the hill past the little iron mine, now abandoned, where GIs had used the miners' shower room during our brief stay, past Homecourt and Ste. Marie-aux-Chaines on the way to Metz. It was now late afternoon under heavy gray clouds. Our division had pushed the Germans back through here in the ice-cold rain of late 1944. We stopped for a moment at the wintry crossroads of Gravelotte, where there was a dusty little battlefield museum of the Franco-Prussian War. It had a large model of the action, including a ravine in which miniature horse-drawn ambulances struggled up the hillsides. Gravelotte was one of that war's bloodiest fields; the name of it had even passed into the local language, my friend said, signifying that hell had broken loose.    Metz is one of those frontier citadels, taken and retaken throughout history, that acquires, through the long effort of survival, an aloof, almost a forbidding, stamp. The car bounced along a long row of half-bare trees by the grassy banks of a still canal, wove through a swirl of traffic lights and old tram tracks. Suddenly we were in the shadow of the grim stone railroad station, a vast linear pile built in the long German occupation of Lorraine between 1871 and 1918 -- annexation from the French point of view, recuperation from the German. That was something that had survived the last war, although it had seemed at the time that all of Metz must have gone up in smoke and flame.    We went by the turreted Porte des Allemands and finally turned into a parking place next to the central barrack square where the long yellow neoclassic facades, brighter than the darkening sky, faced the fierce mass of the Gothic cathedral. A motorcycle crowd roared and bounced by over the paving stones and down the hill the pearllike mist began to rise, as night came, along the quais of the Moselle.    ---   Mr. King is director of the Foreign Press Center in New York. </TEXT></DOC>