<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880113-0062 </DOCNO><HL> In Gulf, U.S. Underestimates Own Strengths </HL><AUTHOR> Karen Elliott House </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST MDEST </CO><IN> TRA PET </IN><TEXT>   As America enters an election year and a year of stepped-up superpower negotiations, pressures almost surely will mount to make linkages that ought to be avoided and to avoid commitments that ought to be kept.    Nowhere is that more true than in the Persian Gulf, where American warships are defending the right to freedom of navigation, the economic interests of the Western alliance and America's reputation as a reliable ally. It is a commitment that the Reagan administration isn't as proud of as it should be, and that the pack of Democratic presidential candidates is much more critical of than either logic or smart politics should lead them to be. The commitment is put further at risk by morose and muddle-headed analysts who wring their hands and argue that by standing up to the Iranians, we are going to wind up handing Iran to the Russians.    What the critics are saying, in effect, is that America's very success at keeping the Persian Gulf oil lanes open in the face of Iranian threats serves to increase Iranian isolation and hostility and thus will send Iran scurrying to Moscow for sympathy and support. This is undoubtedly what the Soviets wish would happen -- and what the Iranians want us to believe could happen -- but it isn't what either Moscow or Tehran believes will happen.    As all too often is the case, Americans are assigning exaggerated capabilities and opportunities to the Soviets and overlooking the strengths of America's position. For the first time in the modern history of this region, Arabs and Israelis are united in their support of an American initiative; and for the first time since the Korean War, almost all of America's European allies are providing direct military support for a U.S. military action outside of Europe. Imagine the hand wringing among professional pessimists if Moscow had the united support of gulf Arabs and its allies for some Soviet initiative in the region.    In truth, the Soviets seem neither confident nor content about their position in the gulf. Soviet officials accompanying Mikhail Gorbachev on his recent visit to Washington dropped hints all over town that their efforts to court Iran have brought only frustration -- and worsening relations with the Arabs. Indeed, Iraq, a longtime Soviet ally, is so frustrated with Moscow's political and military support for Iran that Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz publicly has lashed out at the Soviets. (Moscow provides some 80% of Iraq's arms and allows its East European allies and Syria to supply Iran.)    More important, Soviet actions seem to be supporting Soviet whispers. For example, the Soviets have just welcomed Jordan's King Hussein to Moscow, in spite -- or more likely because -- of the fact that he has just orchestrated an unusual show of Arab unity with Iraq in its eight-year-old war against Iran.    Above all, history and ideology stand in the way of any significant Soviet-Iranian friendship. Iran for centuries has viewed Russia as a threatening giant to the North. And Iran's current ideology of Islamic fundamentalism is as hostile to godless communism as to infidel imperialism. The Soviets surely are well aware of all this. Much as they might dream of dominating Iran and winning warm-water ports on the Persian Gulf, their more realistic goal is much more limited: to prevent Iran from being lured back into America's orbit.    The point here isn't that it's inconceivable for the Soviets to improve relations with Iran nor that an American policy of allying itself with Arab interests against Iran is free of all risks. The point is that a year ago Iran was moving to dominate the entire region by bludgeoning the Iraqis on the battlefield, bullying Persian Gulf oil sheikdoms such as Kuwait and blackmailing Saudi Arabia into supporting Iran's strategy for higher oil prices. U.S. credibility in the region was at an all time low after the Reagan administration's duplicitous arms-for-hostages deal with Iran. The immediate risk wasn't Soviet dominance of Iran but Iranian domination of the region that accounts for nearly 60% of the world's proven oil reserves.    Given that bleak outlook a year ago, it's remarkable how well America and the rest of the West have managed their gulf policy. It would be tragically ironic if America now abandons a winning position with the gulf Arabs out of fear of future Soviet gains in Iran at precisely the moment Moscow is realizing its position with Tehran is unwinnable and is trying to tilt to the Arabs again.    There are a couple of ways Moscow may try to encourage that switch. In recent weeks, the Soviet Union, which blocked United Nations sanctions against Iran in an effort to curry favor with Tehran, is suddenly beginning to hint at a willingness to support sanctions -- but with one big condition: that the U.S. naval armada must leave the Persian Gulf. The Soviets are setting up a situation in which the U.S. naval presence, rather than their own gamesmanship with Iran, will be perceived as the obstacle to international cooperation against Iran. If the Soviets could get an impotent U.N. force (which would, of course, include some Soviet ships) to replace the powerful U.S. presence in the gulf, not only would they have a freer hand in the region but American credibility would be destroyed with the very Arab oil producers the U.S. seeks to protect.    The further risk is that Moscow may somehow manage to link Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan to American with drawal from the Persian Gulf. Undersecretary of State Michael Armacost was in Southwest Asia this past week seeking ways to hasten Soviet with drawal from Afghanistan, while Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci was in the gulf to &quot;re-evaluate&quot; (reduce?) America's presence there. Equating the U.S. presence in the gulf with the Soviet presence in Afghanistan is exactly like equating the actions of a mugger with the actions of a policeman. They're both at the sites of conflicts but for precisely opposite reasons. The Soviets invaded Afghanistan to deprive Afghans of their freedom. The U.S. is in the gulf to keep Iran from depriving Arabs of their freedom. Thus, linkage of these issues is immoral as well as illogical.    The biggest danger of all, however, to American interests in the gulf isn't the sophistication of Soviet foreign policy but, once again, the muddle-headed view among many in Washington that the Persian Gulf is somehow comparable to Vietnam and Lebanon. It isn't.    The U.S. is involved in a naval operation, not a land war. The U.S. is fighting both for a clear principle and clear national interests, not for fuzzy goals it can't define. America has the solid support of nations within the region and of its Western allies. And unlike Vietnam and Lebanon, where friends and foes were hard to distinguish, the Iranian adversary is easy to identify. Moreover, the ayatollah's Iran isn't the sort of underdog that attracts the sympathies of Americans. Fundamentally, the common sense of the American people buys the common sense of America's commitment.    Nonetheless, administration officials these days talk nervously of the need to scale down the U.S. presence in the gulf. The hand wringing of all the Democratic presidential candidates (except Sen. Albert Gore) and their incantations of &quot;another Vietnam, another Lebanon&quot; put further pressure on the Reagan administration to begin withdrawing from the gulf. Add to that the pressure that inevitably will build in coming months to go along with the Soviets on all kinds of issues to protect the president's plans for a midyear summit in Moscow, and there is a real risk the administration may make linkages that ought to be avoided or reduce commitments that ought to be preserved. If so, it won't be the first time that America has been its own most dangerous enemy.    ---   Ms. House is the Journal's foreign editor. </TEXT></DOC>