<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880708-0152 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Edwin Meese and Beyond </HL><SO> </SO><G> JUS EXE </G><TEXT>   In Edwin Meese's seven years with President Reagan, it wasn't his failures but his successes that did him in.    Mr. Meese's unrelenting tormentors were motivated by the unbearable sight of this man from California taking away their cherished playpen -- the federal court system. Even before Mr. Meese took over the Justice Department, he was the moving force behind the dramatic alteration in the courts. He searched for the brightest conservative lawyers in the land, and found many, including Antonin Scalia, Robert Bork, Richard Posner, Frank Easterbrook, Laurence Silberman, Alex Kozinski and Ralph Winter. Most of the nation's federal courts now have a majority of restrained jurists. He also gathered a cadre of brilliant mid-level officials we'll hear more from in the years ahead, including John Bolton, Charles Cooper, Joseph Morris and Richard Willard.    With the instrumental aid of Terry Eastland, Mr. Meese put original-intent jurisprudence back on the map with a series of speeches. Activist judges remain, but they no longer dare try to defend their methods. The exclusionary rule has been watered down, and the zero-tolerance program for drug users finally gets to the demand side of the problem. Mr. Meese reminded everyone that crime victims have rights too. His department led nearly every state to adopt tort reforms, and persuaded the Supreme Court to bring back property rights. In other words, he lived up to the greatest fears of his critics.    Their most recent mudballs were desperation shots. Independent counsel James McKay was appointed to look into Wedtech, but somehow managed to investigate all aspects of Mr. Meese's life. Of course we still don't know what the McKay report says other than there will be no indictment, but as we've said before the idea of any report is offensive. It is a strange exercise for a prosecutor to admit that there's no crime, then issue a dissertation -- based on supposedly secret grand-jury evidence -- on his view of his target's &quot;ethics.&quot;    The most sickening spectacle was the playing out of this melodrama. Massive (and illegal) leaks, apparently from Mr. McKay's office throughout the investigation, served as prompts to those who equate &quot;appearances of impropriety&quot; with guilt. Then came the crocodile tears that Mr. Meese's politics had nothing to do with this, that it was entirely a matter of maintaining Washington's ethical standards. The bottom line: a 14-month, multimillion-dollar investigation, with an independent counsel finding nothing to prosecute.    All this said, we must add that Mr. Meese didn't always live up to expectations. Under the circumstances of his tenure, that isn't surprising. A highly politicized mob was constantly after his most able top aides, notably Brad Reynolds. He faced a hostile permanent bureaucracy. Not least, he served a President who had a near-total lack of appetite for confrontation. Still, we watched the deterioration of presidential powers in horror, which accelerated with Mr. Meese's November 25, 1986 press conference to announce the Iran-Contra affair as the low point. Mr. Meese's press conference on the Pentagon procurement &quot;scandal&quot; was deja vu; as with Iran-Contra, the real scandal is congressional meddling, again creating vague, complex rules to regulate executive-branch functions.    His department's sometimes arrogant prosecutions of alleged inside traders led to several false accusations. Mr. Meese did make amends for the shameful prosecution of former NASA chief James Beggs for alleged fraud while at General Dynamics, but who will send apologies to Ray Donovan, Anne Gorsuch, Richard Allen and the rest? These people, their careers destroyed, have become the individual victims of the assault on presidential powers.    Which brings us to Mr. Meese's successor. If George Bush wins the election he has the right to appoint his own attorney general, but the right kind of caretaker could start to lay the groundwork for resurrecting the constitutional powers of the presidency. What we do not need is someone who will now capitulate to the anti-Meese forces.    There is a good case as well to start upgrading the office of White House counsel. Mr. Meese was surely in an awkward spot investigating Iran-Contra as both the top law-enforcement officer and the President's legal confidant. And it will take hard-headed advocates of presidential authority throughout the executive branch to ensure that a President isn't coerced to sign $600 billion continuing resolutions or to appoint any more independent counsel.    In many ways, the attorney general may be the most important cabinet selection in any Bush presidency. Another conservative administration will likely again be at the mercy of a voracious Congress. It's not too soon for Mr. Bush to start looking for a few good people pledged to energetically defend the powers of the presidency. </TEXT></DOC>