<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880318-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   U.S. TROOPS ARRIVED in Honduras as combat flared at Nicaragua's border.    Planeloads of American infantry and airborne forces began arriving at the Palmerola Air Base, about 125 miles from where U.S. officials said Nicaragua's army had chased Contra rebels over the border into Honduras. Reagan ordered 3,200 troops into the Central American nation Wednesday for a &quot;training exercise.&quot; In northern Nicaragua, Honduran jets attacked a Sandinista military headquarters. Casualties weren't reported. The strike came as Nicaragua's anti-Contra offensive also was continuing.    Ortega, saying Nicaragua's soldiers wouldn't withdraw from the border area, called the U.S. move &quot;a dangerous act.&quot; The U.N. Security Council agreed to hear Managua's complaint.    ---   Panama announced that essential services would be brought under the control of the military. The move was prompted by outages of water and electricity caused by sporadic strikes. In Panama City, soldiers loyal to Noriega patrolled the streets. Calm was reported after Wednesday's failed military coup and anti-government protests.    ---   South Africa's high court granted a one-month stay of execution to the &quot;Sharpeville Six,&quot; a group of blacks convicted of a 1984 mob killing of a black township official. The reprieve was granted after a Supreme Court judge in Pretoria heard evidence that a witness had lied in court. The five men and one woman were to have been hanged today.    ---   A White House spokesman dismissed talk of possible presidential pardons for North, Poindexter and two others indicted for their roles in the Iran-Contra affair, saying Reagan hadn't discussed the matter. Meanwhile, a federal judge in Washington set a March 24 arraignment date for the four men charged with conspiracy, fraud and theft.    ---   Shamir concluded a four-day visit to Washington without any indication that he would drop his opposition to a U.S. peace plan for the Mideast. In the West Bank, Israeli troops closed Arab shops and uprooted trees. The move, viewed as an effort to reassert Israeli authority, came as trials opened against soldiers charged with brutality.    Israeli warplanes destroyed a PLO base in a Druse-held hilltop above Beirut in Israel's deepest air raid into Lebanon this year. Lebanese police said one guerrilla was killed and another wounded in the assault, which came a day after guerrillas in southern Lebanon fired Soviet-made rockets into Israel. Casualties weren't reported.    ---   Colombian airliner crashed during a storm in the northern Colombian mountains, killing all 137 people aboard, a civil defense official said. The Avianca jet, a Boeing 727, had left Cucuta, about 250 miles northeast of Bogota. Its final destination was to have been the Caribbean resort of Cartagena.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci ended two days of talks with Soviet Defense Minister Yazov. The unprecedented discussions in Bern, Switzerland, covered arms control, East-West military forces and regional issues. Carlucci said the meeting was useful, but hadn't produced any breakthroughs in areas of superpower disagreement.    ---   A Taiwanese gangster was convicted by a California jury of first-degree murder in the 1984 shooting of Chinese-American journalist Henry Liu. Tung Kuei-sen, a onetime member of the United Bamboo gang, admitted his guilt in the slaying. Two others were convicted in Taiwan of their involvement of Liu's murder in San Francisco.    ---   Iran attacked a Japanese-owned gas tanker off the coast of the United Arab Emirates, setting the vessel ablaze. The ship's entire crew was reported missing. The assault came as ground fighting was reported in the Iran-Iraq war. Iraq also fired a long-range missile into Tehran.    ---   Soviet media reported that the mayor and Communist Party chief of the Azerbaijan city of Sumgait were dismissed. At least 32 people died last month in ethnic rioting in the city. Meanwhile, Armenians boycotted work and school in the Nagorno-Karabak region of Azerbaijan, demanding that the area be annexed to Soviet Armenia.    ---   The Kremlin remains committed to withdrawing its troops from Afghanistan, the Soviet Foreign Ministry said. As talks resumed in Geneva, a spokesman said that while Moscow would rather conduct the pullout as part of a settlement of the Afghan conflict, such a withdrawal would proceed without an accord. A time frame wasn't mentioned.    ---   Anglo American Corp. said it is prepared to rehire half of the South African gold miners who are still without jobs after being fired during last August's three-week strike. The company has rehired about 20,000 dismissed workers, and said its coal mines will offer jobs to 500 of 1,600 dismissed workers who still haven't been taken back. </TEXT></DOC>