<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870527-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Verification: The Impossible Dream---By James T. Hackett</HL><DD> 05/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev are close to an arms-control agreement that would eliminate short- and intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe. On the surface this sounds desirable, but there are several serious problems. One of the most serious is verification.    Simply stated, it is impossible to verify how many mobile missiles an adversary may have -- or where they are. This is a given and must be recognized before any agreement is signed because an unverifiable agreement would be based on little more than trust.    The Reagan administration, to its credit, says it will insist on strict verification, including direct inventory control of the weapons covered by the agreement and on-site inspection of suspect sites (not just the ones the Soviets say the U.S. may inspect). This means U.S. inspectors would need ready access to Soviet missile fields, test ranges, production facilities and destruction centers.    Can you imagine that? One of the world's most tightly controlled police states, which treats even the Moscow telephone book as a classified document, is going to let U.S. inspectors poke around freely in their most secret facilities? Who's kidding whom?    Even the most optimistic arms-control enthusiasts concede that effective verification is essential. But don't worry; the State Department says it can all be worked out. That must be gratifying to the Kremlin's experts in arms-control cheating, who know that verification presents enormous problems. For example:    --No one knows how many missiles the Soviets have. The numbers the U.S. uses are its own estimates; the Soviets never provide figures. What is the point in the U.S. carefully monitoring reductions when it doesn't know how many missiles there are in the first place?    --The missiles are mobile. The missile &quot;launchers&quot; the U.S. tries to count are wheeled vehicles that can be driven on roads or over open country. They can travel hundreds of miles under cover of darkness and even farther on cloudy or rainy days when U.S. satellites cannot see them. Consequently, the U.S. doesn't actually count missiles or launchers, but the sheds it thinks they are parked in. This means the U.S. doesn't really know where the launchers are from day to day, or how many there are.    --The U.S. can't verify production. The Soviets could, of course, show U.S. inspectors a former missile plant that now produces toasters, but how do we know they don't have another missile factory somewhere else that they're not telling us about? And what's to keep them from starting a new missile production line next week?    We can't see through roofs. Mobile missiles don't sit in fixed silos. The launchers can be driven from their sheds into bunkers, hangars, factories, tunnels, garages, or anything else that has a roof over it -- and U.S. satellites can't see or count them.    --The launchers can be reloaded. U.S. figures are based on missile launchers, not the missiles themselves. A single launcher can be reloaded and reused over and over again. So even if the U.S. could count the launchers accurately, it still wouldn't know how many missiles there were.    --The missiles can be converted. The main Soviet intermediate-range missile, the SS-20, has two rocket stages. Add a third stage and it becomes a long-range SS-16 intercontinental ballistic missile. Would the Soviets dare dismantle their SS-20s under the proposed agreement and then convert them to SS-16s that are not prohibited? What do you think?    --Replacements can be built. The short-range Soviet missiles that are supposed to be eliminated are effective against targets 300 to 600 miles away. Even if such missiles were outlawed, battlefield missiles with a range of as much as 240 miles still would be permitted. The Soviets have an aging battlefield missile called the &quot;Scud B&quot; with a range of 180 miles. If short-range missiles are banned, might Moscow then produce an &quot;improved&quot; version of the Scud B with a longer range? Want to bet?    --Other things can do the same job. Moscow is churning out its new mobile ICBM, the SS-25, like sausages. Is Europe more secure if SS-20s are removed while a little farther from the target dozens of new SS-25s take their place?    Improved cameras on U.S. reconnaissance satellites can take excellent pictures of even small objects -- if they know where to look. But the Soviet land mass is enormous. It is virtually impossible to find something in such a large area if the other side wants to hide it.    How can the U.S. have a verifiable agreement under such conditions? It can't. So why do some U.S. officials claim that verification of mobile missiles is possible? Apparently they believe that Moscow wants an agreement so badly it will let U.S. inspectors prowl unannounced around the Soviet Union.    We should put Moscow to the test. The administration must not retreat from its insistence on ironclad verification provisions, including inspection on demand of suspect sites.    ---   Mr. Hackett, acting director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1981, is a senior scholar at the Heritage Foundation. </TEXT></DOC>