<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871023-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan's Reversal:Stock Market's CrashMakes Budget Accord,Tax Rise More Likely---Baker, Baker and GreenspanChange President's Mind;'Everything on the Table'---But Will a Compromise Help?---By Alan Murray and Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The stock market's collapse has dramatically altered the political landscape here and made a budget agreement between the White House and Congress all but inevitable.    Although a budget compromise that almost surely will include a tax increase represents an abrupt change in President Reagan's position, it isn't likely to do much to reduce the federal deficit. Administration and congressional leaders concede that they will be hard pressed to produce more than $23 billion in deficit cuts -- the same amount they would have got if they had done nothing and just let the Gramm-Rudman budget-reduction law take effect.    At a news conference last night, Mr. Reagan said &quot;$23 billion is all we're looking for in a reduction.&quot;    But many investors and foreign governments are hoping for a budget-reduction package far larger than that. &quot;That's the crazy thing about this,&quot; one administration official says. &quot;This is supposedly being done for the market, but we will probably end up the same place we were if the stock market hadn't crashed.&quot;    President Reagan, who has stubbornly refused all year to even consider raising taxes, appears to have been dragged kicking and screaming into talks with Congress by Treasury Secretary James Baker and White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker -- with an assist by Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan. The two Mr. Bakers, in effect, seized control of administration economic policy and pushed the president in a direction that he -- as well as others in the administration -- had strongly opposed.    A statement from the president yesterday afternoon makes it clear that he is now ready to accept some new taxes. &quot;Everything is on the table, with the exception of Social Security,&quot; the statement said. Rather than repeat his previous vows to veto taxes, the president said his goal &quot;was to develop a package that keeps spending and taxes as low as possible.&quot; At his press conference, the president said only that he won't accept a tax increase that has &quot;a deleterious effect on the economy.&quot;    Some members of Congress and the administration have talked about trying to put together a package that reduces the deficit by more than $23 billion. But a senior administration official involved in the discussions said yesterday, &quot;I wouldn't look for that. It's hard enough to get $23 billion.&quot; He added:    &quot;What the markets are looking for is evidence that the executive and legislative branches can work together. It is important to send a signal to them that we are cooperating.&quot;    But Wall Street expects more than a show of cooperation. &quot;If they don't do something that speaks to fundamental change, it won't do anything&quot; to calm the markets, Arthur Levitt Jr., the chairman of the American Stock Exchange, warned yesterday afternoon. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 77.42 points yesterday.    Also speaking yesterday afternoon, Donald Straszheim, the president of Merrill Lynch Economics Inc. in New York, said, &quot;If the outcome is nothing more than a ratification of the $23 billion cut that was going to happen anyway and statements by the president and Democratic leaders reaffirming the appropriateness of their positions over the last few years, that's not enough. The dashing of the market's optimistic hopes could do damage in itself.&quot;    Noting the administration's inability to reduce the huge budget and trade deficits, Frederick W. Zuckerman, vice president and treasurer at Chrysler Corp., said yesterday morning that he is &quot;really bearish on both the bond and stock markets.&quot;    &quot;I think we are finally paying the piper for seven years of profligacy by this administration,&quot; he said. &quot;I do not believe the present reduction in interest rates is real because I don't believe the administration is determined to reduce the deficits. There will be a serious impairment of consumer confidence.&quot; He added: &quot;I don't think we're going to have a depression like in 1929. But the outlook isn't good.&quot;    Members of Congress were skeptical that the negotiations would go beyond the $23 billion deficit cut already expected. &quot;It's not very much,&quot; said Sen. Pete Domenici, a New Mexico Republican on the Senate Budget Committee. &quot;We really ought to do more, but I don't expect it.&quot;    Moreover, budget experts note that the $23 billion number cited by the administration and Congress gives a deceptive picture of deficit reduction. The cuts will be made from a fiscal 1988 baseline well above fiscal 1987 spending. As a result, odds are that the deficit next year will rise from the $148 billion deficit in fiscal 1987, even with a budget agreement.    Negotiations will begin in earnest next week, and administration officials say they will have to scramble to complete an agreement by mid-November. The package must be completed and enacted by Nov. 20 to avoid the automatic spending cuts of the Gramm-Rudman law.    Administration officials are quick to caution that plenty of pitfalls still lie in the way of any budget agreement. The administration may find it difficult to wrest domestic spending cuts from Congress; and some administration officials, stressing Mr. Reagan's opposition to tax increases, worry that he could back away from an agreement at the last minute.    But the fear of continuing financial turbulence if the talks fail will weigh heavily on the negotiators. Thus, the pressures on both sides to reach agreement will be intense.    Although the details of any agreement remain to be worked out, officials say the package could include roughly $10 billion to $12 billion in additional revenue for fiscal 1988. While a portion of that will clearly be taxes, some of it might also include items such as higher tax collections expected from an increase in the Internal Revenue Service work force.    Although intended to convince markets that the nation is in good hands, the extraordinary maneuvers of the past week in many ways underscored Mr. Reagan's detached leadership. The president responded to the stock-market crash only after the two Mr. Bakers, in effect, took charge.    The turning point in the administration's long odyssey toward a budget compromise with Congress came at 3:45 Tuesday afternoon, at a tense meeting in President Reagan's private quarters at the White House. The stock market had plunged 508 points the day before, and its recovery had been thin and narrow. Moreover, there was a growing clamor for action from Congress and the markets for a show of presidential leadership.    Mr. Reagan sat down with his four top economic aides for what one White House aide calls a &quot;very frank&quot; meeting. The aides already had decided that Mr. Reagan should calm the markets by declaring that he was ready to negotiate with Congress to put the federal budget in order. In the end, the aides persuaded him to take an action he clearly didn't like. Mr. Reagan walked to the South Grounds of the White House and announced his move.    He called for bipartisan negotiations to reach a deficit-reduction package and said he was &quot;willing to look at whatever proposal&quot; congressional leaders presented.    But an incident the next morning illustrated that Mr. Reagan wasn't happy about being forced into the move. During a meeting Wednesday that included his chief of staff and Treasury secretary, Mr. Reagan turned to them and said, according to one account: &quot;Every time you talk to me about this, you bring up taxes. What's wrong with Bakers anyway?&quot;    The president's aides had begun bracing for possible problems at about 7:30 Monday morning, when calls began coming in from officials in investment houses tipping off the administration that bad signs were spreading through the Tokyo stock market.    Chief of Staff Baker found himself virtually alone as the crisis began taking shape. Treasury Secretary James Baker was in Europe, Fed Chairman Greenspan was in Texas, and Secretary of State George Shultz, a former Treasury secretary, was in the Mideast.    Dan Crippen, a White House economics aide, put together a list of market leaders for Chief of Staff Baker to contact. They included John Gutfreund, the chairman of Salomon Brothers; William Schreyer, the chairman of Merrill Lynch; David Ruder, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission; and John Phelan, the head of the New York Stock Exchange. He also instituted a system to give Mr. Reagan an hourly update of market information.    Beryl Sprinkel, the chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, briefed Mr. Reagan on the market slide at a regular staff lunch Monday. But the extent of the slide wasn't clear then, and Mr. Reagan urged his troops in familiar tones to resist calls that he predicted would emerge for a tax increase to close the budget deficit.    As the market situation worsened, the chief of staff called the Treasury secretary in Europe and Mr. Greenspan in Dallas and urged them to return to town. Secretary Baker had been up until 1 a.m. drafting a statement issued with West German leaders reiterating the Louvre Accord, an arrangement to help stabilize exchange rates, and noting that the pact provided for &quot;flexibility.&quot; Mr. Reagan tried to make reassuring comments late in the afternoon -- with little effect.    The market rebounded on Tuesday, but Howard Baker was being told by his Wall Street contacts that the rally was narrow and focused on blue-chip issues. He formed a team to draft a presidential statement. By about 1:30, White House Communications Director Thomas Griscom had drafted two different versions of a statement, both stressing the administration's cooperation with Japan and Germany but one focusing more on the White House's willingness to negotiate with Congress.    But the key paragraph of the statement would be the last one, explaining how the administration would handle the budget deficit that was so troubling world markets. Though the idea of initiating budget negotiations with Congress had been under discussion among White House aides since the morning, the key paragraph wasn't made final until a mid-afternoon meeting of the two Bakers and Messrs. Greenspan and Sprinkel in the Treasury secretary's office. They found themselves in agreement: The president would have to tell the world that he was prepared to begin negotiations with Congress to arrive at a deficit-reduction package.    They moved to the White House to deliver their message at the climactic Tuesday meeting in Mr. Reagan's residence. The session lasted 45 minutes. The president was uneasy, arguing that he has negotiated before but seen Congress fail to live up to agreements. But in the end, he agreed to authorize negotiations.    Even after the Tuesday statement, business leaders called the White House to press for action. Roger Smith, the chairman of General Motors and of the Business Roundtable, telephoned Howard Baker both Wednesday and Thursday to urge presidential leadership.    Another chief executive officer from a major corporation, talking to Chief of Staff Baker and separately to Treasury Secretary Baker during the crisis, says he told them, &quot;Gang, you've got lit dynamite in your hands. Don't start playing partisan games.&quot;    And yesterday, as the market volatility continued, Mr. Reagan went further. At a morning meeting with the two Mr. Bakers, he said he wanted to meet personally with congressional leaders and was willing to put all budgetary issues except Social Security on the table. The statement was made at last night's evening news conference. But Mr. Reagan decided his aides should issue an advance statement in midafternoon, hoping to help calm markets.    &quot;The whole world in effect has changed in the last few days,&quot; says Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas. &quot;We may have to back off some long-held views -- on both sides. If we're going to retain confidence, we have to move with dispatch.&quot;    One administration official said additional cuts in Medicare and farm spending could be part of the final package. On the revenue side, the package also could include the closing of an estate-tax loophole, which would raise more than $1 billion, and several other smaller revenue measures that were in the congressional tax bills as well as the president's budget.    Budget Director James Miller has played almost no role in the recent deliberations. He disagreed with the notion that the budget deficit contributed to the stockmarket crash, and he infuriated White House and Treasury officials by continuing to say he didn't think the president would accept a tax increase -- even after the pivotal Tuesday statement.    Mr. Miller was on Capitol Hill Tuesday afternoon, and he wasn't informed of the crucial meetings at the Treasury and White House. After learning of the president's decision, Mr. Miller told Chief of Staff Baker that he felt he should have been included. Mr. Baker reportedly replied: &quot;I guess that's so.&quot;    ---   Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, Rose Gutfeld and Thomas E. Ricks contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>