<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0054 </DOCNO><HL> Gingrich's Fiery Fight to Prove Wright Wrong Has GOP House Collegues Scurrying for Cover </HL><AUTHOR> John E. Yang (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When fire broke out in House Speaker James Wright's office one evening recently, the joke on Capitol Hill was that police were checking Rep. Newt Gingrich's whereabouts.    Ever since Mr. Wright moved into the speaker's chair last year, Mr. Gingrich has been lobbing verbal firebombs in the Texas Democrat's direction, attacking his personal ethics as well as his politics.    In the Georgia Republican's superheated rhetoric, what's at stake is nothing short of freedom in America as we know it. Listen to him talk about Mr. Wright and the Democratic leadership in the House: &quot;These people are sick. They are destructive of the values we believe in. They are so consumed by their own power, by a Mussolini-like ego, that their willingness to run over normal human beings and to destroy honest institutions is unending.&quot;    Apparently, though, not many of Mr. Gingrich's Republican colleagues see it quite that way. While the congressman may be raising legitimate questions about Mr. Wright's integrity and judgment, his approach and raucous reputation keep his drive against the speaker a lonely crusade.    He has been trying without success to find a GOP colleague to join him in filing formal charges against Mr. Wright with the House Ethics Committee. House Republicans tend to treat him like a brilliant but mad scientist feverishly at work on a daring experiment: They respect and admire him for what he is doing -- but they don't want to get too close, in case the whole thing blows up in his face.    &quot;Sometimes his style makes me feel uneasy,&quot; says Iowa Rep. Thomas Tauke, a moderate Republican. &quot;He has a tendency to jump in without being properly prepared, without thinking whether his action will help or hurt his long-term goals.&quot;    Rep. Wright, who declined to be interviewed for this story, and his aides no longer respond to Rep. Gingrich. Following an earlier salvo from the Georgian, though, the speaker told reporters that Mr. Gingrich reminded him of a gnat: &quot;A gnat can't do you any real harm, but the worst he can do is irritate you by flying around in your ear.&quot;    A pudgy 44-year-old with a head of unruly gray hair, Mr. Gingrich has the engaging air of a hyperactive, middle-aged Dennis the Menace who's still saying the darnedest things. He has a quick and agile mind that spews out ideas rapid-fire, and none of his thoughts are small ones. A former college history professor, he likens the Democrats to a cross between Italian fascists and the Norman conquerors of 11th Century Britain, and compares himself to the 18th Century Whigs who sought to limit English royal authority.    And he certainly isn't shy. He is known among friend and foe for his knack of self-promotion. In 1984, he showed up in San Francisco during the Democratic convention, granting interviews to the assembled journalists. He also pioneered the technique of making speeches in the House after everyone else goes home, using the C-SPAN television cameras to beam his message nationwide.    He used one of those one-hour talks last month to discuss what he sees as the speaker's latest outrage: newspaper reports that Washington attorney Robert Strauss and Mr. Wright's top aide threatened to sue a small banking trade magazine if it didn't delay publication of a reprinted article critical of the speaker.    Was this censorship? asked Mr. Gingrich. Had House funds paid for Mr. Strauss's services? &quot;The speaker owes all of us an explanation,&quot; he told the deserted chamber.    Asked about the incident yesterday, an aide to the speaker said that House funds weren't spent and that the magazine's editor offered the delay to give Mr. Wright an opportunity to respond.    Mr. Gingrich says he doesn't mind being the lone haranguer. But he also likes to convey the idea -- without actually saying it -- that he runs some grave personal danger in his crusade. He notes that a candidate running against Mr. Wright in a 1948 campaign was killed -- Mr. Wright was never implicated, and Texas Rangers believe the man was killed over gambling debts -- and darkly characterizes the people around the speaker as &quot;remarkably tough.&quot;    &quot;It's pretty reasonable for people to take a dive on this one,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm a little scared. I don't blame people for not being heroes.&quot;    The implication that he might come to harm draws bemused reactions from Democrats, who resort to more-prosaic methods of responding: having articles critical of Rep. Gingrich appear in the Congressional Record. One, a 1984 story from &quot;Mother Jones&quot; magazine, examined Mr. Gingrich's personal behavior and went into great detail about the congressman's bitter divorce. The Democrats' congressional-campaign organization has also compiled a 29-page collection of quotations by and about Mr. Gingrich. The title: &quot;None Dare Call it Reason.&quot;    They've even been able to find a skeleton in his own closet. Earlier this year the Democrats charged that a political-action committee headed by Mr. Gingrich defrauded donors by collecting more than $217,000 but spending only $3,000 to help conservative congressional candidates -- $2,100 of it to pay for Rep. Gingrich's travel expenses. Those who ran the committee, which is no longer in operation, deny any wrongdoing, saying the cost of raising money exceeding the money raised.    Last week, the Federal Election Commission dismissed a complaint against the committee; the Postal Service is still considering the charge.    Mr. Gingrich is only slightly more popular with some of his fellow Republicans. &quot;He's a permanent burr under the saddle,&quot; says a House GOP leadership aide. When Mr. Gingrich led the successful fight to include a no-new-taxes plank in the party's 1984 platform, he called then-Senate Finance Chairman Robert Dole the &quot;tax collector for the welfare state.&quot; Sen. Dole responded by characterizing Rep. Gingrich and his allies as &quot;the young hypocrites.&quot;    Mr. Gingrich has often expressed impatience with what he sees as his colleagues' acquiescence to their minority status. But others note that Mr. Gingrich can afford to take more risks because he has less to risk, as he doesn't hold a leadership post and is seldom involved in the nitty-gritty work of actually passing legislation.    Lately, his relations with fellow Republicans have improved somewhat. &quot;He's working within the system far more than before,&quot; says Oklahoma Rep. Mickey Edwards, who in 1984 sent House Republicans a harsh letter aimed at Mr. Gingrich and his cohorts.    Indeed, some Republicans privately cheer his attacks on Speaker Wright, vicariously striking back through Rep. Gingrich at what they say is the Texas Democrat's ironhanded rule over the House. But his colleagues remain wary of getting out front with him -- both because of possible retaliation from Democrats, and fear that Mr. Gingrich might overreach so far that he'd damage their credibility.    Earlier this year, armed with newspaper reports of the speaker's business dealings, the Georgian asked his GOP colleagues to back him in seeking formal charges against Mr. Wright for not fully disclosing his finances. But the other Republicans, reluctant to get enmeshed in Mr. Gingrich's crusade, delayed so long that Mr. Wright amended his disclosure reports from 1980, making the issue academic. </TEXT></DOC>