<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880902-0108 </DOCNO><HL> The Pentagon Mess: A Consultant Admits Paying for Inside Data About Arms Contract --- Parkin Bares an Earlier Web Of Links to Consultants While Working for Navy --- But He Denies Any Illegalities </HL><AUTHOR> Edward T. Pound and Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EMR UIS NOC TDY </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In revelations about the Pentagon-procurement scandal, nobody has publicly admitted making specific payments for confidential data on defense contracts -- until now.    William Parkin, a defense consultant and central figure in the unfolding investigation, says that starting in late 1986, he paid monthly installments totaling more than $15,000 to another consultant to obtain what he calls &quot;inside information&quot; on a still-pending Navy contract for anti-aircraft equipment. Mr. Parkin says he then passed the data on to his client, Hazeltine Corp., an Emerson Electric Co. unit.    In more than a dozen interviews, Mr. Parkin also describes an earlier web of financial and personal entanglements with consultants and others while he was a top Navy contracting official. For example, he says he took over payments on a $25,000 mobile home from William Galvin, a defense consultant prominent in the current investigation. He says he lent $13,000 to Victor Cohen, a friend of Mr. Galvin's and an Air Force assistant secretary whose phone was tapped by federal investigators. Mr. Parkin's contacts as a consultant included a hustler who became a major informant for federal investigators.    In an affidavit seeking a search warrant and filed in federal court in Dallas, the Federal Bureau of Investigation previously said wire-tapped conversations revealed that Mr. Parkin &quot;served as a middleman who paid government employees for inside information and sold it to contractors.&quot; Sitting at the kitchen table in his Alexandria, Va., home, the 64-year-old Mr. Parkin acknowledges being a middleman but adds, &quot;I deny vehemently that I made payoffs to government officials.&quot;    The government's two-year investigation into procurement corruption, known as Operation Ill Wind, is focusing on whether consultants paid Pentagon employees for privileged information about pending defense contracts. Law-enforcement officials say they also are looking into gifts, special favors and shared investments between government and industry officials.    Once a deal maker for investments ranging from beauty parlors to a trailer park, Mr. Parkin became one of the Navy's most powerful contracting officers while at the Pentagon from 1966 until his retirement in 1983. Initially working in the Naval Air Systems Command and later in the Defense Department's cruise-missile office, he helped direct tens of billions of dollars in contracts to arms makers. Even later, as a consultant, he used his contacts within the defense industry and his deep knowledge of Pentagon contracting machinery to earn handsome fees, normally $1,000 a day, for reviewing the contracting plans of weapons makers.    Hired by Hazeltine to help win Navy work on test equipment for systems that distinguish friendly and hostile aircraft, Mr. Parkin was paid about $36,000 by Hazeltine between late 1986 and May 1988, according to the company. Mr. Parkin says he wrote checks totaling $15,000 to $18,000 to Fred Lackner, then working in collaboration with Mr. Parkin and now a California consultant, in return for secret data on the Navy's plans and requirements.    Mr. Parkin contends that his role was only as a &quot;front&quot; for Mr. Lackner, who Mr. Parkin says was employed by a small contractor and later by Unisys Corp. in the first year the two men were working together. Mr. Parkin says Mr. Lackner did the spadework and obtained the confidential information.    Mr. Parkin insists that Mr. Lackner never told him his source of information, but he says he concluded that the data came from a top Navy engineer, Stuart Berlin, whose office was in charge of writing the technical requirements for the contract. After the scandal erupted in June, Mr. Parkin says Mr. Lackner assured him at an airport meeting that he hadn't paid Mr. Berlin.    In describing the type of data he received from Mr. Lackner, Mr. Parkin says: &quot;It was technical information supplied by the government guy to Lackner, and Lackner gave it to me. It tells ahead of time what would be in the 'request for proposals' -- advance information so they {Hazeltine} could start a proposal.&quot;    In a telephone interview, Mr. Lackner acknowledges getting some information from Mr. Berlin, a longtime friend, but asserts that it &quot;was public knowledge.&quot; He says he gave Mr. Parkin information about the Navy's request for contract proposals and was paid by him, but he adds, &quot;I would not describe it as inside information.&quot; Mr. Lackner also says some defense subcontractors supplied him with procurement data.    Mr. Lackner says he never paid Mr. Berlin or other government officials for information. He adds that about in 1983, he and Mr. Berlin invested in a Maryland condominium unit and that Mr. Berlin bought out his interest a year later.    Mr. Berlin declines comment.    A spokesman for Hazeltine says it was &quot;aware that Parkin worked with other consultants, but wasn't generally aware of the identity of those consultants.&quot; He asserts that Mr. Parkin &quot;was contractually obligated not to obtain inside information by bribery.&quot; He adds, &quot;Hazeltine has been assured by investigators that neither the company nor any current or former employee is a target of the investigation.&quot;    Mr. Parkin says he also helped Hazeltine improve technical aspects of its proposal to the Navy. He says Hazeltine was &quot;clean, other than the fact they had some information they shouldn't have had.&quot;    Investigators are trying to determine whether Mr. Lackner paid Mr. Berlin for inside information on government contracts, according to a law-enforcement official. The official says a search warrant served on Mr. Berlin's Navy office in June sought information on any financial ties to Mr. Lackner.    Mr. Parkin argues that the indirect arrangement -- in which he says Mr. Lackner actually obtained the secret data -- separates him from any potential illegalities. Still, he has doubts about the propriety of his actions: &quot;I bought information from him {Lackner} and passed it to Hazeltine. That is where I made an error.&quot;    His biggest mistake, though, may have been to hook up with the man who became an informer for federal investigators. Mr. Parkin says his desire for new business pushed him to deal with a consultant whom he now says he should have avoided: John Marlowe, a quiet, unsmiling former Marine who introduced himself by phone in late 1986.    Mr. Marlowe, who was then appealing an Arlington, Va., state-court conviction for enticement and aggravated sexual battery involving a girl under age 13, has emerged in the defense scandal as the government informer who secretly recorded the conversations of Mr. Parkin and others. The recorded conversations provided investigators with evidence to obtain wiretaps in January 1987 on Mr. Parkin's office and home telephones. As the inquiry developed over the next 18 months, the phones of other consultants and Pentagon officials also were tapped.    Mr. Parkin says Mr. Marlowe wanted to team up and asked him to provide entree to defense contractors. Mr. Marlowe, he says, had &quot;a credibility gap. He needed someone, he needed credibility, and it was me. . . . I have supposed smarts and know everybody.&quot; Mr. Parkin fell quickly into his usual middleman role.    Before long, Mr. Parkin recalls, Mr. Marlowe obtained advance information on a Marine Corps request for proposals to build an aircraft-communications system. &quot;I passed it on to Bill Sanda,&quot; a Washington-area consultant who provided the information to Unisys, which was interested in the contract, Mr. Parkin says. But, he adds, the information turned out to be &quot;garbage.&quot; Unisys didn't get the job.    A Unisys spokesman confirms that William Sanda worked as a consultant for the company at the time, but declines to discuss what information he provided. Mr. Sanda declines to comment. &quot;I can't communicate with you at all,&quot; he says.    Also, at Mr. Marlowe's request, Mr. Parkin says, he introduced him to representatives of ORI Group Inc., a Maryland defense concern. Over lunch at &quot;a little greasy spoon,&quot; Mr. Parkin says, Mr. Marlowe told the ORI people that for $10,000 down and $2,000 a month, he could get them inside procurement information. Mr. Marlowe's blunt style proved a put-off. &quot;I slid under the table. They just kind of dropped their teeth,&quot; Mr. Parkin recalls. The ORI deal never got off the ground.    After that, &quot;I backed away from him,&quot; Mr. Parkin says. Last year, Mr. Marlowe began serving a six-year sentence for the sex-related convictions.    But because of Mr. Parkin's broad network of contacts and expertise about the procurement process, he had many successes. He says he held $2,000-a-month retainers with Hazeltine and Northrop Corp. and a $6,000-a-month arrangement with Teledyne Electronics. All three were searched by federal agents this summer.    In addition, Mr. Parkin handled short-term jobs critiquing contractors' proposals and helping them satisfy Pentagon demands for competitive development of certain weapons. And he says that at least once, he picked up easy money from a contractor without doing any work at all.    He recalls charging Teledyne Electronics $18,000 to seek an Air Force contract, which the Newbury Park, Calif., company wasn't in any danger of losing. Mr. Parkin says he knew, but the Teledyne Inc. unit didn't know, that it had a lock on the business. He says he passed along two-thirds of the money to Mr. Lackner and another associate who worked with him on the scheme, and he gleefully recalls how they &quot;took advantage&quot; of Teledyne: &quot;We didn't have to do anything.&quot;    A Teledyne spokesman comments: &quot;We're not discussing any relationships -- there's an investigation going on.&quot;    Mr. Parkin's web of financial dealings links him to others under investigation. He says he often entered into financial transactions or provided favors to government officials and consultants, but he says such dealings were always proper.    Mr. Parkin twice bought two-year-old Cadillacs from William Beckmeier, a defense consultant, while Mr. Parkin was working in the cruise-missile program. In the same period, Mr. Beckmeier represented Norden Systems, a United Technologies Corp. unit, and Unidynamics, a subsidiary of Crane Co., both of which won contracts from the cruise-missile office -- Mr. Parkin says without help from him. Mr. Parkin adds that he also didn't get a discount on the Cadillacs. Mr. Beckmeier couldn't be reached for comment.    One of Mr. Parkin's closest ties has been to Mr. Galvin, the gregarious consultant who, along with former Assistant Navy Secretary Melvyn Paisley, has emerged as a major figure in the investigation. While the chief contracting officer in the cruise-missile office, Mr. Parkin in 1982 helped Mr. Galvin get a $225,964 contract to study the targeting equipment for the Tomahawk missile, according to the Navy and Mr. Parkin.    That same year, Mr. Parkin pitched Mr. Galvin on an investment in a condominium unit in Ocean City, Md., with unusual no-money-down terms. Mr. Galvin, a former Marine pilot, was so interested that he flew a small twin-engine plane to Ocean City to see the property. Although Mr. Parkin says he himself didn't plan to invest in the property, he took a day off from his Navy job to accompany Mr. Galvin. The visit was spoiled when the plane's landing gear collapsed, forcing a crash arrival, in which no one was hurt. Mr. Galvin's interest in the condo subsequently withered.    About the same time, Mr. Galvin did enter into another investment suggested by Mr. Parkin -- a $25,000 lease-purchase of a used mobile home. According to Mr. Parkin, Mr. Galvin stopped his payments on it after about $5,000; Mr. Parkin paid off the remaining $20,000 under a new agreement with the seller, and took the mobile home off Mr. Galvin's hands. It is still sitting in Mr. Parkin's driveway.    Mr. Parkin retired from the Navy in November 1983, and, three months later, Mr. Galvin filed incorporation papers for Mr. Parkin's Virginia consulting firm, Crest Inc. Mr. Galvin also helped Mr. Parkin get at least two consulting jobs and hired him as a subcontractor for a Galvin company, Sapphire Systems Inc.    Mr. Parkin says that in 1982, he lent $13,000 to Mr. Cohen, the Air Force official responsible for tactical air systems and a close friend of Mr. Galvin. Mr. Cohen repaid the loan about a year later, after selling five acres of undeveloped land he owned in Great Falls, Va.; Mr. Parkin introduced Mr. Cohen to the buyer. Mr. Cohen's financial-disclosure forms include the $80,000 sale of the Virginia property but don't mention the Parkin loan. Mr. Cohen's lawyer says the transaction with Mr. Parkin was proper.    For Mr. Parkin, the characterization of him as a middleman aptly describes a career, in and out of government, of trading favors, prying loose information and engineering diverse investments, including condominiums, duplexes, a trailer park, restaurants, beauty parlors and a travel agency. An inveterate salesman who once peddled aluminum siding, Mr. Parkin boasts &quot;I even sold the first pizza&quot; in his home state of Iowa after World War II.    Nowadays, Mr. Parkin doesn't seem to have much to do. He has seen trouble before -- many years ago, the Navy reprimanded him for failing to report what it thought was a bribery attempt -- but never anything like this. His lawyer, Gerard Treanor, has talked with prosecutors, but no deal has been worked out. Mr. Parkin says he will &quot;just cry a lot and keep my fingers crossed&quot; that he isn't indicted.    Meanwhile, Mr. Parkin is liquidating assets, and his once-healthy consulting business, which grossed $130,000 last year, is moribund: All his defense clients have dropped him. He faces heavy legal bills. And his Alexandria home is up for sale for more than $500,000. </TEXT></DOC>