<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871112-0037 </DOCNO><HL> ATandamp;T Sees Glimmerings of Turnaround---Coherent Strategies EmergingAfter Disarray---By Janet GuyonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> T NCRTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)COMPUTERS (EDP)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) </IN><TEXT>   When Gartner Group held its &quot;ATandamp;T Futures&quot; conference a year ago, the Stamford, Conn.-based consultants joked that American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. might not even have a future.    The company was in complete disarray, having had losses of billions of dollars trying to compete against International Business Machines Corp. in the computer business. Morale was bad. Another huge round of job cuts was imminent. Attempts to sell equipment overseas backfired. And the only big profit maker, long-distance phone service, still had its profits tightly capped by the Federal Communications Commission.    Today, Gartner Group and other ATandamp;T watchers are no longer as worried about the future. For the first time since the breakup of the Bell system in 1984, ATandamp;T is presenting coherent strategies that, if executed well, could make it into the technological powerhouse it always thought it could be. The FCC is smiling on ATandamp;T's ideas about deregulation. Equally significant, executives say that factory orders for new phone and computer products are up. ATandamp;T could break even next year on phone equipment sales and rentals to businesses and consumers.    All of which doesn't mean that ATandamp;T has turned around -- yet. The computer business is reorganizing once again and it is likely to have a loss of a few hundred million dollars next year. Phone equipment orders aren't up enough to meet the level of returns ATandamp;T wants from its mammoth factories, and a recession would dampen the company's optimistic outlook. Consumers oppose its deregulatory efforts. And, long-term, ATandamp;T increasingly will find itself competing against its former Bell units.    Senior officers, however, are upbeat. &quot;After five years, I think we've finally gotten our act together,&quot; says one executive. &quot;I just hope nobody screws it up again. And that is directed at ATandamp;T (management) as much as anyone else.&quot;    Analysts have been recommending ATandamp;T stock since the summer on the belief that by mid-1988 the FCC will cease capping ATandamp;T's profits and cap prices instead. If approved, the move will enable ATandamp;T to earn far more than the 12.7% return on its interstate phone network allowed by current FCC rules. Some states that have dropped profit caps have seen ATandamp;T's returns on investments soar to 125%.    Reflecting such financial strength, ATandamp;T's shares have declined only 14.8% from their closing price on Oct. 13, before the market plunge began. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, by comparison, declined 24.3% in the same period.    ATandamp;T closed at $28.875, up 37.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.    At the same time, ATandamp;T insiders are optimistic about its phone and computer equipment sales. Victor A. Pelson, who heads the unit that sells products and long-distance service to consumers and small businesses, told reporters at a recent breakfast that new unit orders to the factories for certain products sold to businesses and consumers are up 10% to 20%, depending on the product. ATandamp;T says that, in aggregate, orders for all products are also up 10% to 20%.    Even taking into account any price-cutting that may occur, Mr. Pelson says, ATandamp;T expects to post revenue increases from product sales beginning in next year's first quarter. If so, it would be the first revenue increase ATandamp;T has posted on sales of products to consumers and businesses since it created its unregulated equipment arm nearly five years ago.    Because of declining rentals, analysts say, the company's total equipment revenues are expected to continue falling next year. However, analysts expect losses to narrow significantly from the estimated $800 million last year.    &quot;What goes up could always change and go down, but right now things look good,&quot; says Mr. Pelson.    Consultants recently feted by ATandamp;T at a 2 1/2-day seminar are particularly impressed with efforts by group vice president John A. &quot;Gus&quot; Blanchard to turn around sales of phone equipment to small businesses. That market, which foreign companies have entered, is intensely competitive and few players are making money.    After four years of hollering by ATandamp;T sales managers in the field, Mr. Blanchard says, top management finally realized it was cannibalizing the company's own profits by selling equipment to customers who were already renting ATandamp;T equipment at high profit margins, instead of trying to sell equipment to competitors' customers. His group has recently started several programs aimed at keeping small businesses renting from ATandamp;T for a fixed period of time, then giving them discounts on new ATandamp;T equipment.    For the first time, ATandamp;T's small business group is tracking competitors, developing information on what customers are buying from which vendors in various metropolitan areas. Like other concerns that distribute nationally, Mr. Blanchard's operation is tailoring marketing plans to geographic areas, holding regional groups responsible for profits and losses in their areas. He says profits and sales to small businesses have improved and complaints are one-third what they were a year ago. &quot;We believe we can make (20% returns) in another two years,&quot; adds Mr. Blanchard.    Product sales results for large companies aren't as upbeat, but corporate telecommunications managers say ATandamp;T service is much better than a year ago. Then, according to an internal ATandamp;T survey, customers of ATandamp;T's System 75 and 85 private branch exchanges -- electronic phone switchboards -- complained that post-sales support was nonexistent and merchandise faulty. &quot;The secretaries in my office know more about the System 75 than you,&quot; one big customer complained to the company.    According to individuals within ATandamp;T, some products sold by Business Markets Group, the unit calling on large customers, are selling at rates above projections. From January through August, there were 1,700 new orders for System 75, about 1% ahead of projections, although installations are running behind forecasts.    Orders for other products, however, such as the System 85 switches, Dataphone II modems, 3B minicomputers, the ISN local area network, and the 6500 &quot;dumb&quot; terminals, are running far behind projections, at least through the end of August.    An ATandamp;T spokeswoman says the company is gaining market share in large PBXs in the second half of this year and expects to sell even more such products next year. ATandamp;T executives declined to talk about the company's strategy for big businesses.    But customers and others inside the company say ATandamp;T will sell big customers flexible long-distance services combined with on-premises communications and computer products in packages for a fixed price and fixed period of time. No other single vendor of network services, software and equipment can offer that. ATandamp;T has recently sold such packages to General Electric Co. and Du Pont Co.    Meanwhile, ATandamp;T continues to look for other ways to sell more products and keep its factories running at capacity. That was the motive behind top management's August discussions about acquiring NCR Corp., an office products concern, say individuals close to the company.    Many of these efforts are also meant to lock big customers into buying from ATandamp;T before the regional Bell concerns, who are aggressively trying to get court approval to invade ATandamp;T's markets, are allowed to enter the long-distance and manufacturing businesses. ATandamp;T has, at most, three years to firmly establish its markets and customers before it comes face to face with the Bells, executives in the industry say.    To further distance itself from its current competitors, analysts say, ATandamp;T intends to spend an unprecedented $15 billion on its phone network in the next five years, making its network 95% digital by 1995. The company said yesterday that it plans to invest $3 billion in its digital network in 1988 and a similar amount in 1989.    Within five years, however, ATandamp;T will have to decide whether to divest itself of its best hope for getting international revenue: Network Systems, which makes the big phone switches sold primarily to the Bells. It is the capability of these switches that, in the future, will enable the Bells to become ATandamp;T's biggest competitors. If it continues to own Network Systems, ATandamp;T will eventually become its own worst enemy, having sold the Baby Bells the critical technology they need to compete against their former parent.    In the meantime, ATandamp;T can still wring plenty of costs from its businesses, an effort spearheaded by the company's chief financial officer, Robert Kavner, who came to ATandamp;T from the accounting firm of Coopers andamp; Lybrand 3 1/2 years ago. In one significant change, ATandamp;T has made its components business a cost center, rather than a profit center, reducing the infighting over transfer prices between units within the company that has helped inflate costs of the company's products in past years.    Market forecasts now are being closely questioned by both the financial staffs and manufacturing staffs in an effort to keep the company from ending up with warehouses full of unsalable products. Only now, says Mr. Kavner, is ATandamp;T developing the financial systems, order entry systems, inventory managment systems and billing systems that allow it to manage its business in an efficient way.    At one time, says Mr. Kavner, ATandamp;T had 17 different payroll systems; by early next year it will have one. Order-entry systems were designed to handle only the most complicated orders, frustrating salespeople who had just plain vanilla orders for, say, 10 computer terminals. Jerrybuilt financial systems required that task forces be formed just to find out what a big customer bought from ATandamp;T because different units of ATandamp;T called the same item by different names.    &quot;Three years ago, I only knew sales of my product,&quot; says one ATandamp;T product manager. &quot;I couldn't tell you costs, revenue, advertising or service support. Today I can.&quot;    Such efforts are raising morale. A year ago, an ATandamp;T staff psychologist reported that, among other things, &quot;We have some very 'disturbed' managers. . . . The amount of suppressed, covert hostility lurking just below the surface is truly frightening.&quot; Now, says one former ATandamp;T manager who still deals with the company, morale is up even if sales in many areas aren't. &quot;People are going to get bonuses and they think they have job security,&quot; he says.    Nonetheless, ATandamp;T employees aren't forgetting the trauma they've been through since divestiture of the Bells. Many believe that ATandamp;T will cut jobs further if the long-distance business is deregulated. Meanwhile, some employees are suing the company, contending that the selection of who gets severance pay is discriminatory. Others have discussed suing as stockholders, contending top management is inept. And one former manager, James O. Crawford, has written a book. The title: &quot;Ma Bell Is No Lady.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>