<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871029-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Manila's Mood:As Terrorism Spreads,Mrs. Aquino's TenureAppears in Jeopardy---Threats of Coups and Strikes,And Military's Menacing,Put U.S. on the Defensive---The Murders of 3 Americans---By Lee LescazeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> MANILA, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Rocked by bombings andassassinations, this jittery capital is awaiting the finalblow to Corazon Aquino's presidency.   With large elements of the armed forces hostile to her government, Mrs. Aquino remains in power in large part because her opponents are divided on what individual or group should succeed her.    Events move slowly in the Philippines, and her government could keep staggering for months, perhaps even through 1988. But its survival until the end of Mrs. Aquino's term in 1992 would be miraculous indeed.    The capital's jitters intensified yesterday with the killing of two U.S. servicemen, a retired U.S. serviceman and a Filipino in separate shooting incidents near Clark Air Base, 50 miles north of here. Officials say they don't know who was responsible for the attacks, which occurred in a 15-minute period.    Menacing rumors of impending strikes, conspiracies and rebellions had the government threatening to impose martial law even before the latest round of terrorism -- although that would amount to a forsaking of all Mrs. Aquino accomplished when she ousted President Ferdinand Marcos and restored democracy. Her opponents have been calling for her to share power with them -- although that would amount to her complete surrender.    Government corruption, meanwhile, is said to be approaching Marcos-era proportions. Checkbook warfare has broken out, with each side bidding for the loyalty of military commanders whose allegiance is for sale. Buying commanders buys time for Mrs. Aquino's government, but the momentum against her appears irreversible, and a major governmental role for military leaders seems inevitable.    No one knows what laws a new government would follow, but the rapid decline of Mrs. Aquino's authority in her 20 months in office raises serious questions about the future of democracy in the Philippines.    An early casualty of Philippine turmoil is the U.S. image, which had held up well here ever since World War II. Many Filipinos now believe the U.S. is manipulating events, and they resent it. Only 31% of Manilans say the U.S. is acting &quot;sincerely,&quot; while 38% disagree, according to a recent survey.    Rumors play on suspicions that the U.S. is secretly working with the Philippine military to move the nation to the right and to guarantee future U.S. control over the huge military facilities (Clark field and Subic Naval Base), for which it pays $200 million annually in rent disguised as aid.    Any American statement angers at least one Philippine faction. Immediately after the latest coup attempt Aug. 28, Sen. Raul Manglapus, who has since become the foreign secretary, accused Washington of supporting the rebels. To quash that idea, U.S. Ambassador Nicholas Platt said that an American official had telephoned coup leader Col. Gregorio &quot;Gringo&quot; Honasan during the insurgency to warn that the U.S. would cut off aid if the rebels succeeded.    This prompted suspicious Filipinos to question how the U.S. could reach a rebel so quickly during the fighting. Others charged U.S. interference in internal Philippine affairs. Still others, like Manila Standard columnist Luis Teodoro, simply don't believe Mr. Platt. The columnist describes Col. Honasan and other right-wingers as &quot;the U.S. dagger at the throat of the Aquino government.&quot;    Although the U.S. often reiterates its support for Mrs. Aquino, the Filipino attitude now seems to be that the U.S. should shut up -- and ante up more aid. House Speaker Ramon Mitra says, &quot;We don't need Mr. Platt's assurances of support. If they want to help, why don't they rush the entire 1988 assistance money here now?&quot;    As the pressures on Mrs. Aquino mount, she is limited in her possible responses by the new constitution, which doesn't give her the same martial-law powers that Mr. Marcos had. What's more, declaring martial law when the prime problem is a disaffected armed forces would seem a hazardous exercise. But she has already formed one unconstitutional organ, a Council of State, that seems to be handling all national security matters in place of the National Security Council, which, by law, must include her political opposition.    Though Mrs. Aquino remains the best-liked politician in the nation, her once-overwhelming popularity is being sapped by rising prices, a weakening economy, military hostility and the reports of official corruption. Only 55% of Manila's population approves of her handling of the presidency, down from 73% in March, the recent poll shows.    &quot;The country is deteriorating faster now than in the last days of Marcos,&quot; one businessman says. Many businessmen would welcome more authoritarian leadership with or without Mrs. Aquino, choosing law and order over democracy. &quot;The honeymoon is over, isn't it?&quot; Mrs. Aquino said in a recent speech to businessmen. &quot;A Cory who can do no wrong is now seen as having done nothing at all.&quot;    Support for Mrs. Aquino usually gets expressed in the negative. The first argument Mrs. Aquino's backers advance is that any alternative would be worse. Sen. Ernesto Maceda says, &quot;Fear of what would come next kept people behind Marcos for a long time. It will be the same for her. She will stagger through to 1992.&quot; Other allies, like House Speaker Mitra, worry in apocalyptic terms. &quot;What's at stake is the future of democracy,&quot; he says. &quot;People must realize that there are no democratic alternatives to Cory. There are only two other choices: a military dictatorship or communism.&quot;    The Communist New People's Army, apparently content to watch the chaos in Manila, has seemed to ease its pressure, but the armed forces do pose a short-term threat. The military is a genie let out of its bottle. Politicized and corrupted under Mr. Marcos, military men got their first whiff of political king-making when Aquino backers solicited their help and they turned on Mr. Marcos. Now they want a political role, but they want political figures to join in governing with them.    Col. Honasan has become a prominent opposition spokesman, hectoring the president from his hiding place as though taking up arms against the government had established his credentials. He remains at large, it is said, because he is sheltered by sympathetic military units not far from Manila. Two other rebel officers, each probably with more armed men than Col. Honasan, also threaten the government. Among them, these men already have the capacity to end government control over most provinces north of Manila.    Filipinos, remembering that Mr. Marcos manufactured the string of bombings, assassination attempts and other menacing events to justify declaring martial law, wonder who the &quot;destabilizers&quot; are this time. They consider the Aquino government and the U.S. suspect, and they discount government statements that the Communists are behind each explosion or assassination.    If Mrs. Aquino doesn't know how to get the military genie back into its bottle, she also seems buffaloed by Sen. Juan Ponce Enrile, the leader of the opposition party and a man Col. Honasan frequently calls his spiritual father.    Mr. Enrile denies any responsibility for the August coup attempt or for Mrs. Aquino's troubles. &quot;They keep pointing to me as the bad guy,&quot; he says, &quot;but I am not the problem.&quot; He is liberal with his criticism of the president, however. &quot;There is no authority at the center. No one has the baton. Imagine someone trying to play Rachmaninoff without a conductor,&quot; he says. Switching metaphors, he adds: &quot;I am a passenger on a bus being driven by a student driver.&quot;    Vice President Salvador Laurel now also opposes the president, and both men make much of their support for the armed forces, leading to speculation that they will be among civilians involved in a military-imposed post-Aquino government. If Mr. Laurel was involved, a government could claim a constitutional legitimacy.    Messrs. Enrile and Laurel predict that many of the politicians elected with Mrs. Aquino's backing will defect to the opposition. &quot;The Aquino group is practicing self-criticism,&quot; Mr. Enrile says. &quot;In politics, your bed mate of today may be outside the mosquito netting tomorrow.&quot; Mr. Enrile in fact shared mosquito netting with Mr. Marcos for almost 20 years and was Mrs. Aquino's first defense secretary until she dropped him last November.    Shifting political alliances are a hallmark of Philippine politics, and although 22 of 24 senators and a large majority of house members were elected with campaign support from Mrs. Aquino, their loyalty runs shallow. Most politicians' first imperative is to be with the winner; the president's weakness drives the politicians to look for new bedfellows.    Mr. Enrile has positioned himself as the opposite of Mrs. Aquino -- a man of action. But after the latest coup attempt, his popularity plummeted to 25% from 55% a year ago. &quot;He isn't really what the political center wants, but if things continue to deteriorate, they'll turn to him,&quot; one businessman predicts.    While Manila has become a high-anxiety city, lower-intensity guerrilla warfare continues in the countryside, with neither side making significant headway despite numerous small-unit clashes. Facts about the insurgency are notoriously unreliable, but it seems the New People's Army has been gaining back some of the manpower it lost through defections in the early months of Mrs. Aquino's presidency.    For their part, the Communists are putting a high priority now on strikes and on organization in urban areas, says a party member in Manila. He expects either that Mrs. Aquino will abandon what remains of her pro-poor policies and crack down on leftist labor and social action groups, or that she will be replaced by a more right-wing leader.    Mrs. Aquino's failure to assert her leadership has proved disastrous both because Filipinos admire decisive command and because other politicians exploit her apparent weakness. Speaker Mitra, claiming that Mrs. Aquino recoils from using her powers, grimly jokes that &quot;people should shoot at her son more often&quot; to force her to action. After her only son was wounded during this summer's coup attempt, Mrs. Aquino displayed uncharacteristic determination in demanding that the rebels be caught and punished.    Philippine problems are so serious, however, that many wonder how even the most vigorous leadership could accomplish much. The rapid annual population growth of almost 3%, for one thing, means the nation must create 700,000 jobs a year. It isn't coming close.    At Catholic Divine Word College in Legazpi City, faculty member Carlos Ante says fewer than 3% of graduates find jobs. As it is, about 60% of the 57 million Filipinos live in severe poverty. Desperate for work, many Filipinos look abroad. Educated women take jobs abroad as domestic servants. Doctors and nurses go to foreign countries for better pay. So do helicopter pilots and maintenance men who get military training here and then decamp.    Government leaders always have represented the interests of the wealthy. Mrs. Aquino, a member of a rich, landowning family, has spoken movingly about the poor, but her initial moves of reconciliation with the New People's Army guerrillas, labor unions and other organizations on the political left brought sharp opposition from the military and most politicians. She has backed away.    The Rev. James J. Carroll, a Catholic teacher who remains a strong Aquino supporter, says, &quot;I'm afraid that government isn't aware that radical social change is needed. They have to be reminded that nothing in the last 70 years has brought the average Filipino much benefit.&quot; Mrs. Aquino doesn't command the fervor among Catholic leaders she once did. Some churchmen are offended that she has accomplished so little. &quot;We support her, but would we go into the streets for her again?&quot; asks a priest, alluding to the &quot;People Power&quot; revolt that brought her to power. He answers his question with a shrug.    Resurgent corruption has helped turn the cheers for Mrs. Aquino to jeers. She is most damaged by reported activities of her brother Jose &quot;Peping&quot; Cojuangco and his wife, Margarita &quot;Ting-Ting&quot; Cojuangco, who separately are said to have taken over a number of richly rewarding businesses. One politician says he has raised the subject with the president. &quot;I don't know whether or not she believes it,&quot; he says. &quot;She has a very soft spot for Peping, her little brother.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>