<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0178 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: Brazil's Land Reform Condemns Farmers to Poverty </HL><AUTHOR> Ellen B. Geld </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> CMD </IN><DATELINE> TIETE, Brazil  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Because Sao Paulo farmer Jorge Borges's 40 hectares (about 100 acres) is too small to compensate machine costs, he yearly rents 200 hectares more to plant soybeans and wheat. Eventually he hopes to increase his hectarage so as to farm entirely on his own property. But last year inflation raised interest rates from 1% a month to 20% within a season, and he was forced to sell his equipment to pay his debts. Had not neighbors -- organized by the local Rural Democratic Union, a nationwide organization of private farmers -- helped him to plant in the spring, he would have had to quit farming.    Compare his plight with that of Altair Souzas from Irece, Bahia, who, losing everything to prolonged drought, migrated southward with thousands of others. Joining a loose confederation known as the &quot;Movement of the Landless,&quot; he camped on invaded property until it was expropriated and divided by an agency of the Brazilian Ministry of Agrarian Reform. Today, over a year later, he lives with his family in an improvised shack, still awaiting the financing and technical assistance necessary to do anything more than eke out a bare subsistence from his poorly managed soil. But even as the assistance becomes available, it is doubtful he will survive on the 20 hectares alloted him; it is too small to provide a livelihood.    These are but two victims of a vicious cycle perpetuated by an agrarian reform that has increased the violence and rural exodus it was supposed to stem. Of 450,000 families scheduled to be settled by 1988, only 40,000 have been -- in conditions comparable to the Souzases'. An additional 45,000 farmers not included in the reform joined the rural exodus last year.    In a country where 30% of the arable land is still a wilderness, the problem is certainly not lack of land. And the 55% of farmers who own less than 25 hectares are quitting not because &quot;big mechanized farming is forcing them off the land,&quot; as is often claimed by land reformists. It is because they haven't the backing to improve, expand and farm efficiently.    The small farmers are also leaving because Brazil is fast becoming an industrial nation. The trend is irreversible and, with a population of 141 million (increasing by more than 2% a year), should eventually turn out for the best. But to make it workas in all successful industrial nations -- fewer farmers must produce more food for people who live well by doing other things. If a reform is to be useful, it must not only help farmers to acquire property, but practice modern technology on land of adequate quality and size. Unfortunately, until now the opposite has happened in Brazil because agrarian reform is based on politics and fantasy rather than agricultural reality.    The politics began in 1985 when, to gain popular appeal, the government of President Jose Sarney promised to settle no fewer than seven million families (roughly one-third of the population) on land. Since then -- with periodic pompous declarations -- the reform has been abandoned to bureaucrats better at producing theories than results in the field. Influenced by &quot;progressive&quot; priests and socialist ideologists, the emphasis has been on &quot;the people's right to the land they till&quot; -- particularly private land.    Big is bad; small is good, regardless of the kind of crop and the space it needs to provide an income. Using numbers of people employed as the criteria, a family of 10 working with hoes and mules on 20 hectares is considered ideal. But three men cultivating 500 hectares with machines is wasteful of space and employment -- even though the three support their families while providing food for themselves and 100 others. The result of this back-through-the-looking-glass exercise has been the division of large properties -- be they in the distant Amazon or the highly developed Sao Paulo region -- into plots of less than 30 hectares, thus condemning their recipients to the poor, medieval farming they left behind. Yes, this may be land reform, but it certainly isn't development.    Although the government owns 112 million hectares of arable land that could be distributed at no cost, private property has been the target of reformists. Productive farms are supposed to be exempt. But absurd criteria (e.g., rented lands, even if fully cropped, are considered unproductive) have caused numerous well-run properties to fall subject to expropriation. One result has been a series of protests that has kept the Ministry of Agrarian Reform busier settling court cases than farmers. Another has been the alienation not only of those whose interest in land is merely speculative, but of a much larger group who farm for a living and have been the last to be consulted on a program that will affect them first.    If Brazil is one of the world's largest and most diverse agricultural producers, it is thanks to the research and extension done by private enterprise. And over the past 40 years, while government has settled a million farmers, private cooperatives and colonization companies have settled four times that many -- from the great migrations to Parana in the 1940s to settlements in the Amazon today. And yet there is no reason why the government cannot work with the private sector in genuine, agricultural development policies.    Indeed, right now in Altair Souzas's Irece, five private companies are ready to invest in a project that would irrigate 150,000 hectares of large and small farms. Between agriculture and related industries, this project eventually should generate 240,000 jobs and an income of about $660 million a year. What is lacking is the government's commitment in establishing water projects (i.e., dams, canals and waterdistribution networks) drawing from the Rio Verde -- a project that, when completed, should cost $900 million.    The advantages of such joint ventures are obvious: for the private entities, increased profits and jobs; for the government, tax revenue for more development programs. Had the government helped with the irrigation project long ago, Altair Souzas and thousands more who migrate yearly could have stayed where they were. And with long-term financing, both he and Jorge Borges could improve their technology, expand and pay their debts by being more productive.    While such needs remain unattended, the direction of the agrarian reform remains the same. The latest agrarian reform minister, Jader Barbalho, is more determined than his predecessors, and he has extracted more promises of funding from the federal government. While the Constituent Assembly debates statutes that would make expropriation of rural lands irrevocable, a plan is in the works to issue some $4 billion of government bonds to be used just for the expropriation of five million hectares to settle 200,000 families this year.    But as forceful as Jader Barbalho may be, he seems to have as little interest in the realities of farming as preceding ministers; the emphasis is still on mules and hoes and division for division's sakes. To what end? The continuation of a vicious cycle, as long as politics are considered more important than the practicalities of establishing individuals as modern farmers in a modern world.    ---   Mrs. Geld has lived and farmed in Brazil for 30 years and writes a weekly column for O Estado do Sao Paulo. </TEXT></DOC>