<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Space Shuttle Program Faces Big Hurdle---Thiokol to TestRedesigned Motor Tomorrow---By Judith ValenteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MTI GOVMT UTXAEROSPACE (ARO)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   The space shuttle program faces a critical hurdle tomorrow, when Morton Thiokol Inc. is scheduled to conduct the first full-scale test of its redesigned rocket motor.    The test will help determine whether the mechanical problems that led to the explosion of the shuttle last year have been solved. Its outcome also could decide whether the National Aeronautics and Space Administration can stick to its current goal of a June 1988 launch.    A critical failure could make it almost certain that the next launch would be pushed back beyond 1988, said Thomas S. Russell, Morton Thiokol's vice president of development and strategic planning.    While a successful test is important to the space program, it is also important to the economic performance of Morton Thiokol, a Chicago-based manufacturer of specialty chemicals and salt in addition to propulsion systems.    In recent months, the company has conducted a number of small-scale tests of the various parts of the redesigned motor. Tomorrow, however, will be the first time that the company has attempted firing of a redesigned rocket with a full load of propellant. The test will last for two minutes.    &quot;We know the various pieces have worked when tested independently, but will it all work together? That's what this test is about,&quot; said Mr. Russell.    The 1.2 million-pound solid-fuel rocket has been redesigned with new joints that link sections of the motor. A presidential commission concluded in June 1986 that cold temperatures on the day of the Challenger launch in January 1986 caused two O-rings in one of the joints to contract, allowing hot gases to escape and ignite the shuttle's external fuel tank.    As a result, Morton Thiokol has redesigned the joint so that insulation between the propellant and the joint is now sealed with adhesive. In addition, the joint contains a metal lip or &quot;capture feature&quot; that will prevent the joint from opening up under ignition pressure as it apparently did in the shuttle disaster. Morton Thiokol also has added a third rubber O-ring to the joint to prevent escaping gases.    Though Morton Thiokol won a contract to redesign the rocket motors from NASA, it is locked in competition with four other companies to build a new generation of safer, more powerful shuttle rockets that will be put into use beyond 1993.    Morton Thiokol's space business accounts for 35% of the sales in its aerospace division, and 7% of the division's profits. In the fiscal year ended June 30, the aerospace group's profit declined 24% largely because of the loss of business related to the shuttle and a $10 million penalty NASA imposed on the company because of the disaster.    A successful rocket test tomorrow will also be a significant boost to the 2,500 space program workers at Morton Thiokol's operations plant in the foothills of the Wasatch Mountains about 20 miles outside Brigham City, Utah, who have worked almost exclusively on the motor redesign for the past 20 months.    Morton Thiokol's chairman and chief executive officer, Charles S. Locke, is flying out to watch the test. Several thousand Brigham City residents also are expected to take time away from the town's annual Peach Days Festival to watch the test firing.    Dee Jay Hammon, an aerospace engineer at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch plant said employees there are confident that tomorrow's test will go well. &quot;Whether they worked directly on the shuttle program or not, all employees will be feeling the same thing-elated,&quot; Mr. Hammon said.    Even if successful tomorrow, the rocket motor will face five to six additional two-minute full-scale tests to ensure that the redesigned joints will function properly at various temperatures, Mr. Russell said. Although Morton Thiokol engineers will have an indication almost immediately whether the test was a success, a full analysis of the firing will take two weeks.    In a previous scaled-down test, Morton Thiokol engineers deliberately cut one of the seals to see if that might lead to a leak. It didn't.    In addition to improving the joints that link the four sections of the solid rocket motor, Morton Thiokol also redesigned the joints that hold together the rocket case and nozzle exit cone. John Thomas, manager of the NASA rocket motor redesign team, said that although this joint wasn't involved in the shuttle accident, NASA officials did see stress on the O-rings in this joint on previous shuttle missions.    Mr. Thomas said if the full-scale test is successful, &quot;We shouldn't have any erosion or any gas escaping to any of the primary or secondary O-rings.&quot; The motor must meet NASA specifications in all other respects to be certified for actual use, he said.    Although Morton Thiokol's space business has suffered in the past two years, analysts say investors' confidence in the company has increased lately.    Morton Thiokol's stock jumped $2.50 a share to close at $53 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday on volume of 305,200 shares after Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. issued a buy recommendation.    The company has remained profitable since the disaster and analysts are predicting per-share earnings in fiscal 1988 ending June 30 of $3.25 to $3.35 a share, compared with $2.90 a share, or $138 million, in fiscal 1987. Half of Morton Thiokol's earnings comes from its specialty chemicals division, but there is also potential for growth in the non-shuttle divisions of its aerospace group, analysts said. Morton Thiokol is negotiating to become the sole supplier of air-bag restraints for General Motors Corp. cars, a contract estimated to be valued at as much as $500 million.    Morton Thiokol is also competing in a joint venture with United Technologies Corp. for a $1 billion contract to upgrade the Titan IV expendable launch vehicle, Mr. Russell of Morton Thiokol said. </TEXT></DOC>