<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890823-0019 </DOCNO><DD> = 890823 </DD><AN> 890823-0019. </AN><HL> What's News --@  World-Wide </HL><DD> 08/23/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   COLOMBIA STARTED extraditing an alleged drug finance boss to the U.S.    Eduardo Martinez, who is said to manage funds for the Medellin cartel, faces U.S. conspiracy charges for his alleged role in a billion-dollar money laundering scheme. He was arrested during a crackdown on drug lords after the murders of a judge, police colonel and presidential candidate last week. Meanwhile, Colombia's judges, who went on strike to protest drug violence, announced they would return to work. And Colombia said it wouldn't accept any help from U.S. troops in fighting drug traffickers.    Attorney General Thornburgh issued a &quot;dozen most wanted list&quot; of Colombian drug lords and warned the U.S. can't bow to fears it will be a target.    ---   Gorbachev conferred with Poland's Communist chief by phone and agreed that solving Poland's problems is impossible without the party, a spokesman said. The conversation came as Solidarity activist Mazowiecki held talks on forming a government. He is expected to be elected prime minister tomorrow.    ---   Voyager 2 found at least one complete ring of debris orbiting Neptune. The discovery surprised scientists, who were trying to relocate one of two partial rings -- called ring arcs -- that appeared in pictures the spacecraft sent back to earth Aug. 11. The new photos also show the second arc and suggest that it may be a complete ring as well.    ---   An East German was shot to death in a struggle with Hungarian border guards as he tried to escape to the West. Bonn said it was closing its embassy in Prague because it was overwhelmed by refugees. It closed its embassy in Budapest and its mission in East Berlin this month because of the crush of East Germans trying to flee.    ---   The EPA said it sued 34 firms and individuals that have violated federal rules on asbestos removal. The agency also warned that it has begun to use its authority to bar companies found guilty of asbestos-removal violations from getting federal contracts, loans and grants.    ---   A Lithuanian commission denounced the Red Army's occupation of the republic in 1940 and said a vote by its Parliament to join the Soviet Union was invalid. The parliamentary panel's views were published in official Lithuanian newspapers on the eve of protests marking the 50th anniversary of a Nazi-Soviet pact to carve up Europe.    ---   Fuel shortages hit the Armenian capital of Yerevan, and strikes in neighboring Azerbaijan entered their second day as hundreds of thousands demonstrated in the city of Baku. The shortages and unrest increased tensions in the Soviet republics, where more than 100 Armenians and Azeris have died in ethnic turmoil in the past 18 months.    ---   South African police used whips, tear gas and rubber bullets in clashes with schoolchildren near Cape Town, and they arrested 113 hospital workers in the city. In Durban, nine white activists were arrested. Conflict has increased in the past few days as a campaign to defy apartheid and emergency restrictions has spread to most major cities.    ---   Huey P. Newton was found shot to death on the sidewalk of a drug-infested neighborhood in Oakland, Calif. Newton, 47, was a co-founder of the militant Black Panther Party in the 1960s. The Panthers advocated armed self-defense for blacks and had frequent clashes with police. They also ran breakfast programs for ghetto children.    ---   Eight African leaders met in Harare, Zimbabwe, to try to shore up a faltering cease-fire in Angola. Since a peace accord was reached in Zaire in June, truce violations have raised fears the Angolan civil war could escalate and threaten complex, U.S.-brokered peace accords signed by Angola, South Africa and Cuba in December.    ---   Najibullah outlined ways to end Afghanistan's civil war. Diplomats said the Afghan president's plan drops his previous insistence on a cease-fire before talks but doesn't meet Moslem guerrilla demands that he step down. Western experts had expected the U.S.-backed guerrillas to oust Najibullah soon after Soviet forces withdrew Feb. 15.    ---   The Nicaraguan opposition would return confiscated land and dismantle much of the army if elected in February, according to a draft platform obtained by the Associated Press. The coalition also envisions maintaining state control of foreign trade while freeing the domestic market. The coalition ranges from communists to conservatives.    ---   Arafat warned the PLO may rethink its peace drive unless the U.S. and Israel respond to it. He also said at a news conference in Amman that the PLO may call for full-scale civil disobedience in the Israeli-occupied territories. Washington wants the PLO to accept some form of Israeli proposal for elections in the West Bank and Gaza.    ---   Died: Diana Vreeland, fashion editor, in New York City, of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>