<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0146 </DOCNO><HL> Small Comfort: Prized by Hospitals, Accreditation Hides Perils Patients Face --- Slipshod Institutions Keep Group's Seal of Approval Even in Forced Closings --- Bloody Tables and Maggots </HL><AUTHOR> Walt Bogdanich (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Like most other Americans, 86-year-old Lillian Levin had probably never heard of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.    But without accreditation by the joint commission -- the hospital world's highest seal of approval -- New York City's Parsons Hospital might not have been in business when Ms. Levin checked in with a case of pneumonia last April.    Parsons had been inspected by the joint commission in June 1986 and remained fully accredited. Thus, Ms. Levin had no way of knowing what the joint commission had really found at Parsons: serious failings that would ultimately cause the hospital to flunk its inspection. In line with its policy, the joint commission did nothing to warn prospective patients or doctors.    The sick, many of them elderly, kept coming. Ms. Levin's pneumonia was improperly treated with a poor choice of medicine. She developed congestive heart failure, but it went unrecognized and untreated. She lost blood, but it went uninvestigated. On April 18, after 16 days in Parsons' care, Ms. Levin died.    Ms. Levin's tragedy isn't just another example of negligent hospital care. She had every reason to believe she was entering a hospital that met the most stringent quality standards. In fact, a three-month investigation by this newspaper shows, accreditation masks serious failings in possibly hundreds of the 5,100 hospitals in America inspected and approved by the joint commission.    The case of Parsons is particularly unsettling. From Oct. 1, 1987, through April 18, 1988, a time when the joint commission knew of Parsons' deficiencies but left it accredited, 73 patients died. More than half of them received deficient care, a state-commissioned report found.    Parsons closed on May 12. Not until one week later did the joint commission finally remove Parsons' prized accreditation.    The joint commission, based in Chicago, is one of the most powerful and secretive groups in all of health care. Federal regulators, most state health departments, insurance companies and even lenders rely on the nonprofit group to tell them when hospitals aren't performing up to standard. Although accreditation is voluntary, many hospitals couldn't survive without it. Accredited hospitals qualify for Medicare reimbursements, the single greatest source of revenue for most hospitals.    The Wall Street Journal, in its examination of the joint commission, interviewed hospital workers and government officials, examined hospital records obtained through the Freedom of Information Act, and researched court and other records.    Among the findings: The joint commission allows dangers to health and safety to go uncorrected for weeks, months and even years. Sloppy, irresponsible hospitals have little to fear from the commission: Punishment in recent years has been nearly nonexistent. Although the law requires federal officials to monitor the commission, their efforts are disorganized, weak and ineffective.    In May, Pennsylvania officials ordered the accredited James C. Giuffre Medical Center in Philadelphia to stop admitting surgery patients. Inspectors had found 124 deficiencies. Of 66 cases reviewed, they found 12 questionable deaths after surgery, 29 unnecessary surgeries, and 56 cases of post-surgical complications. A surgical team member was unqualified.    Last November, health inspectors visited the accredited Inglewood Women's Hospital, specializing in abortions, in Los Angeles County. There they found patients rushed through medical procedures &quot;in the interest of maintaining the facility's busy operating schedule.&quot; They saw patients moved into an operating room &quot;soiled by the fresh blood of previous patients&quot;; between operations, an operating table was wiped in a &quot;slovenly fashion&quot; with a bloody towel. The hospital also kept inaccurate medical records, inspectors said.    A spokesman for Inglewood, now closed, denies the charges. He says the hospital became a target because it performed abortions. Giuffre says that many of its problems have been corrected and that new management is in place.    Although the joint commission is the first to learn of a hospital's sloppiness, it is usually the last to act decisively. While bureaucratic fumbling may occasionally play a role, the commission appears subject to a fundamental conflict.    The group is the creation of five major medical bodies, among them the American Medical Association and the American Hospital Association, which dominate the joint commission's 22-member governing board. Most of its $32 million budget comes from fees imposed on hospitals seeking accreditation; 84% of the nation's hospitals are accredited by the joint commission. &quot;We do control it in a business sense, in a policy sense,&quot; says Alexander H. Williams, senior vice president of the American Hospital Association. But he insists that the association has no influence on accreditation decisions.    The joint commission sees its business as helping hospitals and others maintain or improve their standards to stay in business, not regulating them in a legal sense or punishing them. Its accreditation depends largely on an institution's ability to meet standards rather than its performance in actually meeting them. &quot;We keep as many institutions as possible within the pale of our influence, so we can keep lifting them up,&quot; says Jack Coale, a spokesman. &quot;You get more things fixed through a cooperative arrangement.&quot;    A policy of keeping hospital deficiencies under tight wraps reflects the spirit of cooperation. The joint commission has kept the findings of its hospital surveys confidential since the group was established by the American College of Surgeons in 1951. (The college had conducted the first nationwide hospital inspection in 1919 -- and after reviewing the dismal findings at a meeting at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York, it tossed them into the hotel's furnace.) Without the promise of confidentiality, the joint commission argues, hospitals wouldn't voluntarily agree to open their private records to outsiders.    Dennis S. O'Leary, the doctor who serves as president of the joint commission, angrily denies that the commission covers up for sloppy hospitals. &quot;You can look like an awful tough law enforcer if you come in and beat people around the head whether they need it or not,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm not going to sit here and tell you our review processes are perfect. They're not. Nor am I going to tell you that the federal government and the states are perfect, because they're not, either.&quot;    Since joining the commission in April 1986, Dr. O'Leary has tried to improve the group's image through more speeches before medical groups and interviews with the trade press. Many observers consider him ideally suited to the task.    Dr. O'Leary became nationally known in 1981 following the attempted assassination of President Reagan. As dean of clinical affairs at George Washington University, Dr. O'Leary calmly provided the nation with televised updates on Mr. Reagan's condition.    As it stands, the joint commission is accountable to neither government nor patients. Yet it commands a quasi-regulatory status. The government deems qualified for Medicare money any hospital accredited by the group. And 42 states accept accreditation as evidence of compliance with their licensing requirements in whole or in part.    There is no systematic federal inspection of accredited hospitals. The government contracts with state officials to investigate specific complaints and make random inspections -- spot checks. When &quot;serious deficiencies&quot; are uncovered, the federal government assumes primary inspection responsibility for the hospitals at fault. Since January 1986, such deficiencies have been found in more than 150 hospitals around the nation.    Ralph Lopez, who helps oversee hospital inspections in Los Angeles County, says big, prestigious hospitals would provide top-quality care even without the joint commission. He says poor hospitals aren't sufficiently cowed by the joint commission to improve much. &quot;The {joint commission} safeguard just isn't there,&quot; he says. &quot;That has been clearly demonstrated in the cases we looked into.&quot;    &quot;The joint commission should be put out of business,&quot; says Art Levin, director of the Center for Medical Consumers and Health Information, a New York patientadvocacy group. &quot;The public runs around thinking that someone is looking over the hospital's shoulder, and that just isn't the case.&quot;    The joint commission refuses to release or specifically discuss any of its hospital-inspection reports. The contents are so closely guarded that even some high-level government health officials can't see them. But records obtained from other sources show widespread problems.    In random checks of 58 of the nation's accredited hospitals last year, state inspectors commissioned by the federal government found about one in three was seriously substandard. From January 1986 through June 1988, federal officials have had to take over full inspection responsibility in 156 accredited hospitals after state inspectors found serious deficiencies.    The joint commission has often asserted that it denies accreditation to 2% of the hospitals it surveys. Yet in 1986 it denied it to only four, and in 1987 to only five, of more than 3,500 it surveyed -- about 0.3%.    Problems appear to be worsening. In fiscal 1983, the government found about 35 accredited hospitals in serious violation of federal health and safety laws. That number rose to 74 in 1987. A flurry of violations of new federal rules barring hospitals from refusing to treat indigent patients partly explains the jump.    Even some of the best hospitals occasionally get accused of sloppy work. Though tolerable rates of error haven't been generally established, hospitals that fail government inspections exhibit a flagrant and systematic pattern of abuses. Typically, they have also failed to establish procedures to identify and correct persistent problems.    Questions about the joint commission come at a time of growing concern over the quality of hospital care and the government's ability to do anything about it.    Many hospitals, pressured by public and private cost-containment efforts, have had to slash services and staff. At the same time, hospitals remain critically short of qualified nurses.    The joint commission concedes that it can't always identify new problems in hospitals as quickly as it would like. Amid much fanfare, it has announced an &quot;Agenda for Change,&quot; whereby it would measure a hospital's actual performance, not just its ability to meet standards. By the early 1990s, it plans to examine how patients fare during hospitalization.    The group also is extending its reach. It has begun accrediting health-maintenance organizations and home health-care groups. It also accredits nursing homes, outpatient surgery centers, hospices, and U.S. Army hospitals around the world.    Most states accept commission accreditation, which must be renewed after a survey every three years, in lieu of their own full-scale inspections. But New York is no longer one of them. Recently, the state essentially ended a longstanding arrangement under which its inspectors joined joint commission surveys to avoid duplicated inspection effort. The split climaxed years of frustration with the joint commission on the part of New York officials.    At Baptist Medical Center in Brooklyn, things got so bad by 1985 that, according to a New York newspaper, a nurses' union leader said she wouldn't send her dog there. Records show that an elderly woman, admitted to the hospital for routine foot surgery in 1984, suffered severe brain damage after improper application of a tourniquet. A few months earlier, a neglected patient died -- but not before developing an infestation of maggots in the mouth and nose.    Not until April 1987, nearly two years after discovering its deficiencies, did the joint commission withdraw Baptist Medical's accreditation. As in the case of Parsons Hospital, computer-related delays were blamed. The hospital is now closed.    In a 1984 letter, New York health officials implored the joint commission to get tougher. &quot;Accreditation decisions have been of concern to this agency for quite some time,&quot; the state said. It noted that &quot;extensive deficiencies&quot; had been found in many hospital functions, including nursing, medical staffing, dietary, pharmacy and medical record-keeping.    Since 1980, the letter said, New York inspectors had found 16 accredited hospitals that violated major federal quality standards; all but one &quot;had received full accreditation status both before and after our enforcement actions.&quot;    In a complaint that found its way to federal authorities -- it was addressed to the White House -- a woman charged that her son had received poor care at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, N.Y. Federal officials asked the state to investigate. A state survey on Nov. 16 showed that patient call signals were unanswered, patients were left lying in urine and feces for hours, and equipment was soiled by blood and encrusted material.    A month earlier, the joint commission had conducted its full survey of the hospital and granted it a three-year accreditation certificate. &quot;Congratulations on your achievement,&quot; a letter from the joint commission to the hospital said. &quot;This achievement reflects the efforts of your organization to provide high-quality care for those you serve.&quot; Both the hospital and the state report that the major problems have since been corrected.    About the same time, New York state investigators uncovered serious problems at Parsons Hospital.    Parsons was small, with only 100 beds, but had a large presence in New York's borough of Queens. Since 1978, at least half a dozen Queens hospitals had closed, and residents didn't want to lose another. Parsons was particularly accessible to Queens' growing Asian community. Asian Americans owned the hospital, and some of its doctors spoke Asian languages.    Among local health officials, however, Parsons' reputation was poor. In the summer of 1987, inspectors responding to a complaint found water gushing from a first-floor elevator. On another visit they found roaches and flies crawling in the food-preparation area, soiled pans that had been passed off as washed and sanitized, and dust so thick the inspectors could write their names on a table in a room designated for sterilizing surgical equipment.    The worst, however, involved actual medical care. According to state inspection reports, medication and tests were prescribed for the critically ill but never given. A pregnant patient was injected with drugs intended for someone else.    Later, the cases of Houy Chang and other patients came to light. Ms. Chang, 64 years old, was diagnosed as a heart-attack victim when she arrived at the hospital one day last October. She waited almost seven hours before a cardiologist examined her. She died later that day of heart failure.    In 1986, no hospital in New York state had a higher mortality rate among Medicare patients than did Parsons. Its rate also was one of the highest in the nation.    In early 1988, it took inspectors 85 pages to list the hospital's deficiencies. &quot;These were widespread system failures involving the quality of patient services,&quot; says Fred Heigel, assistant director of hospital services for New York state.    These and other findings led federal and state governments to move against the hospital. The federal Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), which oversees Medicare, took steps toward booting Parsons out of the program, a move tantamount to closing it. New York state wanted to close the hospital for violations.    Under contract from the state, the Island Peer Review Organization Inc., a medical group, investigated the quality of patient care and came to the conclusion that slovenly care probably was helping kill patients. &quot;It was frightening,&quot; says Annemarie Schmidt, an official of the HCFA. &quot;That's what made us decide to try to shut it down immediately.&quot;    Wayne Osten, director of New York's hospital services, says the government might have moved against the hospital sooner had the joint commission promptly revoked Parsons' accreditation. &quot;That would have precipitated us to do a full survey of the hospital, which I think would have identified the extent of the problems that we in fact found,&quot; Mr. Osten says.    Even as the officials sought to close Parsons, a patient or doctor who called the joint commission would have learned nothing of Parsons' troubles. A reporter did call, in early May. He was told only that Parsons was accredited and had last been inspected in June 1986.    A joint commission report on its June 1986 inspection of Parsons was obtained from New York state officials. The report cited failures to complete medical procedures and to administer drugs properly. Some emergency drugs were unavailable and other drugs were outdated. Poor nursing compromised patient care.    Parsons, in fact, flunked its commission inspection. Yet the accrediting group waited nearly a full year, until May 28, 1987, before reporting its findings in writing to Parsons officials. In a cover letter of the same date, the joint commission told Parsons it could, nevertheless, appeal the findings of its &quot;recent&quot; inspection.    From hospital records provided by New York state, it appears that Parsons missed the deadline to respond to the commission's findings but incurred no penalty. The former executive director of Parsons says that patients' lives weren't endangered and that violations cited by health officials weren't all that serious.    Dr. O'Leary, of the joint commission, says its handling of Parsons was unacceptable. He blames the delay on the group's conversion to computers, begun in 1986. Parsons was &quot;probably a typical problem&quot; caused by the conversion, he says.    The joint commission discloses even less information about hospitals than it did in the past. Until 1982, prospective patients could call to learn whether a hospital had earned a standard two-year or a more provisional one-year accreditation. Now, any hospital that passes inspection, and almost all do, obtains a three-year accreditation. Hospitals get at least one month's notice that they will be inspected. The hospitals prepare in advance, &quot;cleaning the hospital, getting staff manuals in place, and in some cases increasing staffing levels,&quot; says Mr. Osten of the New York state hospital-inspection agency.    The joint commission rarely exercises its authority to conduct surprise inspections. It made only 22 in a recent 12-month period. It seldom reviews patient-complaint files or interviews patients.    The commission also sells advice to hospitals on how to pass its inspections. &quot;We can help an organization prepare in all facets of its operations, or in selected areas, for the joint commission survey,&quot; a sales pitch reads. The commission doesn't see this as a conflict of interest because, it says, its help is sold through a subsidiary with no &quot;direct relationship&quot; to the accreditation process.    Keeping their accreditation is important to hospitals. It influences malpractice and health insurers and hospital-bond underwriters. It makes it easier for hospitals to recruit doctors and to operate residency programs. &quot;If a hospital is not accredited, it suffers various sanctions within the health-care community,&quot; Marvin L. Tenzer, a lawyer for a New York hospital, explained in a 1983 federal court case. &quot;Consumers would know not to use that hospital. Physicians would be loath to admit their patients to the hospital.&quot;    Accreditation gives hospitals a strong defense against criticism. For years some state and local officials in New York have considered the city-owned Harlem Hospital Center one of the most problem-ridden. When criticism of the hospital erupted in June 1986, administrators had a ready response: The hospital was accredited by the &quot;nationally recognized&quot; joint commission. The critics &quot;know that, and I cannot understand why they want to forget it,&quot; said Jo Ivey Boufford, president of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corp.    ---   It was the summer of 1983, and federal Judge Richard Owen couldn't understand what was unfolding before him in his New York courtroom.    The Health Care Financing Administration was arguing in federal court that the private, 186-bed Jewish Memorial Hospital in Manhattan was substandard and that its Medicare and Medicaid funds should be cut off. Jewish Memorial, on the other hand, asserted that conditions weren't particularly serious, and it cited as evidence its accreditation by the joint commission.    This put the HCFA in a difficult position. It had to explain why the court should reject the opinion of an accrediting agency that the HCFA itself relied upon.    &quot;Had the survey team from the {joint commission} made a mistake, went off the deep end?&quot; Judge Owen asked in frustration. &quot;If they are a good inspecting agency, it seems to me they ought to be relied on. If you find that they are not, you ought not to be relying on them at all.&quot;    An HCFA official responded that his agency was legally required to rely on the joint commission -- except when problems were discovered.    Jewish Memorial had more than its share of problems, according to government and joint commission inspection records. Yet the joint commission had accredited and praised Jewish Memorial.    &quot;Your hospital . . . is to be commended for its efforts in providing high quality patient care,&quot; the commission wrote in an April 1982 letter informing Jewish Memorial that it had won accreditation.    The federal government's conclusion couldn't have been more different. The HCFA retained a peer-review group, the New York County Health Services Review Organization, to investigate patient care in the hospital. In the five months preceding the joint commission's inspection in February 1982, the peer-review group documented 100 cases of alleged medical maltreatment. Records showed that tests and medical procedures went undone, patients were poorly fed, cockroaches crawled in food-storage areas, and nurses failed to carry out doctors' orders. While Jewish Memorial basked in its accredited status, a separate New York state inspection turned up 64 pages of deficiencies.    The quality of patient care grew so worrisome that on June 28, 1982 -- just two months after the commission had praised the hospital -- the peer-review group recommended that Jewish Memorial be excluded from the Medicare and Medicaid program. About a month later, eight members of that review group discussed their grim findings at a tape-recorded meeting with nine Jewish Memorial officials.    &quot;We have repeatedly found major quality deficiencies among large numbers of patients . . . many of which, we honestly believe, jeopardize patients' lives,&quot; the review group warned. &quot;Problems occur across a broad spectrum of physicians, and so we presume that some of the problems aren't those solely of physicians but of the hospital.&quot;    By the time the case dropped into Judge Owen's lap, the HCFA, the peer-review group and New York state all were pressing to close the hospital. A former lawyer for the hospital says the government overstated its deficiencies.    Judge Owen dismissed the government's case on procedural grounds. But in a second suit that summer, another federal judge concluded that Jewish Memorial did constitute a danger, and he ordered the end of federal reimbursements.    That put the hospital out of business. At 5:30 p.m. on Aug. 20, 1983, the last patient was transferred out, and Jewish Memorial closed. Like Parsons, it remained, until the end, a fully accredited hospital. </TEXT></DOC>