<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870506-0118 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):As the World Turns</HL><DD> 05/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   America's political drama has taken an unexpected turn, as dramas do. Gary Hart, the handsome presidential candidate, stands accused of trysting with a former South Carolina beauty queen -- just when everyone was settling down for further episodes about the strapping Marine colonel, the bookish admiral and the aging, affable former leading man turned leader of men.    Heck, we like a good yarn as much as the next person, and we defy any fictionist to outdo what unfolds daily on the front pages and nightly news. But in our more sober moments, we marvel at the current tendencies to reduce American politics to the level of soap opera, and wonder whether this is exactly healthy.    Gary Hart himself, speaking to the American Newspaper Publishers Association yesterday in New York, denied that he had done anything immoral, complained of press intrusions into his personal life and deplored what he sees as a public debate now captive to the &quot;worst instincts of American politics.&quot; That represented less than a full accounting of the presence of Donna Rice at his Capitol Hill town house last weekend, but that &quot;worst instincts&quot; complaint has a certain resonance with us.    We hear conflicting views on the subject. Some of our colleagues take delight in what they see as a return to that more boisterous era of American history when politicians were viewed mainly with skepticism and amusement, a view held to be most fitting for a free people. Such memories have their appeal, but we remind ourselves that times have changed. Today we have big government and weapons of mass destruction. Politics still can be fun, but actual policies are matters of some greater seriousness.    On the other hand, we have the moralists, those who see Gary Hart's much-discussed interest in the opposite sex as a serious character flaw. At its most basic level, that seems like a rather hard judgment, though of course the issue becomes more complicated when the politician has a wife offstage. Questions of integrity come into play. And a question of judgment enters when, as in this case, the politician seemed to be inviting the press scrutiny he now complains of.    Finally, we have the reverse moralists, those who think that even politicians are entitled to a private life, and the press is guilty of immorality for invading that preserve. We have our sympathy for this position. Spying for trysts as a way of choosing presidents is demeaning not only to the candidates but also to the democratic process itself. And we have spent years deploring the Beltway habit of deciding public issues by destroying the individuals who seem to be prevailing on them.    Yet we find it hard to envision a standard by which sexual behavior is irrelevant while careers turn on covenants in musty deeds or details of personal loans or &quot;insensitivity&quot; to minorities or potential appearances of possible conflicts of interest. In some minds, of course, the latter range of interests reflects on policy choices and character while sex does not. Yet to say the least, not all voters agree.    The politics of personal scandal recently have been fashionable. We've heard altogether too many gratuitous slurs hurled by senators at hapless would-be public servants up for confirmation, as when Joe Biden publicly insulted Ed Meese. We hear from officials whose character we have never doubted about being terrorized by phone calls from people who have somehow gotten their hands on data that, if taken out of context and made public, could destroy a reputation. We hear altogether too much about &quot;investigations&quot; into matters of picayune importance, where quite obviously the objective is partisan advantage. If all this is legitimate and indeed applauded by the enlightened, sexual stakeouts cannot be far behind.    And of course, the protestations of morality are often accompanied by self-interest and double standards. Many politicians of both parties will shed no tears if Gary Hart's indiscretions prove fatal to his political chances. It will simply mean more running room for other contenders. The moralists who see Mr. Hart as wronged, columnist Anthony Lewis, for example, have often been among the most censorious toward embattled Reagan administration officials. We were not made privy only yesterday to the fact that American politics is a rough-and-tumble business, of course, but neither are we ready to admit that the system works best when there are no holds barred.    If politicians and the press are going to engage in contests that center on nothing more than who is in possession of a higher morality, who will be left to make the policy judgments that must be made if a huge government enterprise is to be managed responsibly? If we are indeed slipping into soap-opera politics, it suggests a certain poverty of ideas, which strikes us as a bigger concern than what Gary Hart was doing last weekend. </TEXT></DOC>