<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880304-0142 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: Costa Rica in Danger of Losing Its Clean Reputation </HL><AUTHOR> Jaime Daremblum </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   Reports on connections between the Latin American drug cartel and Latin politicians have been limited primarily to a group of seedy dictators -- such as Panama's Manuel Antonio Noriega and his Communist friends in Nicaragua and Cuba. However, the pall of drug trafficking now casts an ominous shadow over Panama's democratic neighbor to the north, Costa Rica.    Because of its longstanding democratic tradition, Costa Rica has been a very open and peaceful society, lacking even an army. It was only recently that the threat of political subversion by the Marxist Sandinistas and an increase in the crime rate forced Costa Rica to improve the professional standards of its police force. However, specifically because large portions of Costa Rica's territory are unmonitored by the authorities, it has become a prominent link in the international drug trade -- as a bridge in the transportation of narcotics from South America into the U.S., and as a center for money laundering.    According to conservative estimates, not less than 15 metric tons -- 15 thousand kilos -- of cocaine, both raw and processed, pass annually through Costa Rica. The total value of this load, some $800 million, is almost equal to the total dollar value of Costa Rica's exports. Only a fraction of this amount remains in the country, to help finance the domestic support structure of the traffickers.    Small planes flying between Colombia and Mexico, or other destinations in the Southwestern U.S., can stop at any of some 250 airstrips, or on Costa Rican beaches, for refueling and crew changes. Such pauses allow the planes to carry less fuel and more drugs, as well as to fly with greater frequency. A local team has to provide airstrips, service the planes, house the pilots, and watch the planes and cargo while on the ground.    Authorities apparently have been enlisted and paid handsomely to &quot;guard and protect&quot; the flights. In one case currently pending in Dade County, Fla., which involved close to 6,000 kilos of cocaine, two Costa Rican police officials were indicted for their participation in a scheme that brought cargoes into Miami through Monterrey, Mexico. According to the file, the officers -- a colonel and a captain -- received about $20,000 a trip.    A vast array of drug-money-laundering schemes are used in Costa Rica, such as channeling funds into finance companies and banks through anonymous Panamanian companies and local agents. Other examples abound. Recently, a Costa Rican official resigned after repeatedly transferring suitcases filled with U.S. dollars to three banks; this money was used to obtain drafts that were sent to Panama and Colombia. In one bank, such exchanges totaled more than $12 million in less than a year. One officer acknowledged that the amounts were of such magnitude that his bank stopped importing dollar bills from the U.S. for its legitimate services.    Export companies provide a much used mechanism both for money cleansing and for transporting drugs into the U.S. There are several reported instances of entire containers of Costa Rican food products that have remained unclaimed in ports in Florida, because their paramount content already had been removed.    On occasion, international drug dealers have tried to use drug profits to invest in legitimate Costa Rican enterprises. Investigations made by two distinguished Costa Rican journalists, Edgar Espinoza and Guillermo Fernandez, of the daily La Nacion, unraveled a story that underlines the depth of drug involvement in the country. In 1986, Colombian cocaine baron, Pablo Escobar Gaviria, tried to purchase the newest hotel in San Jose, a Holiday Inn franchise with a licensed casino. While the negotiations were under way, a son of the principal shareholder and president of the hotel, died under mysterious circumstances. The coroner diagnosed the cause as a cocaine overdose, which the family suspects was not voluntary.    Mexican drug trafficker Rafael Caro Quintero, accused of the murder of Drug Enforcement Agency agent Enrique Camarena, was captured in 1985 in Costa Rica where he was trying to establish new headquarters. He had sent an advance team headed by his lieutenant, Jesus Dias de Leon Zamorano, known as &quot;El Cachas,&quot; to purchase several properties. &quot;El Cachas&quot; negotiated with a prestigious bank the acquisition of the Playboy Hotel, then in receivership, but the deal was not completed. He also wanted to buy the local Sheraton facilities. Government and press reports assert that the entry of Mr. Caro Quintero and his group into Costa Rica was made possible by well-placed individuals. A Special Commission of our Congress determined that the officials involved acted under the direction of an unnamed &quot;superior political authority,&quot; and that they were &quot;the smaller link in a larger problem.&quot;    In Latin America, a strategic alliance, whose tragic consequences can be observed in Colombia, has developed between the extreme left and the drug industry. Last December, I interviewed Sandinista defector Maj. Roger Miranda, a former assistant to Humberto Ortega, Nicaragua's minister of defense. He confirmed that the Sandinista regime is actively participating in the drug trade, and that Gen. Ortega was responsible for providing logistical support to the business, which is directed by Interior Minister Tomas Borge. Maj. Miranda also confirmed that the Sandinista involvement in drugs is a joint venture with Panama's Gen. Noriega.    This connection is not new. Much of the air-transportation network that carried weapons to Sandinistas via Panama at the time of the insurrection against Anastasio Somoza now is engaged in the drug traffic. Pilots Floyd Carlton Caceres, Miguel Alemany Soto, Alejandro Benitez and Teofilo Watson -- Panamanian military men who operated through Costa Rica -- have been convicted for drug crimes. All now are serving jail sentences in the U.S., except Watson, who disappeared two years ago and is believed to have been murdered in the Dominican Republic for betraying the Medellin drug cartel.    Costa Rica has scored impressive gains in the battle against international drug traffickers. Four different anti-drug units, the most important one belonging to the judiciary, enforce stiff regulations of the criminal code and health statutes with prison penalties of up to 20 years for narcotraffic. And it is encouraging that courts do not seem permeated by corruption from drug dealers. Also, a law currently being debated in our Congress and expected to be approved shortly for the first time incorporates drug-racketeering regulations targeted against money laundering. The new law would allow the embargo of funds and assets of suspicious origin and oblige defendants to prove their source.    Such regulations, new measures to improve government control over airstrips, expediting extradition procedures of narcotraffickers and a continuing educational campaign on drug abuse constitute positive steps in the right direction. The struggle against drugs and against drug money is also a fight for the survival of democracy.    ---   Mr. Daremblum is a lawyer and newspaper columnist in San Jose. This article is excerpted from a March 2 speech he delivered at the White House Conference for a Drug Free America. </TEXT></DOC>