<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0100 </DOCNO><HL> A Breath of Life for Sandamp;L Insurance---By John D. Hawke Jr., William M. Isaac and James A. Marino</HL><DD> 02/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   The most urgent issue of financial regulation facing Congress and the federal regulatory agencies is the effective bankruptcy of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. FSLIC's primary insurance reserves now stand at only $1.4 billion, down from $1.9 billion at the end of 1986. Estimates of the thrift industry's real deficit net worth vary -- a problem that has been compounded by the absence of current market accounting -- but some knowledgeable analysts project that FSLIC's ultimate losses could exceed $30 billion.    The intractable question facing policy makers is who should pay for the resuscitation of FSLIC -- a question that has both economic and political dimensions. Because of the difficulties inherent in any approach to this question, most of the remedies that have been proposed have amounted to temporizing.    While the current administration proposal could raise (through borrowings) funds sufficient to resolve a substantial portion of the problem, servicing the debt would place an enormous financial burden on the Sandamp;L industry and would leave behind a chronically impoverished insurance fund. A stripped-down proposal by the U.S. League of Savings Institutions would place less burden on the industry but would be woefully inadequate in terms of addressing the extent of the problems.    In the long run, depending on the actual extent of the losses, it is possible that some portion of the cost of resolving the thrift industry's plight will be borne by taxpayers -- a conclusion that legislators are naturally reluctant to embrace. In the meantime, and in order to minimize the taxpayer exposure by providing more financial and managerial resources to deal with the Sandamp;L problems, FSLIC and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., the comparable fund backing the nation's banks, should be merged.    Merging the insurance funds would provide considerable financial resources. Sandamp;L deposit insurance assessments over the next five years will total roughly $9 billion. The FDIC's income from assessments and from its investment portfolio will be in the range of $18 billion. These two revenue sources, plus the residual $1.4 billion in the FSLIC fund, would provide nearly $29 billion to handle bank and Sandamp;L failures over the next five years without dipping into the corpus of the FDIC fund. Assuming the FDIC spends in the range of $1.2 billion a year on bank failures (one would hope that would not be necessary), the combined fund would generate about $23 billion for handling Sandamp;L failures. If an additional cushion were deemed desirable, the administration's proposal to channel $3 billion in excess capital from the federal home-loan banks could be incorporated into the merger plan. The combined agency probably could not prudently spend the money at a faster rate.    To be sure, a number of political hurdles would be faced by any proposal to merge the funds. First, commercial banks will be inclined to oppose a merger if they perceive that the ultimate result will be an increase in their deposit insurance premiums. They have no desire, in short, to pay for bailing out the Sandamp;L industry.    Second, some elements of the Sandamp;L industry may fear a merger would result in the extinction of Sandamp;Ls as a separately identified type of financial institution, dedicated to the home mortgage market.    Third, a merger of the funds would focus attention on the disparities in regulatory treatment of banks and Sandamp;Ls. The powers of Sandamp;Ls and their holding companies are in a number of respects more permissive than the powers of commercial banks and their holding companies. At the same time, Sandamp;Ls are permitted to operate with capital ratios significantly lower than those of commercial banking organizations. Thus, many people question whether the two types of institutions can fairly be subjected to a common insurance regime without equalizing their regulatory treatment, and the question is raised whether equalization is politically possible.    We believe these hurdles can be overcome.    The essence of a merger would, of course, be the commingling of the insurance funds. To meet the legitimate concerns of current FDIC-insured institutions that commingling would expose them to higher premiums, bank and Sandamp;L assessments could be computed on a separate basis for a specified period -- five to seven years, for example. Effective bank premiums would be held to what they would have been if no merger had taken place. This period should be long enough to permit resolution of the current Sandamp;L crisis and give commercial banks comfort that the bill will not be paid by the banking industry. Moreover, in view of the FDIC's current $1.7 billion annual income on its investment portfolio, the current special premium assessment on Sandamp;Ls could be phased out on a straight-line basis over a five-year period, thus addressing a major concern of the Sandamp;L industry.    As far as the plan endangering the special lending role of the Sandamp;Ls, this line of reasoning ignores the fact that the FDIC has been the insurer of the mutual savings bank industry for more than 50 years.    From a supervisory standpoint, the relationship between the combined insurance agency and the Sandamp;L industry could be modeled on the FDIC's current relationship to nationally chartered banks, which are regulated primarily by the Comptroller of the Currency. The Federal Home Loan Bank Board would remain the primary federal regulator of all federally insured Sandamp;Ls, while the FDIC would be given the right to examine larger and problem Sandamp;Ls and a random sampling of others.    Along with the financial considerations of an FDIC merger are the managerial imperatives for FSLIC.    As the current crisis deepened, the Home Loan Bank Board has brought into the system a number of highly respected former bank supervisors. Nevertheless, dealing with credit quality remains a major problem -- something the bank board, unlike the FDIC, has had little experience in handling. The board's traditional priority has been the promotion of home ownership, largely through the promotion of the Sandamp;L industry. Some would argue that safety and soundness have often taken a back seat. Certainly, the board's upper-management ranks are thin, and FSLIC is tremendously understaffed. At present, who could oversee a large infusion of capital, should it become available?    If the insurance funds were to be merged, Congress undoubtedly would want to use the occasion to phase in common accounting, capital and supervisory standards, thereby bringing to bear more discipline in the Sandamp;L industry. While such a phase-in might be viewed as painful by some in the Sandamp;L industry, there is no basis in sound policy for a continuation of the current relaxed standards. Indeed, equalization would seem a necessity if the FDIC were to assume the risk of insuring Sandamp;Ls, and it also would be a benefit to healthy banks and thrifts that now must compete against undercapitalized and underregulated institutions.    The occasion of a merger also would bring into sharp focus the disparities in powers between banking and thrift organizations -- although it would not be essential to resolve that very difficult set of issues at the outset. It seems inevitable to us, however, that the powers of banks and thrifts will have to be harmonized before very long in any event. One salutary effect of a merger could be to force the issue.    We do not pretend that a merger would be problem free. Such a combination would put strains on the resources of the FDIC as it adjusted to supervision of an industry with which it is not totally familiar. Moreover, the FDIC itself faces a record number of bank failures, and its personnel and financial resources are being taxed. In the long run, however, the enhanced capacity of a merged insurance agency would outweigh any short-run burdens.    It must be recognized that a merger of the insurance funds might not be a complete solution to the plight of the Sandamp;L industry, and in the long run an infusion of taxpayers' money might be necessary. Congress must face up to the realities now, so as to minimize that likelihood.    ---   Mr. Isaac is the past chairman of the FDIC, of which Mr. Marino was a research and planning official. They are affiliated with the Secura Group, Washington-based consultants on banking and thrift issues. Mr. Hawke, a partner in the law firm of Arnold and Porter, is a former general counsel of the Federal Reserve Board. </TEXT></DOC>