<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870820-0016 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Pork Belly Prices Jump as Traders RushTo Cover Positions Before Margin Soars---By Jean Marie BrownStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Pork belly futures prices shot up, in part because traders rushed to cover short, or selling, positions before the Chicago Mercantile Exchange quintuples margins for the August contract tonight.    Cash prices also rebounded amid expecation of increased retailer demand.    After opening down its daily limit of two cents a pound, the August contract raced higher to close up 1.8 cents at 83.15 cents.    The contract's sharp price rise indicated that &quot;short&quot; traders were taking profits or liquidating positions rather than pay the larger margin, analysts said. A short position is a commitment to deliver a commodity in the future at a set price.    The exchange hoped the unusual margin action would force some traders out of the market. It wants to reduce a big imbalance between August contracts and the amount of frozen pork bellies, or uncured slabs of bacon, that can be delivered against the contract, which expires Monday at noon in Chicago. As of Tuesday's close of trading, contracts representing delivery of about 76.2 million pounds of bellies were outstanding, while only about seven million pounds have been certified by the Chicago Merc for delivery.    The exchange's pork belly pit has been plagued by tight supplies and volatility all year. In February, the exchange limited traders' holdings of contracts for delivery that month as commitments exceeded deliverable supplies.    There also has been speculation that a squeeze -- a trading maneuver in which big futures buyers try in times of shortage to force sellers to pay higher and higher prices to offset their delivery obligations -- took place earlier this month when prices soared to 92.5 cents.    That sharp run-up and the subsequent collapse of prices left the August contract trading at a large premium over the cash market. During the summer, when demand is at a peak, the reverse is usually true.    Exchange officials, however, denied that their actions had anything to do with rumors of a squeeze, saying they are only trying to encourage an orderly liquidation of the August contract.    The exchange might have been able to avoid or lessen the severity of the current situation if it hadn't limited traders's holdings of February contracts, analysts said.    &quot;It could have been averted if they would have let the market work itself out early in the season,&quot; said Gerald Abbenhaus, an analyst at A.G. Edwards andamp; Sons Inc. in St. Louis. &quot;They forced the longs (or buyers of contracts willing to take delivery) to reduce holdings when we're going into a position when bellies could have been stored,&quot; Mr. Abbenhaus said. &quot;It's not surprising that we now have tight supplies.&quot;    Meanwhile, bellies for delivery in 1988 hit life-of-contract highs as traders reacted to the turnaround in cash prices.    Hog futures prices finished higher as pork product prices rose and a smaller-than-expected slaughter lifted autumn contracts to highs.    Cattle futures closed mixed.    In other futures markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Oil futures prices slipped the 10th time in the past 12 sessions as traders continued to sell contracts they bought earlier. Prices also were under some pressure, analysts said, from bearish weekly inventory figures released by an industry group after the market closed Tuesday. The American Petroleum Institute said U.S. stockpiles of crude oil and distillates rose in the week ended Friday. In addition, U.S. refiners operated at 87% of capacity, up from 85.7% the week before, portending increased supplies of refined products in the market in the coming weeks. &quot;The refinery number, in particular, was higher than expected and particularly disconcerting,&quot; an analyst said. The API also said U.S. oil imports in July soared to the highest level in more than seven years amid a drop in domestic crude oil output and rising demand.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Most grain and soybean futures prices finished higher, bolstered by rumors that the Soviet Union may have bought or is in the market for U.S. corn. The Agriculture Department didn't confirm or deny the rumors. Wheat prices rose with the department's announcement that one million metric tons, or 36.7 million bushels, of wheat were offered to China with subsidies under the export enhancement program. The advance in soybean prices was led by the August contract, as lack of farmer selling kept supplies tight.    SUGAR: Futures prices eased as world-wide overabundance and slackened demand outweighed reports that the European sugar beet crop was behind schedule. At the moment, analysts said, the delay is having a minor impact on prices because there is time for the crop to recover if it gets warm, dry growing weather. Although earlier in the year global output was expected to lag behind demand, analysts said, now production is expected to outpace rising consumption and to add to surpluses. Crop conditions in the season, which concludes at the end of the month, improved, resulting in higher output, analysts said. Prices haven't fallen further, an analyst said, because of drought conditions in producing nations India and Cuba, which could cut output.    COTTON: The expectation that India may buy a large quantity of the fiber because of drought damage to its crop lifted futures prices to contract highs before late profit-taking trimmed the advances. A news service report said India may buy between 300,000 and 500,000 bales of cotton, some of it from the U.S., said Ernest Simon, cotton specialist at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. India hasn't imported a signficant amount of cotton since the 1977-78 season, according to the Agriculture Department.    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices rebounded near the close of trading to register modest advances, after trading lower most of the day in the wake of Tuesday's dollar-led decline. The bellwether Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index future for September settlement closed up 1.20 at 331.5, after trading as low as 327.3 during the day. Short-covering by traders who had bet on a further decline, and a modest amount of arbitrage-related trading between stocks and stock-index futures fueled the rally, traders said. The day's turning points occurred when most index futures stayed above the lows set Tuesday, and when a decline in Treasury bond futures prices failed to depress index futures prices, said Peter Grennan, head of the stock-index futures department at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York. &quot;We're heading for a test of (stock index) contract highs within a week,&quot; Mr. Grennan said. The Treasury bond future for September settlement closed down 8/32 at 88 31/32. </TEXT></DOC>