<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881026-0045 </DOCNO><HL> Frankfurt's Bourse Makes Its Mark, and Then Some </HL><AUTHOR> Terence Roth (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><DATELINE> FRANKFURT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After one of the worst beatings suffered anywhere during last year's international market crash, West Germany's 400-year-old Frankfurt stock exchange has turned into one of Europe's hottest performers.    German share prices have been rising steadily on unexpectedly good news about the German economy. The FAZ index of German stocks last Wednesday clocked a 1988 high of 538.27, up 33% from 404.86 on Jan. 4.    Glowing indicators from Europe's largest economy continue to defy the dismal predictions issued last winter by government planners and private-sector economists alike. News of nearly 4% economic growth is being translated into rising corporate profits, higher dividends and new acquisitions. And here, in a market where dawn raids, proxy battles and megabuyouts are considered hair-raising tales from another planet, it's about as exciting as things get.    Foreign institutional investors are rediscovering German stocks. Last October, foreigners owned about half of the German stock market's capitalization before cutting and running after the crash. The foreign exodus accelerated the sharp postcrash sell-off in German stocks, which lost a third of their value. It left the majority of German shares in local hands for the first time in memory. Now foreign investors are coming back -- not for excitement, but to climb aboard one of the best recoveries anywhere, at least for a while.    &quot;The good German indicators have only recently snuck up on people, who are beginning to realize just how well its economy is performing this year,&quot; says Guy Rigden, a senior analyst for UBS-Phillips andamp; Drew, in London. Analysts also say growing perceptions that the dollar may have reached its peak against the mark are bringing investors to German investments to cash in on potential currency gains later on.    Attracting foreign investors is exactly what exchange officials had in mind when making the decision three years ago to modernize the Frankfurt stock exchange. With rapid changes coming elsewhere, Frankfurt was threatened with becoming a backwater in a global market focusing on Tokyo, New York and London.    Set squarely in the middle of the city's financial district, the Frankfurt Bourse is surrounded by the high-rise buildings of German banks, who largely determine what happens in the market. The exchange's glossy parquet trading floor is rarely the scene of frenzied trading. Business normally is conducted in hushed murmers that echo off a lofty cupola. No paper litters the floor. German orderliness prevails.    Frankfurt has been Germany's financial capital since money changers congregated here in the Middle Ages to do business at one of central Europe's commercial crossroads. The Bourse handles 75% of the trading volume of Germany's eight stock exchanges and is the country's flagship exchange, competing with other international exchanges for business.    But even in aggregate, the eight exchanges last year drummed up only two-thirds of London's trading volume. The Tokyo exchange last year handled five times the volume of the combined German exchanges, and the New York Stock Exchange accounted for three times their business.    The huge securities operations of Germany's powerful banks dominate trading volume on German stock exchanges. There is only a handful of small independent stock brokerages, and the banks work within a clubby environment that's largely free of regulatory supervision. In a self-regulated market, it's commonplace for a bank to prop up an issue that has gone sour, particularly if it's one the bank itself helped to launch. Germany doesn't have anything like the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, nor does it have laws making insider trading a prosecutable offense.    In 1985, the banks set up an Association of German Stock Exchanges, filling its board with senior bankers, and set about linking up the eight German exchanges with a trading network similar to the U.S. Intermarket Trading System.    The new system has born fruit by making price trends more transparent, but it hasn't significantly changed a market in which only about a fifth of the 522 listed stocks are regularly traded. The market is still driven by institutional investors and German banks, whose branches follow the universally recommended policy of selling stocks over the counter only after the customer has a suitable &quot;savings base.&quot;    So, further initiatives are in the works to generate more institutional business. The banks are sponsoring a new German futures and options exchange to better compete with London, Europe's largest exchange. They also are pressuring a resisting government to drop the unpopular 0.25% tax on all stock transactions. &quot;This tax is single greatest impediment to Frankfurt becoming a viable financial center in a global market,&quot; says Ruediger von Rosen, executive vice chairman of the Association of German Stock Exchanges.    Meanwhile, the Frankfurt exchange is buzzing with rumors as German industry prepares for the start-up of an integrated European market in 1992. Speculative buying has been targeting the big German blue chips, nicknamed &quot;the battleships.&quot;    Daimler-Benz AG, the biggest of them all, appears about to become bigger still with the planned acquisition of the state-owned Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH aerospace and defense-systems group. After a lot of false starts, Daimler-Benz and the Bonn government are believed to be preparing a deal for later this year that would include federal subsidies to cover MBB's future losses in commercial-aircraft production.    Deutsche Bank is expected to announce in December another major step in becoming a multifunction international-finance group by creating a life-insurance arm, probably with the acquisition of an existing insurance firm. Siemens AG's stock, meanwhile, is benefiting from this summer's far-reaching structural reorganization to cut duplication in its top-heavy management, a move considered by analysts to have been long overdue. </TEXT></DOC>