<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880718-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: A Completely New Way to Purchase Medical Benefits </HL><AUTHOR> Edward L. Hennessy Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> INS PHA </IN><TEXT>   America's annual health-care bill climbed from $248 billion in 1980 to $540 billion last year -- a 120% increase that far exceeded the rate of inflation. More than $100 billion of this outlay is shouldered by corporations that provide health insurance for employees. The huge, fast-growing expense is a heavy burden for companies, which are fighting to keep costs down to compete against highly productive foreign firms.    We hear talk about cost-control from doctors and hospitals. But let's face it, we're not likely to get real help from that quarter. We've got to help ourselves. To escape the cost avalanche, a completely new approach to purchasing medical benefits must be taken, one aimed at increasing market pressure on the health-care providers.    We at Allied-Signal Inc. recently became one of the first to do this when we created a single, national health-care plan. By arranging to make our U.S. employees customers for one insurer, Cigna Corp., we've been able to negotiate more reasonable terms in the health-care marketplace.    In areas of the country where there is a surplus of doctors and hospitals, it is possible to negotiate lower health-care rates. But unfortunately most companies purchasing health care still aren't cost-conscious buyers -- and those that are haven't yet taken steps to use their bargaining power effectively. As a result, many health-care providers are not offering more favorable financial arrangements. And those who do usually compensate by increasing services and charges for other consumers. So the nation's health-care bill keeps shooting up.    Consider the government's effort to cut hospital care costs. In 1983, Medicare initiated a fixed-fee program that has led to shorter hospital stays for its patients. But as a number of health-care analysts have noted, hospitals have been making up for the revenue loss by raising charges to private patients. In addition, hospitals and doctors have been delivering a greater volume of higher-priced outpatient services, because these are less subject to Medicare cost controls.    Also, studies indicate that many unnecessary surgical procedures are being performed. Findings by the National Institutes of Health reveal that 60% to 80% of the 250,000 coronary bypass operations performed in the U.S. each year -- at a cost of about $25,000 each -- bring the patients no increase in life span beyond what could be gained through non-surgical treatment. And recent studies suggest that more than half of the 120,000 pacemaker implants done annually at a cost of about $12,000 each are unnecessary or of debatable value. According to Dr. Sidney Wolfe of the Public Citizens Health Research Group, last year as much as $180 billion was wasted on unnecessary surgery, hospitalizations and other services.    Of course, there are many reasons why one physician differs from another over how to treat a particular case; questionable procedures are not necessarily motivated by economic self-interest. But without a doubt, &quot;revenue-enhancing&quot; moves have been a major factor responsible for the failure of government and private-sector efforts to combat cost inflation.    Most company cost-containment programs have been futile because they've focused only on influencing consumers of health care. At Allied-Signal, for example, we have long offered incentives for employees to use cost-efficient medical alternatives such as outpatient surgery for minor procedures, home health care and direct contracts for prescription drugs. But we soon learned that the only way to achieve meaningful cost control was to give providers themselves a reason to work for this goal.    By offering volume business to Cigna, we've secured a three-year fixed rate of increase in costs for comprehensive medical and dental care for our U.S. employees. Cigna is able to share the risk with us because it in turn has contracted with a network of physicians, hospitals and other health-care providers to deliver services.    The new plan shields our company from dangerously ballooning costs for the three-year period. We're not looking for reductions in our health-care bill, but we do expect to slow its growth enough to generate savings in the $200 million range over the next few years.    While the plan provides a complete package of high-quality health-care services for employees, it does have one shortcoming. In some parts of the country, the providers our employees would prefer to use are not part of the Cigna network. The only way to get more providers participating in cost-effective networks is for many more organizations to demand such arrangements.    Momentum is building in this direction. In Milwaukee, for instance, Miller Brewing, Allis-Chalmers and five other companies have joined forces with the municipal government to negotiate lower rates with a network of local hospitals and doctors. Southern New England Bell has created its own company network of providers for employees. And Southwestern Bell and May Department Stores are following Allied-Signal's course of purchasing an insurance carrier's provider network. In fact, this latter approach is currently being evaluated for possible adoption by at least 15 more major companies.    Companies throughout industry need to start making better use of their bargaining power -- to stop watering it down by dealing with many diverse insurers and HMOs. We need to make U.S. industry a customer that has to be reckoned with in the health-care marketplace. If we're serious about this goal, it shouldn't take handstands to accomplish it. After all, collectively we pay the health-care insurance bill for 69% of the population.    We must persuade the providers to take a seat beside us on the cost-containment bandwagon. Only then will we be able to bring health-care cost inflation more in line with that for products and services in other sectors.    ---   Mr. Hennessy is chairman and chief executive officer of Allied-Signal Inc. </TEXT></DOC>