<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Cuban Connection:Bay of Pigs VeteransFind in NicaraguaA New War to Fight---Backing the Contras Is PartOf Anti-Castro Struggle;Taking on Eden Pastora---Of the CIA and Illicit Drugs---By Jose de Cordoba and Thomas E. RicksStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM GOVMTCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   One day last month, while the Iran-Contra scandal was roiling Washington, Contra military commander Enrique Bermudez delivered a speech in a Spanish restaurant here to a reunion of veterans of the Bay of Pigs.    &quot;We have never doubted that the destinies of Cuba and Nicaragua are united,&quot; he told his audience of 150 Cuban-Americans and retired Central Intelligence Agency officers. &quot;If God grants us this victory . . . Nicaragua will be a bastion for the liberation of Cuba.&quot;    To many Americans, the failed 1961 invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs is nothing more than a dimly remembered fiasco. But to the 1,500 men who fought and lost there, it was the first battle in a never-ending war against communism. In the years since, veterans of the Bay of Pigs have fought for the U.S. in, among other places, the Dominican Republic, the Congo and Vietnam.    Now, many of the Bay of Pigs veterans are back, fighting communism in Central America. Much remains murky about their role there. But scores of interviews with veterans, Contras and others suggest that the Bay of Pigs crowd has been closely involved in several controversial aspects of the U.S.-backed war by the Contra guerrillas against Nicaragua's Sandinista government.    Senate investigators theorize that Bay of Pigs veterans, among others, formed the rank and file of the Contra-supply network set up, perhaps illegally, by Lt. Col. Oliver North, the National Security Council aide fired in November. That is likely to be explored in congressional hearings later this year on the Iran-Contra affair; but there is plenty of evidence of Cuban-American involvement in the war.    One Bay of Pigs veteran, Armando Lopez Estrada, says that on the instructions of a U.S. official in Costa Rica, he recruited Bay of Pigs people to advise the Contras on the southern front, along the border between Nicaragua and Costa Rica, almost as soon as fighting began there in 1983. Senate investigators and others suspect that those men later were involved in a CIA campaign to undermine Eden Pastora, the leftist former Sandinista who then dominated the southern front.    In mid-1984, when Congress cut off aid to the Contras, Cuban-Americans on the southern front got money to establish a separate combat battalion, led primarily by Cubans and manned by Nicaraguans, according to Pedro Gil, a former CIA operative who became one of the unit's leaders. The funds allegedly came from Miami Cubans and from an undisclosed source.    Juan Perez Franco, the president of the veterans' association of Brigade 2506 -- the Bay of Pigs force -- says that 10 to 50 veterans have trained or fought with the Contras. Another handful is said to be involved in U.S. intelligence work. About a dozen Bay of Pigs veterans now are colonels in branches of the U.S. military, and many of them have played liaison roles in Central America. Other veterans outside the region have influenced events there: Jorge Mas Canosa, for example, is the chairman of the Cuban American National Foundation, which has helped shape U.S. Central American policy.    &quot;They're everywhere,&quot; says Carlos Ulvert, the secretary for international relations of the United Nicaraguan Opposition, the Contra umbrella group. &quot;The striking thing is you find them from Mas Canosa -- where you're talking White House -- to the private aid network, to the actual fighting.&quot;    Many Bay of Pigs veterans have their own goals -- which, above all, involve destabilizing the Castro regime. &quot;The people who work for the CIA don't consider that they work for the CIA; they feel the CIA works for them,&quot; contends Alfredo Duran, who is both a former president of the veterans' association and a former chairman of the Florida Democratic Party.    Sometimes those aims diverge from U.S. goals. Three Bay of Pigs veterans who have been active in Contra supply or support activities have been linked by U.S. law-enforcement officials to the 1976 bombing of a Cuban airliner, which killed all 73 people on board. The three dispute the reports of their involvement, and, indeed, they haven't been tried or convicted of any such charges.    The old-boy network of Cubans, which is all but invisible to most Americans, is based in Miami and stretches across Central America. It ranges from colonels to convicted drug smugglers. &quot;We all keep in touch,&quot; says Eugenio Rolando Martinez, a &quot;brigadista&quot; who participated in the Watergate burglary. &quot;We love each other.&quot;    Indeed, the veterans' dominant characteristic is a fierce loyalty to their cause and to one another that supersedes other differences. Speaking of a friend who once saved his life on a CIA mission inside Cuba and who went on to become a drug smuggler, Brigade 2506 member Jose Basulto says, &quot;If I saw him again, of course I would give him an 'abrazo.'&quot;    The bonds were established in the jungles of Guatemala, where the men trained for their 1961 effort to overthrow the Castro regime. They fought for three days at the Bay of Pigs, only to fail for lack of supplies and air support. They stood on the beaches and watched as U.S. ships steamed away, abandoning them to Fidel Castro's prison camps -- where they languished for 18 months while negotiations for their release sputtered. Finally, the U.S. ransomed them, for $53 million in food and medical supplies.    Upon their release, many veterans immediately signed up to run clandestine raids against Cuba for the CIA's Miami station, which in the early 1960s had some 600 U.S. officers and 2,000 Cuban employees. More than 200 other brigade members were commissioned officers in the U.S. Army. But the war in Southeast Asia distracted the U.S. from the anti-Castro cause. After 1965, the Miami CIA station dwindled, as did financing for actions against Cuba.    Over the next decade or so, a few Bay of Pigs veterans were implicated in criminal activities. Four of the Watergate burglars had participated in the Bay of Pigs invasion. Other veterans, cut off from CIA financing and needing money, hooked up with Miami's burgeoning drug industry, says David Nye, a 15-year-veteran of the Miami police bomb and terrorism squad. Of five convicted drug dealers brought to Miami last summer as part of a federal investigation of corruption in south Florida, two fought at the Bay of Pigs. One of them, Jose Alvero Cruz, is serving 10 years in federal prison for tax evasion, but he was &quot;probably the largest marijuana importer in the country at one time,&quot; according to Raul Diaz, a former Metro Dade (greater Miami) terrorism and narcotics investigator.    And some Bay of Pigs veterans became linked to terrorism -- most notoriously in the 1976 bombing of the Cuban airliner. Luis Posada, a Bay of Pigs veteran, was charged by Venezuela but never tried for complicity in the bombing. He was held, awaiting trial, for nine years, until he escaped in August 1985, only to reappear a few months ago at the Salvadoran end of the Contra supply network.    In June 1976, according to a summary by the Metro Dade police of a Federal Bureau of Investigation report, 10 right-wing anti-Castro activists met in the Dominican Republic to form a group called the Coordination of United Revolutionary Organizations. At the meeting, according to U.S. law-enforcement authorities and a former Venezuelan intelligence official, a campaign of terrorism was planned that resulted in the airliner bombing. Among the people the FBI listed as attending the meeting, according to the Metro Dade summary, is Mr. Perez Franco, now the president of Brigade 2506. Another listed attendee is Mr. Lopez Estrada, the former military chief of the brigade who -- at the request of a U.S. official, he says -- subsequently recruited Bay of Pigs veterans to fight in the Contra war. Mr. Perez Franco says he was in the Dominican Republic at the time and saw all the listed participants but attended no such meeting. Mr. Lopez Estrada says that both he and Mr. Perez Franco did attend a meeting but that no airliner bombing was planned there.    The vast majority of Bay of Pigs veterans haven't involved themselves in criminal activities; most settled down in Miami and have lived conventional lives. Nonetheless, by the end of the 1970s, recalls Raul Masvidal, a Miami banker and former mayoral candidate, &quot;the brigade was on the verge of disappearing,&quot; partly because of the prominence of its criminal element. Mr. Masvidal, who worked in intelligence at the Bay of Pigs, credits two events with revitalizing Brigade 2506 and its cause: the 1980 election of President Reagan and the outbreak about 18 months later of the Contra war in Nicaragua.    &quot;You get 50-year-old brigade members who thought they had fired their last shot,&quot; Mr. Masvidal says. &quot;And {then} there's fighting in Nicaragua and a chance to take a last shot at Castro.&quot;    In early 1982, as the U.S.-backed Contras began their war against the leftist regime of Nicaragua, Bay of Pigs veterans were quick to embrace the new cause. Brigade 2506 sponsored fund-raisers and coordinated shipments of aid. And some Bay of Pigs people headed down to fight.    Yet the rebel groups fighting on the crucial northern front -- along the Honduran-Nicaraguan border, where the bulk of the Contras are based -- rebuffed the Cuban fighters, despite their ideological closeness. &quot;We weren't allowed to go to the northern front,&quot; says Sergio Becerra, a Bay of Pigs veteran known as &quot;the Poet.&quot;    Rather, the Cubans began showing up on the southern front almost as soon as fighting started there in 1983. That was odd, because that front was then dominated by Eden Pastora, the former Sandinista known as &quot;Commander Zero,&quot; whose politics were sharply at odds with those of most Bay of Pigs veterans.    Senate investigators theorize that Bay of Pigs veterans first were recruited by the CIA to bolster the Contras on the southern front and that later they were used in a CIA effort to undercut Mr. Pastora and replace him with the more pliable Fernando &quot;Negro&quot; Chamorro as the main Contra power in the south.    Brigade 2506 involvement on the southern front seems to have begun when Mr. Lopez Estrada, a former military chief of the brigade who says he had been doing contract work for the CIA in Central America, was told by a contact at the U.S. Embassy in San Jose, Costa Rica, to recruit some brigade members to advise Mr. Pastora's forces. &quot;The southern zone was a disaster area,&quot; recalls Mr. Lopez Estrada as he sips tea in a Cuban restaurant in Miami. Soon a handful of &quot;brigadistas&quot; and others with experience running raids against Cuba for the CIA in the 1960s joined Mr. Pastora's troops.    It isn't clear that any of them actually were ordered to undermine Mr. Pastora; accounts given in several interviews differ. But that was certainly the effect the Miami Cubans had. Knowing Mr. Pastora to be distrustful of Cuban-Americans, the first who enlisted in his forces said they were Puerto Rican. The relationship went downhill from there. &quot;For me, Pastora is a 'Fidelista,'&quot; says Mr. Gil, the former CIA operative who joined the fight. &quot;I saw him wear a cap with a red star, and I felt like vomiting.&quot;    The feeling was mutual. Mr. Pastora says the Cubans made lousy soldiers: &quot;They never fought, never left the frontier.&quot; He says it is possible that they were part of a CIA effort to displace him. Of Rene Corbo, who later was named Brigade 2506's official representative to the southern front, he says: &quot;He moves like he is CIA, with security, immunity, money, contacts and power of decision.&quot; Mr. Corbo couldn't be reached for comment.    Whatever the reason, Mr. Pastora's forces crumbled. Last May, he announced his withdrawal from the war. The Miami Cubans are happy to take some credit for that. &quot;The most important factor in destroying Pastora was our entrance,&quot; boasts Mr. Gil. &quot;We bad-mouthed, bad-mouthed, bad-mouthed him.&quot;    Even as Mr. Pastora's effort was flagging, brigade involvement in Central America seems to have been growing. It was during this time, in mid-1984, that the congressional ban on aid to the Contras took effect. Senate investigators contend that the &quot;brigadistas'&quot; increased participation isn't coincidental. They argue that in mid-1984, the CIA in fact turned the Contra war over to Col. North and the National Security Council.    Unable to use full-time CIA professionals, this theory goes, Col. North turned to a network of former and part-time CIA and Pentagon employees, such as Thomas Clines, a former CIA officer who served in Miami in the 1960s. Mr. Clines, they say, in turn recruited some Bay of Pigs veterans who had worked for him in the old days, such as Rafael Quintero, who joined the Contra-supply network in El Salvador. Mr. Clines couldn't be reached for comment.    Among the dozens of contacts reactivated, the theory continues, were a few old hands who had become involved in drug trafficking or who had become close to people engaged in the drug trade. Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel investigating the Iran-Contra scandal, is expected to pursue allegations of narcotics smuggling by some Contras or by their supporters. Senate investigators say they suspect some of the Miami Cubans could prove central to that supposed Contra drug connection.    A full test of that theory will come only with testimony before Congress. But much evidence supporting the parts unrelated to drugs is available. Most complete is that concerning Felix Rodriguez, the former CIA operative identified in October by downed cargo specialist Eugene Hasenfus as a key figure in the Salvadoran end of the Contra supply network. Mr. Rodriguez declined to be interviewed for this article, but his close friend Jose Basulto reports that Mr. Rodriguez was doing counterinsurgency work in El Salvador when &quot;North appeared with a campaign for helping supply the Contras and said he needed help.&quot;    Enlisted also to aid the supply network in El Salvador were two other Bay of Pigs veterans: Mr. Quintero, who last was in the news when he testified about refusing to kill a Libyan dissident for rogue CIA operative Edwin Wilson, and Mr. Posada, who was charged in the airliner bombing.    ---   From the outset of the Contras' war, all sides have been aware of the similarity of their situation to that of the Cubans in 1961. Indeed, it is an analogy the Contras are tired of hearing from Cuban-Americans. &quot;Everybody wants to tell you that story -- 'Watch out for the Americans, they abandoned us, and they'll abandon you,'&quot; says a senior Contra official.    That may be the appropriate warning for the Contras. But, as he drives through Miami to visit his friend Felix Rodriguez, brigade member Jose Basulto suggests that, for the Americans, the opposite lesson can also be drawn: Surrogates aren't that easy to abandon.    &quot;Everyone thought they could wash their hands of it,&quot; he says, referring to American officials and the Bay of Pigs. &quot;But when the day came to wash their hands, they could find neither soap nor water, and their hands stayed covered in mud.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>