<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Health Care: 'You Get What You Pay For' </HL><SO> </SO><CO> ALD </CO><IN> PHA INS </IN><TEXT>   Edward L. Hennessy Jr. (&quot;A Completely New Way to Purchase Medical Benefits,&quot; Manager's Journal, July 18) suggests that one way for American businesses to compete more effectively against highly productive foreign firms is to bring their costs down. Further, he states that one of the best ways to do this is to move toward oligopsonistic purchase of employee health-care benefits.    While there are other (and much better) ways to achieve the same objective, if his view were to prevail we should be prepared to pay several possible prices. For instance, a contract with a health-maintenance organization for a three-year fixed rate of increase in costs won't do Allied-Signal Inc. much good if the HMO fails and, to date, more have failed than have succeeded.    Second, by squeezing employees into the lowest-cost health plan it can find, Allied-Signal increases its risk of being named a co-defendant every time one of those employees files a malpractice claim.    Third, if more and more American businesses seek only the lowest-cost medical care they can get, quality will erode and hospitals in the communities where their employees live will be forced to cut back or eliminate needed services that billed charges formerly subsidized as, for instance, burn units, neonatology services, emergency rooms, etc. Hospitals, after all, also have payrolls to meet.    If asked, the American people will tell you that they expect their local hospitals to continue to offer a full spectrum of the available modern technological miracles that American medicine and nursing can provide. In other words, when people are sick they want the best care they can get. If, as Mr. Hennessy suggests, we are to treat this social good as if it were only a commodity -- the availability and price of which are to be determined by the leverage exerted by large corporations like Allied-Signal -- many employees will no doubt learn that in health care, as in other services, you get what you pay for.    Merlin K. Duval M.D.    Senior Vice President   Medical Affairs   Samaritan Health Service Phoenix, Ariz.    ---   Mr. Hennessy's proposal for health control is a popular opinion among those attempting to direct health-care control. According to his data, as much as one-third of the medical care is &quot;wasted.&quot; This may very well be the case from a financial standpoint. A procedure may be &quot;wasted&quot; but to that patient or that patient's family it may be felt to be necessary care and inappropriate to deny it.    When government or industry decides which procedures and treatments are appropriate and which are not only then will the physician and health-care provider not be at risk of unnecessarily denying treatment to someone. The decision is difficult. Does one defer a single $40 chest X-ray or a $400 CAT scan and miss a diagnosis that will cost the provider one million dollars in court -- the cost of 25,000 chest X-rays or 2,500 CAT scans?    The trade-offs are not easy and as long as health-care recipients and our legal systems only tolerate first-class medical care, high technology and expenses will continue to rise.    The real question concerning heath-care insurance is the expansion of more and more services. In the past, one could secure an insurance policy to insure against a major accident or illness but now one has to be protected against AIDS, obesity, alcohol, drug abuse, drug prescriptions and a number of other very expensive and poor insurance risks. Whatever happened to insurance as insurance?    Ten to 15 years ago outpatient testing was completely non-reimbursed by many insurance companies and hospitalization was required. Five to 10 years later, the 180-degree turnaround makes for significant confusion and, unfortunately, the patient has been one of the last to be informed by his insurance carrier of the abrupt changes and disqualifying factors. He is spending more and more for less useful coverage but has few choices.    The other area of confusion is why industry continues to pay 25% to 40% of its premium dollar for administrative needs that do not actually reach the health-care provider. If one were to reduce the middlemen in the system, one would save the same billions of dollars a year without reducing medical care.    E. Benson Scott II M.D.    West Monroe, La.   ---   While I commend Mr. Hennessy's concerned and lucid description of hands-on involvement by a chief executive officer of a major corporation in the control of health-care costs, the Allied-Signal medical-benefit plan is hardly a &quot;completely new way.&quot;    Preferred provider organizations, known as PPOs, have been available for some time and have offered the wholesaling of medical care that Mr. Hennessy describes. However, such plans require an urban milieu where physicians are plentiful and competition among providers creates a receptive marketplace for the volume business that a large industry can provide. In less-populated areas with few physicians and a single hospital, there is little or no incentive for providers to negotiate fee schedules and employees cannot be mandated to seek out inconvenient health care.    More important in favorable environments, as Mr. Hennessy points out, is the corporate will to take a stand and cut back on a benefit that is no longer considered &quot;fringe&quot; by its recipients. Industry should recognize its clout both with what it offers employees and with the considerable revenue it makes available to health providers, both physicians and hospitals.    What will continue to hamper all efforts at cost containment is the &quot;supplier induced demand&quot; created by the physician-suppliers themselves. &quot;Revenue enhancing&quot; moves have indeed been a major cause of health-care inflation and while advancing technology drives some of these spiraling costs, the patient-consumer will remain at the mercy of his trusty physician.    Joseph M. Miller M.D.    Plymouth, N.H. </TEXT></DOC>