<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880129-0166 </DOCNO><HL> Bonn Policy Makers Caught Off Guard By East German Crackdown On Dissent </HL><AUTHOR> Victoria Pope (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   East Germany is abruptly giving the cold shoulder to detente.    After a brief spell of greater liberty, it swooped down on East Germany's fledgling dissident movement, expelling about 60 of them to West Germany and handing prison terms to seven dissidents. This week its border guards shot at East Germans trying to escape to the West, a practice that had been suspended when East German leader Erich Honecker visited West Germany in September. Yesterday it sentenced another dissident, a former Communist Party member who was among 200 activists detained Jan. 17.    The heavy-handed tactics come, incongruously, during what was one of the most harmonious periods between the two Germanys since their post-war division. It isn't difficult to gauge why Mr. Honecker has let the mask of respectability fall: He garnered the legitimacy he craved by traveling to West Germany and France, but his very decision to go touched off demands for more economic and political liberalizations that threatened East Germany's entrenched leadership.    First came the mild liberalizations that the party's old guard grudgingly allowed for the sake of the Honecker trip. But these emboldened East Germans to protest in the streets. Meantime, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's drive for reform at home has revitalized East Germany's protest movement, and militants have taken to shouting his phrases or painting them on banners.    The crackdown in East Germany comes as a disappointment for Bonn policy makers, who have been pressing quietly and patiently for human-rights concessions. Worse yet, West German officials doubt they can do anything about the policy reversal, at least in the short run.    Deutschlandpolitik, West Germany's policy toward the Germany east of the River Elbe, is a hybrid. Bonn offers many economic advantages to its Communist neighbor, hoping that East Berlin, tit-for-tat, will allow more contact between the countries' peoples. It is largely a carrot-without-the-stick approach that shuns direct public pressure on East Germany.    To be sure, this month's roundup of dissidents was widely condemned in West Germany -- but often with the qualification that it mustn't be allowed to damage relations. The most forthright response came from leading West German entertainers, who heeded a call from the wife of imprisoned singer-songwriter Stephan Krawcyk to refuse all East German engagements until her husband is out of jail.    West German politicians argue that by keeping channels open to East Germany, they have avoided the kind of intense hostility that divides North and South Korea. They fear forceful pressure would mean a clampdown on cross-border traffic.    But critics say Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government is being too cautious. They acknowledge that politics are at a delicate stage in East Germany. Its fiercest ideologues, men like Politburo member Kurt Hager, are trying to consolidate their position. East German authorities have stepped up police surveillance, and they recently accused several dissidents of spying for the West.    Bonn's critics in West Germany say it might help to remind East Germany where its bread is buttered. West Germany pays for East-West German river cleanups, indirectly subsidizes East Germany's postal service, and shells out an estimated 525 million marks ($315 million) a year for transit visas and border inspections. In eight years, Bonn spent 2.2 billion marks ($1.32 billion) improving East Germany's highways and rails.    West Germany, which in the 1950s tried to undermine the Communist regime next door, switched in the late 1960s to Ostpolitik, the opening to the East championed by former Chancellor Willi Brandt.    Since then, it has supplied many half-finished goods and production materials to East Germany. It gets paid through a special credit system, so that East Germany can keep precious hard currency for other purposes. East Germany also gains access to European Community markets because Bonn convinced its Common Market partners that the border between the Germanys isn't a real frontier.    Despite such help, East Germany's economy is faltering. It has slipped from its long-standing ranking as the world's 10th-leading industrial power to No. 26. Its technology is falling way behind the West's. A new agreement for an exchange of scientists with West Germany gives East Germany hope of bridging this gap. The threat of its cancellation would give officials in East Berlin pause.    Fear of losing Western assistance has sometimes been remarkably effective in stopping crackdowns in other East European countries. That is the sort of leverage some critics of Bonn's low-key diplomacy would like to see it use. </TEXT></DOC>