<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0031 </DOCNO><HL> Hamtramck, a CityOf Scars and Pride,Awaits Pope's Visit---Michigan Town Has SurvivedEthnic, Economic Shifts;Its Heart Remains Polish---By Joseph B. WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> HAMTRAMCK, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If you look toward heaven at the corner of Joseph Campau Avenue and Belmont Street, you will see it. Larger than life, arms spread in blessing, the bronze likeness of the Polish pope, John Paul II, gazes down from rooftop level over the center of this largely Polish town.    This Saturday, the flesh-and-blood pope will ride down Joseph Campau. He will be visiting a city that has become a living museum of the urban American past, a reminder of a time when white ethnic communities steeped in the ways of the Old World were the building blocks of Northern cities -- and the cornerstone of the American Catholic Church.    He will be coming, too, to a city that has plenty of scars to show, but a city that rolls with the punches and fights on.    Dozens of immigrant neighborhoods like Hamtramck (pronounced ham-TRAM'k) once dotted major Eastern and Midwestern cities. Most have disappeared, swept away as the children and grandchildren of the immigrants headed for the suburbs. Hamtramck, a 2.09-square-mile enclave surrounded by mostly poor, mostly black neighborhoods of Detroit, has flirted with that fate.    The city seemed doomed most recently in January 1980 when the big Dodge auto plant that powered its economy for 66 years shut down. But despite economic hard times, a shifting ethnic mix and the first inroads of gentrification and homogenization (McDonald's recently came to town, and a supermarket is on the way), Hamtramck survives.    &quot;In the '50s,&quot; says John Radwanski, a Hamtramck native who now is the superintendent of the city's public schools, &quot;everybody was getting emotional saying, 'Gee, the town is going to change.' When Dodge left, they said this was the death of the town. For some reason, it gets back on its feet.&quot;    Still, there are those scars. The population of about 21,190 is less than half what it was in the 1950s, when ethnic Poles made up 80% of the population. Now, little more than half the city is Polish, as Yugoslavians, Albanians and immigrants from the Middle East have moved in. The General Motors plant that replaced Dodge replaced just a small fraction of the jobs that Hamtramck lost. Boarded-up homes, abandoned by their owners as the area's economy skidded during the early 1980s, dot the city's fringes and some of its neighborhoods because the city has had no money to tear them down.    This month, Robert Kozaren, Hamtramck's tirelessly boosterish mayor, decided that, money or no, the worst of the abandoned homes had to go. Mr. Kozaren, acting on his own, made a deal with a contractor, and the old homes are now being demolished. Because he acted on his own, the mayor is personally liable for the estimated $200,000 demolition bill and is seeking private donations to help pay the tab. Raising the money might prove difficult. Hamtramck's per-capita income in 1983 was $7,657, about 15% lower than the average for surrounding Wayne County, a statistic that reflects the large number of elderly residents in the city.    But Hamtramck's core remains intact. In neighborhoods of modest two-story homes on 30-by-100-foot lots, a tightly knit Polish-American community resists the economic and social tides that have battered it.    Thomas and Cindy Cervanek live in one such neighborhood, a place that Mr. Cervanek calls &quot;a working-class historical district.&quot; Their neighborhood is, in fact, on the National Register of Historic Places, thanks in part to the lobbying of residents and because its 50- and 60-year-old homes still retain their original character. Here, says Mr. Cervanek, &quot;there's a sense people feel that they're in control of their situation.&quot;    The Cervaneks and their only child, daughter Alexandra, live almost in the shadow of the 220-foot-tall steeple of St. Florian's Catholic Church. An easy stroll up the street lives Mrs. Cervanek's mother, Lucille Luberski, who has lived in town all her life, as did her mother after arriving from Poland in 1919. &quot;There's two or three families (on the block) with three generations,&quot; she says. When two-year-old Alexandra graduates from her stroller, she will walk to St. Florian's school, just as her mother and grandmother did.    The Cervaneks live in an older home they have remodeled. Both have made Hamtramck a full-time vocation: Mr. Cervanek, 37, has for 12 years run People's Community Services, a social-service agency that among other things helped to organize Hamtramck's block associations during the early 1980s. Mrs. Cervanek, 33, heads the Norwalk Block Association, one of 19 block associations that have evolved into a potent political force in the city.    Not all residents, of course, are professional Hamtramckers. Most are like Pamela and Thomas Witkowski.    Mr. Witkowski, 37, like generations of Hamtramck men before him, works in an auto factory. Unlike earlier generations, however, Mr. Witkowski has to drive to his assembly job at the Dodge truck plant two towns away in suburban Warren. But Mr. Witkowski says he has no plans to move to the suburbs. He says that taxes are low and that his children -- Renay, 11, and Thomas, 8 -- are safe and getting a good education at St. Florian's.    &quot;Where else could you go where everything's within walking distance?&quot; he says, surveying the busy street from under a red baseball cap. &quot;Everything&quot; includes most of the Witkowskis' relatives.    Says Mrs. Witkowski: &quot;I've lived here all my life, my mother and father lived here all their lives, my kids will be here all their lives.&quot;    Hamtramck's inexpensive housing (single-family homes generally sell for less than $35,000; apartment rents are half the Detroit norm) and its unusual fusion of American small-town style and Eastern European culture have begun to attract a small but growing number of outsiders. Among them are students and academics from Wayne State University in Detroit. When the pope makes his address in his native language, many Hamtramck residents won't understand him or share his ethnic heritage.    The trend is evident in the city's public schools, which traditionally have been charged with teaching Polish youngsters American ways. Now the schools teach classes in Urdu, Macedonian, Arabic, Yugoslavian and Albanian -- as well as Polish.    The shifting ethnic mix has produced ethnic and racial tensions. Last year, a day of fighting between black and Albanian students unsettled the city's schools. City Police Chief Alexander Schulhan says the trouble started when an Albanian youth challenged a black youth who was dating an Albanian girl.    Relations between blacks and the Polish-American community have functioned at two levels in recent years, says Yvonne Myrick, former president of the city's chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. &quot;On a one-to-one basis, everyone gets along fine,&quot; she says, citing the fact that two years ago, the predominantly white publicworks union of the city elected her its president. But Mrs. Myrick says that blacks have had trouble with the city's Polish-dominated government over the issue of housing.    In 1968, a group of black residents sued the city, charging that urban renewal as practiced in 87%-white Hamtramck meant systematic removal of black families. The city lost the case at the U.S. district-court level in 1971, and in 1980 Hamtramck agreed to allow construction of low-income housing in return for an end to the litigation.    But Mrs. Myrick says it remains to be seen how that low-income housing will be developed and whether any of the black families displaced by urban renewal 18 years ago will get new homes.    So far, Hamtramck has kept its Polish heart despite the pressures of an increasingly disparate population. The Michigan Polish American Congress has its headquarters here. The loose network of former Solidarity officials who have settled around Michigan comes to town for meetings and fund-raising.    Hamtramck's little markets and restaurants still draw shoppers nostalgic for pirogis, honey babka cake and locally produced kielbasa. While the smattering of empty storefronts and weather-beaten shop signs on Joseph Campau Avenue attest to the hard times of a few years back, the city's main shopping street is busier than it has been in years.    Perhaps the city's most hopeful sign comes from St. Florian's. The mostly Polish-American parishioners recently had to decide whether to plunge nearly $1 million into repairing the 60-year-old building's steel and brick facade. The parish council voted to spend the money. &quot;I don't think the people who live in the parish would ever&quot; let it die, says Cindy Cervanek.    While they are at it, though, the parishioners might raise a few more dollars for another cause. It turns out that the statue of John Paul II -- the same one the pope will ride past Saturday in a parade celebrating his ties to the Polish-American community -- was planned with more pride than fiscal forethought. Mayor Kozaren still needs $80,000 in donations to pay the three-year-old bill. &quot;Nobody talks about the $220,000 we paid,&quot; he protests. &quot;That's a phenomenon!&quot; </TEXT></DOC>