<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871022-0032 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. SUSPENDED plans to ease sales of certain high-tech gear to China.    Complaining that Beijing has ignored its requests to stop supplying Silkworm missiles to Iran, the White House decided to shelve plans for China to purchase some advanced U.S. technology without going through licensing procedures. The move came after China refused last week to acknowledge sales of weapons to Iran.    The Senate approved a resolution requiring that the administration report to Congress on its Persian Gulf policies. The resolution calls for the report within 60 days. It left unresolved the future of the War Powers Act, under which Congress could force a withdrawal of forces.    Shipping sources in the gulf region reported an explosion off the southern coast of Kuwait, site of an oil terminal. Cause of the blast wasn't known.    ---   NORWAY FOUND that U.S. allies violated Cocom export controls.    A Norwegian police investigation of illegal shipments of high-technology products by state-owned arms maker Kongsberg uncovered what appear to be far more serious violations of allied export-control rules by Italian, West German, French and British firms, U.S. officials said. Oslo wasn't expected to announce those findings officially until today.    A senior administration official, who learned of the inquiry's conclusions during briefings by Norwegian diplomats, faulted Cocom controls as &quot;weak.&quot;    ---   An American researcher at MIT won the 1987 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science. The Royal Swedish Academy in Stockholm cited Robert M. Solow, a former adviser to the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, for his explanation of how certain factors make industrialized economies grow.    ---   Japan's Defense Agency selected General Dynamics Corp.'s F-16 jet fighter to replace a fleet of aging aircraft that protects Japanese sea lanes against Soviet invasion, a defense official in Tokyo said. The decision comes after a three-year dispute between Japanese and U.S. interests over the $6 billion jet project.    ---   Shultz expressed confidence that he would make progress on a superpower arms-control accord during talks with Soviet officials in Moscow. The two-day meeting is to begin today. In Washington, Reagan said the Kremlin issued &quot;a statement about wanting a summit,&quot; and that a date could be announced as early as today.    Israeli Prime Minister Shamir told Shultz during talks last weekend in Jerusalem to explore the possibility of peace negotiations between Israel and Jordan under the auspices of the U.S. and the Soviet Union.    ---   The Soviet news agency Tass reported that the Communist Party Central Committee dismissed Geidar Aliev from the ruling Politburo and sent him into retirement &quot;for reasons of health.&quot; Aliev, 64, was absent from the June plenary meeting of the Central Committee, prompting speculation that he was ill or out of favor with Gorbachev.    ---   Reagan held Oval Office talks with Honduran President Azcona, and said that Nicaragua's Contra rebels must &quot;remain strong&quot; until Managua is &quot;irreversibly on the road to democracy.&quot; In El Salvador, leftist rebels attacked several electric power stations as representatives of the guerrillas and Duarte's government met in Venezuela.    ---   U.S. immigration officials eased slightly their amnesty-program rules, allowing children in this country illegally to remain with parents whose status is made legal. But the Immigration and Naturalization Service rebuffed pressure to establish a national, blanket policy for spouses.    ---   The Senate began debating Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court, but couldn't agree on when to take a final vote. Fiftyfour senators have announced their opposition to Bork's confirmation, making defeat of the nominee almost certain.    ---   Indian soldiers fought house-to-house battles along mined and booby-trapped streets in the northern Sri Lankan city of Jaffna, the last Tamil separatist stronghold. New Delhi's forces, sent to the island nation to enforce a July 29 truce, renewed appeals for the Tamil rebels to surrender.    ---   South Korea's Roh was pelted with eggs and assaulted with a tear-gas grenade during campaign stops in Kwangju, considered an opposition stronghold. The government's presidential candidate said he wouldn't be intimidated by such acts, the first such incident in the campaign leading to the election that is to be held by Dec. 20.    ---   Police in the Philippines dismantled barricades blocking entrance to 10 strike-bound businesses in Manila, a day after President Aquino pledged to stop what she called illegal strikes. Police didn't interfere with picketing, and violence wasn't reported.    ---   Chile approved a bill that strips convicted Marxists of the right to free speech and empowers Santiago's military junta to suspend them from their jobs. The measure, seen as an attempt by Pinochet to stifle Marxist activities in next year's presidential election, also foresees sanctions for political parties aligned with Marxist groups.    ---   Marine Sgt. Lonetree agreed to cooperate with U.S. counter-intelligence agents in exchange for a promised five-year reduction in his 30-year prison sentence on espionage charges. Lonetree, a former embassy guard in Moscow, was convicted in August of spying for the Soviet Union. </TEXT></DOC>