<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870427-0033 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For years, Republican Rep. Bill Frenzel of Minnesota has been Congress's most outspoken free trader, relentlessly opposing even minor restrictions on imports.    But this year, Rep. Frenzel is playing a new role: Working with Democrats, he was a key player in getting almost all of the Ways and Means Committee to approve the trade package now before the House.    &quot;I've changed,&quot; the 17-year congressional veteran says. &quot;Free traders are getting run out of town; so we have to give a little ground.&quot;    Rep. Frenzel isn't the only one giving ground. Unblemished free traders have become as rare in Washington as Cadillacs in Tokyo. The movement toward tough trade legislation has become a stampede, and enactment of a bill looks highly likely.    The new mood partly reflects the continuing erosion of the coalition of multinational corporations that for decades staunchly opposed any curbs on trade. Some import-battered companies, such as Chrysler Corp., Motorola Inc. and Ford Motor Co., have deserted the free-trade fold and are backing a controversial measure that automatically limits imports from countries having large trade surpluses with the U.S.    Many other companies, led by the Business Roundtable and the National Association of Manufacturers, are backing the Ways and Means Committee's trade bill, even though it contains elements that Joseph Gavin, the manager for trade policy at the U.S. Council for International Business, calls &quot;low-profile, creeping protectionism.&quot;    &quot;The greatest change in the last year is the tremendous shift in business,&quot; says Rep. Richard Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat. &quot;Companies that were once adamant free traders unwilling to do anything to upset the apple cart now are for tough measures on trade.&quot; Gary Horlick, a trade lawyer, agrees. &quot;Many businesses are coming around to wanting trade legislation,&quot; he says, &quot;because they've become convinced that the world is unfair to them.&quot;    The House plans to begin debate on the Ways and Means bill tomorrow. In the Senate, the Finance Committee will continue work on its version of a trade bill. Both debates will be going on as Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone meets with President Reagan here to try to reduce trade tensions between Tokyo and Washington. Just how tough the final measure will be is unclear, but, undoubtedly, import barriers are going to grow higher.    Over the weekend, President Reagan appealed to Congress: &quot;With my meeting with Prime Minister Nakasone and the Venice economic summit coming up {in June}, it is terribly important not to restrict the president's options in such trade dealings with foreign governments.&quot; But Rep. Gephardt said his controversial retaliation amendment &quot;will give us the teeth we need in trade negotiations to get free-trade agreements.&quot;    Sparking the current furor is America's yawning trade deficit, which jumped from $39.6 billion in 1981, the year Mr. Reagan took office, to a record $166 billion last year. Ironically, the political push for a trade bill is coming just as the trade deficit may be subsiding; government statistics indicate it peaked in the 1986 third quarter. And a narrowing deficit helped spur economic growth to a 4.3% annual rate in the first quarter of this year.    Those early signs of economic improvement, however, haven't yet penetrated the political debate. The trade turnaround has been so slow in coming that many politicians and business-people have grown tired of waiting and are demanding action now. As a result, concludes Doreen Brown, the president of Consumers for World Trade, the pressure for a tough trade bill &quot;may be reaching its fever pitch at just the wrong time.&quot; Some analysts worry that Congress may be risking a trade war at a time when the U.S. should be pushing for open markets to take advantage of export opportunities created by the lower dollar.    Of course, members of Congress have threatened to enact protectionist legislation in the past, egged on by organized labor and a few struggling industries such as steel, textiles, machine tools and, more recently, autos and semiconductors. But until this year, the congressional efforts were thwarted by the Reagan administration and remnants of the free-trade coalition.    However, the 1986 election put control of both houses of Congress in Democratic hands for the first time in six years, and the Democrats have decided to make trade a key test of their power. Moved by the tide of political and popular sentiment, the administration and much of the business community have decided to join in the effort to draw up trade legislation.    &quot;We're seeing a gravitation to the middle,&quot; says GOP Sen. John Danforth of Missouri. &quot;While there are still a lot of protectionists and free traders, the principle of reciprocity is rallying both sides. The emerging center is realistic, tough-minded and committed to the principle of reciprocity.&quot;    &quot;Reciprocity&quot; proposals seek to force foreign nations such as Japan to open their markets to U.S. exports. Supporters insist that these proposals aren't &quot;protectionist&quot; because their ultimate goal is to increase exports, not restrict imports.    But the reciprocity proposals all include a threat to shut off imports from countries that don't abide by U.S. rules. The moderate version of the trade bill passed by the Ways and Means Committee tightens existing laws for retaliating against countries using &quot;unfair&quot; trading practices. The more extreme version -- an amendment being sponsored by Rep. Gephardt -- would automatically impose tariffs and quotas on countries, such as Japan, that continue to run large trade surpluses with the U.S. The Gephardt goal is to reduce other countries' surpluses with the U.S. by 10% a year.    Except for Chrysler, Ford, Motorola and a few others, the business community is largely united in opposing Rep. Gephardt's approach. Indeed, some businesses supporting the milder Ways and Means bill are doing so only as a tactical move to head off the more extreme proposal.    &quot;If we had our druthers, we would have thought it preferable for Congress to not legislate on trade,&quot; says Robert McNeil, executive vice chairman of the Emergency Committee for American Trade, a group of multinational companies. &quot;But the fact of the matter is that Congress is going to legislate on trade. So the question becomes, What's the best you can get?&quot;    Many other businesses backing the Ways and Means bill, however, have grown frustrated by the trade issue and are eager to see Congress act. The dollar's plunge over the past two years was supposed to help them, by making imports more expensive and their exports more competitive overseas. Instead, businesses are finding it difficult to win back export markets, and, increasingly, they are blaming foreigners' unfair trading practices.    &quot;There is less patience with the difficulties of entry into the Japanese market, in particular,&quot; says Lawrence Fox, vice president of the international department at the National Association of Manufacturers. &quot;And there is a greater willingness to deal with that through direct action.&quot;    Some critics also view the change in corporate attitudes as an effort to blame foreign trade barriers for the failings of U.S. corporate management.    &quot;There has been a greater willingness on the part of large corporate America to scapegoat our trading partners as a rhetorical device to minimize the inadequacies that corporate America has shown in competing abroad,&quot; says William Lilley, who heads the American Business Conference, a small group of high-growth companies that oppose import curbs. &quot;The uproar about the need for action is more of a political phenomenon than any kind of substantive, international economic phenomena.&quot;    In addition to the new business support, public sentiment for action seems strong. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll this month, for instance, found that 69% of those surveyed believe that the U.S. should limit Japanese imports to protect domestic industries. &quot;There's a very strong sentiment out there that the trade situation has gotten out of control,&quot; says Frank Greer, a Democratic media consultant.    &quot;The trade problem is much greater now&quot; than three years ago, Rep. Gephardt agrees. &quot;More industries are affected, more jobs are being lost, wages are declining, and the middle class is shrinking.&quot;    Some Democrats also argue that trade played an important role in their party's 1986 election victories. Mr. Greer, for instance, says President Reagan's veto of a protectionist bill for the textile industry last year helped defeat incumbent Republican senators in North Carolina, Georgia and Alabama.    As a result, Democratic congressional leaders have concluded that the trade issue should get top political priority and could be a key issue in the 1988 presidential election. Rep. Gephardt is hoping that his attack against trade deficits will help his long-shot presidential campaign.    Public support for tough trade legislation, however, could drop quickly if it brought negative consequences. The Journal/NBC poll found that only 44% of Americans would back a proposal such as Rep. Gephardt's if it increased the cost of goods they buy. Republican pollster Robert Teeter warns that although polls show &quot;some pretty strong protectionist attitudes&quot; among the public, they also show much support for the idea of free trade.    Moreover, trade legislation isn't likely to do much to reduce the trade deficit. Gary Hufbauer, a professor at Georgetown University, estimates that even if all Japanese and European trade barriers were eliminated, the trade deficit would narrow by $30 billion &quot;at the outside.&quot;    Most economists contend that reducing the U.S. budget deficit would be a better way to ease the trade problems. But the way the budget deficit affects trade is difficult for the public to understand and even harder for Congress to resolve. Thus, tough trade legislation remains the most likely congressional response.    &quot;The feeling,&quot; Ms. Brown of the consumer group says, &quot;is that it no longer does any good to go to Congress and offer alternatives that are free trade.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>