<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890829-0105 </DOCNO><DD> = 890829 </DD><AN> 890829-0105. </AN><HL> Le Deficit Bugetaire Geant de 1789@  ----@  By Eugene N. White </HL><DD> 08/29/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   In this summer's celebrations, the French Revolution is depicted as a political and social upheaval. What is largely overlooked are its economic origins.    The revolution began because the monarchy failed to control its deficit spending. When the government exhausted its ability to borrow, Louis XVI was forced to convene a constitutional convention -- the Estates-General -- in the hope of securing new taxes. Once assembled, the Estates-General moved beyond financial matters and seized political control. Although far removed in time from current American policy problems, the events of 1789 reveal the potentially extreme consequences of failing to balance the budget.    The collapse of the French monarchy is directly tied to its inept handling of fiscal policy. Expenditures often ran well ahead of revenues. Attempts to control the budget were often frustrated by the numerous and independent venal officials who managed the king's finances. In wartime, the deficit ballooned; afterward, it was common for the government to declare bankruptcy and suspend payment on some portion of its debt.    Following the partial suspension of interest payments in 1770, two finance ministers, the abbot Terray and the economist Turgot slashed expenditures and raised taxes to produce small surpluses. In addition to reducing the debt outstanding, they gained greater control over the government's financial administration by replacing venal officials with a smaller modern bureaucracy.    The outbreak of the American War for Independence threatened to undo these reforming ministers' accomplishments. Military expenditures to assist the Americans' revolt rose rapidly, but the Parlement of Paris agreed to only a few temporary tax increases. The absence of any government paper money ruled out an inflation tax, and the crown was forced to finance the war almost entirely by borrowing. Although all the necessary ingredients for a disaster were present, a crisis was averted. The king took the radical step of appointing an able Swiss Protestant financier, Jacques Necker, as finance minister.    Necker continued to fund the war by issuing more securities, but he ensured that the growing debt could be serviced. Rising interest payments were made by cuts in non-military expenditures and a continuing reform of the inefficient and wasteful financial administration. The market responded favorably to Necker's policies. The yields on government securities that had shot up in the early years of the war now fell.    In spite of his success, Necker was dismissed near the war's end, and the coveted ministry fell to less able French aristocrats. The administrative reforms of Necker and his predecessors were gradually undone. Worse yet, once peace arrived, high military expenditures were replaced by expenditures for public works and court favorites. Instead of peacetime surpluses, large deficits appeared in the 1780s.    The new minister of finance, Calonne, found that he could continue to borrow, thanks to his predecessors' enhancement of the crown's financial reputation. But interest rates soon rose, making borrowing increasingly expensive and difficult. In a major policy shift Calonne attempted to raise taxes, but the Parlement and his own hand-picked Assembly of Notables refused to countenance a tax increase. They insisted that only the Estates-General, a constitutional convention that had not met since 1614, could consent to new taxes.    The king refused to call an Estates-General until August 1788, when the government found itself unable to borrow any more. The king also recalled Necker in the hope that he could turn around the kingdom's finances so that the Estates-General would not be able to dictate economic policy. But it was too late, and Necker only bought time by borrowing banknotes from the Discount Bank and declaring them legal tender, thus creating the first government paper money in 60 years.    When the Estates-General met in May 1789, it discovered that it controlled the kingdom's future because it controlled the kingdom's finances. The crown's worst fears were realized when the Estates-General transformed itself into the National Assembly and challenged the monarchy's political authority. The storming of the Bastille on July 14 marks a breakdown in political and social control from above. Henceforth, the Parisian crowd could influence and intimidate the government. It was thus not in the political interest of the National Assembly to raise new taxes, and it allowed the old ones to go unpaid.    The revolutionaries did begin major economic reforms. In the early years, they eliminated all internal barriers to trade, creating a unified national market, and permitted freedom of enterprise. While this lay the foundations for later modern economic growth, the revolutionaries did not eliminate their inherited budget deficit. This failure led to inflation, the confiscation of church and private property, price controls, and eventually a bankruptcy.    The revolution and its disastrous economic policies could have been avoided had the king the political will to support the policies of his reform-minded ministers. The permissive growth of deficit spending ensured a momentous economic and political crisis.    ---   Mr. White is an associate professor of economics at Rutgers. </TEXT></DOC>