<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880614-0054 </DOCNO><HL> The Grain Drain: Killing Drought Raises Food Prices, Portends Worsening of Inflation --- Economists Grow Pessimistic About Holding Rise to 4% At the Checkout Counter --- From Beer to Breakfast Cereal </HL><AUTHOR> Scott Kilman and Richard Gibson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ECO FOD CMD SCR FAR </IN><TEXT>   An explosion in food prices over the next year seems likely to loosen America's already shaky grip on inflation.    Blame the drought, mainly. The worst in five years, it has scorched the waves of grain over a vast expanse of the U.S. breadbasket stretching from the Midwest to the Pacific Coast. For many crops in many places, the critical point in growth arrived last week -- and passed rainless.    Even if the drought ended tomorrow, these crops no longer stand a chance of full recovery. The corn crop has shrunk by at least a fifth in parts of the Midwest, says a grain exporter who worries about not having enough to ship. Oats, wheat, soybeans and barley -- grains whose cost affects goods ranging from breakfast cereals to salad dressings and beer -- are similarly being stunted.    The upshot: Although economists say food-price increases this year may not greatly exceed early forecasts of 4% overall, they are becoming much more pessimistic about 1989, when this year's higher-priced crops fully work their way into the food-production chain. Food prices and gasoline prices have risen only slowly for most of this decade and have served to reassure consumers that inflation generally was moribund. A sudden blow to this complacency could revive inflationary expectations.    Vincent Malanga, the president of LaSalle Economics Inc., thinks the damage to date could increase food prices by 7% next year. &quot;Six percent is the problem range,&quot; says Donald Ratajczak, the director of economic forecasting at Georgia State University. Yesterday he raised his forecast for 1989 food inflation to 6% from 4.5%. &quot;Food is rising at a higher rate than wages, and that puts upward pressure on wage demands,&quot; he says. &quot;The feeling of inflation is important. People feel inflation quickly in food because they deal with it daily.&quot;    A 6% increase in food prices would cost a typical American family more than $300 a year. A family of four on a moderate budget spent $99.60 a week at the supermarket last month, according to the Agriculture Department; a 6% increase would raise the average to $105.58.    Some foods have already been marked up noticeably, even before the severity of the drought became apparent. Gerber Products Co., the baby-food giant, raised prices 6% in early April. Most cereal prices have increased 5% or more so far this year. Kraft Inc. has raised the prices of its margarine, salad dressings and mayonnaise by 5% to 10%. A 15-ounce box of Cheerios that last October cost $1.98 now sells for $2.14. Kraft mayonnaise in 32-ounce jars sells for $1.98, up from $1.48. Government figures show that the average price of a one-pound loaf of white bread has risen 10% since April 1987 to 60 cents.    Some increases have even reached the double-digit levels of the inflationary 1970s. Wholesale chicken prices rose 16% in May alone. The wholesale price of popcorn increased 10% in the past two weeks. Stokely USA Inc., a big vegetable canner, says it plans 12% to 15% increases soon. The drought has shriveled some of its vegetable harvests to only one-sixth the normal.    Government policies designed to ease the farm crisis -- selling American crops cheaply overseas and paying U.S. farmers to idle land -- made food prices unusually vulnerable this year. Such policies have shrunk the towering stockpiles of foodstuffs that had kept prices down for years. There are signs, too, that after seven years of low food inflation, food companies -- more aggressively managed than in the past -- will raise prices at the first sign that their costs are increasing. Kellogg Co. raised its cereal prices 5% in January and 5% again last Saturday. Analysts say such pricing will become typical.    For much of rural America, the drought is clouding an agricultural recovery. Although the drought has sent crop prices soaring, many farmers will have less to sell. There isn't much help from government in sight; although the farmers will sell smaller crops, market prices are approaching federal support levels. In regions such as North Dakota's Red River Valley, some farmers seem destined to fail. They already have lost half their normal harvest of wheat and barley.    &quot;A lot were just barely making it with good crops,&quot; says Joseph Simon, the head of the U.S. Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service in North Dakota's Grand Forks County. &quot;Now these guys are really in a bind. The crop is in the toilet, and the government's payment is going that way, too.&quot;    Across most of the Midwest and Plains states, the drought is in its third month. Until last week, the crop was young enough to warrant the general belief that rains would fully restore it. Any immediate rain may stave off disaster, farmers now say, but they have lost hope for a rich harvest.    Beginning this week, says Steve Freed, an agricultural analyst for Dean Witter Reynolds in Chicago, the corn yield will drop 5% for every week it rains less than normal. If temperatures climb, the damage will worsen. It already has, in some places. William Dodds, the grain-merchandising manager for the Andersons, a big grain handler based in Maumee, Ohio, says the corn and soybean harvests in Indiana, Ohio and Michigan will be 20% smaller than last year's. In central Illinois, the corn crop has lost one-fifth of its kernel-making potential, says Jack Huggins, senior vice president of Pekin Energy Co., which makes ethanol from corn.    The corn loss directly affects meat prices, because much of the crop feeds livestock. Grain-price increases and damage to the alfalfa and hay crop have raised by about 20% the cost of feeding cattle at some Texas feedlots, all but ensuring that beef prices, even if they don't rise again, will stay at their recent high levels.    &quot;I expect meat prices to stay at a higher plateau,&quot; says Ron Pekrul, vice president of the Lone Star Feedyard in Happy, Texas.    A glut of poultry had been expected to keep chicken prices down, competitively checking a rise in beef. Instead, chicken prices have risen by nearly one-fifth recently.    Food prices overall rose only 2.7% in 1983, when the last big drought came. Cattle ranchers whose herds had just peaked in size panicked when the drought sent feed costs up, and stampeded their cattle to market, creating a supply that forced prices down. This year, however, the supply of young cattle is the smallest since the 1960s, and there's small chance of a similar glut.    Crops that go directly into human foods and other goods -- wheat, oats, barley and soybeans -- have suffered even more than corn. In some parts of the Plains states, the spring wheat, oat and barley crops are expected to be half the size of last year. D-Con Co., a Sterling Drug Inc. subsidiary that makes rat and mouse poisons, says oat prices have become so high that it may have to stop using hulled oat stubble as the main filler in the poisons.    Soybean prices have soared mainly because stockpiles have dwindled since last year. Crushed into oil and meal, the beans help make cooking oils, salad dressings, mayonnaise and margarine.    The increases affect many other products. Frito-Lay, owned by PepsiCo Inc., says it may have to raise the price of corn chips and other snack foods this fall. It uses soy oil to cook them. &quot;You want to stock up on dog food?&quot; asks John M. McMillin, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. &quot;Maybe you do.&quot; Soy meal is used in the pet food.    Food companies try to hedge themselves against cost disasters with contracts that lock in the prices they pay. The insurance they get is only partial, however. Stokely USA had fixed-priced contracts on vegetables in Wisconsin; because of the drought, however, fields that usually yield 2,500 pounds of peas an acre were yielding only 400 pounds this season. Much of the harvest is inferior as well, forcing Stokely to pay top dollar for better peas. &quot;A situation where all the prices seem to go up at once is a rarity,&quot; says Joseph B. Weix, the chairman of Stokely. &quot;But that's likely this year because the drought is early.&quot;    Even when food companies have planned for drought, the benefit may not accrue to consumers. Golden Valley Microwave Foods Inc., a microwave-popcorn maker in suburban Minneapolis, says most of its popcorn crop is irrigated, but it still might match the competition's rising prices. Or it might keep its prices down to snare business. &quot;We can pick and choose,&quot; says Richard J. Moen, executive vice president.    Rural America fears that the rapid rise in grain prices will derail agriculture's economic recovery. High prices will encourage farmers to forgo federal price supports next year in order to plant land that would have been idled in a support program. While that would reduce the taxpayers' price-support burden, it could rapidly rebuild stockpiles that could cause another agricultural crash. &quot;Farmers could destroy the recovery if they go fence-row to fence-row next year,&quot; says Raymond Daniel, an economist at WEFA Group Inc., a consulting firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.    A year ago, higher prices would have made a bonanza for many farmers. In the Midwest, many had several seasons' worth of harvest stored on their farms. But mostly it is gone, sold over the winter as prices edged upward and the weak dollar encouraged exports. &quot;High prices don't help if you go into town with an empty truck,&quot; says John Galegher, a farmer in Thompson, N.D.    The drought is also threatening agribusiness's rebound. Bankers who recently saw the first pickup in several years in equipment and real-estate loans now worry about another retrenchment. So do equipment dealers, whose tractor sales had begun to recover after last fall's near-record crops. &quot;Everything is grinding to a halt,&quot; says Derryl McLaren, a farmer in Farragut, Iowa.    Country grain elevators, the biggest businesses in many rural communities, have been pinched by a big rally in futures prices. Like many big food companies, they hedge their purchases of grain by selling futures contracts. The contracts are promises to deliver grain at a certain date. By hedging, the elevator tries to protect itself from wild price declines.    As prices rise, though, the elevators have been forced to scramble to come up with the cash to meet rising margin requirements on their futures contracts. Some are trying to get the extra money from bankers, but others have been forced to sell their grain inventory to get out of the market.    &quot;It's a battle,&quot; says Frank Beurskens, the president of Advance Trading Inc. in Bloomington, Ill., which advises grain elevators.    At the commodities exchanges themselves, business is booming in pits that until recently were moribund. Trading at the Chicago Board of Trade in grain contracts has doubled from last June. Russell Wasendorf, the president of a commodity brokerage firm in Cedar Falls, Iowa, says he has twice as many clients now as at the beginning of the year.    The wild volatility in prices, though, is also making trading much riskier than it has been for five years. &quot;It's like driving a go-cart, and someone puts you in an Indianapolis 500 car,&quot; says Mr. Wasendorf. </TEXT></DOC>