<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871109-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Global Traders:How Merrill LynchMoves Its Stock DealsAll Around the World---A Day of Trading in Tokyo,London and New YorkShows Close New Links---Many Late-Night Phone Calls---This article was prepared byWall Street Journal staff reportersBryan Burrough in New York,Craig Forman in LondonAnd Kathryn Graven in Tokyo</HL><DD> 11/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MER JAPAN EUROPSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   Inside Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.'s sprawling Manhattan trading room, stock traders are regularly stopping by Richard Brody's desk to ask the latest news from London and Tokyo. They didn't used to do that.    But Mr. Brody, one of Merrill Lynch's two U.S. traders of Japanese stocks, thought little of it -- until his mother got interested, too. &quot;When my mother calls me up and tells me what's going on in the Tokyo market, I know something has changed,&quot; the 29-year-old trader says.    From Wall Street to Main Street, the stock-market crash of Oct. 19, Black Monday, has awakened U.S. investors to the global stock market. The huge waves of stock transactions that ebbed and flowed across world stock markets that day and in the following weeks have shocked -- and fascinated -- experts and neophytes alike.    Radio stations that once wrote off the London and Tokyo markets in 20 seconds now carry as much as five minutes of foreign financial news each morning. Since the crash, U.S. investors have been struggling to understand such overseas indicators as the Nikkei average, Tokyo's equivalent of the Dow Jones Industrial Average, and the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index, the London version that traders call the &quot;footsie.&quot;    A day spent with Merrill Lynch stock traders in New York, Tokyo and London shows how the three markets are intertwined. As Thursday, Nov. 5, in New York turned into Friday, Nov. 6, in Tokyo and London, teams of Merrill Lynch traders in one city picked up trading where their overseas colleagues had left off.    Long before Black Monday, of course, stocks had been traded world-wide, though not as much as bonds or currencies. What the crash did is persuade investors that stock markets, while not ignoring parochial concerns, have become increasingly interconnected world-wide.    &quot;Black Monday changed investor psychology forever,&quot; says Brian Barefoot, Merrill Lynch's chief of equity trading. &quot;It traumatized everyone everywhere, and in the process we became one big global {stock} market.&quot; Adds Mr. Brody, the trader: &quot;They were saying for a long time that the stock market was global. But no one really believed them until that day.&quot;    Moreover, the crash may have laid to rest Americans' long-held notion that New York always led the pack among world stock markets. The old axiom, &quot;When New York sneezes, Tokyo and London catch a cold,&quot; has become outdated. &quot;Now anyone can catch a cold from anyone,&quot; observes Jerome P. Kenney, the chief executive of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.    That became increasingly clear as Merrill's trading operations slowly circled the globe last Thursday. As the sun rose in New York, traders tracked rumors of an interest-rate cut by German banks. Later, their colleagues in Tokyo guessed wrong: They thought that the Bank of Japan would follow suit. In such an unpredictable market, all were surprised by a strong, 40-point rally in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Merrill misread the reaction by Japanese, and to some extent, European investors. But by sticking to a cautious strategy devised in the wake of Black Monday, it avoided any major pitfalls and managed to post a profitable day.    Riding herd over Merrill Lynch's global stock group is John Tognino, Merrill Lynch's 48-year-old head of international and over-the-counter trading in New York. A tall, bluff man, Mr. Tognino faces a world drastically changed from the one he entered as an 18-year-old Merrill Lynch runner in 1957. As late as 1975, U.S. stock markets represented 58% of all the stock value traded in the world, Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. estimates. Today, that has shrunk to 34%. In market value, the Tokyo market is bigger than New York -- and still growing.    That the stock market would go global has been widely anticipated for some time. Mammoth pension funds have been pumping record sums into foreign stocks: an estimated $80 billion last year, up from less than $10 billion in 1977. Vastly improved computer technology has reduced communications snafus. And the deregulation and restructuring have made world capital markets more liquid and efficient.    Mr. Tognino presides over a group of 40 traders in five countries who specialize in international stocks, including a diverse team of five trading a &quot;book&quot; of Japanese stocks in New York, London and Tokyo. The team consists of two Americans, one Japanese, a Londoner and a British subject born in South Africa. With such diverse backgrounds, the trading team would never &quot;get together if it wasn't work,&quot; says Allan Beuthin, a London-based vice president and trading manager. &quot;And yet we all eat, sleep and dream the Japanese book.&quot;    In New York, Mr. Tognino's day begins when the phone rings at his suburban home, in Scarsdale, at 6:15 a.m. Joseph R. &quot;Chuck&quot; Dorsey Jr., the 46-year-old head trader in Merrill's London office, is calling with gloomy news: London's &quot;footsie&quot; is down 40 points, a strong indication that the U.S. market will suffer its third drop in a row. However, Mr. Dorsey holds out some hope for news that might hearten European investors: British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher is criticizing U.S. budget and trade deficits, and rumors of impending interest rate cuts by German banks are circulating.    At 8:15, two dozen Merrill traders jam into Mr. Tognino's office in the firm's headquarters in the World Financial Center in downtown Manhattan. Thomas Burnett, Mr. Tognino's international specialist, gives the bad news from overseas. &quot;Far East -- down. Hong Kong -- down 5%. The Aussies got hit bad last night. Tokyo was down about 2%.&quot; As each trader reports on another sector, it becomes clear that the market is nervous, jumpy, unpredictable. Uncertainty rules the room.    Finding few signs of the stability he badly wants after two weeks of churning markets, Mr. Tognino counsels continuing caution. &quot;Our strategy seems right on target,&quot; he advises. &quot;We're not looking to hit any home runs out there.&quot;    By 8:45, Mr. Tognino is at his desk on Merrill's huge trading floor, which is roughly the size of six high-school gymnasiums. Around him, hundreds of traders sit at long tables elbow-to-elbow before banks of computer monitors; high on the walls, market news crawls across giant electronic screens. When trading starts at 9:30, all the traders will begin shouting at once.    Mr. Tognino, sipping seltzer from a can, fields another call from London's Mr. Dorsey, who says the British market seems to be awaiting interest-rate moves by German bankers. As the two men talk, news of the German rate cut crosses the tape. This day, Mr. Tognino will talk to his London office 10 times -- by 10 a.m.    The German move, coming a half hour before U.S. trading opens, sets an upbeat tone. The rally gains momentum as U.S. banks cut the prime rate -- their base lending rate on business loans -- during the first hour of trading, and major U.S. retailers report monthly results that, at least, aren't disappointing. By mid-morning in New York, the London market has rebounded on news of the German move.    That rebound is what Mr. Tognino and other Merrill traders have been waiting for. Betting on a recovery in London, they had already begun buying shares of Britain's General Electric Co. (which isn't related to the American company). They figure that U.S. investors may want to participate in what's shaping up as a minor rally in London.    As Mr. Tognino turns his attention toward U.S. trading, his Japanese-stock trading team is swinging into action. Sitting across the floor before monitors topped by a small Japanese flag, Mr. Brody and his partner, Thomas Raimondo, trade about 60 Japanese stocks, maybe 25 actively, including such well-known names as Honda, Canon, Sony and Hitachi.    At the end of each U.S. trading session, the two Americans pass on to Merrill's Tokyo traders the stock positions remaining in their Japanese &quot;book&quot; as well as whatever market intelligence they pick up. Despite their positions on three continents, all five members of the Japanese-stock trading team share a single profit-and-loss statement. Another stock &quot;book&quot; is traded via Hong Kong instead of Tokyo; still others shuttle between only two cities. Most U.S. stocks, for example, are traded largely by the Merrill offices in the U.S. and London because they remain thinly traded in Japan.    Messrs. Brody and Raimondo are alert to such matters as currency fluctuations and the Japanese emperor's health (his death might set off a further surge in Japanese printing and paper stocks because millions of calendars and other publications would be republished). They don't, however, spend much time poring over stock charts. &quot;Charts go out the window in this kind of market,&quot; Mr. Brody says.    Instead, they play hunches. Mr. Raimondo's favorite saying is, &quot;It's time.&quot; How does he know when it's time? &quot;Who knows?&quot; he says. &quot;That's like asking Grandma how she makes sauce.&quot;    Today, the two men scramble early to unwind -- sell -- several stock positions that they had inherited from London and that don't appear promising. Because Japanese stocks still aren't widely traded in the U.S., selling a position can take a while. Mr. Brody spends more than two hours later in the day unwinding a customer's large position in Sony. Trading on the London exchange stays active until about 5 p.m., overlapping the U.S. market, so the two often consult with London team members to find which side of the Atlantic offers the better prices.    When the two execute a trade over the phone, they punch it into Merrill's trading computers. Merrill trades from all over the world are processed by two supercomputers in Manhattan, one in a Lower West Side warehouse and the other in a financial-district office tower. If one of the International Business Machines computers breaks down -- so far, it's never happened -- a third, standby computer should automatically hum to life in four minutes.    Messrs. Brody and Raimondo trade in and out of several stocks during the day, deciding to lock in what profits they have and selling most positions by day's end. &quot;Good day, the team made 50, 60 grand&quot; around the world, Mr. Raimondo says.    At 4:15 p.m. -- 6:15 a.m. Tokyo time -- the New York trader calls Akira Kitajima, his 37-year-old counterpart in Tokyo. &quot;He in shower,&quot; a polite female voice answers. &quot;Call back five minutes.&quot;    Ten minutes later, Mr. Kitajima takes Mr. Raimondo's call. &quot;You sound like you're still asleep,&quot; the American jokes before quickly summarizing the day's events in New York. Citing concern about the falling dollar, Mr. Raimondo predicts that Japanese investors will snap up domestic Japanese stocks and shy away from big exporters such as Canon and Honda.    &quot;We left you pretty clean,&quot; Mr. Raimondo adds, detailing the dozen or so stock positions the American traders leave for Mr. Kitajima. &quot;We took the profits where we could. Good luck.&quot;    By 7:30, Mr. Kitajima is in his central-Tokyo office, scanning overnight trading reports and the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's daily economic newspaper. Cuts in the German discount rate -- the central bank's rate on loans to financial institutions -- and U.S. prime rate are big news for Tokyo traders. Mr. Kitajima, who is the lead trader of Japanese stocks in Tokyo, bets that the Bank of Japan will follow suit.    &quot;It's the first day of Prime Minister Takeshita's administration,&quot; he tells salesmen at the morning meeting. &quot;He might want to give some kind of present to President Reagan.&quot;    Playing his hunch, Mr. Kitajima directs the salesmen to pitch to customers the stock of Tokio Marine andamp; Fire Insurance, a large issue that he hopes will react well to news of lower interest rates. In the first few minutes of trading, with Merrill salesmen all around him pushing Tokio Marine and other stocks, the Tokyo market picks up and accelerates New York's rally. The Nikkei index of 225 stocks shoots up sharply.    Mr. Kitajima gets excited. He predicts a big gain in the index, maybe 1,000 points. &quot;It's just a feeling I have,&quot; he says.    The feeling is short-lived. By 10 a.m., the rally is fizzling. Institutions aren't buying, Mr. Kitajima tells London's Mr. Beuthin, who calls as he prepares for bed after midnight in England. The Japanese trader relays the same report to Mr. Raimondo, who checks in minutes later after dinner at his rural New Jersey home. The U.S. trader will call again as he goes to bed around midnight.    By lunchtime, Mr. Kitajima, abandoning all hope of a strong rally, shows off a baseball cap labeled &quot;Hot Trader.&quot; Unless things pick up, he says, he can't wear his rally cap. Outside, the trading floor's mood is placid. One salesman practices putting golf balls between the trading desks.    Afternoon trading is lackluster, and the discount-rate cut that Mr. Kitajima predicted never materializes. Worse, Mr. Raimondo's guess that Japanese investors will snap up domestic stocks falls flat in the wake of rumors that Nomura Investment Trust Co., a huge investment company with close ties to Nomura Securities Co., the powerful Japanese giant, is accumulating export stocks.    It's a painful reminder that, as much as the world's stock markets are intertwined, factors peculiar to each country can still derail an international rally. Today, &quot;we are Nomura watchers, not Fed watchers,&quot; Mr. Kitajima quips.    At 4 p.m. -- 7 a.m. in London -- Mr. Kitajima phones Mr. Beuthin, Merrill's 43-year-old senior international stock trader in London, who has picked his way into the Merrill office through a heavy morning fog. Mr. Beuthin, who knows from his postmidnight call that Tokyo markets seem calm, has taken advantage of the market sluggishness to drop his car off for servicing before coming to work. As Mr. Kitajima's voice crackles over the international phone line, he writes out Tokyo's closing prices longhand because his computer is acting up.    The book is in good shape. So far, Mr. Kitajima, sticking to Merrill's cautious strategy, has earned more than $30,000. The Japanese trader makes clear that some important market themes have changed since the New York market closed. For example, a cut in Japan's discount rate now seems unlikely.    As the London traders take over the stock positions they inherited from Tokyo, news comes from Mr. Kitajima that a late Japanese seller wants Merrill to buy 50,000 shares of Nippon Express, a transportation and freight company whose stock doesn't trade widely outside Japan. Mr. Beuthin, knowing it was too early in London to try to find a European buyer, nevertheless backs Mr. Kitajima's decision to buy the shares. &quot;We'll find a buyer in London or sell them back in Japan,&quot; Mr. Beuthin says.    London seizes an early arbitrage opportunity that helps boost the Japanese book's profit to $40,000. A few hours earlier, Mr. Kitajima had sold 25,000 Nomura shares at 3,430 yen (about $25.41) each. London trader David Russell finds an early European seller ready to part with 23,000 shares at 3,400 yen ($25.19) each, thereby covering Merrill's position in posting a profit. &quot;That was a nice one there,&quot; Mr. Beuthin says.    Still, such opportunities prove rare, as the day turns out to be a snoozer for Japanese equities in London. Few of Merrill's European clients want to trade. Things are little better for Mr. Beuthin's boss, Mr. Dorsey, who paces up and down the trading floor, talking to traders about the market. &quot;I still have no sense of where the U.K. market is going,&quot; he complains.    The London market, taking its cue from Tokyo and New York, strengthens initially, then tumbles amid investor fears about the weak dollar. The rally that looked so promising 24 hours earlier is now kaput. At 8:15 a.m. in New York, Mr. Dorsey, via speaker phone, doles out the morning's gloomy news to the traders again assembled in Mr. Tognino's office.    &quot;Things are unsettled here, largely because of a rumor the G7 {industrial nations} may meet,&quot; Mr. Dorsey tells the U.S. traders. &quot;I'd think twice before doing anything too big.&quot;    Meanwhile, on the trading floor in New York, Messrs. Brody and Raimondo arrive early to begin trading in tandem with London. As the market opens, Mr. Brody, after several conversations with Mr. Beuthin, decides to make a fast bet. When a floor trader phones to say Honda's indicated opening price is $2 more than the London price, he quickly phones Mr. Beuthin and orders all the Honda stock immediately available. Mr. Beuthin calls back a minute later after buying 18,000 Honda shares from another big brokerage firm. But Honda opens only slightly higher, and Mr. Brody loses his trans-Atlantic bet.    &quot;Ah, well,&quot; says Mr. Brody, disappointed. &quot;It was a shot. That's the name of the game.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>