<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870106-0156 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Why Political Pressure Groups Aren't All Bad---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 01/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Yesterday the Reagan administration sent to Congress a new budget for the next fiscal year. In large part the budget is a portrait of the accomplishments of political pressure groups -- organizations that aren't as bad as they're sometimes painted.    Prof. Gary S. Becker, a University of Chicago economist, pondered the morals and methods of pressure groups in a recent talk at Saint Vincent College, Latrobe, Pa. The talk was the first in the Alex G. McKenna series on Economic Education: Topics in Political Economy.    In recent years it has become common, at least in some quarters, to regard pressure groups as mainly an evil. Rich men put together huge sums of money to buy elections and influence votes on issues crucial to their economic well-being.    Prof. Becker offers several criticisms of this oversimplified picture. To begin with, pressure groups aren't new. The Chicago economist quotes from James Madison in the Federalist Papers:    &quot;The most common and durable source of factions has been the various distributions of property, the landed interest, the manufacturing interest, the mercantile interest, the money interest with many lesser interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations and divide them into different classes; the regulation of these interfering interests forms the principal task of modern legislation and involves the spirit of party and faction in the necessary and ordinary operations of government.&quot;    It would be nice if we could count on our elected legislators always to decide issues in the clear public interest. But as Adam Smith said earlier in &quot;The Wealth of Nations,&quot; we can't always count on human beings to act in an entirely high-minded way. Philosopher Smith decided that spirited competition among conflicting interests would work for the public good.    The key word is competition. As James Madison said, pressure groups have to be regulated. That gets the government into the act, and that fact deeply worried the founding fathers. They set up a system of checks and balances to try to limit the damage that any particular pressure group could do. The small states in the union, for instance, were worried that Virginia, New York and Massachusetts would ride roughshod over them. So the Constitution allotted each state two senators, no matter how many people it had. The big states could dominate measures in the House, but the Senate would slow things down.    In an ideal world, there would be competition among pressure groups of fairly equal power. But the founding fathers were realists; they knew the ideal was unachievable. Many people, for instance, now believe that the two-senators-to-a-state rule gives the small states unfair power. Senators from small states exert considerable influence over legislation in Congress.    The conflicts among pressure groups usually involve competition for resources. One group wants government subsidies of some sort, and someone has to pay for the subsidies, through taxes or in higher prices. Partly because this redistribution of resources involves the government, something is always lost in the process: The taxes people pay always exceed the subsidies other people receive. But the process also costs resources because it affects the incentives of taxpayers.    &quot;For example,&quot; Prof. Becker says, &quot;let's say we have a Social Security tax and for anybody who is over 65 and under 72 years of age and who earns income, Social Security benefits are either taken away or reduced. Such a tax will affect how many hours a person is willing to work or can even encourage people to withdraw from the labor force -- that is the effect on incentives. . . . If there is an income tax and, as a result of the tax, people work fewer hours, the tax is affecting their incentives and we will be raising the cost to society.&quot;    The measures that get through Congress tend to be those where the incentive-distorting effect on the revenue side is fairly small. Prof. Becker notes that there are lots of crackpot schemes proposed in Congress every session. Fortunately, few of them ever become law. &quot;Let's say that to give a million-dollar benefit to some group will cost society $30 million or $50 million,&quot; he comments. &quot;These are the proposals that we don't see enacted even though we sometimes hear about them.&quot; They don't get passed because their social cost is too high.    Proposals with sizable social costs sometimes do get through, often because proponents are able to persuade legislators that there are offsetting factors. The Chrysler bailout, for instance, got through Congress in part because of the argument that auto workers had special skills not readily transferable to the computer industry or financial-services businesses. This argument helps to explain why pressure groups almost always find it easier to get government subsidies for a declining industry than for an expanding industry.    The arguments for and against various pressure groups can and do change over time. Prof. Becker cites the case of airline deregulation. From 1939 to the late 1970s, not a single new interstate airline was permitted to operate in the U.S. The industry was a highly successful pressure group, arguing that for public safety, for the general public interest, its tight little monopoly was essential.    Over time, however, the social cost of the tight government regulation steadily rose. The development of many new routes and areas to fly into made the cost of the regulations so high that a deregulation pressure group had a strong incentive to change the laws.    In the securities industry, the social costs rose because of the growth of institutional trading -- traders who neither needed nor wanted the advice that came along with the fixed commission rates. Rising social costs also explain the deregulation of trucking and banking.    Pressure groups that become movers and shakers don't necessarily have to be large. In fact, small size can be an advantage. Take, for example, the 11,000 sugar farmers in the U.S. &quot;They have been getting something like four to six times the world price of sugar through their political power to restrict entry of much cheaper, more efficiently produced sugar from the Caribbean and other parts of the world,&quot; Prof. Becker notes.    How can such a small group exert so much power? Prof. Becker suggests there are a number of reasons; one possibility could be that several small groups get together and pool their interests. Beyond that, though, there are a lot more than 11, 000 sugar users in the U.S., and what they spend for sugar, high price or not, makes up a very small part of their budgets. The small number of U.S. sugar growers has a very high per-capita incentive to campaign for curbs on foreign sugar. The average sugar user has a very small incentive to mount, or even to take part, in a campaign to get sugar prices down.    The system is far from perfect, but it seems to be better than any available alternative. As Prof. Becker points out, we're better off than socialist countries. Russia, China and the others have pressure groups of their own, and the government is involved in practically all of them. In the U.S., at least, a lot of our resources remain in private hands. Yesterday's federal budget wasn't exactly a pretty picture, but under other government systems it could have looked worse. </TEXT></DOC>