<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0126 </DOCNO><HL> Phone-Linked Medical Devices Are Giving A New Meaning to the Words 'House Call' </HL><AUTHOR> Rhonda L. Rhundle (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TEL PHA INS </IN><TEXT>   Fresh from an hour's rest on her couch, Linda Boss unstraps a sensor-equipped elastic belt from her pregnant belly, dials a number on the phone, cradles the receiver in a device the size of a large paperback and punches the unit's &quot;send&quot; button.    Six minutes later, nurses at a medical center near Mrs. Boss's La Canada, Calif., home are reviewing a record of uterine contractions that will tell them how she is doing in her battle to avoid having her baby dangerously early.    Like the uterine monitor used by Mrs. Boss, a growing array of phone-linked monitoring and diagnostic systems is being developed and tested as a way to improve home care for pregnant women, high-risk infants and adults with heart, sleep and other ailments.    &quot;The next major phase in home care is to become more interactive,&quot; says Patrick S. Smith, chief executive officer of New England Critical Care Inc., a Marlborough, Mass., company that provides home health-care services. Besides those phone-linked devices that provide an instant snapshot of a patient's vital signs, Mr. Smith notes, some newer systems can record data over several weeks. One system can even deliver electric shocks to revive a patient whose heart has stopped.    However, even though few telemedical systems are in actual use yet, questions are already arising about the potential liability risks they pose for doctors. It's also still unclear how great an advantage they can offer over current home-care practices, and to what extent their use will be covered by insurers.    The first so-called telemetric devices were introduced nearly 20 years ago to gather blood-pressure data from hypertensive patients and those with heart problems. Later systems checked pacemaker function and took electrocardiograms.    Advances in computer technology have made the current crop of devices much more sophisticated and reliable, which has helped to win over some skeptical members of the medical community. At the same time, the advent of new therapies for heart patients and others has made phone-based systems more attractive by heightening the urgency of early medical attention. New clot-breaking drugs, for example, are most effective within a few hours after chest pains or other symptoms occur.    Supporters of telemetric monitoring say the devices can provide big savings to patients by reducing hospital stays, the need for individual nursing and the risk of expensive complications. Some see other benefits as well. &quot;Along with lower cost, the patient is more comfortable at home and may receive a higher level of care&quot; because of the added psychological and emotional support, says Mr. Smith of New England Critical Care.    Patients have warmed to the idea as they've become more familiar with phone-linked home computers, and as more kinds of treatment are offered at home and in doctors' offices rather than in hospitals.    After coronary-bypass surgery last fall in the Chicago area, Edward C. Shultz agreed to test a new machine called Buddy System -- made by 2 1/2-year-old Buddy Systems Inc. of Northbrook, Ill. -- when he got home from the hospital. Twice a day, he pulled up a chair in front of a computer screen mounted on a wheeled cart that carried measuring paraphernalia.    When the 79-year-old Mr. Shultz had checked such things as his weight and blood pressure and pushed buttons to answer a series of questions about how he felt, he sent the data by phone to a central station, which relayed it to his doctor. Five times daily, the unit sounded chimes to remind him to take medication.    &quot;It gave me a feeling of security to know that my doctor was in touch with my readings on a constant basis,&quot; he says. &quot;It was almost like being in the hospital.&quot;    For the physician, &quot;it's like making a telephone-aided house call every day,&quot; says Joseph V. Messer, professor of medicine at Chicago's Rush Medical College and director of clinical trials for the device Mr. Shultz tested. Medical Cardiology Associates, a group of seven cardiologists that includes Dr. Messer, now plans to set up a Buddy System center in its offices under a six-month trial agreement.    &quot;We want to see what kind of reception the system receives from other physicians,&quot; says Eugene Uretz, the group's administrator. Dr. Messer concedes that some physicians might be put off because the system interposes a layer of care between them and their patients. A medical technician at MCA will receive the transmissions and relay data to the doctors.    But the larger questions about telemedicine may be legal. &quot;It could be considered kind of like trying to do medicine without seeing the patient,&quot; says Andrew Senyei, a physician who is also a partner in Enterprise Partners, a Newport Beach, Calif., health-care venture fund. What's more, he adds, some systems record huge quantities of data that could be turned against a doctor in a malpractice lawsuit. (Corometrics Medical Systems Inc., an American Home Products Co. subsidiary, recently introduced a system that keeps tabs on an infant's breathing for 30 days.)    And with some devices that actually administer treatment, malpractice concerns are compounded by practical ones.    At Jewish Hospital in St. Louis, some heart patients will soon be sent home with an MDphone, made by MEDphone Corp. in Paramus, N.J. The briefcase-like device, which costs about $30,000 but will generally be leased to users, allows instant diagnosis and treatment of cardiac arrest. Simply opening the case automatically dials a base station, where a cardiologist reviews the patient's medical history. If necessary, the physician can trigger an electric shock over the phone to resuscitate the patient.    However, MDphone requires someone to place the electrodes on the patient's chest. &quot;A cardiac arrest is a very frightening thing, especially if the victim is your spouse,&quot; notes Douglas P. Zipes, professor of medicine at Indiana University School of Medicine. Remaining level-headed, he adds, can be &quot;a difficult thing to expect of any nonmedically trained individual.&quot;    The fate of any new medical product is determined in part by whether health-maintenance organizations, private insurers, Medicare and other government programs will pay for its use. And to a large extent, these groups haven't yet declared their position on the new devices.    Traditionally, though, they've been rather conservative about such developments. &quot;The environment for home monitoring is very restrictive,&quot; says Gordon Schatz, associate general counsel for the Health Industry Manufacturers Association, a trade group. Adds Halley S. Faust, an assistant vice president and medical director for Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co.: &quot;When manufacturers come out with a new product, it doesn't mean that it's an improvement over past practice. Lots of technology is overused.&quot;    Aetna does cover uterine-activity monitors of the type used by Mrs. Boss, as do many other private insurers and HMOs. This is partly because of the compelling economic arguments for attentive prenatal care. Hospital care for an infant born prematurely can cost as much as $3,000 a day, with total bills exceeding $200,000.    For the patient, however, there are even stronger arguments. Laura Perloff, a San Francisco aerobics-studio owner, says her uterine monitor was worth whatever it cost. After three miscarriages in 18 months, she switched to an obstetrician who set her up with the system, and in May she delivered healthy twin boys. The monitor, she says, &quot;was a godsend.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>