<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880916-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: As Campaign Becomes a 'Made for TV' Race, A Picture a Day Obviates Thousands of Words </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib and Michel McQueen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> UNION CITY, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   George Bush goes before the TV cameras and demands that Michael Dukakis answer seven &quot;key questions&quot; on national security.    But the same network correspondents who must report the vice president's pronouncement aren't allowed to ask him any questions.    The next day, Michael Dukakis, in helmet and jumpsuit, shows up on the nightly newscasts putting an M1 tank through its paces -- film footage so precious that one network is still airing it 24 hours later.    Unlike his rival, Mr. Dukakis does answer questions from the press this day. Unfortunately, the session is conducted entirely in Spanish.    A week spent following the two presidential candidates shows that the art of staging campaign events for the sole benefit of the TV news cameras is rising to new heights this year. The Republicans, who pioneered this sort of thing two decades ago, are doing it better than ever. And the Democrats, while still not up to GOP standards, are rapidly moving in the same direction. After being consistently drubbed in the imagery race, the Democrats seemed to have the edge this week, at least until last night.    As a result, both campaigns script virtually every campaign stop and public utterance of their candidates with only one thing in mind: gaining treasured time on the nightly national news programs. &quot;Presidential campaigns are directed almost exclusively at getting on the evening news,&quot; laments John Reilly, who was a senior adviser to Walter Mondale in 1984. &quot;Even worse, the images the candidates need to use to appear on the evening news are so inane that they have nothing to do with real issues.&quot;    To get this exposure, the campaigns try to establish a single theme for the day -- the one impression they want to give the folks watching at home that night.    &quot;The point is to get the message clear,&quot; says James Steinberg, a Dukakis foreign-affairs issues adviser. &quot;We want to present his message before a variety of audiences and before a variety of settings.&quot;    One casualty of this process is substance. On those few occasions when the candidates have something thoughtful to say, they often receive short shrift anyway.    Another casualty is almost any contact with real voters. They have become little more than props, used to provide pleasing visuals for the television cameras and little else.    Fearful of less-than-enthusiastic crowds -- or worse, hecklers -- political operatives are seeking to isolate not just the candidate but the entire campaign from anything resembling spontaneous reality. Thus, when Mr. Dukakis went to Annapolis Wednesday for a statehouse-steps rally to taunt Mr. Bush for backing out of the presidential debate that was to have been held there, access was controlled by issuing tickets through Democratic leaders for the best viewing area, which was roped off.    The Bush campaign, meanwhile, has taken to distributing cases of air horns to supporters that can be sounded whenever the vice president delivers an applause line so there will be a din of enthusiastic cheering on television -- and also can be used to drown out the chants of any Dukakis supporters who might materialize.    Mostly, the vice president appears exclusively at safe and carefully designed events, seldom entertains questions from the press -- a session with reporters scheduled for today will be his first in two weeks -- and rarely does anything that might distract attention from the day's pre-ordained message.    Here is a week in the life of the two campaigns, as seen through the eyes of the TV camera:   MONDAY   This is a critical week for the Dukakis campaign, which hopes to convince voters that the Democratic candidate is tough enough on defense and foreign-policy issues. From start to finish, Mr. Dukakis's activities are designed to combine tough talk and tough pictures to present an image of the candidate as, well, a tough guy.    Today, the visual highlights are visits to a Philadelphia union hall and a Cincinnati defense plant, where Mr. Dukakis poses in front of jet engines. There are some boos at the defense plant, but Mr. Steinberg, the adviser, sees some benefit in the manner in which Mr. Dukakis handles them. He says it sounded &quot;great.&quot;    Mr. Bush's intended emphasis for the day is Hispanic voters: A carefully staged rally in a blue-collar Hispanic neighborhood of Union City, complete with a Latin band on hand to greet the vice president, Spanish-speaking orators and singers on stage, and plenty of waving of campaign-provided American flags.    The network newscasts tonight all have Mr. Dukakis's appearances. But two of the three also have Mr. Bush's &quot;questions&quot; to his opponent. And, except for a brief line, the vice president manages to avoid all comments about the main issue his campaign doesn't want to talk about today: the resignations of several campaign aides amidst charges of anti-Semitism. -   TUESDAY   For the Dukakis forces -- and the TV cameras -- the highlight is Mr. Dukakis's encounter with the tank. The day's events are geared totally toward getting that image; no other potentially distracting events are scheduled. &quot;We wanted a picture of Michael Dukakis in a tank, we got a picture of Michael Dukakis in a tank,&quot; says campaign spokesman Dayton Duncan.    For Mr. Bush, the theme is economics, featuring a picture-pretty lunchtime rally in Jefferson City, Mo. Mr. Bush spoke in front of a stories-high American flag draped over the entrance to the Missouri state capitol, and was flanked by 40 smaller flags placed on stands on the capitol steps.    The tank footage makes all three networks tonight -- but Mr. Bush manages to get some air time for his promise never to impose a grain embargo as a foreign-policy weapon.    WEDNESDAY   Today's Bush event of the day is a rally at a Fresno, Calif., raisin-producing plant. Gloom: It doesn't make the nightly newscast. One possible reason might be that the most obvious visual prop for the appearance -- the singing California Raisins -- are unavailable to appear with the vice president.    Mr. Dukakis, meanwhile, makes all the newscasts. There are brief snippets from his speech at Georgetown University in Washington, the most substantive foreign-policy address he has made in the campaign. But there is also extensive footage from the friendly-looking Annapolis rally.    THURSDAY   Mr. Bush does sometimes address substantive issues, as he does today in a well-received speech to San Francisco's conservative Commonwealth Club attacking Mr. Dukakis' record in managing the Massachusetts economy. But the speech, one of the most effective of Mr. Bush's campaign, illustrates its careful style: The vice president reads it from a Teleprompter, sticking carefully to his prepared text and thus not risking any distracting ad libs like his Pearl Harbor Day gaffe of last week, or fumbling any of the lines designed for television consumption.    Meanwhile, Mr. Dukakis, on his way to the West Coast, stops off at Yellowstone National Park to express his concern for the residents and firefighters in the ravaged area. The setting gives the candidate the opportunity to look a little outdoorsy for the cameras; to enhance his ruggedness a bit, he swaps the red sweater he has been wearing for an aide's suede jacket.    The jacket and Mr. Dukakis do make it on to the air, but not in the context campaign aides had hoped for. ABC and NBC, which both use extensive footage of Mr. Bush's attacks, briefly show Mr. Dukakis in the charred park -- defending his Massachusetts economic record. </TEXT></DOC>