<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0080 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Soviets in the Eye of Argentina/Britain Storm---By Alphonse Max</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM EUROP FREST </IN><DATELINE> MONTEVIDEO, Uruguay  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Oct. 29, the British government declared that it would extend its &quot;zone of exclusion&quot; to 200 miles from the coast of the Malvinas/Falkland Islands as of February 1987. This appears to have come as a surprise to Argentine President Raul Alfonsin and Foreign Minister Dante Caputo. However, the current British decision was not intended as a &quot;provocation,&quot; as Buenos Aires now claims; it was a reaction to the distressing possibility of a dramatically increased Soviet presence in the South Atlantic.    The Argentine president and his minister, both of whom visited Havana and Moscow this year, had just concluded several &quot;fishing agreements&quot; with the Soviet Union and Bulgaria. These agreements renew and enlarge the existing ones dating from the early 1970s and ratified and extended during the military regime of 1976-83. They would permit the unhindered cruising of hundreds of Soviet ships in the vicinity of the strategically important Magellan Strait, Drake Passage and Malvinas/Falkland Islands. Fishing trawlers, together with the merchant marine, scientific vessels, tourist liners and all other Soviet ships are under the general command of the Red Navy. Repeated incidents -- not in the South Atlantic alone -- leave no doubt that the task of Soviet &quot;fishing trawlers&quot; is not only to catch fish.    The agreement with the Soviet Union and Bulgaria came at a time when evidence had been mounting of preparations for renewed guerrilla activity in Argentina. Since April of this year, discoveries of arms and military arsenals have increased. The Jan. 7 edition of the Buenos Aires daily La Razon reported that the Argentine guerrilla organization ERP (People's Revolutionary Army) has established contact with the Peruvian Sendero Luminoso and has been preparing for armed activities, especially in the province of Tucuman. According to an April 25 dispatch by the Spanish news agency EFE, the guerrillas infiltrated Argentine political parties with the purpose of playing down the discovery of what could be interpreted as guerrilla-war preparation.    Then in June, La Prensa of Buenos Aires reported that one of ERP's top leaders, Gorriaran Merlo, had secretly entered Argentina (from his headquarters in Managua, Nicaragua) to discuss with his comrades the intention of rejuvenating three factions of the ERP, among which there had been friction. Also in June, public prosecutor Juan Romero Victorica reported that the former guerrilla chief Mario Firmenitch was directing from his prison cell activities designed to reactivate terrorist activities in Argentina.    Most troublesome to the Alfonsin government is the increased radicalization of the official Communist Party and its association with extreme-left factions of the Peronist Party. President Alfonsin mentioned this publicly in October, shortly before his trip to Moscow and Havana, and reportedly discussed this matter with his communist hosts. The government also is worried about a rapprochement between the Argentine Communist Party and the Chilean Communist Party that may bring about the establishment of secret bases of Chilean communist guerrillas on Argentine territory, to the detriment of relations between the two countries.    Any softening of the Argentine Communist Party has to be ordered in Moscow. And since the result of Mr. Alfonsin's visit to Moscow was the greatly increased fishing rights of the Soviets in Argentine waters, there seems to be little doubt that this was at least one concession made by the Soviets. Taking into account that even the military regime, which fought the guerrillas without restraint, needed the Kremlin's help in putting an end to guerrilla activity, how much more reliant on Soviet help must Mr. Alfonsin now consider himself and his government, given the legal restraints of fighting terrorism under the rules of democracy. Of course, also hampering the government's anti-terrorist position is that Mr. Alfonsin severely limited the armed forces' anti-terrorist capabilities after his election, partly due to the uproar over their &quot;dirty war&quot; and partly due to his concern over their attempts to mount a coup d'etat.    If the Soviets have agreed to use their influence to curb radical activity in Argentina in exchange for the recent agreements, they have asked a high price for their protection: They maintain a huge trade deficit with Argentina, and not having the needed foreign exchange, they are pressuring for increased purchases of machinery in payment for Argentine cereals and beef. Besides the energy-production sector, fishing -- with its sidelines of port construction, industrial development, increased transportation and logistical facilities (also to the Antartic), etc. -- offers Moscow many interesting possibilities other than economic advantages.    In the case of the agreements with Argentina, the Kremlin also may want to gauge the military and moral preparedness of Britain (and the U.S.) in defending the waters of the South Atlantic. This is evident from the fact that Bulgaria, the most docile of Soviet satellites (and not Poland, which had wide-reaching fishing agreements with Argentina in the past) was included automatically in the new deal. The Soviets usually try not to expose their own forces to danger (the exception is Afghanistan), preferring to let the satellites take their place (i.e., Cubans in Africa). In 1977, when Soviet and Bulgarian trawlers were caught fishing within the Argentine 200-mile zone, the Soviets, after repeated warnings from the Argentine coast guard, abandoned the area, leaving the Bulgarians to face the navy's cannon fire. Perhaps the Bulgarians are to be used in the future for another tour de force.    At the beginning of his term, President Alfonsin vowed to negotiate with the British about the Malvinas/Falklands, but the few talks that did take place were abruptly ended shortly afterward because of an apparent stalemate. At present, Argentina is unable to force concessions from Britain, either from the economic or the military standpoint. Nor is Argentina prepared to deter Soviet encroachment on the South Atlantic coastal regions, which has met with tenacious resistance in South Africa and is therefore all the more coveted on the other side of the ocean.    ---   Mr. Max is director of the Institute for International Studies in Montevideo. </TEXT></DOC>