<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861229-0035 </DOCNO><HL> Without Provoking Party Conservatives---By James R. Schiffman and Vigor FungStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/29/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   China's reformist leaders have instituted tough rules to quell a nationwide student outcry for democracy, freedom and human rights. At the same time, however, the leadership has maneuvered to prevent the protests from undermining its ability to introduce some of the very reforms the students demanded.    After gaining momentum for several weeks, the protests subsided after stern measures were imposed last week. In Peking and Shanghai, for example, authorities issued regulations Friday requiring protesters to apply five days in advance for permission to demonstrate.    But on Sunday, the official People's Daily reported that, &quot;in order to give full play to democracy,&quot; more than one candidate, apparently including members of non-Communist parties or groups, would be allowed to run for seats in local people's congresses -- an apparent attempt to satisfy a major demand of the student protestors.    The students have raised fresh questions about the future of political and economic changes in the country. &quot;Now students have the courage to think that the Communist Party should loosen its grip over the people and the students,&quot; says Steve Chin, a Hong Kong-based China watcher. &quot;When Deng Xiaoping dies, the issue could explode. But for the time being, the party will continue to tightly control every aspect of people's livelihood.&quot;    It is too early to say if the agitation will benefit Mr. Deng, China's 82-year-old supreme leader, and fellow reformers, or conservatives who seek to slow the pace of change. But the signs point to more control over public debate.    The Communist Party has ordered the state-controlled press to change the tone of what is published, knowledgeable Chinese officials say. In the People's Daily Saturday, historian Zhou Gucheng was quoted as telling a student gathering that Western, &quot;bourgeois democracy&quot; isn't ideal and can't be blindly adopted in China. The article marks a reversal from previous public statements that suggested democracy had a place in China.    Communist Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang, believed to be in charge of damage-control in the student unrest, is said to have criticized some intellectuals at meetings with senior party leaders, implying that their &quot;irresponsible&quot; statements advocating total Westernization had helped provoke the students.    Chinese sources say Mr. Hu also said China faces two major problems: opposition to political and economic changes being introduced by Mr. Deng, and the rise of &quot;bourgeois liberalism.&quot; Bourgeois liberalism is a catch phrase of anti-reform Chinese conservatives who fear that China under Mr. Deng is adopting too many Western ideas. Criticism of bourgeois liberalism hasn't been heard for some time. By raising the issue, Mr. Hu appears to be trying to please the conservatives while keeping the way open for change.    In another indication of a compromise strategy, Politburo member Hu Qili is said to have warned senior party officials in Peking last week not to indiscriminately purge liberal intellectuals, but, on the other hand, not to allow unrest to spread to the point where a crackdown is necessary. And he told the officials not to make it appear that the party abhors freedom and democracy.    Before the student outbursts, 1987 was supposed to be a year of debate on overhauling the political system to enhance economic efficiency. No definite proposals have emerged, but there has been talk about removing the party from the management of factories and giving enterprises more say.    The student unrest presents a challenge to this kind of change. &quot;If the reformists have guts, they should pressure the conservatives and tell them the demonstrations show what the people want,&quot; says Wan Fai, editor of Hong Kong-based Cheng Ming magazine, which specializes in Chinese affairs. But he says the demonstrations have given the conservative leaders &quot;more ammunition to tighten control over the people and close China's wide-opened door a little bit. It's a bumpy road to democracy. It may take a generation to achieve this goal.&quot;    The demonstrations, foreign analysts say, stemmed from the students' frustration over the lukewarm progress of political change, the party's tight control over their livelihood and their deteriorating living conditions.    Officials at first didn't interfere with the student protests, indicating that demonstrations were a constitutionally protected right. But when the protests swelled, the Communist Party began a nationwide media blitz aimed at destroying the students' credibility. Reports emphasized disruptions to traffic and to factory work. Articles urged people to cherish the current stability and seek political reform only under the party's guidance.    On Friday, officials in Shanghai and Peking issued tough strictures against demonstrations. In addition to requesting approval of demonstrations five days in advance, protest leaders must give authorities their names and addresses and specify the reason for demonstrating. Except for a protest by several thousand students in Nanjing Saturday, no further demonstrations have been reported.    Tens of thousands of students from several Shanghai universities participated in the protests. The main slogans called for democracy and freedom, but there were others. Students from Shanghai's prestigious Fudan University demonstrated outside the stately European-style houses in the city occupied by senior Communist Party cadres and government officials, shouting: &quot;Down with privileges for senior cadres.&quot;    The protesters were trying to deliver a message that was never stated explicitly, one Fudan student says. &quot;This country shouldn't be run by only one party. But we can't bring this out in the open now,&quot; he says.    In Canton, a student expresses similar sentiments. &quot;We want to help the reform-minded Peking leaders. We feel that the reforms in the past two years have been too slow. We feel that the power is too centralized,&quot; the student says.    &quot;The Communist Party doesn't want to give up its power,&quot; he adds. &quot;The state should be governed by the people, not by the party. We just ask what the constitution already gives us -- freedom of speech, publication and democratic election.&quot;    Says a Chinese resident in Shanghai: &quot;In our country, only students can speak their minds. Ordinary people feel the same way, but we can't speak out. We're afraid of the consequences.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>