<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880219-0126 </DOCNO><HL> There's No 'Peace Process' in Mideast </HL><AUTHOR> Irving Kristol </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   So Secretary of State George Shultz, spurred by Arab unrest on the West Bank and in Gaza, soon will be flying to the Mideast in the hope of reviving &quot;the Middle East Peace Process.&quot; When I read such news, I experience a powerful urge to race to the State Department, assemble its top policy makers, and demand that they recite after me: &quot;There is no Middle East peace process. There is no Middle East peace process.&quot; Perhaps this would infuse some common sense into their thinking. On the other hand, probably not.    There is no more pernicious influence on public policy than permitting rhetoric to obscure reality. And there is no area of the world where such obscurantism prevails more stubbornly than in the Middle East. And there is no major power whose policy in this area is so dominated by such obscurantism as is the U.S.    For there really is no such thing as a Middle East peace process. What there is, and has been since 1973, is a cold war between Israel and the Arabs, interrupted occasionally by bursts of violence, such as we are witnessing now.    The myth of a peace process was born of the Camp David accords, a startling and hopeful development that, in retrospect, can be seen to have been a singular, nonreplicable event. It was singular because it was initiated by a bold and imaginative Arab leader whose subsequent assassination signified the end of that line. It was also singular because Egypt and Israel were in a position where the primordial principle of international relations -- quid pro quo -- could be brought into play. Israel received diplomatic recognition from Egypt, the first such action by an Arab state, and Egypt received something it badly wanted: the Sinai, a strategic area that controlled the Suez Canal and that also had valuable oil wells (developed, as it happens, by the Israelis).    In retrospect, most Israelis have cause to wonder whether it was a worthwhile deal. Diplomatic relations between Egypt and Israel have remained at a barely visible level. Egypt's official anti-Israel policy has been modulated -- it has got what, above all, it wanted. But it is once again voting with the other Arab nations, and echoing their sentiments, in every international forum. In any case, it is clear by now that Camp David established no important precedent, since Israel and the other Arab states have no quids or quos to exchange.    It is because no one today has any notion of a viable settlement that would reduce hostility and violence between Israeli and Arab that our State Department's venture in peacemaking is so foolish. What, even vaguely, does it have in mind? The sad truth is that it has nothing in mind, except some kind of peace conference. But a peace conference that has no imaginable terms of settlement is doomed to failure, and a failed peace conference is usually worse than none at all.    What problems would any such peace conference discuss, and with what prospects of success? Let us run down an abbreviated agenda. To give this agenda a favorable &quot;tilt,&quot; let us assume that the issue of Jerusalem will be set aside, with both parties simply agreeing to disagree on this insoluble problem -- insoluble because no Israeli government could ever yield sovereignty over its capital (and &quot;holy&quot;) city, and no Arab government could ever recognize such sovereignty over one of its &quot;holy places.&quot; That leaves Gaza and the West Bank (the latter now officially designated by the Israeli government as &quot;Judea and Samaria&quot;). How does one go about negotiating those issues?    The trouble with Gaza is that it is a tiny, arid strip of territory populated by over 500,000 Palestinians -- whom no one wants. Palestinian Arabs are among the most &quot;advanced&quot; -- i.e., literate and sophisticated, both politically and economically -- in the Middle East. They are also, in their overwhelming majority, fervently committed to the ultimate destruction of Israel and the restoration of their &quot;homeland.&quot; Consequently, they are regarded as potentially troublesome by all the Arab states, which have steadfastly refused to absorb them. After all, Egypt governed Gaza for 20 years prior to 1967. It neither annexed the territory nor permitted the Palestinians there to emigrate to (or even visit!) Egypt.    So what is to be done? Well, there is the possibility of economic development within the strip, so that these unfortunate people would not have to live in the squalor that now prevails. Actually, when Israel first occupied the territory it moved in this direction -- building roads, replacing the refugee camps with more decent housing, etc. But the Arab states feared this would lead to the economic integration of Gaza with Israel and complained to the United Nations, which promptly declared Israel's actions to be a violation of international law. So the Palestinians remain squalid in Gaza.    What about political autonomy and self-rule for those Palestinians? Gaza (and the West Bank, too) could have political autonomy tomorrow if it agreed not to use such autonomy for the purpose of challenging the de facto -- never mind de jure -- legitimacy of the Israeli occupying authority in the area. Those few Palestinian leaders who were attracted to this idea have already been assassinated by the PLO and no replacements are forthcoming. In fact, Palestinians themselves never talk about autonomy and are neither requesting nor demanding it. This possibility exists only in the minds of our State Department and the Western media.    What the Palestinians want, and this they do say, is a Palestinian state. But a Palestinian state in Gaza would be nothing more than an armed camp for intransigent irridentists who would be at permanent war with Israel. Why should Israel agree to any such scenario? It won't, since it would only end up having to occupy Gaza all over again.    The situation on the West Bank is even more complicated and less hopeful. It does, however, have this in common with Gaza: There are absolutely no Arab voices demanding local self-government or local autonomy. Again such a demand implies a de facto, temporary recognition of ultimate Israeli authority. This in the eyes of militant Palestinian and Arab nationalists is the equivalent of treason and provokes condign punishment.    Nor is there any Arab state that has a &quot;national interest&quot; in a peaceful settlement of the situation on the West Bank. Syria would not mind incorporating both the West Bank and Israel itself into a &quot;Greater Syria&quot; -- a permanent Syrian dream, reflected in its official maps. The other Arab states would, of course, mind very much. Iraq and Saudi Arabia are intransigently opposed to the very existence of a Jewish state on &quot;unalienable&quot; Arab-Moslem territory. This attitude is a popular one in the Arab world and costs them nothing, since they want nothing from Israel except its nonexistence.    Which leaves Jordan. In the name of Arab solidarity, the Hashemite regime feels compelled to echo the call for Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank. In truth, however, it is not dissatisfied with the status quo.    Jordan has no desire to annex the West Bank and refused to do so in the two decades it occupied the area, since that would mean an overwhelming Palestinian majority -- half of Jordan's population already is Palestinian -- that would summarily sweep aside the archaic, Bedouin-based Hashemite dynasty. Nor could it tolerate a Palestinian (read: PLO) state on the West Bank, since this would inevitably produce the same effect. It prefers Israeli occupation, though it dare not say so. So Jordan has nothing to give and nothing to ask for in any negotiations with Israel. That is why, quite sensibly, it doesn't negotiate.    As for Israel, an active and articulate minority, representing perhaps 20% of Israelis, is in favor of simply annexing &quot;Judea and Samaria&quot; -- but seems not to have the foggiest notion of what to do with the 700,000 or so Arabs who live there. These Israelis don't want them in Israel, but neither do they have the nerve to call for a mass expulsion. So this is a dead end.    At the same time, there is practically no segment of Israeli opinion that envisages a simple withdrawal. After all, there are now some 60,000 Israelis settled on the West Bank, most of them in fully developed suburban and exurban towns within relatively easy commuting distance of Jerusalem or Tel Aviv. They are there to stay. In addition, having been involved in several wars with Jordan -- all resulting from a Jordanian attack -- Israelis appreciate the strategic importance of the &quot;high ground&quot; in the more northern areas of the West Bank. Since the West Bank is much smaller than most people realize, this &quot;high ground&quot; covers quite a lot of ground.    So, it is hard to see an Israeli policy emerging that would fit neatly into a peace conference. It was the recognition of this fact that led the late Yigal Yadin to recommend a bold, unilateral Israeli action, whereby Israel would annex something like 25% of the West Bank -- the Israeli-settled and the strategic areas -- and simultaneously withdraw its troops from the rest of the area, leaving it up for grabs. If Jordan moved in (the most probable event), Israel would not mind. If a Palestinian -- PLO state were formed -- well, Israel would have the military power to coerce it into something that, in the Mideast, could pass for nonpeaceful coexistence.    The Yadin plan has much to be said in its favor. But, even aside from the political controversy it would engender within Israel -- it would mean relinquishing &quot;Judea and Samaria&quot; while accepting an added 100,000 Arabs as Israelis -- it does have one fatal flaw: The State Department (and, it goes without saying, the U.N.) would promptly denounce it as a &quot;blatant violation of international law.&quot; Why the State Department should think that &quot;international law&quot; is sovereign in the Middle East, of all places, while most of the rest of the world observes it or ignores it as a matter of convenience, is one of those mysteries that students of U.S. foreign policy have yet to unravel.    So Secretary Shultz goes to the Middle East -- a trip that is unnecessary, unwise, and pre-ordained to failure. One does, of course, wish him a safe return.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>