<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871104-0119 </DOCNO><HL> A Helping Hand for Entrenched Managers---By Michael C. Jensen</HL><DD> 11/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   After slackening off during the recent market crash, takeovers are picking up. As a result, anti-takeover activity is due for a second wind as well. Congressional Democrats, eager to please the CEOs of some of our largest and worst-run corporations, are engaged in several tax and regulatory efforts.    Existing requirements that purchasers disclose their holdings and intentions within 10 days of acquiring 5% or more of a company's shares already discourage tender offers unduly by creating free-rider problems. These onerous strictures would be tightened if Sen. William Proxmire's bill to further regulate tenders is passed.    Under current law, purchasers who reach the 5% trigger point are required to file within 10 days a 13d report with the Securities and Exchange Commission, disclosing the identity of the owner, the number of shares owned, and the purpose of the acquisition. The Proxmire bill would require the 13d to be filed within five days of acquisition of 5% of a firm's shares and would prohibit further acquisition of shares until the 13d is filed.    While disclosure rules may appear to benefit shareholders by giving them quick access to valuable information, in fact they fundamentally damage both shareholders and security markets. Disclosure requirements are the security market's equivalent of an anti-patent law. They effectively deny private rights in valuable, privately produced information by forcing the producer to make that information public in a way that harms his interests. By doing so the regulations substantially reduce individual incentives to produce information. How does this happen?    Consider a firm or individual that has invested considerable resources in discovering a way to increase the value of a publicly held firm by taking it over and altering its strategy and operations. Current disclosure rules allow the acquirer to buy as many additional shares as possible in the 10-day window between the time the 5% filing trigger is reached and the date of filing.    Research by Profs. Wayne Mikkelson of the University of Oregon and Richard Ruback of Harvard Business School shows that this allows buyers to acquire an average of 14% of the target firm before disclosure.    Since market prices adjust immediately at the 13d announcement to the expected value of the possible future takeover bid, most of the acquirer's profits are made on the difference between the price paid for the shares purchased prior to the filing of the 13d and their value after the acquisition. In addition, research by Profs. Michael Bradley and E. Han Kim at the University of Michigan and Anand Desai at the University of Florida shows that bidding firms recently have been forced by regulations and the resulting auctions that accompany tender offers to pay target shareholders prices that grant the shareholders all the benefits in the takeover.    Thus, the forced disclosure of the acquirer's intentions forces the average acquirer to give the major share -- 86% -- of the benefits to other investors who have invested no resources in the discovery of the value-increasing information and who will finance none of the costs of the takeover effort.    Consider an acquisition that promises total expected gains of $100 million. If the acquirer expects to capture just $14 million of this amount if the bid is successful, he will make a bid only if the legal, investment banking and other costs (including the required risk premium) are less than $14 million. Acquisitions that are expected to cost more than this will not be attempted because the entrepreneur who figures out how to generate the $100 million gain is forced by the disclosure rules to give away $86 million of it to others who take a free ride on his efforts. Shareholders and society are thus denied the benefits of the reorganization.    The solution is to abolish the SEC 13d reporting requirements or to increase significantly the trigger point from the current 5% level. The proposals in the Proxmire bill are moves in exactly the wrong direction.    Barring further purchases of shares over 5% until the 13d report is filed, as the Proxmire bill proposes, would have approximately the same effect on entrepreneurial takeover efforts as a tax of 95% on all acquirer gains computed before takeover-related expenses. It is clear why anti-takeover forces want such punitive taxes -- yet they champion the case on the basis of the right of shareholders to information.    There are fiduciary reasons why it makes sense to give shareholders rights to information produced by the managers of their firm, but these arguments do not imply that the shareholders of, say, Unocal have any economic or moral claim on the value of information produced by T. Boone Pickens of Mesa Petroleum. Yet that is the effect of the 13d disclosure requirements. The effect of Sen. Proxmire's proposal to extend the disclosure regulation is equivalent to that of an anti-patent law that requires public disclosure of all inventions and denies the inventor any property rights in the proceeds of his invention. Shareholders will clearly be harmed by such regulation.    The disclosure filings to the Federal Trade Commission, which are required under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, have effects similar to those of the 13d disclosures. These filings first were required of corporations that purchase 15% or $15 million of the common stock of a firm. The buyer must wait 30 days after filing for approval from the FTC before purchasing additional shares. These disclosure rules are more restrictive than the 13d disclosures since $15 million is a trivial percentage of the total equity of a large firm, and since the waiting period ties the bidder's hands for 30 days. Earlier this year, anti-takeover forces were successful in getting the filing requirements extended to purchases by some partnerships -- again, a move that harms shareholders by hampering transactions in the control market and by creating free-rider problems in the production of information.    The Proxmire bill contains a provision that limits the acquisition of shares by any party that crosses a threshold of 25% of a company's shares. After crossing this threshold, the acquirer would be required to make all additional stock purchases by a tender offer for all shares outstanding. This provision would also prohibit the acquirer from capitalizing on his information and substantially inhibit the formation of large-block shareholders, which perform an important role in the monitoring of managers.    Taken as a whole, these provisions are a cleverly constructed mosaic of regulations that interact in such a way as to substantially inhibit the functioning of the market for corporate control -- a market that, according to my estimates, has generated $400 billion in benefits to shareholders in the past decade. These gains equal 51% of the total cash dividends paid to investors by the entire corporate sector in the decade. Why is this fountain of benefits being stifled?    The Business Roundtable, the CEOs of the 200 largest corporations, is one of the main groups pushing this legislation. This is not surprising, since the top-level managers of many of the largest and most inefficient corporations are threatened with the loss of their jobs by takeovers. Prof. James Walsh of Dartmouth reports that 62% of top managers are gone within three years of an unfriendly takeover, compared with 21% in firms with no change in control. It is not surprising that top managers want to curtail takeover activities. They understand that the 13d disclosure requirement is the Achilles' heel of the takeover market as it now operates.    The restructuring of corporate America (including divestitures, spinoffs and &quot;going private&quot; transactions) that is being brought about by the takeover market is streamlining many of the largest and most complex corporations that are simply too large, too complicated and too unfocused to be efficient. Restructuring is bringing top-level managers closer to employees, customers and shareholders. We must not strangle these productive forces. Shareholders and the financial institutions that are the intermediaries should rise up in outrage at what Sen. Proxmire and entrenched managers are proposing to do to them.    ---   Mr. Jensen is a professor at the business schools of Harvard and the University of Rochester. </TEXT></DOC>