<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870922-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Europe-Wide Crackdown Slows Flow of Arms to Iran---Scandals Raise Embarrassing QuestionsAbout National Weapons Sales---This article was reported by Mark M. Nelson in Brussels,Laura Colby in Rome and Marcus W. Brauchli in Stockholm</HL><DD> 09/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP MDEST FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   The police raid this month on the Linz, Austria, offices of Noricum AG, the arms-making subsidiary of Voest-Alpine AG, set off a national scandal in Austria.    Front pages bannered news that the raid yielded records detailing the concern's sales of at least 140 artillery pieces to Iran. Noricum's former chief was arrested, and there were dark reminders that an Austrian ambassador to Greece and the former chairman of Voest both died suddenly while giving evidence on the case to authorities. The sales could have amounted to as many as 600 sophisticated big guns with a total value of 7.2 billion Austrian schillings ($564.7 million).    But it was only the latest in a numbing series of such raids and disclosures throughout Europe. &quot;Everybody's been selling weapons,&quot; says Maurizio Cremasco, a foreign-policy expert at the Institute for Strategic Studies in Rome, where a huge arms-for-Iran story is also unfolding. &quot;These scandals have become so common that no one's excited anymore.&quot;    Across Europe, legislators, customs officials and police are carrying out one of the biggest crackdowns on the illegal arms trade ever. The Europeans have uncovered a vast supply network of arms and explosives for Iran.    Already, the crackdown appears to be having an effect on the Iran-Iraq war, which enters its eighth year today. There is a growing consensus that the European investigations are making it harder and more expensive for Iran and Iraq to continue fighting. According to Rep. Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, the flow of arms from Europe in 1987's first six months fell to about 15% of Iran's needs from 40% last year. Though China, North Korea and others make up much of the shortfall, the arms flow to Iran appears to be slowing.    The European arms industry has come under its heaviest criticism since World War II. Defense analysts warn that some politicians are using the industry's black eye to undercut legitimate defense efforts. The crackdown comes at a time when the illicit sale of arms is hitting home in Europe. Britain, France, the Netherlands, Belgium and Italy have all agreed to send ships to the Persian Gulf to protect merchant shipping from mines. The nightly television news features young sailors setting off on the five-week voyage. Europeans have had to face the reality that the men are going to clear mines that may have been sold by Europeans or contain European explosives.    Police and customs officials across Europe are sharing information and matching records concerning arms sales. In this task they have been aided by a three-year-old Swedish inquiry into Nobel Industrier Sverige AG. West European journalists have joined in, popping up in places like Yugoslavian ports, where, among the shipping crates, they snap pictures of shipping documents and arms bound from their countries to Iran.    The emerging public awareness of Europe's role in the gulf war is having widespread diplomatic effects. Countries that are thought to have provided transfer points for arms from Europe to Iran -- Greece, Yugoslavia, Spain, Portugal, Singapore and others -- are under diplomatic pressure from the U.S. and Western Europe to stop the flow. The Arab League, the U.S. and Kuwait have joined in an attempt to persuade China and North Korea not to fill the arms gap left by the retreat of the Europeans.    The mounting diplomatic pressures and declining arms supplies may have helped to soften some of Iran's formerly staunch positions, some Middle East experts say. These experts contend that Iran has begun questioning the wisdom of continuing to fight a seemingly fruitless war -- perhaps in part because of the increasingly high prices it has to pay for ammunition and arms. The gulf war is a debilitating effort whose great cost in lives is reminiscent of World War I. It requires huge amounts of arms, especially for the February offensives the Iranians have mounted each year since the war began.    &quot;It does seem to me that the Iranians are having second thoughts about the wisdom of another large-scale offensive,&quot; says William Quandt, a Mideast expert at the Brookings Institution in Washington.    Many politicians have concluded that there should be tighter regulation of the arms trade in Europe. In Sweden, Belgium and the Netherlands, where neutralist leanings have led to the prohibition of arms sales to warring nations, the revelations that they and their arms industries were being used to transfer arms to Iran have sparked a movement to punish the arms makers.    In Sweden, some political leaders have called on the government to stop doing business with Nobel and its main arms subsidiary Bofors. Nobel has tightened control over its arms-making units, and the government intends to give the company &quot;a new start,&quot; says Carl-Johan Aberg, a foreign-trade official. &quot;I think they have been greatly embarrassed.&quot;    But the calls for a review of arms-trading legislation is clearly gaining strength across Europe. Belgian legislators think it likely new review mechanisms will be in place by next year.    The Italian government last week instituted several such measures. Trade Minister Renato Ruggiero said customs officials have been ordered to inspect all crates being sent to Iran or Iraq, not a sampling as in the past. And the government intends to draft a comprehensive law on arms shipments. Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti plans to propose to the United Nations a world listing of arms deals so that countries can verify where shipments end up.    Paolo Miggiano of the Institute for Research on Disarmament, Development and Peace, an Italian organization, thinks more regulation is necessary. &quot;In the past we sold arms, not in the interests of Italy but in the interests of private individuals. They sold everything to everybody, and each company had its own policy.&quot;    But arms makers say now they're having trouble selling to anybody. The Norwegian government last week rejected a request by the state arms maker Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk AS -- facing U.S. anger over technology sales to Moscow -- to sell missiles to Singapore, Venezuela, Indonesia and Thailand.    &quot;We don't want to be looked upon as a big weapons exporter,&quot; says Erik Senstad, a Defense Ministry spokesman. &quot;If you export weapons to too many countries it is difficult to control that the weapons stay in the right hands.&quot;    The arms debate in Europe is sure to create friction. In Italy, for example, the arms industry employs an estimated 100,000 people, and the Foreign Trade Ministry estimates that arms exports total five trillion lire ($3.8 billion) a year.    Arms dealers say that more regulation on top of their already difficult circumstances could put them out of business. Arms makers say they already have been hurt by the fall in the U.S. dollar and in oil revenues among their traditional customers in the Middle East.    Even proponents of tighter regulation say the public reaction is spilling over into international defense issues. &quot;My worry,&quot; says a U.S. diplomat stationed in Europe, &quot;is that the public sentiment will be used against the whole defense establishment. . . . I can't escape the conclusion that what we're seeing here is bad.&quot;    Moreover, observers note that while an arms embargo may make it harder to fight a war, it doesn't necessarily ease political tensions in the gulf region. They worry that further isolation of Iran will only make it more difficult to deal with.    &quot;There are hard questions that aren't being discussed here,&quot; says the U.S. diplomat. &quot;We are using Band-Aids. If you can stop the flow of arms, is that going to fix the problem?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>