<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861215-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Taiwan's Prosperity Is Bringing Liberty Along---By Claudia Rosett</HL><DD> 12/15/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> TAIPEI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When I flew to Taiwan earlier this month to watch the elections, it was my first trip back since 1969. I was hoping to find an old Chinese girlfriend from the days when I went to high school in Taipei. Let's call her Amy. The last I knew of Amy, she was a smart, skinny teen-ager studying stenography. She aspired to become a secretary. If I found her, I wasn't sure I'd even recognize her. But Amy had helped me get to know Taiwan 17 years ago. I knew if I did find her, she could do it again. As the bus sped along the freeway into Taipei, I realized I would be lucky even to recognize the city.    In 1969, Taipei literally stank of poverty. A haze of charcoal smoke rose from the buckets that served as stoves for women who did their family cooking on the sidewalk. Rusting taxis rattled across the potholes. Reeking open sewers ran along the streets. Pedicab drivers pedaled three-wheeled carriages past rice paddies rank with human fertilizer. Squatters' shacks, pieced together out of tin and old boards, were ubiquitous. The country's only department store provided a glimpse of the modern world. Chiang Kai-shek's ruling Kuomintang had no patience with dissent. There were no opposition party candidates holding rallies. Martial law was rigidly enforced. Censors blotted out any reference to Communist China. If you looked up &quot;Mao Tse-tung&quot; in an English-language book, you'd find a blank space.    Today, the changes are stunning, in large part reflecting the trade-based growth that has enriched the island. The sewers of Taipei are buried beneath paved roads. The pedicabs are gone, replaced by taxis that offer digital meters and a smooth ride. Many of the rice paddies and squatters' settlements have given way to factories, houses and shops. Though the city still wheezes along in a developing-country smog, the worst of the muck has vanished, along with most charcoal cooking pots. Political repression continues to cloud the scene, but like the smog, it has been dissipating. President Chiang Chingkuo, son of the late Chiang Kai-shek, said in October he plans to lift martial law soon. This would help free the press and end trials of civilians by military courts.    It's still forbidden to circulate literature about Communist China or to form opposition parties. But on the eve of the Dec. 6 legislative elections, book venders at the entrance to a Taipei high school were doing a brisk business in illegal Chinese works about Communist leader Deng Xiao Ping. It was &quot;a law holiday,&quot; as one vender explained. His customers were among the several thousand voters who had filed into the school playground after dark for the final -- illegal -- political rally of one of the leading opposition candidates, Kang Ning-hsiang. Mr. Kang is a member of the new -- and also illegal -- Democratic Progressive Party. Both the rally and the book sales went forward undisturbed by the policemen outside the school.    The KMT's apparent willingness to live with the DPP, at least so far, is the most solid sign of political reform to date. For some time there has been a fairly active opposition, known as the Tangwai, which means &quot;outside the party.&quot; Until this fall, the opposition had not been allowed to form organized parties. But on Sept. 28, some Tangwai members decided to ignore the law. They founded the DPP, which now has about 1,300 registered members, and went on to field 46 candidates in the recent elections. DPP rallies have proven to be lively affairs, featuring peddlers of sausages that are legal and books that aren't and speeches criticizing the president and attacking corruption in the Kuomintang.    From this brew came victory for 23 DPP candidates, including Mr. Kang. The new party won 12 of the 322 seats in the country's main lawmaking body, the Legislative Yuan, and 11 of the 972 seats in the National Assembly, which elects the president. This is nowhere near enough to direct policy, and it may not look like much for a party that pulled 25% of the vote. But it has at least been enough to provoke some healthy self-criticism within the KMT -- which during the campaign had some of its own candidates discussing the need for government reform.    Government tolerance of the opposition is especially striking in light of how close some DPP members come to calling for Taiwanese independence. The code word they use is &quot;self-determination,&quot; which also can be understood as simply a call for democracy. But for the KMT to brook even this ambiguity is a big change. Although the Nationalist government lost the mainland to Mao 37 years ago, it claims sovereignty over all China and regards Taiwan as only one of the provinces. The Communist regime likewise claims sovereignty over Taiwan -- and has threatened to invade Taiwan should the island declare independence.    One hurdle in the Nationalist path toward democracy is how to square freedom on Taiwan with the 1946 Nationalist constitution, which provides for elected representatives from all of China. The problem is that the mainland hasn't seen free elections since the Chinese Communist Party gained control in Peking 37 years ago. Some of the seats in the Nationalist legislature are still filled by officials elected before the Communist takeover. It can certainly be argued --as it was by some DPP members in the recent campaigns -- that representing people who can't vote is a convenient arrangement for the KMT. The makeup of the ruling KMT is also changing; 70% of the members are now people born on Taiwan -- albeit many of mainland descent. As the recent DPP victories further attest, there is no question that the KMT has been slowly relaxing its authoritarian grip.    Where the reforms will finally lead is not yet clear. So far, the DPP doesn't have much of a program beyond its challenge to one-party rule. For the time being, that may be enough. Chatting in the party headquarters on election day, the chairman of the DPP, David P.C. Chiang, wouldn't go much beyond the general assertion that opposition supporters are &quot;generally middle class and intellectuals&quot; who &quot;know that the principle of checks and balances is important to Taiwan.&quot; An opposition editor, Antonio Chiang, described the DPP as having &quot;a lot of similarity with the Green Party in Germany,&quot; especially in its concern for the environment. He summed up with a reference to Taiwan's prospering middle class. &quot;The social structure has changed,&quot; he said. &quot;The social, economic and education conditions are ripe for democracy.&quot;    And that was exactly the message I got when -- after some detective work -- I finally met up with my old friend Amy. She's not a secretary. She makes a much better living as a lawyer. She asked me not to use her real name here -- things are not yet that free in Taiwan. But on election morning, over a street-stall breakfast of fried onion bread and soya milk, she described the course of political change in her country. As people have become wealthy enough to afford better education, more travel, more access to information, she explained, they have started to wonder why they shouldn't enjoy the rights they find in places like America. She would vote Tangwai, she said, not because of any specific program the opposition presents, but because &quot;it will encourage the KMT to reform.&quot; Then she went to cast her ballot.    ---   Ms. Rosett is editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>