<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880303-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Childbearing Women Have AIDS Virus More Often Than Expected, Tests Show </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Tests of newborn infants' blood in Massachusetts indicated the AIDS virus is more widespead among young women of childbearing age than previous studies had suggested.    The blood tests showed that in early 1987 one of every 476 women giving birth in Massachusetts carried the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The AIDS virus infection rate in inner cities was one in every 125 women giving birth.    Specifically, researchers found that 81 of the 30,708 mothers who gave birth during a seven-month period were infected with the AIDS virus.    It wasn't known how many of the young mothers actually had AIDS. The tests were carried out on blood samples routinely taken from infants at birth, and sent to a state laboratory for testing for a variety of congenital defects and illnesses. The researchers who tested the samples for antibodies to the AIDS virus were kept in ignorance of the mothers' identities.    Newborn infants temporarily retain antibodies that their mothers have built up against infections, including antibodies to the AIDS virus, though the infants may or may not inherit the virus. Experience has indicated that 20% to 60% of infants born to infected mothers will inherit the virus and develop the disease. The Massachusetts findings hint that 32 to 97 infected infants were born in that state last year. If the same rate is occurring nationwide it means that between 1,620 and 4,860 infected infants are born each year, researchers from the Massachusetts State Laboratory Institute noted in their report published in the New England Journal of Medicine.    How the mothers acquired their infections wasn't known. So far, however, about half the women in the U.S. who have developed AIDS have been drug addicts, while another 26% were sexual partners of drug addicts. The pattern seen in Massachusetts -- with high rates of infection at innercity hospitals and low rates in hospitals in rural areas, where drug use is less prevalent -- suggests that most of the mothers' infections were similarly acquired.    The testing was done to see if sampling the blood of the newborn, routine in many states, could be used to monitor the spread of the AIDS virus. At present, public health officials' only definitive gauge for the spread of the virus is the incidence of AIDS itself. The fatal disease, however, may not develop until four or five years after a person is infected. Thus, the incidence of AIDS cases indicates how widespread the virus was four or five years ago, rather than at present.    The experiment showed that the prevalence of the virus in women giving birth last year in 58 hospitals was 2.1 per 1,000. This was more than 100 times higher than the incidence of AIDS itself -- 0.02 per 1,000 -- among women in the state and in the U.S. overall. It also was almost 10 times higher than the prevalence of AIDS among men, 0.25 per 1,000 men in Massachusetts and 0.29 per 1,000 in the U.S.    The prevalence found in the Massachusetts test also was sharply higher than indicated by screening of blood donated to blood banks. Such screening in Massachusetts had previously found one out of every 25,000 female blood donors infected by the virus. Screening of military recruits found only two infected persons among 2,029 women recruits.    Massachusetts has reported about 2% of all AIDS cases in the U.S., putting it a distant sixth in rank for AIDS, behind New York, California, Forida, Texas and New Jersey. The researchers noted that the prevalence of AIDS itself in the state is almost identical to the national prevalence. Hence, the new findings might reflect the national prevalence of the AIDS virus. </TEXT></DOC>