<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Colombia's President Doesn't Walk on the Wild Side---By Peter Nares</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> BOGOTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The man Colombians voted for as their new president last year could have come from central casting -- but not to play the role of a hot-blooded Latin politician. The American-trained Virgilio Barco looks like the quintessential English country squire. When this introverted graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology hit the campaign trail, with his U.S.-born wife at his side, he was dismissed by many analysts because his austere and pragmatic style seemed a poor fit with the political volatility of his Andean homeland. But it now seems that a disaffected, colorless style within an atmosphere electric with passion may be, in some instances, just the medicine this troubled nation needs.    A member of a patrician family from the Cucuta region, Mr. Barco, aged 66, is the antithesis of his populist predecessor. Ex-President Belisario Betancur (1982-86) was a flamboyant Conservative Party politician who manifested his anti-American nationalism by taking Colombia into the Non-Aligned Group of Nations. Mr. Barco, on the other hand, has thrown open virtually all sectors of the economy to foreign investment. With gross domestic product expected to grow by 4% or more this year, Mr. Barco's economic program continues to attain its objectives.    Of course, it remains to be seen whether fresh capital will flow into a country that has one of the world's highest homicide rates. Andean cocaine barons continue to smuggle narcotics, valued at billions of dollars annually, to North America. Despite control campaigns, the authorities have been unable to suppress the trafficking and the violence it generates.    Also, no end is in sight for the 23-year guerrilla war. Three of the country's guerrilla organizations -- &quot;M-19,&quot; the pro-Castro National Liberation Army (ELN), and the Maoist Popular Liberation Army (EPL) -- continue their armed struggle. In the first quarter of 1987, 72 soldiers and policemen and 70 rebels were killed in gun battles. Colombia's fourth guerrilla movement, the Soviet-aligned Revolutionary Armed Forces Organization (FARC), still theoretically observes the truce it signed with the authorities in 1984. But in the field, FARC insurgents regularly clash with the military, and the truce soon may end. After FARC rebels killed 26 soldiers in a June ambush, Mr. Barco warned he would terminate the cease-fire in any zone where the guerrillas attacked security forces.    In attempting to negotiate a settlement to the insurgency, Mr. Barco disbanded the peace commissions established by Mr. Betancur. He has replaced them with a presidential adviser who is supervising the precarious peace process. But unlike Mr. Betancur, who made numerous concessions to the rebels in an abortive endeavor to appease them, Mr. Barco has adopted a firm stand.    The government, he has pledged, will restore order in zones affected by guerrilla violence. But Colombia's army, with less than 80,000 soldiers, lacks the manpower, equipment and money to suppress the 10,000 or so guerrillas and their supporters, who are now estimated to control about 20% of Colombia's inhabited territory.    Long term, though, the authorities hope to reduce grass-roots backing for the guerrillas with a four-year $1.1 billion &quot;rehabilitation&quot; program, which is being implemented to fund emergency development projects in zones where insurgents are active. Mr. Barco is hopeful that as living standards rise in such districts peasants will rally behind his administration.    This is the rational, MIT-graduate approach. But rationality has its limits in a country as anarchical as Colombia. For example, while Mr. Barco has been able to streamline some bureaucratic formalities, he has made little headway in his efforts to rationalize Colombia's woefully inefficient legal system. In a country where the law of the jungle rather than the Napoleonic Code frequently applies, rationality is of little avail. For instance, an extradition law, under which narcotics suspects were sent to the U.S. for trial, was recently toppled by the Supreme Court on technical grounds. But many jurists suspect that the law was thrown out because jittery court members had received death threats from drug traffickers.    Though Mr. Barco's critics deride him as boring, they acknowledge that the dour engineer has taken much of the heat out of Colombian politics. Under the disasterprone Betancur government, Colombians endured more than their share of emergencies. Among them was the M-19 attack on the Bogota Supreme Court in November 1985, when nearly 100 people were killed. But Mr. Barco's steady, if drab, leadership has restored at least some of the confidence Colombians lost during the erratic Betancur administration, whose guiding motto was instant action, whatever the consequences.    By contrast, the plodding Mr. Barco can take months to reach decisions. Nearly a year elapsed, for instance, before he finally got around to appointing an ambassador to the U.S. Yet when decisive action is called for, Mr. Barco can rise to the occasion. When Carlos Lehder, a fugitive and alleged ringleader of Andean cocaine smugglers, was arrested on a farm in February, Mr. Barco extradited him within 24 hours to the U.S., reportedly for fear that other smugglers might attempt to rescue him.    As for posterity, Mr. Barco is unlikely to go down in history books as a great statesman. In all probability, however, he will be remembered as a very competent administrator -- a distinction that will set him apart from many of his more colorful predecessors.    ---   Mr. Nares is a free-lance writer living in Bogota. </TEXT></DOC>