<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870313-0127 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Canada's Socialists Gaining Ground---By Jan Boucek</HL><DD> 03/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDA </IN><DATELINE> TORONTO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Canada's New Democratic Party doesn't like California grapes that haven't been picked by the United Farm Workers union. So, at this coming weekend's convention, the party faithful will be asked to approve the following resolution: &quot;Whereas the tentacles of incipient Fascism are everywhere gradually strangling Democracy on the planet; and if people who believe in democratic principles do not everywhere hang together, we shall find to our ultimate sorrow that we will hang separately, . . . therefore be it resolved to boycott those California grapes.&quot; David Martinez of the UFW will give a 10-minute speech, presumably with a firsthand account of incipient fascism.    That same New Democratic Party could play a big role in the nation's affairs after the next general election. It now has only 30 seats in Canada's 282-seat Parliament, but recent polls show it favored by 32% of the voters. That's double its historical average and could mean up to 70 to 80 seats in an election. As the party gathers for its biennial convention this weekend in Montreal, spirits are high. While an election isn't likely for at least two years, the NDP's strong showing raises the specter of a lurch to the left in Canada's affairs and a deterioration in relations with the U.S., even threatening its security.    NDP members like to call themselves social democrats, but there's no mistaking the party's socialist foundation. The preamble to the party's constitution states: &quot;The production and distribution of goods and services shall be directed to meeting the social and individual needs of people and not to the making of profit.&quot; In an NDP paradise, as pictured in its 270-page policy manual, workers run the workplace and capital flows are strictly controlled. The government owns the resource, transportation and communications industries and nationalizes one of the country's Big Five private banks. Canada pulls out of NATO and NORAD, declares itself a nuclear-free zone and works to &quot;reorder the world's economic institutions to transfer a share of power to the poorer nations.&quot;    This weekend's convention won't be a struggle for the heart and soul of the party nor a challenge to Ed Broadbent, the party's leader since 1975. A mind-numbing 507 proposed resolutions -- there are 15-minute fitness breaks to relieve the mental strain -- apply the party's basic philosophy to the issues of the day, such as opposition to any free-trade deal with the U.S. and to a proposed NATO air base in Newfoundland. There are nine resolutions on South Africa, none on Angola; 12 on Central America, none on Afghanistan.    The NDP is a long way from forming a government. But if neither the ruling Conservatives nor opposition Liberals win an outright majority in the next Parliament, the NDP could become the kingmaker. There haven't been two consecutive majority governments since the 1950s and &quot;a minority government is likely after the next election,&quot; says University of Toronto political scientist Jack McLeod.    In such a circumstance, the NDP might find enough in common with the Liberals to ruffle many feathers, both in Canada and in the U.S. Last fall, the Liberal convention that ratified John Turner as leader also passed resolutions to stop U.S. cruise-missile testing in Canada, declare Canada a nuclear-free zone and oppose President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. In addition, the Liberals reaffirmed their traditional faith in world federalism with calls for an international environmental tribunal and a sharing of the world's resources.    Mr. Turner isn't bound by his party's platform and, with his extensive government and corporate experience, he had to swallow hard to publicly accept some of the policy planks. But having struggled for so long to be prime minister, could he refuse an accommodation with the NDP if the Liberals don't win an outright majority? &quot;If Turner can work with the Liberal platform from their convention,&quot; says University of Toronto Prof. Donald Forbes, &quot;he can work with the NDP.&quot;    Liberal-NDP cooperation is not without precedent. During the minority Liberal government of Pierre Trudeau from 1972-74, the NDP voted with the Liberals to create Petro-Canada, the huge, state-owned oil company, and to restrict foreign investments. Currently, the NDP is supporting a minority Liberal government in Ontario where pay-equity legislation has been introduced, doctors turned into civil servants and overall spending sharply accelerated.    An alliance of the Liberals and NDP in Ottawa would almost certainly mean a return to Trudeau-style economic nationalism, affecting U.S. investment and access to natural resources. New Democrats and Liberals would both like to repeal recent drug-patent legislation that protects new products from generic copying. Both would like to &quot;stabilize&quot; oil- and gas-price fluctuations and neither favors any free-trade arrangement with the U.S. Liberals are vague on alternatives, but the NDP would seek minimum Canadian content regulations in exchange for access to Canadian markets. Assertive claims to Arctic sovereignty could hamper U.S. surveillance of Soviet submarine activity. Canadian denials of radar installations in the Arctic or overflights by sensor-bearing aircraft could complicate deployment of SDI. The U.S. could find itself constantly nagged by Canada on Nicaragua or on any number of United Nations-sponsored schemes.    The NDP's brightest electoral prospects are in the west. The party began as an agrarian socialist movement in Saskatchewan during the Depression. It currently governs Manitoba and has, within the past decade, ruled British Columbia and Saskatchewan. The west's commodity-based industries are in a slump and many westerners, who used to blame the Liberals, are now disenchanted with the Conservatives. Allen Gregg, chief pollster for the Tories, notes: &quot;Western alienation is real. There is no precedent for such partisan uprooting and the Conservatives aren't recognizing the problem there.&quot;    To become a truly national party, the NDP must win seats in Quebec, something they have never done. Recent polls give them a record 35% approval in the province, with support coming from disenfranchised separatists, the militant labor movement including the unionized civil service and Yuppie intellectuals. A number of resolutions at the NDP convention call for recognizing Quebec as a province with special status, which is anathema to both Liberals and Conservatives. On the Atlantic Coast, where neither Conservative nor Liberal governments have alleviated the region's perennial economic problems, NDP promises of still more federal handouts are getting attention, particularly in hard-luck Newfoundland and Cape Breton. With a few more seats from union strongholds in Ontario, the NDP could end its role as a third party.    ---   Mr. Boucek is news editor of the Canadian Dow Jones News Services. </TEXT></DOC>