<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Ex-CIA Officer Clines Emerges as FigureIn Covert Security Council Operations---By Edward T. Pound and David RogersStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Thomas Clines, a controversial former Central Intelligence Agency senior officer, is emerging as a behind-the-scenes figure in secret National Security Council staff operations, including some aspects of the Iran-Contra affair.    Mr. Clines had a long history of associations with former CIA agent Edwin Wilson, who was convicted in 1982 of illegally exporting arms and explosives to Libya. The relationship between the two men goes back to their years in the CIA and clandestine operations. After leaving the agency in 1978, Mr. Clines benefited from a loan of about $500,000 arranged by Mr. Wilson through his Geneva attorney in 1979.    Mr. Clines, who left the agency under pressure from former CIA Director Stansfield Turner, was a main figure in a scandal during the early 1980s involving the transport of U.S. weapons to Egypt. In 1984, a now-defunct company he owned pleaded guilty to filing false invoices in an alleged scheme to overcharge the Pentagon for shipping the arms to Egypt.    Virtually ostracized by the CIA's upper echelons, Mr. Clines, a self-described investor and consultant who now spends much of his time overseas, found a new champion in NSC staffer Lt. Col. Oliver North, despite misgivings elsewhere in the government about Mr. Clines. Evidence of Mr. Clines's dealings with the NSC staff remains fragmentary but he apparently used his experience in logistics and a myriad of connections that run from Europe to Central America.    Intelligence sources say Mr. Clines helped Lt. Col. North, who since has been dismissed from the NSC staff, obtain a ship to be used in a vain effort off Cyprus last May to free U.S. hostages in Lebanon with a $2 million ransom put up by Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot. The ransom effort came shortly before a secret trip to Iran May 28 by former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane and Lt. Col. North.    Also, in a federal civil suit in South Carolina, a close associate identified Mr. Clines in sworn testimony as &quot;working with the National Security Council.&quot; After hearing arguments in private, the judge in the case barred some questioning of Mr. Clines, saying &quot;it would not be in the best interests of this country.&quot;    The former CIA officer is a close friend of one of the major figures in the Iran-Nicaragua arms affair, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord. Maj. Gen. Secord was central to the private network Lt. Col. North relied on to handle both the secret arms sales to Iran and diversion of profits to aid the Nicaraguan insurgents, also known as Contras.    Mr. Clines, 58 years old, has been active in recent years in Europe, spending time in Portugal, a frequent transit point in the international arms trade. He is a familiar face to personnel at a Lisbon trading company, Defex-Portugal, which played a role in arms shipments to Nicaraguan insurgents, according to intelligence sources.    At the Central American end of the Contra supply line, Rafael Quintero, a close friend from his CIA days and former business partner of Mr. Clines, helped to oversee operations at a base in El Salvador used for flying in supplies from Portugal and ferrying them into Nicaragua.    The significance of Mr. Clines's connections with the NSC staff is twofold. Given his controversial past, any involvement by the former agent would demonstrate how far Lt. Col. North went in relying on a private network of shadowy characters. Second, in his own testimony in connection with the South Carolina lawsuit, Mr. Clines may have left clues useful to investigators now trying to understand the NSC's Iran-Contra operations.    The court suit rose out of a 1984 breach-of-contract dispute related to a stock purchase in Sisco Inc., a South Carolina concern that makes screening equipment used in oil exploration. After a ruling in U.S. District Court in Charleston last June, the matter is under appeal at the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond.    Mr. Clines's involvement in the case came because of his past financial backing to investors in the stock purchase. In this regard, he was questioned about his own business dealings, but in a deposition taken in November 1985, he declined to give specifics about his consulting work abroad.    In a closed-door hearing last January in Charleston, Mr. Clines met privately with a federal judge who subsequently issued an order barring questions regarding Mr. Clines's 1984 and 1985 consulting work abroad because of its sensitivity to the government. And Mr. Clines's attorney earlier told the judge that his client was absent from the court proceedings in 1985 because of work on behalf of the U.S.    No public account of the in-camera hearing is available, but notes were taken by a court reporter during the estimated 30-minute to 45-minute session and sealed as part of the case record. In a pre-trial conference a few days later, the U.S. District Court judge, Falcon Hawkins, left little doubt about the influence the session had on him.    &quot;I am of the opinion, based on what he said on certain activities of his from the very beginning up until this present time, that it would not be in the best interests of this country . . . for these matters to be aired in any public or private forum,&quot; Judge Hawkins said, according to a court transcript. He added, &quot;The matters which I am familiar with, that occurred during 1984 and 1985, I would not permit any testimony concerning that.&quot;    Both the judge and Mr. Clines's Charleston attorney, A. Hoyt Rowell, refuse to discuss the in-camera session, and it remains unclear what, if anything, was said about Mr. Clines's involvement in the Iran-Contra operation.    In a recent interview, Judge Hawkins said, &quot;I suspect that the reason I did not permit the testimony was because Clines was still working for the government.&quot; The judge said he himself made no effort to confirm Mr. Clines's statements. But in a deposition in the case taken in November 1985, Sandra Pruett, Mr. Clines's friend and former personal assistant, testified that &quot;Tom . . . is working with the National Security Council.&quot;    Mr. Rowell, the attorney, confirms too that in the fall of 1985 -- at Judge Hawkins's direction -- he spoke with a person &quot;in authority&quot; before asking for a continuance because of Mr. Clines's frequent absences in the case. Mr. Rowell refuses to identify the person with whom he spoke, but by pre-arrangement, he says, the contact telephoned him at home to say Mr. Clines &quot;was out of the country working on something for the United States.&quot;    The caller wasn't a government official, Mr. Rowell said, but represented himself as someone &quot;working with the National Security Council.&quot; He added, &quot;I don't have any doubts of the veracity of what I was told.&quot; When asked if the caller was Maj. Gen. Secord, the lawyer said, &quot;You'll have to draw your own conclusions.&quot;    Mr. Clines's Washington attorney, John Ellsworth Stein, declined to comment, and efforts to reach Mr. Clines were unsuccessful. But the picture of the heavy-set former agent that emerges from interviews with associates and from his own testimony is that of a cigar-chomping soldier of fortune whose boastful humor leavens the more serious, shadowy style of a nearly 30-year veteran of the CIA. In testimony in South Carolina in November 1985, he said, &quot;I was transferred anywhere the Army needed a good ballplayer,&quot; referring to his early years in the military.    His economic fortunes have ridden a roller coaster since he left the agency in 1978. According to court records, after reporting modest earnings through 1981, Mr. Clines's 1982 tax return shows income exceeding $906,000 as he benefited from shipping U.S. arms to Egypt and other business transactions. By 1984, according to his own testimony, his earnings had dropped off again, but for 1985, he estimated his income at about $300,000.    &quot;Tom would get involved for two purposes,&quot; said an associate of Mr. Clines, in reference to the Iran-Contra affair. &quot;To make something out of it, and to do a good deed.&quot;    Mr. Clines's role in NSC staff operations appears to have come largely through Maj. Gen. Secord, and he served as a lieutenant of sorts to the retired Air Force officer. Intelligence sources said Lt. Col. North subsequently attempted to get CIA Director William Casey to hire Mr. Clines as a consultant, but senior officials in the agency objected because of Mr. Clines's past ties to the notorious Mr. Wilson.    The ransom attempt to free U.S. hostages last year is one of the clearest examples of Mr. Clines's assistance to Lt. Col. North. Intelligence sources said Mr. Clines helped Lt. Col. North in the operation, which was to take place off the coast of Cyprus during the third week of May, but it never occurred because the Lebanese intermediaries with whom Lt. Col. North had been dealing never showed up to deliver the hostages or collect the money.    Defex-Portugal, the Lisbon trading company, is believed to have played a role in Contra arms shipments as early as 1985, according to intelligence sources. The company has been the subject of recent inquiries by U.S. diplomatic officials in Europe, and is viewed with annoyance by a much larger Spanish military consortium with a similar name in Madrid.    Jose Garnel, a principal in the Lisbon company, had served as the Portugal agent for such major weapons makers as Colt Industries Inc., New York. Efforts to reach Mr. Garnel were unsuccessful.    Mr. Clines has been active in Portugal and was readily known to a Defex worker as someone who had visited the Lisbon office as recently as this fall. According to an experienced arms trader, Portugal is an attractive transit point for dealers, and the country's weapons and ammunition industry has long traded in the Mideast. Lisbon also is a nexus for Southern Air Transport, the Miami-based cargo carrier that has been linked both to arms shipments to the Contras and Iran. U.S. Transportation Department records show Southern Air made flights from Portugal to the El Salvador base used to supply the Contras.    A much smaller air cargo company, Race Aviation, operates from Madrid and is a descendant of sorts from a failed U.S. firm, Global International. Global often carried U.S. arms to Egypt from 1981-1983, according to the Transportation Department records. More than 265 tons of weapons were transported under contract with the Egyptian American Transportation Service Co., in which Mr. Clines was a major partner until selling his interest in 1982.    Global's chief stockholder was Farhad Azima, an Iranian emigre and the oldest of three brothers, all of whom worked in Global and now have connections to Race Aviation. Race Aviation's single Boeing 707 is one of the same planes that flew for Global. It is owned by Farhad Azima, while his brothers, Farzin and Fariborz, are the principals who oversee the operations.    A Boeing jet described in news reports as belonging to Race Aviation carried arms to Iran in July. But since the Race jet has no company markings or colors, it is possible that a second plane was used with forged tail numbers. &quot;I know for certain the plane was not used,&quot; said Farzin Azima.    Evidence indicates that this type of subterfuge -- often used by the Israelis, who had a major role in shipping U.S. arms to Iran -- was employed elsewhere in the operation to confuse the identity of persons and equipment involved. </TEXT></DOC>