<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Iran Aims to Be Superpower of the Gulf---By Gerald F. Seib</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><TEXT>   A bearded young Iranian working in Tehran's state security service was explaining in passionate tones why Iran is a power to be reckoned with.    Iran's brand of pure Islam is attracting followers all over the world, he asserted. To which countries, a visitor asked, is Iranian-style Islamic rule most likely to spread?    &quot;Kuwait first,&quot; the Iranian answered without hesitation. &quot;Then Egypt. And after that, Saudi Arabia.&quot;    That exchange, which took place during a visit to Iran a few weeks ago, illuminates an important question that has gone almost undiscussed in the flood of verbiage about the Reagan administration's secret arms sales to Iran. Is Iran, eight years after its own Islamic revolution, an expansionist power bent on seeing its version of Islamic government spread around the Middle East? Or has it narrowed its sights and resigned itself to living within the existing constellation of Islamic states?    The answer is that, down deep, Iran still seems determined to spread its version of pure Islam. True, Iran's rhetoric has softened, and its protracted war with Iraq may leave Iranians with little appetite for expanding their power through brute force. Also, Iran's hamstrung economy is illustrating the need for cooperating with the outside world.    But plenty of Iranians still believe in the power, and the inevitable spread, of the Islamic ideas they espouse. The war with Iraq has prevented the kind of mellowing out and shift in attention to internal affairs that normally would follow a revolution like Iran's. Instead, the war has allowed hard-liners to keep a stronger grip on power than they might have otherwise.    So, for example, the tentacles of Iranian influence are spreading daily among the Shiite Moslems of Lebanon, where new posters of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini are being put up daily. Some Lebanese think Iran's influence there will mushroom overnight if Iranian troops should score a knockout blow in the war against Iraq.    Almost without notice, Iran also is redefining the fight against Israel as a struggle between Islam and Israel rather than one between simply Arabs and Israel. That change, which transforms the struggle into a religious rather than a nationalistic one, has potentially profound implications that few in Israel seem ready to address.    And though Iran doesn't threaten the kingdoms and sheikdoms of the Persian Gulf as bluntly as it once did, it has used intimidation and strong-arm tactics to influence their oil policies -- indicating that even if Iran isn't forcing changes in the Gulf, it at least insists on influence. Iranians are members of the Shiite minority sect of Islam, but many think they also can inspire members of the majority Sunni.    All this doesn't mean there isn't an opening for American influence in Iran. There is. Some leaders, particularly powerful Parliament Speaker Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, clearly are flirting with America. They are self-confident enough now to deal with the &quot;great Satan,&quot; and seem to want at least some kind of relationship with the U.S. to acquire arms and to serve as a counterweight to the Soviet colossus on Iran's northern border.    The U.S. is wise to explore such openings, if only in hopes of countering some of the illogical anti-Americanism that pops up all over Iran now. Recently, for instance, a wailing crowd of mourners was carrying a casket through the streets of downtown Tehran. The casket contained the body of a man killed when Iraqi airplanes bombed an Iranian city. The Iraqi air force that killed the man uses, to a large degree, Soviet-trained pilots flying Soviet jets that drop Soviet bombs. So what was the crowd chanting as it mourned this air-raid victim? &quot;Death to America,&quot; of course.    But while probing for openings, the U.S. shouldn't delude itself into believing that Iran is a country that has somehow gone mellow or begun pulling in its horns. Nowhere is this clearer than at the front in the war against Iraq.    There, young Iranian volunteers -- men dressed in ragged khaki uniforms and blue tennis shoes and armed with little more than red headbands carrying Islamic slogans -- still show up in droves to fight for Islam. Amid the gnarled Iraqi corpses and the piles of spent artillery shells, nobody believes Iran is fighting only for some kind of limited political victory against Iraq.    &quot;Our final goal is to reach Karbala and Al Quds, which is a goal for all Moslems,&quot; says Ali Husseini, a burly commander of Iran's Revolutionary Guards. Karbala is a city deep inside Iraq that is a holy site for Shiite Moslems like those in Iran. Al Quds is the Islamic name for Jerusalem.    Iranian soldiers, in short, believe that once they have cut through Iraq and replaced the government there with a truly Islamic regime, they will join with other Moslem fighters from around the region to wrench the holy city of Jerusalem out of the hands of Israel.    Many of the fighters in this coming battle for Jerusalem will come from Lebanon, Iranians believe. For in Lebanon, more than anywhere else, the Iranian revolution is reaching out and winning real converts. Members of Iran's Revolutionary Guards, the paramilitary force formed to preserve the Iranian revoluion, are stationed in eastern Lebanon, helping militias there. Iran's ideas are promoted by the Hezbollah, a militia inspired by Iran's revolutionary Islamic system -- so much so, in fact, that Syrian troops occupying Lebanon have felt compelled in recent days to try to clamp down on the growing power of Hezbollah and to paint over some of those Khomeini posters.    Iranian officials regularly meet Lebanese politicians to give pep talks and instructions. Ayatollah Hussein Ali Montazeri, the man designated to be Iran's religious leader after Ayatollah Khomeini dies, met a group recently in the Iranian holy city of Qum.    Islamic sects, he told them, &quot;like the five fingers of a hand, should turn into a fist against Israel and the infidels of the East and the West.&quot; He added: &quot;Now that the Palestinians are homeless and driven from the homeland, those who have houses should shelter them. {We should} equip them against Israel so that all continue the struggle against Israel as an Islamic task.&quot;    Some Iranian leaders, to be sure, are toning down the rhetorical broadsides aimed at their neighbors. Mr. Rafsanjani, for instance, tried to sound a moderate tone when a reporter asked him about Iran's frequent criticisms of its Islamic neighbors. &quot;Some {Islamic} countries aren't practicing Islam completely,&quot; he said. But, he added, &quot;we aren't going to impose the Islam we practice here on them by force. . . . The only thing we expect of Islamic governments is that they allow people to practice Islam and live the Islamic way of life freely.&quot;    And, of course, many average Iranians don't share their leaders' passion for Islam or their eagerness to fight &quot;infidels.&quot; They would prefer for the government to concentrate on improving the tattered Iranian economy. Iran is running an estimated $5.4 billion annual balance-of-payments deficit, hard currency is so short that a dollar changed into local currency on the black market fetches 10 times the official exchange rate, and Tehran's skyline is crisscrossed with idle construction cranes looming over half-finished buildings.    Still, even some nonreligious Iranians can't resist speculating about the possibility that their country may someday become the superpower of the Persian Gulf; that its size, strategic position and natural resources suggest it could be. For instance, one nonreligious businessman in Tehran who is openly contemptuous of the mullahs who run the country mused the other day about what might happen if Iran somehow wins the war against Iraq.    &quot;Can you imagine the power these people will have if we have our own oil reserves and Iraq's, too?&quot; he says with a glint in his eye. &quot;Business could be great here again.&quot;    For Iranian leaders, who are more concerned with spiritual than business advances, the prospect of increased power and influence must be equally attractive.    ---   Mr. Seib, detained for a week in Iran last month, covers the Mideast for the Journal. He has returned to the paper's Cairo bureau. </TEXT></DOC>