<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870402-0189 </DOCNO><HL> Uphill Battle:Eastman Kodak Co.Has Arduous StruggleTo Regain Lost Edge---Beset by Rivals From Japan,Customers' Complaints, ItAbandons Its Traditions---Getting Over Disk Disaster---By Clare AnsberryStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EK FUJIYPHOTOGRAPHY (PIX) </IN><DATELINE> ROCHESTER, N.Y.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Veteran Sports Illustrated photographer Walter Iooss Jr. refused one of the most desired photo projects of the decade last year for a simple reason: He was required to use Kodak film.    &quot;I just couldn't do it,&quot; says Mr. Iooss of his decision not to participate in the Day in the Life of America project, sponsored in part by Eastman Kodak Co. For the past several years, Mr. Iooss has used only film made by Japan's Fuji Photo Film Co. He prefers what he describes as Fuji's superior color quality.    Mr. Iooss apparently has plenty of company. While Americans are shooting more pictures each year, Kodak's domestic market share of color-negative film has slipped to 82% from its virtual monopoly just 15 years ago. What's more, where Kodak once led the pack in technology, it now increasingly chases Fuji, whether in introducing faster-speed film or in marketing 35-millimeter disposable cameras.    Another sign of trouble: This year, the nation's top executives dropped Kodak to 70th in Fortune magazine's annual rating of the most admired major U.S. corporations; it was fourth in 1983.    Kodak is yet one more U.S. corporate giant to lose its edge in an industry it created and long controlled. As long ago as 1982, Kodak's then chairman, Walter A. Fallon, asserted, &quot;It's time to make this elephant dance.&quot; A program aimed at revitalizing the company began in 1984, when Kodak formed small entrepreneurial business units; it accelerated last year when the company moved to slash its work force of 128,950 by 10% and its expenses by 5%, a wrenching process that isn't over.    At the same time, tradition-driven Kodak, which almost exclusively promoted from within and rarely sought help from outside, began bringing in consultants and managers. And to develop new ideas and to meet production goals, managers began looking to their staffs; the bio-products division, for one, has monthly pizza lunches where employees are encouraged to help management set directions.    The result: &quot;The elephant is breaking into a slow shuffle,&quot; says Peter Enderlin, a Kodak watcher at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. Still, he quickly adds, &quot;It's yet to dance.&quot;    Since Kodak was in many ways lulled into complacency by its past successes, an understanding of its current situation is helped by a look at its roots. The company dates back a century, when its founder, George Eastman, introduced the Number One Kodak camera and Kodak's familiar credo of self-sufficiency and confidence: &quot;You press the button. We do the rest.&quot;    As it prospered, Kodak cultivated a fierce allegiance from its workers through such means as handsome annual bonuses and free noontime movies. One young bachelor met a Kodak employee at a party but didn't ask her out because he fell into that forsaken Rochester category of &quot;others&quot; -- those who didn't work at Kodak. And among those who did work for the company, competition within the ranks was considered rude.    When it came to managing Kodak, only Kodak executives needed to apply; it helped even more if you were an engineer. Kodak President Kay Whitmore says only one outsider was brought into top management during his 30 years -- a general counsel who recently retired and was replaced by a 29-year Kodak veteran.    As engineers, the executives believed in perfection, no matter how long it took, and less in market timing. One result of that was durability: In its bulky product catalog of 70,000 items, Kodak still offers the same gelatin filter introduced in 1912 for science and industry.    Decisions percolated to the top for even minor entertainment expenses. Until recently, Vice Chairman J. Phillip Samper, who heads photographic and information products, could be called upon to make a decision on any one of 50,000 products. (Now business-unit managers are responsible for their own lines.) Tradition was all-important: One supervisor, who recently retired, kept employment records from the 1930s in his office drawer &quot;because they had always been there.&quot;    That patient, paternalistic and autocratic management style worked as long as Kodak controlled technology and quality standards. But by the 1980s, that conservative bent destined the company for a fall. Nudging it over the edge were the strength of the U.S. dollar and a serious misfire of a new product: the disk camera.    Former Chairman Fallon had determined that the 1980s would be the decade of the disk. &quot;The new engine that will drive amateur photography is here,&quot; he predicted confidently at the 1982 unveiling of the &quot;engine,&quot; a wallet-thin camera built to accommodate a rotating disk of film.    Although many disk cameras were sold, the engine ultimately turned out to be Kodak's Edsel. While the company concentrated on easy-to-use, inexpensive but poorer-quality disks, its Japanese competition, which once reverently referred to it as Kodak-san, concentrated on simplifying the high-quality 35-mm camera. Now it is the 35-mm camera that is propelling photography today, while the disk languishes on dealer shelves. Last year, Kodak conceded by introducing two 35-mm cameras and returning to a market it had dismissed 16 years before as too sophisticated.    During those 16 years, Fuji flexed its technological muscle. In 1976, it captured the industry limelight by introducing what was then the world's fastest color-print still film, 400-speed; Kodak followed months later. The victory was no fluke. In 1984, Fuji again introduced the world's fastest film, its 1600-speed, and Kodak has yet to match it. (The higher the film speed, the less light is needed to take a picture.)    Fuji snared 10% of the U.S. color-negative film market in the past decade, in part because professional photographers like Mr. Iooss grew dissatisfied with Kodak. One of them, Robert Herko, says he must leave Kodak film on the roof of his doghouse in the summer because fresh Kodak film isn't sufficiently aged; he advises other professionals to buy old film. Kodak says it is addressing that problem.    The company also lost ground to Fuji because of the 1984 Olympics. Kodak was the first choice of Olympic organizers to be a sponsor of the games, but it fussed so long over the contract that sponsors turned to a more amenable and eager Fuji. The usually calm Mr. Fallon reportedly pounded the table when told of Fuji's coup.    But it wasn't in film alone that Kodak began to slip. Ilford Photo Corp., a unit of the Swiss Ciba-Geigy Ltd., has led recent advancements in black-and-white photographic paper. &quot;Kodak used to be the innovators. Now it seems they let others dictate what they do,&quot; says Cynthia Brenner, a buyer for Schmitt Photo Service in Evansville, Ind.    The biggest headaches developed in photofinishing, where customers complained of blurry and grainy enlargements of prints that were also often several weeks late. Once-loyal Kodak photofinishers have switched to Fuji products, claiming Kodak's 20% premium for processing materials isn't worth it.    Last fall, after receiving about 25 complaints a week about lost pictures and delays caused by Kodak, Wegmans, a supermarket chain based here, stopped accepting film for Kodak photofinishing. Kodak worked on the problems, and Wegmans ended its ban in late December.    In photofinishing alone, Kodak sales plunged to $60 million last year from about $200 million five years ago, according to Photofinishing News Letter, an industry newsletter. That share, however, will undoubtedly increase as Kodak puts into effect its recently announced plans to service Colorcraft Corp., the largest photofinisher in the country.    In graphic arts, Kodak has lost ground as well, having abruptly canceled 25% of its independent graphic-arts dealers in February. That action, which Kodak said was prompted by a need to consolidate its dealer network, infuriated remaining dealers fearful that they, too, could be canceled at any time. The National Graphic Arts Dealers Association surveyed its Kodak dealers and found that 42% thought the company's policy toward dealers &quot;was getting worse.&quot;    &quot;Eastman Kodak was almost like a god in this business a few years ago,&quot; says Robert Fitzpatrick, executive vice president of the graphics dealers' association. &quot;Not anymore.&quot;    Kodak's biggest fall from grace, however, came last year when Polaroid Corp. won its decade-long patent-infringement suit, which forced Kodak from the instant-camera market. Kodak initially had dismissed that business as a fad, but when the fad refused to fade, Kodak wanted in. In 1976, it introduced its instant camera; one week later, Polaroid filed suit.    Kodak argued that Polaroid's patents weren't valid, but ultimately the Supreme Court disagreed. Still unresolved is the settlement to Polaroid, which could reach $1 billion -- and how owners of the now-useless 16.5 million Kodak instants will be compensated.    Even as Kodak struggled to keep pace in its basic business, it began branching into the volatile high-tech electronic business. The move hasn't been without problems. Its Atex unit, once the leader in electronic publishing in the U.S., has lost its No. 1 position. All three founders of Atex, which Kodak acquired in 1981, have left and Kodak recently named its third management team there. Its Verbatim unit, likewise, has dropped from its lead in the floppy-disk business since Kodak took over in 1985.    The man who has to deal with all these problems, Colby Chandler, Kodak's chairman, in many respects mirrors the company he works for. Conservative and down-to-earth, he grew up on a Maine dairy farm, drives a pickup truck and wears a 10-year-old Ronald McDonald watch, he says, for one simple reason: &quot;It works.&quot; And he is an engineer, which some Kodak watchers consider a strike against him. &quot;They need some quirky individuals up there, some marketing people,&quot; contends Alta Cools, the editor of For Your Information, an industry newsletter. Others consider Mr. Chandler, who serves coffee to his colleagues on the company plane, too nice to make further hard-nosed cost-cutting moves that they consider necessary.    His challenge: to sustain the restructuring program and, more important, to convince Kodak's 121,450 employes they must change. That process is proving particularly tough since Kodak hadn't encouraged much decision making below top-management ranks.    So when Kodak created several small business units in 1984, hoping to foster some entrepreneurial spirit, no one was judged qualified to head them. &quot;People were floundering around, reluctant to make decisions,&quot; says John Heiman, who took early retirement last spring as a director of a technology section after 30 years at Kodak. &quot;I'd approach a supervisor with an idea and he'd say, 'Come back in six months. Can't you see we're in turmoil?' Six months turned into another six months and so on. I got sick of it.&quot;    Hundreds of employees like Mr. Heiman have also recently chosen to retire early, and the loss of that veteran talent has triggered production problems for Kodak. Its improved 400-speed film, introduced in January 1986, has yet to reach retailer shelves; meanwhile, Fuji's improved 400-speed film has been on the market for months.    But Mr. Chandler presses on. In line with budget cuts, wastebaskets in his office are no longer emptied every night. Management meetings are replayed on television sets at noon in the cafeteria. Supervisors tack up posters exhorting &quot;quality.&quot; Kodak, which has been in Japan for more than six decades, only recently began a huge promotion campaign there, sailing its bright yellow blimp over the emperor's palace in Tokyo. And for the first time since World War II, Kodak has a senior executive there.    Strict deadlines have been imposed on business units to cut costs and improve profits. &quot;If they're not profitable by a certain period of time, we'll do something -- sell it, shut it down, raise prices,&quot; Mr. Chandler says. &quot;The time horizons are short. It's 1987 for many of them.&quot;    Kodak also has decided this year to tie a portion of some managers' salaries to company performance, a move most major companies have made but one that Kodak had been reluctant to do.    Initial results are encouraging. Following a year of disappointments, Kodak's pre-tax operating earnings turned up in the fourth quarter by 82%, and sales rose 8.6% in 1986 to $11.55 billion. Decisions on everything from product development to marketing strategy are being made faster and further down the line. Kodak's recent entry into the dry-battery business took only two years from the time the concept was conceived until the product was on retailer shelves, officials say.    Vice Chairman Samper proudly recounts a recent impromptu visit to a film-making plant. Bells were ringing, and the entire production line was shut down because a technician had determined a quality problem in the emulsion mix. &quot;In the past,&quot; Mr. Samper says, &quot;it would have taken some part of a day for someone to make that decision.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>