<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880328-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Insecure Feeling: A Supersecret Agency Finds Selling Secrecy To Others Isn't Easy --- NSA Fears That Foreigners Intercept Firms' Messages, Touts Own Code Devices --- But the Customers Are Wary </HL><AUTHOR> Bob Davis (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> ELE EDP TEL </IN><DATELINE> FORT GEORGE MEADE, Md.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At the supersecret National Security Agency, it's time to talk. About marketing. Top officials munch on Twinkies, then turn to a review of the spy agency's latest posters. One features Uncle Sam glowering out from a computer screen: &quot;I want to protect the information in YOUR computer.&quot;    Too much like Big Brother, frowns Patrick Gallagher, the head of the NSA's computer-security efforts. He nods approvingly at another poster, which warns: &quot;It's 11 o'clock. Do you know what your computer is doing?&quot;    The NSA, which spends most of its time eavesdropping on telephone conversations and computer transmissions around the world, has gone public with efforts to sell the idea of tighter computer and communications security. For an agency whose initials are said to stand for Never Say Anything, &quot;there's almost been a religious conversion,&quot; says David McManis, the NSA's chief of staff for information security.    The agency is promoting the private production of secret encryption technology that it designs and controls. It wants electronics companies to build that technology into the computers and other electronic products that they sell to corporations and civilian federal agencies. The technology, using secret NSA codes, essentially alters a message so that to unauthorized eyes it looks like gibberish.    But persuasion doesn't come naturally to the intelligence agency. Its spokesmen sometimes come off more like drill sergeants than smooth-talking salesmen, and they frighten off buyers. Some would-be customers complain that NSA technology costs too much, comes with too many restrictions and could even let the agency spy on them.    &quot;The problem with the NSA is that it's schizophrenic,&quot; says Geoffrey Turner, BankAmerica Corp.'s vice president for communications security and a former Navy intelligence officer. &quot;The question is, Which agenda is the NSA pursuing: protecting our communications or collecting intelligence&quot; by eavesdropping on international banking?    The NSA has an answer to such suspicions. &quot;The American public has no problem with relying on us to provide the technology that prevents the unauthorized launch of nuclear weapons,&quot; says Harold Daniels, the agency's head of information security. &quot;If you trust us to protect against that, you can trust us to protect {private} records.&quot;    As it seeks to sell its point of view, the NSA finds itself engaged in a new openness -- a sharp departure for an agency whose budget, size and charter are classified.    Interviews for this story were the first granted by the NSA in four years. Mr. Daniels now speaks at a half-dozen electronics and security trade conferences a year. The agency invites some 1,600 engineers to an annual computer-security conference it co-sponsors, and last year it even was the host for a trade show, Infosec '87, where about 50 companies showed off security products in classified and unclassified exhibits.    The agency is turning to the outside world because it fears that the growth of computerized communications is outstripping its ability to protect U.S. secrets. Here at Fort Meade, the site of the NSA's sprawling headquarters 25 miles north of Washington, saucer-shaped antennas and superfast computers sift through millions of overseas conversations, revealing how adversaries try to prey on U.S. weaknesses. The NSA worries that the Soviet Union is copying U.S. missiles by intercepting facsimile transmissions and that foreign competitors are getting a jump on U.S. companies by tapping corporate communications networks.    &quot;If you don't think we're being exploited by friends and enemies, buster, you're crazy,&quot; says Walter Deeley, a former NSA official who pushed the agency to modernize electronic-security technology.    Since the NSA's founding in 1952, its response has been to design a series of shoebox-sized encryption devices to encode and decode communications for military and intelligence agencies. But these encryption boxes have been too bulky and expensive, at $3,500 each, to be used outside these agencies to protect communications between the millions of personal computers, facsimile machine and telephones that the NSA worries about. Meanwhile, in 1982, the NSA backed the spread of a privately developed encryption technology called the data encryption standard, or DES, that now is widely used by private concerns, particularly the banking industry. However, the NSA has recently changed course on DES, arguing that it no longer is secure enough and pitching its own technology instead.    In recent years the NSA has begun a program called Project Overtake and a related program to slim down encryption boxes to a more usable size. In 1985, the agency awarded about $6 million in contracts to 11 electronics companies to build snap-in computer cards about the size of an audio cassette that use the NSA's secret formulas to encrypt messages. The NSA also has persuaded about 40 companies, including General Electric Co., Digital Equipment Corp. and Motorola Inc., to include the encryption boxes in a new generation of computers, radios and cellular telephones.    The NSA insists on keeping control at every step. It takes apart products before they go on the market, to make sure they work properly and are tamper-proof. Those that pass muster get a sort of spy-agency seal of approval, an NSA endorsement number. So far, the NSA has endorsed only a half-dozen products under the two encryption progams but hopes to approve 16 more this year.    The agency's campaign to get companies and civilian agencies to use the new security systems faces an enormous marketing hurdle: how to stir the moribund electronic-security market, which the Electronic Industries Association optimistically pegs at sales of perhaps $4 billion this year.    Outside the NSA and the military, potential customers are skeptical and unwilling to spend much money on encryption. &quot;We're not worried about the KGB,&quot; says Eddie Zeitler, vice president of Security Pacific Corp., a Los Angeles bank-holding company. &quot;We can't protect to that level of security. We'd go broke.&quot;    The NSA's first marketing efforts were a fiasco. Starting in June 1986, NSA agents tried to persuade bankers, the nation's biggest commercial users of encryption technology, to switch to a new system designed under Project Overtake. Conversations were icy. &quot;An NSA guy stands up and makes pronouncements,&quot; says Mr. Zeitler. &quot; `You guys have to do this.' It's a directive. You can imagine how far that gets them.&quot;    Dealing with the NSA can be maddening. The agency takes three years to approve a manufacturer's plans to make a computer-security system. It only hints at what it really knows and what it wants. &quot;It's like playing 20 questions,&quot; groans Dennis Brandstad, a senior computer researcher at the National Bureau of Standards and a former NSA cryptographer.    And don't expect to see NSA ads during the Super Bowl. Even though the agency is talking to more outsiders than ever before, it regularly talks only to a small group of clients it already knows -- government agencies and big businesses that buy electronic-security devices, and manufacturers that make them. A tiny start-up security firm, Ultron Labs, got an NSA go-ahead only after its two founders struck up friendships with NSA officials while working on a Xerox Corp. computer-security contract. Ultron then hired an NSA agent to work with the agency and was recently purchased by a company headed by the NSA's former chief, Bobby Inman.    The agency, however, is moving on a broad front. Among other projects, its National Computer Security Center painstakingly rates computer systems on their ability to protect information from unauthorized release. The NSA also has spent $40 million developing a compact secure telephone, cutting the cost of secure phones from $12,000 each to $2,400. The federal government plans to spend about $200 million to buy about 80,000 of the new telephones.    But although the NSA employs several thousand workers in its information-security programs, by far the largest collection of electronic-security talent in the country, it can't keep up with its ambitious plans. Marvin Schaefer, former chief scientist at the National Computer Security Center, says that a company often waits two years before the NCSC begins inspecting equipment and two more years before it finishes. PE Systems Inc. of Alexandria, Va., which won NSA approval for a personal-computer encryption board, says the NSA insists on approving its advertising, too.    In a pub outside Washington, Robert Jueneman, a burly engineer for Computer Sciences Corp., downs iced tea and frets about wringing an endorsement out of the NSA for a secure work station. &quot;My fear is it will take three years to get certified and in the interim the rest of the market will have raced off to a new technology,&quot; he says.    When NSA representatives met with bankers, the bankers quickly objected to the multimillion-dollar expense of switching technologies in their industry and to the NSA's plans to restrict the new system to U.S. companies. Leslie Chalmers, data-security officer for Bank of California, says the NSA's plans would leave her bank, which is owned by Mitsubishi Bank Ltd. of Japan, unable to do business electronically with U.S.-owned banks without risking interception.    NSA demands also fed bankers' fears that the agency would exploit rather than protect them. The NSA insists on keeping secret the encryption formulas at the heart of Project Overtake, sparking speculation that the agency would fiddle with the software so that it could read all communications. The agency also demands that it make and distribute all keys that control the Project Overtake encryption gear, raising concerns that the spy agency would keep copies of keys for itself.    &quot;It's absolutely inconceivable that the NSA would spend billions of dollars a year on encryption and promote codes it can't crack,&quot; says Cipher Davours, a Kean College cryptographer whose father worked at the NSA and named him after the word for a secret code or message.    The NSA isn't fully reassuring on that point. &quot;Technically, if someone bought our device and we made the keys and made a copy, sure we could listen in,&quot; acknowledges Mr. McManis. &quot;But we have better things to do with our time.&quot; Sometime, he adds, the NSA may let others make encryption keys.    Finally, last year, the NSA backed down in its fight with the bankers, accepting their current encryption technology, DES, &quot;until suitable replacement is found.&quot; DES uses a widely published formula to encrypt, say, the electronic transfer of money. Users must keep their encryption keys secret to protect the data from being intercepted. The NSA says DES isn't secure enough anymore and wants to make the encryption formula secret, too.    All this puts the computer-security makers in a funk. The NSA's campaign against DES weakens sales of that technology, while NSA's failure to convince the bankers has stalled Project Overtake as well. Without big sales to commercial customers, the price of the NSA's encryption boxes isn't likely to drop much below $1,000 each -- too expensive for all but the NSA and the military. Then the NSA's toughest marketing problem will be sticker shock. </TEXT></DOC>