<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871215-0140 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> SANAA, North Yemen  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In 1955, a British geologist filed a bleak report on the prospects for oil in this poor corner of the Arabian Peninsula.    Even if a gusher were discovered, he wrote, &quot;No man with his right mind will ever think of building a pipeline across those mountains.&quot; Construction workers who have just completed a 263-mile pipeline across those same saw-toothed peaks are inclined to agree.    &quot;It was tougher than Alaska,&quot; says Bjorn Stoltz, a veteran pipeline builder. And a lot hotter. The pipeline begins where Dallas-based Hunt Consolidated Inc. struck oil in 1984, in sand dunes near the ill-defined border with Saudi Arabia.    To get the oil to a Red Sea export terminal, it was necessary to move almost as much earth in 11 months as was moved during the 11-year construction of the Suez Canal. And along the way, workers sometimes skirmished with armed tribesmen inhabiting remote mountain areas. One tribe hijacked an oil company vehicle it thought belonged to a warring clan.    &quot;When they found it was ours, we got it back with two sheep as reparations,&quot; says Ray Hunt, the company's chief executive officer.    North Yemen, officially named the Yemen Arab Republic, has long been an embattled toe of land, with a strategic location at the southern end of the Red Sea that makes it a prize in superpower contests. The narrow Red Sea opening is increasingly important to the flow of American oil supplies. North Yemen is wedged against the Marxist-governed People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, better known as South Yemen, and stares across the water at Ethiopia's Moscow-backed regime.    North Yemen's 45-year-old president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, has played off East and West to gain all kinds of aid for his impoverished country. In 1979, the U.S. sent a package of Saudi-financed military supplies, ranging from F-5 fighter planes to M-60 tanks, to fend off attacks from South Yemen. Lately, however, the Soviets have provided the bulk of the country's weapons, including the SAM-7 missiles that bristle along its coast. America, distracted by the Persian Gulf war, has also cut back on civilian aid.    But Hunt's oil find may have tilted the balance toward the U.S. &quot;Since the discovery of oil, relations with the U.S. have begun to develop significantly,&quot; says President Saleh, who sees the oil as a stabilizing force in his turbulent country.    Until the overthrow of its almost feudal imam in 1962, Yemen was a closed society where the mud-walled capital's gates were locked at sunset. A bloody civil war followed, and the republican government that emerged has had to struggle to control isolated desert and mountain regions.    President Salah's two predecessors were assassinated within less than two years of each other, and he has survived numerous attempts on his own life. But in his nine years in office he has been able to extend government control and introduce a measure of democracy while improving education and communications.    The oil, which the government expects will earn between $600 million and $700 million a year, isn't comparable to finds elsewhere on the Arabian peninsula. But the scale of the basin Hunt has found hasn't been determined, and exploration continues.    &quot;We are at the beginning of the road, and we haven't put it into all minds that in such a very small quantity, oil is going to solve all our social problems,&quot; the president says. &quot;Our life is better now than it was before, without oil. Oil will add to what we are already striving for.&quot;    Once the domain of the Biblical queen of Sheba, Yemen's fertile lands provided a base for traders. Mocha coffee gets its name from the Yemeni port from which the beans were exported, and the famous blue of Chinese Ming vases is thought to have come from local cobalt.    These days, the trading picture is a lot bleaker, with this year's deficit estimated at $900 million. In 1985, North Yemen's nine million people had an estimated per-capita income of only $440.    The closely held Hunt company started looking for oil in Yemen almost by chance, when, over a beer, a Syrian exploration consultant mentioned an interesting aeromagnetic survey to a Hunt employee. The Texans who went to investigate felt at home. In West Texas, as in desert Yemen, Mr. Hunt notes, it's possible to grow up 30 miles from your nearest neighbor. &quot;And in West Texas if someone thinks you're a jerk they won't have anything to do with you, while if they respect you they'll do anything. I think there are a lot of parallels.&quot;    There are parallels, too, between the Hunt family and some of the clans of the tribal sheiks. Ray Hunt's father, the famous wildcatter H.L. Hunt, had three families almost simultaneously, and the feuds between the offspring are legendary. Nelson Bunker and William Herbert, from the first family, are Ray Hunt's half-brothers and their business interests are entirely separate.    The Texans did have some unusual problems in Yemen. When an oil rig worker broke a camel's tooth while trying to shoo it away with a wrench, the animal's irate owner demanded tooth-for-a-tooth reparations. The company convinced him to settle for a payment rather than a punch in the mouth.    Yemen's traditional life is already under pressure, even without the pace of change associated with oil. Ahmed Moharam, a 38-year-old Exxon Corp. administrator, remembers being sent from his mountain village when he was 11 because the only real schools were in Sanaa, the capital. He had to walk seven hours from his village just to reach a road.    Mr. Moharam, an expert in his country's rich archeology, adds that &quot;things that have been preserved for 2,000 years are being destroyed in 15 because of shovels and bulldozers.&quot;    But Abdul Karim al-Eryani, the foreign minister, says Yemen will never turn into a camel-to-Cadillac boomtown like other oil states because of the country's thousands of years of culture.    In other places, he says, &quot;Oil came up in the middle of the desert and everybody had to start a new life. That danger doesn't exist for the Yemen Arab Republic.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>