<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:A Sterling Example of a Lesson Not Learned---By Stephen Fay</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><TEXT>   It is not necessary to be a Marxist to believe that history repeats itself, whether as tragedy or farce. Any observer of British politics in 1976 is perfectly familiar with many of the scenes acted out in Washington over the past few weeks, and for anyone who wants to learn just how economies can be mismanaged, the sterling crisis of 1976 is an instructive tale.    It begins early in 1976 when Harold Wilson's Labor government had been in office for two years. The budget deficit had risen alarmingly, and had reached $12 billion. The balance of payments, meanwhile, was deteriorating. The pound had been valued at just over $2 throughout the winter, but was due for a fall unless the government cut public spending.    Spending cuts were still regarded as unnatural acts by Labor politicians, so the British Treasury's senior bureaucrat, Sir Douglas Wass, thought up a ploy that would make a virtue of a falling exchange rate. A devaluation of some 5% -- to $1.90 -- would make British goods more competitive abroad and reduce the balance-of-payments deficit. The scheme was to allow the value of the pound to fall without it being announced as policy. Devaluation was to be engineered covertly, by reducing interest rates. Denis Healey, the chancellor of the exchequer, acquiesced; this was, he thought, a particularly clever expedient.    The Treasury hypothesis was that dealers would sell in an orderly manner and the pound would fall gently. In the City, the Bank of England warned the Treasury that the foreign-exchange market was unstable and might not behave as civil servants and ministers thought it ought to. For his part, the governor of the bank, Lord Richardson, disliked the whole concept of manipulating the currency. But the Treasury persisted, and an interest rate cut was scheduled for March 5.    The best laid covert plans tend to go awry, however, and on the morning of March 4 information was relayed by commercial banks to the Bank of England's foreign-exchange dealing room that a number of larger orders for sterling were pushing its value up -- the reverse of the Treasury's plan. The Bank of England's dealer reacted automatically and sold sterling, intending to hold its rise in value.    The bank was out of luck, for as it was selling, the market price was brought down independently by a large sale of sterling by Nigeria. There was confusion over strategy between the bank and the Treasury, and, lacking any clear signal from the bank, foreign-exchange dealers concluded that official policy was to force the rate down. So it was, but the market had reached the correct conclusion before the Treasury intended it should. The pound fell.    The original strategy had called for a reduction of the interest rate on the following day, and the bank now foresaw that, coming on top of the fall on March 4, an interest-rate cut on March 5 would be taken by the market as proof that the government's new policy was indeed devaluation, and the market would panic. But since the cut was already rumored in the City, Mr. Healey argued that to cancel it would cause an even greater panic.    The next day the market noted the cut in the interest rate, and panicked. Sterling fell below $2 for the first time, and kept on falling. Within a week it was $1.90 (which would have pleased Treasury officials if it had stopped there) and went on down through the $1.80s. It was the Treasury's turn to panic. The Bank of England was told to move in to stop the fall at $1.85, and the attempt to do so -- by buying sterling in a falling market -- cost $1 billion. It was a waste of money, for by the beginning of June sterling stood at $1.71 and was on the brink of collapse.    Bruised, the Treasury set about making arrangements for the customary cure. A $5.3 billion standby loan was arranged with European central banks, the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve, with which sum the Bank of England intended to put a stop to speculation against the pound, once and for all. So it said.    There was only one small snag: William Simon and Edwin Yeo at the U.S. Treasury had managed to impose a condition. They insisted that the loan be repaid within six months, which was the length of time they proposed giving the Labor government (now under James Callaghan's leadership) to ease the pressure on sterling by changing its economic policies, and, in particular, doing what it had so scrupulously avoided so far -- cutting public spending.    Cuts were made in July, but these angered Labor parliamentarians without being substantial enough to appease the markets. When sterling began to fall again in September, the chancellor decided it was a waste to use the reserves any longer ($1.5 billion of the $5.3 billion had already been spent). The bank stopped intervening, and sterling went into further decline.    Such a policy of neglect could not be sustained for long. On Sept. 26 as the chancellor of the exchequer and the governor of the Bank of England were driving to Heathrow to catch a flight to the annual International Monetary Fund conference, the foreign-exchange market sent them a message: Sterling was marked down 4 1/2 cents. Mr. Healey finally acknowledged that the standby loan would have to be converted into a permanent loan from the IMF -- an idea he had resisted, since an IMF loan carried with it the condition of new financial disciplines imposed from abroad.    The negotiations that followed were traumatic for the Labor cabinet, its back-bench supporters, and the IMF's examiners. A majority of the cabinet, backed by the parliamentary party, originally insisted that cuts on the scale demanded by the IMF would lead to recession and unemployment. Allies were entrapped into taking positions. It took almost three months to make a deal in which the IMF loan was granted in exchange for a $3 billion cut by the government in public borrowing and a promise to limit domestic credit expansion. In the new year the credibility of sterling was miraculously restored and the mood of foreign-exchange markets shifted from depressive to manic.    Some lessons had been learned by the British during the grim year of '76 that clearly still have to be learned elsewhere -- that, for instance, markets cannot be successfully manipulated by covert actions to influence exchange rates; indeed, their fundamental volatility removes them from the control of one nation's central bank and government acting alone.    The story also tells us that richer nations abroad eventually tire of financing high levels of government spending at home, and that overseas critics sometimes must be cruel to be kind. (When James Baker feels hurt by Nigel Lawson's disapproval, he knows how Denis Healey felt when confronted by Edwin Yeo.)    Finally, we learn that politicians of every persuasion -- from the British Labor Party to the Republican administration in Washington -- will continue to seek to evade the consequences when it is perfectly clear that the game is up.    It is, perhaps, idle to ask whether history is repeating itself as tragedy or farce. It is more useful to recall that Hegel said: &quot;What experience and history teach is this -- that people and governments never learned anything from history, or acted on the principles deduced from it.&quot;    ---   Mr. Fay edits Business magazine in London. His book on the Bank of England, &quot;Portrait of an Old Lady,&quot; is due from Viking next year. </TEXT></DOC>