<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880926-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Companies Flock to New Jersey to Sue Insurers Over Pollution Cleanup Bills </HL><AUTHOR> Paul M. Barrett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> INS ENV </IN><TEXT>   When Westinghouse Electric Corp. wanted to resolve a major dispute with its insurers over who should pay for its pollution-cleanup efforts in 23 states, the company decided to sue the insurers all at once and all in one place. The place it chose was Union County, N.J.    Faced with similar pollution-liability headaches, other industry giants are taking battles with their insurers to New Jersey, too. In the fight over who will pay to clean up the nation's environment, the Garden State has become the place in which to sue.    The potential amounts at stake in such struggles are huge. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has estimated it will cost $100 billion just to clean up the worst of the nation's hazardous-waste dump sites. And some individual companies, with dozens of sites to clean up, may be facing liabilities exceeding $100 million. Naturally, they don't relish the idea of spending that kind of money, which is why so many of them are trying to pin financial responsibility on their insurers.    One reason they are attempting to do so in New Jersey turns on the state's own efforts to control pollution. It leads the nation in EPA-designated hazardous waste sites, with 110 -- more than 9% of the total. And in recent years, regulators in the state have filed an unusually large number of cleanup orders and lawsuits against alleged polluters. These companies, in turn, are filing suits against their insurers, hoping to resolve the question of who will be responsible for any eventual liabilities.    But equally important in generating new insurance-coverage litigation in New Jersey is the reputation of its state court judges. When it comes to interpreting disputed pollution-insurance contracts, say lawyers, these judges strongly favor the policyholder. As a result, many big companies are scrambling to get questions of coverage resolved in the state.    To bring a suit in New Jersey, policyholders must establish that they have a legally valid relationship to the state, such as the presence of a plant or a dump site there. Westinghouse, which is based in Pittsburgh, has nine sites in New Jersey; thus its suit against 144 of its insurers in which the company alleges they also are obligated to pay for cleaning up 72 additional sites nationwide. Other companies filing similar multistate suits in New Jersey include Allied-Signal Inc., RCA Corp., BOC Group Inc. and SCM Corp.    Of course, lawyers for the insurers in these cases have nothing good to say about the rush to litigate in New Jersey. It's &quot;the most blatant display of lawyers shopping for a favorable forum that I've ever seen,&quot; says Stewart Dalzell, an attorney for Kemper Corp., Long Grove, Ill., an insurer currently battling a number of companies in New Jersey courts.    But policyholders' lawyers say there's nothing improper in what they are doing. &quot;It's part of our business to seek the best forum for our clients,&quot; says Matthew P. Boylan, one of the attorneys representing Westinghouse in its suit.    New Jersey's reputation is based on a series of key decisions in which its courts have interpreted contested insurance-contract provisions to favor policyholders. (The state's Supreme Court hasn't ruled directly on the lower courts' findings but is expected to do so in the next few years.)    One of these provisions is the so-called pollution exclusion. Commercial-liability policies typically exclude coverage for damage caused by pollution, with one crucial exception. They do cover the damage if it is &quot;sudden and accidental.&quot;    Unlike some state courts, those in New Jersey haven't limited their interpretation of the &quot;sudden and accidental&quot; language to its temporal meaning. Instead, they have broadened it to include pollution that is &quot;neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of the insured.&quot; Thus, insurers can be held responsible for cleanup efforts involving pollution that took place over many years, even decades.    Another provision that New Jersey's courts have read to favor policyholders is the so-called owned-property exclusion, which bars coverage for pollution damage to &quot;property owned or occupied by the insured.&quot; Despite that language, New Jersey's judges have consistently held that insurers must pay up if pollution on a policyholder's property even threatens to damage the property of others.    Policyholders insist that regardless of the disputed exclusions, their insurance contracts were designed to cover most pollution damages. But according to lawyers and legal scholars, New Jersey's judges have ruled in favor of alleged polluters because they fear if the companies alone are forced to foot the cleanup bills, many of them will collapse under the burden -- and the jobs won't get done. The result has been &quot;judge-made insurance&quot; created &quot;in the face of contrary policy language,&quot; wrote Kenneth S. Abraham, a law professor at the University of Virginia, in a recent issue of the Columbia Law Review.    An extreme example of this arose last year when Summit Associates Inc., a New Jersey real-estate developer, sued its insurer for the $439,000 it had paid to clean up hazardous substances discovered on property it owns in Edison Township, N.J.; the waste had been buried there by a previous owner. In his opinion, Joseph E. Sadofski, a Superior Court judge in Middlesex Co., N.J., set aside the owned-property exclusion because &quot;the health, safety and welfare of the people of this state must outweigh the express provisions of the insurance policy in issue.&quot;    An appellate panel subsequently scolded the judge for ignoring the contract language. Still, it returned the case to the trial court, suggesting other grounds on which the owned-property exclusion could be avoided.    As a result of such decisions, insurers are fighting to keep cases from being heard in New Jersey. Some insurance companies appear to be doing a little forum shopping of their own. Last January, for example, Travelers Corp., a Hartford, Conn., insurance company, sued Allied-Signal, a Morristown, N.J., aerospace and automotive-products maker, in federal court in Baltimore, where judges are generally thought to favor insurers. At issue are questions concerning the cleanup of more than 85 pollution sites in 24 states.    (Allied-Signal didn't take this lightly, however. Shortly after Travelers sued, Allied-Signal filed its own suit, on the same issues and against its insurers. The venue? New Jersey. It hasn't been determined yet which of the suits will move forward.)    Another strategy is to challenge the propriety of even having these kinds of suits heard in New Jersey. In the Westinghouse case, for example, the insurers are arguing, among other things, that New Jersey shouldn't be forced to bear the administrative burden of deciding on matters of coverage involving sites outside the state. A trial court has found in favor of the insurers, but Westinghouse is appealing the decision, and the fight is far from over. </TEXT></DOC>