<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871228-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Dominant Socialism of Nordic RegionShifts a Bit as Public Disaffection Grows---By Marcus W. BrauchliStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> MALMOE, Sweden  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Agneta Gandiaga runs a tightkindergarten. Her uniformed charges help prepare their ownmeals, learn manners and pray each morning beside an altar.   &quot;There is a need for old-fashioned values in children,&quot; says Ms. Gandiaga, a 39-year-old former nurse's aide. Parents in this port city seem to agree. They have signed up more than 100 toddlers on a waiting list for 24 spots at the private kindergarten. &quot;I could easily open five more schools like this tomorrow,&quot; she says.    What is preventing her? &quot;The socialists,&quot; Ms. Gandiaga says. She blames Sweden's ruling Social Democratic Party for trying to block private-sector alternatives to the country's social-welfare system. &quot;They think they always know what is best and don't want me to continue,&quot; Ms. Gandiaga says. &quot;But we will show them there is more than one way.&quot;    Ms. Gandiaga's resentment isn't about to unravel Sweden's monolithic welfare state. But it reflects a growing public dissatisfaction with the socialism that has dominated life in the Nordic region for most of this century.    The shift in attitudes is by no means an ideological revolution. Socialism remains the prevalent political force in the four big Nordic countries -- Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland. High taxes and a cradle-to-grave welfare state still characterize life for the nearly 22 million people in this sparsely populated region. But while a voter revolt is unlikely, a growing number of critics argue that the Nordic welfare state has become a bureaucratic leviathan and must be reined in. Indeed, analysts blame a dearth of new ideas for large-scale defections from some of the region's socialist parties.    &quot;There is a feeling of public unease, that things could be done better,&quot; concedes Svend Auken, the leader of Denmark's Social Democratic Party.    Hoping to contain their losses, some socialists have adopted decidedly unsocialist-sounding themes. Here is a look at some important trends in each of the four countries:    SWEDEN   In many of Sweden's 284 municipalities, private groups or individuals have taken up responsibility for running social services that once were the exclusive domain of local government. Officially, the ruling Social Democratic Party opposes the idea. But even some socialist communities are allowing private-sector contractors to take over services that they can provide more cheaply. One reason: The Social Democratic government wants to simplify the country's notoriously burdensome tax structure, and savings in expenditures will make that task easier.    Hewing to their ideological roots, the Social Democrats have laid out one firm restriction on private alternatives: Nobody should profit by providing essential services like health or geriatric care.    But several notable failures by the public sector may have accelerated the willingness of Swedes to accept the notion of unfettered private-sector contractors. &quot;All foreigners know about the two main tasks for the public sector in Sweden: to find foreign submarines and to find the late Prime Minister Olaf Palme's murderer,&quot; says Lars Leijonborg of the Swedish Employers' Federation. He was referring to the suspected intrusion of Soviet submarines and frogmen into Swedish waters in 1984 and to the unsolved slaying of Mr. Palme in 1986.    NORWAY   Norway's socialist Labor Party, which for decades built up state involvement in industries such as electricity, oil, aluminum and railroads, has moved away from that strategy. This year, a minority Labor government actually shut down a heavily indebted, loss-making state concern, Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk AS.    The Labor Party, which is now 100 years old, is willing to experiment with alternatives -- including some private-sector social services -- because of concerns that collectivism is outdated. &quot;We are constantly trying to change,&quot; says Einar Foerde, the Labor Party's parliamentary leader.    The country's strong economy, driven by an oil boom over the past decade, has made changing easier. Shutting Kongsberg meant no increase in unemployment, simply a shift in employers for some workers. But analysts say it nevertheless was a sign of the times.    Taking its lead from the Labor government, Norway's parliament, the Storting, is trying to reduce handouts to state industries. &quot;This society has to take a chance on decentralization,&quot; Mr. Foerde says. &quot;Allowing the market to work is an answer to problems of bureaucracy and rationalization.&quot;    DENMARK   Reduced state involvement in private industry is stirring debate in Denmark, too. But here it isn't the socialists who are breaking ground but a governing center-right coalition. In two consecutive elections, the most recent in September, the coalition has used the promise of reduced government to defeat Denmark's Social Democrats.    Unlike Sweden and Norway, Denmark's economy is growing slowly and suffers from unemployment. Most estimates put the jobless rate at 8.5% for 1987 and ascribe it to high wages and lack of industrial competitiveness. The government blames the socialists for those conditions.    In the September elections, the Social Democrats campaigned on a platform of trimming unemployment by increasing government spending. By contrast, the center-right coalition led by Prime Minister Poul Schlueter promised to cut business taxes to spur industry. The Social Democrats lost, and their continued absence from government may make the center-right coalition's tax cuts possible.    FINLAND   In this country along the Soviet Union's northwestern border, a local detente is bringing a wave of change that includes partial privatization of state industries, talk of tax reductions and a facelift to the socialist model.    The changes result from deadlocked elections in March. President Mauno Koivisto, who dropped his Social Democratic affiliation when he took non-partisan office nearly six years ago, broke the deadlock by appointing a coalition government of political rivals, the Social Democrats and the conservative Kokoomus Party.    The move took politicians of both sides by surprise. But the resulting government, led by conservative Prime Minister Harri Holkeri, has found itself able to carry out changes that a single-faction government couldn't even consider with a divided parliament. &quot;This is the only type of government that can introduce real reforms,&quot; says Mr. Holkeri. </TEXT></DOC>