<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870423-0024 </DOCNO><HL> Capital Guidelines Could Weaken Banks---By Lowell L. Bryan</HL><DD> 04/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Current capital requirements for American banks need changing -- but so does the plan put forward by U.S. regulators and the Bank of England for doing so. The proposed guidelines address the obligation that banks now have to retain the same capital backing for all assets, be they vault cash or loans to insolvent countries or corporations. Some shifts toward risk-adjusted capital seem likely to be adopted. More careful thought could help to see that they don't weaken a banking system that is already under stress.    That, in fact, is what they will do, because bankers view capital much differently than regulators do. While regulators view capital as a buffer to absorb credit losses, banks see it as a very expensive source of funds. In today's banking environment, where stock prices determine who will acquire and who will be acquired, bank managers understandably want to achieve and maintain a healthy stock price. Indeed, stock price heavily influences the compensation of most top bank managers. The strong correlation between stock price and return on equity motivates most bank managers, therefore, to achieve high returns on their equity.    Today most bank managers decide what loans to make based on the margins available and their assessment of the specific risks being taken. Capital requirements are not a factor because they don't vary by asset class. But the proposed guidelines, which specify different levels of capital requirements for different risk assets and off-balance sheet commitments, will introduce a new dimension to decisions about loans.    Some types of risks with low capital requirements will be attractive and bankers will gravitate toward them. Other risks will seem less attractive. Unfortunately, some of the specific risk weightings being proposed will encourage unwise risk taking.    There are three serious problems as a result:    --Banks will continue to take excessive credit and interest-rate risk. Under the proposal (as under the current system) all loans are to have the same capital requirements whether the borrower is a triple-A company or a potential bankrupt. As a result, high-quality, floating-rate loans have narrow spreads and low returns on required equity and are already moving away from banks and toward less expensive, more efficient forms of financing. Because the capital requirements for both high- and low-risk loans will be the same, banks will continue to be motivated to book high credit-risk loans (e.g., acquisition debt, leveraged-buyout finance) or high interest-rate-risk loans (e.g., fixed rate mortgages) to obtain spreads sufficient to generate satisfactory return on equity.    What is particularly worrisome is that it is the weakest U.S. banks, with the poorest management, that are most likely to trade off risk in favor of higher returns. The worst 12% of the U.S. commercial banks (as measured by charge offs as a percentage of assets) already account for 44% of the nation's charge offs. This concentration is not just a regional problem. For example, in the farm-belt states of the West North Central region, the part of the country with the highest charge-off rates, the best 70% of the banks have average charge offs of less than one-half percent of loans while the worst are charging off at a rate of 7% of loans. Similar patterns hold true throughout the nation.    Thus, the new proposal fails to address the biggest single area in which risks among banks are the most varied, that is, within their loan portfolios.    --Banks will be motivated to take on more interest-rate risk in government-related securities. Under the proposed guidelines, government borrowings (e.g., Treasury and gilt notes and bonds, agency paper, and municipal debt) are to have far lower capital requirements than are loans to private borrowers. To put this in perspective, a general-obligation bond issued by a small, nearly insolvent, town government in Texas will have half the capital requirements of a loan to a triple-A corporation such as General Electric.    Banks thus will be encouraged to put their money in high-yielding government instruments. Indeed, many banks will be tempted to take major interest-rate bets by investing in medium- to long-term federal and municipal government debt or guaranteed mortgages and playing the yield curve. For example, a $100 government 20-year bond would require only about $1.50 of capital, which would enable a bank to earn an incremental pre-tax return on equity of more than 100%, assuming today's yield curve and interest-rate levels. If interest rates rise rapidly, as they have been doing recently, the potential losses from such rate betting are enormous.    One has only to look at the history of the U.S. thrift industry to understand how devastating interest-rate mismatches can be. Unless the underlying purpose of the regulation is to help finance the government deficit, this proposed bias for long-term, fixed-rate government debt violates common sense. The proposal says that it is the intention of the U.S. authorities and the Bank of England to develop a more direct measure for interest-rate risk (as well as a measure for foreign-exchange risk) and to develop ways of treating it. Without such measures, however, the potential for motivating unsound behavior is large.    --Banks will be encouraged to keep all risks on their own balance sheets rather than taking advantage of new opportunities to spread risks. The new guidelines constrain banks from being able to securitize many types of loans the way a General Motors Acceptance Corp. can do now. When GMAC securitizes a loan, it typically guarantees to investors only the first 5% loss, which is some multiple of the expected real loss. But a GMAC or a GE Credit does not have to allocate any of its capital, using generally accepted accounting principles, to support that guarantee. It may decide to hold a reserve against the expected real loss (about 1%) based upon many years of reliable statistics.    By contrast, the new proposal requires banks that make similar partial guarantees to meet full regulatory capital requirements (5.5%). What this means is that a bank would have to supply more capital than its actual exposure to loss. This regulation will motivate banks either to guarantee all of a loan or, more likely, to retain the loan and the related credit and interest-rate exposure on their own books rather than securitize it.    The proposed requirements also discourage other types of off-balance-sheet risk spreading. Under an extension of the proposal released in March, the capital guidelines for interest-rate swaps (i.e., the exchange of interest-payment flows between two parties) may discourage some banks from using swaps to neutralize their exposure to interest-rate risk (e.g., exchanging fixed-rate risk for floating-rate risk).    Some of these problems could be alleviated by adjustments to the proposed weightings. For example, loans to borrowers of premium investment-grade quality (i.e., rated double-A or above) could have a 50% weighting, the broad loan portfolio could have a 100% weighting (i.e., about $5.50 of capital per $100 of loans), and any classified loans could have a 200% weighting.    However, the regulators' focus on risk-adjusted capital misses the point. Most U.S. banks are overcapitalized relative to the risks to which they are exposed.    The actual charge offs on the median bank's portfolio, even at today's high levels, is only about 0.37% a year. Yet the average bank, to keep regulators happy, maintains 6.33% of its loan portfolio in equity (even more than the legal requirement) plus a loan-loss reserve of 0.94%. This means that the capital requirements are far too high for the actual credit risks in the portfolios of the weakest banks. Strong and weak banks come in all sizes and are found in all regions. Many of the banks with the very best charge-off records as a percentage of assets are some of the smallest banks in the nation, and at least 70% of the banks in even the most troubled regions are quite strong.    The capital of the strongest banks is, of course, not available to absorb the losses from the weakest banks. Therefore, while there may be far too much capital in the banking system as a whole, there may be far too little to protect the FDIC from experiencing catastrophic losses in a severe, nationwide recession. Simply requiring all banks to raise more capital will not help. The problems are with specific institutions, not with the whole industry.    If already overcapitalized banks are forced to maintain high levels of capital, or indeed to raise new capital, they will continue to be uncompetitive in their pricing of high-quality assets. High-quality borrowers will continue to move away from banks and toward securities.    Capital guidelines are an indirect way to influence risk taking. More direct action needs to be taken against weak institutions that take excessive credit, interest, or off-balance-sheet risk. For example, &quot;stop-lending&quot; powers could be a powerful tool to penalize banks that begin to demonstrate rapidly deteriorating loan portfolios. Similarly, the regulators could require strong risk-control systems to be in effect before allowing banks to participate in certain types of off-balance-sheet risk taking (e.g., making markets in interest-rate or currency swaps). As long as the public is underwriting the risks in the industry through FDIC insurance, sound regulation in the banking industry is, of course, needed. But this regulation should focus much more on the institutions that have problems, not on the entire industry.    ---   Mr. Bryan, a director of McKinsey andamp; Co., is a consultant to several financial-service institutions. </TEXT></DOC>