<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880128-0031 </DOCNO><HL> Money Marketers: Japan's Banks Become Ever-Bigger Lenders To American Business --- They Win Clients by Joining U.S. Regionals in Deals And Focusing on Detail --- First, a Dale Carnegie Course </HL><AUTHOR> Michael R. Sesit (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><TEXT>   The chief financial officer of Gulf States Paper Corp. recalls the day a couple of years ago when someone suggested he try a lender called Industrial Bank of Japan. &quot;I'd never heard of IBJ,&quot; says the executive, James O'Brien. &quot;My first question was: Do they lend in dollars?&quot;    The answer was yes. And five months later, the Tuscaloosa, Ala., company borrowed $15 million from IBJ. &quot;They sent down two Japanese guys from the New York office and analyzed the numbers to death,&quot; Mr. O'Brien says. In 25 years, the firm's main New York bank &quot;never learned our business like the Japanese did. The joke around here was if we didn't understand something in our financial statements, we'd just ask the Japanese to explain it.&quot;    Japan is on the march again, this time in American banking. The Tokyo banks aren't trying anything fancy in the U.S.; they rarely indulge in &quot;creative finance&quot; or other razzmatazz. But by offering standard commerical-banking services -- loans, letters of credit, a little leasing -- and usually executing them with precision, they are making big inroads.    Nine California banks now are Japanese-owned, and another one soon may be; an unidentified Japanese bank is negotiating a possible purchase of Union Bank in Los Angeles from Britain's Standard Chartered Bank. In Tampa, Fla., Japanese banks have just helped finance the buy-out of Jim Walter Corp.    By the middle of last year, in fact, Japanese banks accounted for 9% of U.S. banking assets, the Federal Reserve says. That's more than double their share at the beginning of the decade. Their loans and other assets in this country added up to $270 billion at midyear. While part of this is captive business with Japanese companies here, the sum nonetheless is almost as much as the total of J.P. Morgan's and Citicorp's assets.    Nobuya Hagura can't help remarking on the change. Twenty years ago, as a Japanese bank representative in the U.S., he tried to join the Wall Street Club atop Chase Manhattan Plaza in New York. U.S. bankers and businessmen who were members wouldn't recommend him, he says. Now he is the president of Dai-Ichi Kangyo, a lender to companies as American as Coca-Cola and General Motors -- and the largest bank in the world.    &quot;Japanese banks have a market-share-driven strategy world-wide, and it works,&quot; says Ralph Ziegler, a Union Bank of Switzerland first vice president in Tokyo. &quot;I have absolutely no doubt that in the battle for global supremacy the Japanese are going to make it.&quot;    They have already gained a lot of ground. Eight of the 10 banks with the largest assets (in dollars) now are Japanese, though this is partly because of the strong yen. And the Japanese banks get more leverage from their vast resources than most global rivals, because Tokyo doesn't require as high a ratio of capital to assets as the U.S. and many other countries do.    That could change. Central banks have tentatively agreed to a uniform ratio for major industrial countries. For now, though, it seems to be full speed ahead.    It is in America, anyway. To take the case of Atlanta, seven Japanese banks have set up offices in the city since 1983, joining a Bank of Tokyo operation opened in 1977. (A few Japanese banking operations arrived in the U.S. many years earlier to service Japanese business here.)    Learning U.S. ways hasn't always been easy. When Japanese banks first tried the U.S. market, says Peter Pawlak, a Sanwa Bank vice president in Atlanta, they would do things like present a borrower with &quot;a five-pound stack of paper&quot; to read, documents laboriously translated from Japanese. Not surprisingly, customers balked. But one strength of the Japanese is flexibility, and they quickly whittled down their paper work.    That didn't get them over the personal-relations hurdles, though. &quot;Very often, a company in the South wants to talk to a Southerner or an American,&quot; observes Gregory Brusberg, a senior vice president of Citizens andamp; Southern National Bank in Atlanta. &quot;Very often here, an initial question is: 'Where'd you go to school?'&quot;    Sumitomo Bank tried to prepare Masao Harada to work in the U.S. by sending him to a Dale Carnegie course in Osaka. There, among other exercises, he had to play the role of a carnival barker and practice shouting &quot;Hurry, hurry, hurry -- come to the show.&quot; He did it, but when he first got to America, he still shrank from answering the phone.    Many Japanese banks have hired local bankers to call on potential customers, but that can be overdone too. The first U.S. calling officer Fuji Bank sent to Georgia-Pacific acted &quot;like he just fell off a turnip truck,&quot; says Danny Huff, the director of corporate finance at Georgia-Pacific Corp. &quot;He tried to outdo the most good ol' boy I've ever seen. He didn't last long.&quot;    The newcomers have had better luck when they have tapped into their Japanese business connections. IBJ, for instance, introduced a Japanese steel company, Yamato Kogyo Co., to a U.S. steelmaker, Nucor Corp. of Charlotte, N.C. Then it worked patiently for two years to help them agree on a joint venture. Now they are building a $200 million plant in Arkansas, and at some point IBJ figures to get some lending business out of the deal.    The Japanese banks also link up with U.S. local and regional institutions. Tokyo's banks, which don't offer deposit, checking or other personal services in most cities, pose less of a threat to the regionals than to U.S. money-center banks and to other foreign banks in the U.S. They willingly introduce Japanese companies operating in the U.S. to regional American banks, and, in return, regionals increasingly invite Japanese banks to participate in large loans they arrange.    To the regionals, it is safer this way. &quot;Previously, we had to go up to New York and bring in the money-center banks,&quot; says Mr. Brusberg of Citizens andamp; Southern. &quot;That was always dangerous, because they could go after all your business.&quot;    The mood could change if Japanese banks tried to do more business with smaller U.S. companies or if they took the lead role in syndicated loans to big corporations. &quot;We would be a direct competitor of theirs if they tried to do a direct deal with Coca-Cola,&quot; says Frederic Kress, a senior vice president of a SunTrust Banks' Atlanta unit. In one case, IBJ, wary of starting a turf battle with U.S. banks, politely turned down a chance to bid on a floating-rate credit for Gulf States Paper.    &quot;Because of this fast growth, maybe we should be very courteous,&quot; says Takeo Otsubo, a senior vice president of an IBJ unit in New York. &quot;In Tokyo, we want foreigners to respect Japanese customs. We should expand our business here and take advantage of opportunities, but we shouldn't strut and spread money.&quot;    Some U.S. bankers doubt the Japanese banks have the right stuff anyway -- meaning the ingenuity in deal-making that is the hallmark of American finance. The Tokyo banks operate in a compartmentalized system where each type of financial institution -- trust bank, commercial bank, long-term credit bank or securities firm -- has been protected from encroachment by another. &quot;They've been buying market share; that's not creativity,&quot; says a senior U.S. banker.    Lately, though, Japanese domestic banking has been growing more competitive. Gradual deregulation is eroding the comforts of administered market share, interest-rate ceilings on deposits, and limited competition from foreigners. Partly for this reason, Moody's Investors Service recently lowered six Japanese banks' credit ratings. Most Japanese banks still have higher ratings than their U.S. money-center counterparts, however.    Another concern for Japanese banks is how much of their capital is tied up in the Tokyo stock market. A confidential Bank of England study says that Japanese banks' stockholdings, at current prices, are equal to about one-third of all their assets -- compared with none for U.S. banks and only 2.5% for West Germany's. &quot;That means the Japanese banking system is tremendously vulnerable to a market crash,&quot; a senior Western central banker warns.    Japanese banks also will lose their ability to get greater leverage from their capital once industrial nations phase in uniform capital-to-asset requirements that they have been negotiating. Many Japanese banks may have to build up their capital, rethink the pell-mell expansion of their lending and put new emphasis on profit margins.    Their margins now are quite low. Japanese banks' return on assets was only one-quarter that of U.S. banks in 1986 and their return on equity just 61% as high, according to IBCA Banking Analysis Ltd. in London. Surging global loan volume has made up for this until now, but things would look different if Japanese banks lost their advantage in leveraging capital. The next few years &quot;will be a turning point,&quot; says Sumitomo's Mr. Harada. &quot;We won't be able to be as aggressive as we used to be.&quot;    Regardless, Tokyo's banks will remain formidable competitors. There is plenty of money around, what with Japan's trade surplus and high savings rate. Exposure to developing countries is only about $40 billion, less than half that of U.S. banks. Domestic loan problems are modest, despite some losses in shipping and the capital-goods industry.    In addition, six of the big banks are figured to hold at least three trillion yen ($23.6 billion) apiece in so-called hidden assets, mostly stocks they bought many years ago that are still carried on the books at the original price.    And then there are the intangibles, the Japanese banks' reputation for persistence, attention to detail and crisp execution. Georgia-Pacific's Mr. Huff, who deals with Bank of Tokyo, says it has &quot;some of the best bankers we've ever dealt with.&quot; When his company's $700 million lines of credit are renegotiated, he adds, Japanese and other foreign banks may gain at the expense of U.S. money-center rivals.    As for creativity in financing, Japanese bankers argue that they can hire the foreign talent they need and copy innovative U.S. techniques.    &quot;We were latecomers,&quot; says Yoh Kurosawa, IBJ's deputy president in Tokyo. &quot;But we gradually are catching up, as we caught up in electronics and the car industry. We started from kindergarten, and now we have graduated from business school.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>