<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870325-0005 </DOCNO><HL> Minority Entrepreneurs VenturingInto Broader Range of Businesses---By Linda M. WatkinsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   When Ernest Bates Jr. was growing up, his father ran a small construction firm and a taxi service in Peekskill, N.Y.    Like his father, the younger Mr. Bates went into business. But, while his father quit school after third grade to work, the son went to medical school. In 1978, Dr. Bates started a San Francisco company that supplies diagnostic imaging equipment to hospitals. Today the 50-year-old black neurosurgeon is chairman and chief executive officer of publicly held American Shared Hospital Services, which last year had sales of $7.5 million.    The different paths of these two generations of black businessmen reflect the changing look of minority entrepreneurs. Once concentrated mostly in mom-and-pop businesses like groceries, barber shops and cleaners, more minority entrepreneurs are moving into fields like electronics and health care, advertising and real-estate development, insurance and computer software. Stronger educational credentials, greater access to financing, government assistance and a growing support network among minority-owned businesses have fueled the change.    &quot;These entrepreneurs are tremendously more sophisticated now than they were&quot; a decade ago, says Herbert Wilkins, president of Syndicated Communications Inc., a venture-capital firm that funds minority-owned businesses. &quot;There may have been people before who had the desire, but not the experience. That's changed a lot.&quot;    Though no one has recent statistics showing the mix of minority-owned businesses, signs of their expanded horizons abound. For instance, the Latin American Manufacturers Association, whose members are U.S. companies owned by Hispanics, says 22% of its 500 members in 1986 were in computer-related businesses, up from 10% of 275 members in 1982.    The news, of course, isn't all good. Some minority entrepreneurs say discrimination remains a problem. Randy Crump, a 31-year-old black businessman who in 1984 founded Aptech Inc., a robotics and industrial controls company based in Milwaukee, Wis., recalls having trouble getting a rural Wisconsin company to answer his requests to make a presentation. He was told by an acquaintance there that because black-owned firms were new to the field, the potential customer doubted his ability. After six months, the acquaintance -- who is white -- helped set up a meeting, and Mr. Crump got a $50,000 order.    &quot;Some people are still shocked to see what we do,&quot; says Mr. Crump, whose company had 1986 sales of $1.2 million. &quot;We still have to go an extra step to prove to people that we're capable.&quot;    In fact, it's such corporate discrimination that often spurs minority people to start their own businesses. Many say they can rise into middle management at large companies, but not into top jobs. &quot;I think any (minority person) is going to be stifled on a white career ladder,&quot; says Caroline Jones, who worked for three big advertising agencies -- J. Walter Thompson Co. as a copywriter, Kenyon andamp; Eckhardt as a senior copywriter and BBDO International Inc. as a vice president -- before co-founding Mingo-Jones Advertising Inc. in 1977 and, more recently, starting another agency, Creative Resources Management.    At the same time, though, years of corporate work give some minority entrepreneurs experience and connections that help them succeed on their own. After being laid off from purchasing jobs at both Rockwell International and Aluminum Co. of America, Alexander Nichols Jr. started his own company in 1983. Alcoa helped him get financing for the company, Computer Friend Inc. -- which sells personal computers -- and accounted for about half of its $500,000 in 1986 sales.    Better business and educational credentials also have made financing easier to obtain. &quot;In my father's time, it was almost impossible to raise money (since) people weren't loaning to blacks,&quot; says Mr. Bates of American Shared Hospital Services. &quot;No one believed we could do more than run shoeshine stands.&quot;    Minority business people today also have greater sources of funding to tap. Assets of minority-owned banks last year totaled $4.1 billion, more than triple the 1976 amount -- a growth rate 40% higher than the rate of all banks.    Thomas Welch started a commercial real-estate development company in Boston in 1983 with $400,000 in personal savings. But when he approached white-owned banks for loans shortly after starting his business, Thomas Welch andamp; Associates, he says he was turned down because most of his projects were in minority communities they considered &quot;down and out.&quot;    When Mr. Welch had cash-flow problems 18 months after start-up, he turned to the city's only black-owned bank, Boston Bank of Commerce, which was started in 1983. It loaned him $150,000, allowing him to expand into projects that now include a Miami apartment building and New York City hotel and condominium projects.    Minority enterprise small-business investment companies, or Mesbics, are another source of funds. Licensed by the Small Business Administration and eligible for SBA matching funds, Mesbics invested in 1,658 companies in 1986, up from 431 in 1980.    Mesbic financing helped Henry Mendoza, 41, get into the hazardous-waste and environmental-cleanup businesses. In 1983, Mr. Mendoza paid $57,000 in notes for a 66% stake in a financially troubled hazardous-waste transportation company in Riverdale, Ill. Soon afterward, the Neighborhood Fund, a Chicago Mesbic, invested $50,000 for warrants for 10% of the company. That helped Mr. Mendoza get a $500,000 bank loan backed by the SBA.    Last June, he sold his stake in the transportation company for $200,000 in notes and started Maecorp Inc., a Homewood, Ill., company that analyzes and cleans up toxic-waste sites. Maecorp received $1.7 million from loans and the sale of debentures from a consortium of six Mesbics, and it recently won a $48 million federal contract to assess and clean up toxic-waste sites in six states.    &quot;We probably would not have gotten the contract if it weren't for the Mesbic financing,&quot; Mr. Mendoza says, because the company wouldn't have had the money to expand its staff and operations.    Minority entrepreneurs also have been helped by government contracting programs. Since 1968, an SBA &quot;set-aside&quot; program has allowed minority-owned businesses to obtain federal contracts without competitive bidding. According to the Minority Business Development Agency, which counsels minority-owned companies, the value of federal contracts awarded to minority-owned companies rose to $8.65 billion in fiscal 1986 from $3.1 billion in fiscal 1980. The large contract Mr. Mendoza's company won was awarded under the set-aside program.    Some minority entrepreneurs, though, say they don't have the Reagan administration's support. They note that the administration's proposed fiscal 1988 budget would reduce the staff of the Minority Business Development Agency and merge it into the SBA.    Still, they say, the movement of minority entrepreneurs into new fields should continue. For one thing, as the nucleus of minority-owned firms grows, it creates a network that helps other minority-owned companies start and prosper.    Sunset Specialties andamp; Promotions Inc. does about 20% of its purchasing from other black-owned firms, up from just 4% when it started in 1983. Linda Garrett, executive vice president of the Washington, D.C., specialty advertising firm, says she has made it a point to learn who does what in the black business community. &quot;Other minority groups that have been successful in this country, such as Jews and Asians, have started from some sort of basis of supporting their own,&quot; Ms. Garrett says.    Sunset's main insurer is D.H. Lloyd andamp; Associates, a black-owned firm in Washington that, in turn, does its printing at Sunset. D.H. Lloyd seeks out minority suppliers, even if they may be more expensive. Denise Lloyd, president, says, &quot;As a minority person, I think we have a responsibility to other blacks and Hispanics.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>