<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880908-0148 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Opera: Valhalla Gets Nuked in Acrobatic New-Age 'Ring' </HL><AUTHOR> Manuela Hoelterhoff </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Bayreuth, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If the summer Olympics still have some openings, there are a few opera singers here at the Festspielhaus who probably could qualify for the hammer throw or the clean and jerk. Bayreuth's new &quot;Ring&quot; cycle by East German director Harry Kupfer has its shortcomings, but inertia isn't among them. Brunnhilde carts Sieglinde on her back as if she were just a dwarfish little Nibelung and not another nobly built soprano. Valkyries tumble and climb like pre-pubescent Romanians.    This has to be the most acrobatic &quot;Ring&quot; since Richard Wagner first presented his tetralogy (&quot;Das Rheingold,&quot; &quot;Die Walkure,&quot; &quot;Siegfried&quot; and &quot;Gotterdammerung&quot;) at the Festspielhaus with singers who sprouted roots and blossoms as they intoned the master's heroic lines. Back then in 1876, Wagner nearly went bankrupt trying to fill up his new theater, and a good many who did attend, among them Tchaikovsky, left word of the boredom they barely conquered listening to this gigantic parable of love, lust, power and greed dovetailed over decades out of quaint Nordic myths and some 200 leitmotives.    How times have changed. This summer, the Festspielhaus had 350,000 requests for the 60,000 available seats to the festival, which is devoted exclusively to Wagner's music. Hours before curtain time, emptyhanded pilgrims gather at the doors to the shrine. They would wash your feet with their hair and tears, Kundry-style, if you would just part with your ticket and take yourself to a beer hall, where the seats are more comfortable than in the Festspielhaus anyhow. Seasoned regulars bring foam cushions.    But why complain. The gods of Valhalla aren't resting more comfortably on stage. They have no furniture at all. In Mr. Kupfer's &quot;Ring,&quot; a nuclear war has melted most of the world and made shopping difficult. As Wotan and his family wait to move into Valhalla, they sit on transparent, empty suitcases that probably symbolize empty lives, this being a message production. Musty Wagnerians who love old-fashioned sets with twiggy forests and fairy-tale dragons probably found their seats getting more uncomfortable by the millisecond as the Rhinemaidens started combing green slime out of their hair.    Mr. Kupfer's faith in our ecological future would appear to be dim. His Rhinemaidens swim in bomb craters and green waters all aglow with radioactivity. Things are not much better above either. Pollution is so heavy, nuclear winter so chilly, Brunnhilde beams her song to the warming sun into what most people would consider an eclipse (or a slightly worse than average summer day in nippy Bayreuth).    It's a gloomy Weltanschauung, all right, but at least the bad news is delivered with a sense of humor you don't often find in Wagnerian directors. Light touches illuminate the Stygian night and personalize Wagner's often remote and long-winded bunch of characters. The gods who take their suitcases into &quot;Rheingold&quot; are an amusingly tipsy, sleazy-looking band dressed in raincoats, with Fricka sporting one of those turbans ladies pull on when there is no time for a rinse and set.    Below ground, the Nibelung Mime scurries through a decontamination unit bullying goggled, rodentlike, little mutants who peek out from between the pipes ever so often to squeal in terror.    Modernizing a myth has its challenges and dangers, but in such scenes Mr. Kupfer and his set designer, Hans Schavernoch, have succeeded in finding visually engaging equivalents to the time-worn images of yore. Quite jolly, for instance, is the John Portman-type elevator that takes the gods up to Valhalla with much waving and doffing of hats.    I was sorry to see them go and didn't miss the traditional rainbow bridge for a minute. It isn't often that time flies in a Wagner opera. But so it did, with Gunther von Kannen sweating up his nightclub clothes as Alberich and Graham Clark spinning furiously around the stage as Loge, Wotan's chief counsel. The loutish lord himself is sung by John Tomlinson with a penetrating baritone and a wild red wig. In a goofy touch that offended highminded Wagnerians, his illegitimate kids have hair just like dad's.    We meet them all in &quot;Walkure,&quot; where tenor Peter Hofmann -- known more for his golden locks than his golden voice -- is virtually unrecognizable in Siegmund's carrot-tinted punkish do. He gives a surprising good performance. That death-rattle tremolo seems better controlled and he extracts a little gasp out of the catatonically silent audience by dropping down several feet through the roof into Hunding and Sieglinde's luxurious bomb shelter. (Chairs! Where did they get them?) There are many puzzles in the production, but the exuberant singing of Nadine Secunde, as Siegmund's hostess and twin sister, makes us forget this particular one.    Soon they are running and tumbling ecstatically on a defunct air strip that serves as this &quot;Ring's&quot; visual leitmotif. What is it supposed to be? The Path of Life? The Tunnel of Time? Whatever, I got tired staring at it night after night, though I liked the eerie scene of shrouded, ghostly warriors standing silently on platforms that slowly roll them down the road into oblivion.    Deborah Polaski is Bayreuth's new Brunnhilde, a product of America and several health clubs it would seem. Mr. Kupfer has her sing &quot;Hojotoho&quot; pinning Wotan to the floor and sitting on his chest, in an inventive bit of frisky stage business that gives new life to the tiresome old shriek. She is a spellbinding, handsome Valkyrie, and if her upper body strength is rather stronger than her upper register, the rich middle range pours out like liquid amber.    It is Siegfried Jerusalem's lot to wake her up from her laser- and neon-lit slumber. This is his first venture as Siegfried and he seems in name, appearance (big and blond) and finally voice a nearly ideal choice for the fearless hero. He spends much of Act I chasing Mime (Mr. Clark, in another deft portrait) up and down their odd homestead -- a huge, moss-covered boiler, Snopishly decorated with old car seats and broken machines -- and seemed worn and winded by the time he stumbles upon Brunnhilde on the airstrip. But I felt Daniel Barenboim, the conductor, didn't help much either with his slow tempi. His diaphanous &quot;Ring&quot; is the most lyrical one can imagine, and thus strangely at odds with Mr. Kupfer's energetic direction.    In &quot;Gotterdammerung,&quot; this direction began to go to pieces. He strives ponderously for bleak depths . . . and comes up with kitsch. There is an interesting, not fully persuasive opening with the three (fate-telling) Norns who sit in a field of antennas, tapping information. There also is some very powerful singing from Waltraud Meier as Waltraute and Reiner Goldberg, who took over as Siegfried in the cycle's last opera. But there is little sense of the deep tragedy that must then unfold as Brunnhilde is betrayed and the twilight sets in.    Brunnhilde's immolation for love of Siegfried spells the end of Valhalla with its crass power-hungry caste of gods and leaves the cycle on a hopeful note. Unhappily, Mr. Kupfer remembered he was East German, and in images beamed on side walls, he turns Valhalla into New York or some other capitalist cesspool megalopolis. It blows up in a nuclear explosion. In case some dachshund doesn't get the message that this is us sometime soon, Mr. Kupfer has the remorseless rich mill around the stage, paying no attention. Dressed like Bayreuth regulars, sipping champagne, they watch the destruction on television as the wretched masses writhe painfully in the background.    It doesn't stop there. As the curtain drops, a little boy and girl wander through the awful rubble holding a flashlight -- to lead us into the future, I suppose. Ach du lieber. </TEXT></DOC>