<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880722-0123 </DOCNO><HL> The Soviets' Albatross States </HL><AUTHOR> Irving Kristol </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>   A significant evolution seems to be under way in the Soviet Union. Unlike detente in the 1970s -- a purely strategic maneuver -- changes in Soviet foreign policy today are linked to important changes in social and economic policy, a modest but significant movement toward political reform, and an unprecedented degree of ideological ferment. While no one is advocating, or would be allowed to advocate, the revolutionary institution of a liberal-capitalist democracy, Stalinist totalitarianism and the terror associated with it have been quite explicitly repudiated. New currents of opinion are percolating within Soviet society and within the Communist leadership itself.    What these currents have in common is a sense of outrage and humiliation that their nation, after 70 years of &quot;socialism,&quot; is still so poor, so backward, so underdeveloped economically and technologically. What they also have in common is a lessening -- in some cases a complete loss -- of intellectual interest in Marxist-Leninism, both as an organizing doctrine for Soviet society and as the basis for Soviet foreign policy. These days, any Soviet citizen who still thinks in terms of &quot;workers of the world&quot; uniting for the purpose of &quot;world revolution&quot; is regarded as an absurdly antiquated fogey.    True, the Soviet Union remains, in military terms, one of the world's two &quot;superpowers,&quot; and it is unthinkable that it will cease being so, regardless of internal changes. But this superpower status, while surely a source of national pride, no longer provides, in and of itself, a title to legitimacy for the Soviet system. More tangible benefits, along with more personal freedom, are being demanded. This change has occurred only in recent years and is of major significance.    So the fact that the Soviets are still so powerful militarily does not mean as much as was once the case. Power is one thing and policy is another, as we Americans have had many occasions to realize. And it does seem clear that the Soviet leaders are having serious second thoughts about the costs and benefits involved in the projection of power.    For one thing, it is indeed expensive. The Soviets spend at least $20 billion a year on military and economic aid to their client states. As a percentage of their gross national product -- which we now know to have been grossly overstated by them and overestimated by us -- this is very burdensome. If their economy is to be modernized, such an expenditure is simply not affordable. Moreover, the new public opinion in the Soviet Union can think of more interesting ways to spend that money at home. The peoples of the Soviet Union really couldn't care less whether Angola or Afghanistan have self-designated Marxist-Leninist governments. China has one, too, and many Russians see this China as their greatest potential threat.    Also, it is becoming clear to the Soviet leaders, as it has gradually dawned on the U.S., that client states often can be more trouble than they are worth. They can be unstable politically, retrogressive economically, unreliable ideologically. Both the Soviets and the U.S., disillusioned with such experiences to date, are in the process of limiting their overseas commitments. Some, commitments, of course, are too important geopolitically to be disengaged from. Others can be estimated to provide, on balance, more benefits than costs. But their number, upon reexamination, is shrinking.    The question that naturally arises is: What are the implications of this new situation for American foreign policy?    One clear implication is that in those places where our policies have been able to tilt the cost-benefit equation in our favor, and where the Soviets feel that a prudent retreat is not too much of a threat to their national interest, we can achieve important successes. Afghanistan, where our military aid to the anti-communist forces caused a Soviet change of mind, is a case in point. Angola is another. There, our aid to Jonas Savimbi seems to be paying off in the form of a Cuban withdrawal. These are clear-cut victories for President Reagan's foreign policies, even though the media (along with most members of Congress) seem determined to give the credit to Mr. Gorbachev.    And can anyone doubt that if the Democrats in Congress had been willing to provide adequate military aid to the Contras we would now be witnessing a Soviet disengagement from Nicaragua? The Sandinista regime provides the Soviets with considerable nuisance value vis-a-vis the U.S., but not much more. The continued existence of this regime is a victory for the Democratic Party and American liberalism, which deserve to receive due credit.    It might not, however, be a victory for long, since the self-destructive economic policies of the Sandinistas may yet convince the Soviets that they have a basket case on their hands, and that, even with the assistance of American liberals, the cost-benefit equation can never be made to balance. But we would have avoided a lot of suffering in Nicaragua, and a lot of silly debate in the U.S., if the Contras had received sufficient military support from the outset and if the Sandinista leaders were now refugees in Cuba -- where they might very well end up anyway.    There are limits, however, to the Soviet ability and/or willingness to disengage unilaterally. Though Cuba, for instance, is an expensive headache for the Soviets, they could not abandon the Castro regime without suffering a severe blow to their status as a superpower. So both they (and we) will have to live with the status quo until Castro goes, either in the natural course of time or in the unnatural course of Cuban politics. But the fact is that Castro's Cuba no longer interests anyone very much -- not even the Latin Americans, once so fearful or so enthusiastic. Cuba is coming more and more to resemble a Caribbean version of Albania. The world is passing it by. Only some left-wing professors and journalists in the West still manage to sustain an interest.    And then there is Eastern Europe, the most important place of all -- and, ironically, the one the U.S. and its Western European allies would prefer not to think about at all.    No one seriously expects a unilateral Soviet withdrawal from Eastern Europe. It is just too important for Soviet national security, providing as it does a protective barrier against another invasion from the West. Western Europeans and Americans may appreciate how far-fetched such fears are in actuality, but it is Russian history and Soviet experience that shape the political imagination of Moscow. In the Soviet view, and regardless of any &quot;liberalization&quot; of the Soviet system, Eastern Europe must remain a defensive barrier.    But must it remain more than that? There certainly was a time when Communists in Moscow confidently expected that there would be full-fledged, solidly rooted Communist regimes throughout Eastern Europe. That confidence and expectation have melted away. Those regimes are rickety affairs, presiding over sullen, discontented and sometimes rebellious peoples. There is nothing but bankrupt economies, enforced cultural stagnation and costly trouble ahead for the Soviets in Eastern Europe. It is practically impossible to encounter a Soviet leader who will defend the present situation in Eastern Europe in other than strategic, non-ideological terms.    So it is not surprising that reports emanate from the Soviets that they really wouldn't mind putting Eastern Europe on an agenda for negotiation. And what is the reaction among our Western allies? They are horrified at the prospect. For despite the routine expressions of concern, even of solidarity, the sad truth is that the governments of Western Europe don't give a damn about Eastern Europe. In their small-minded addiction to the status quo, with which they are basically comfortable, they privately pray that the peoples of Eastern Europe will remain passive and quiescent -- indefinitely.    They feel justified in this posture because it is obvious that any negotiations about Eastern Europe also will be negotiations about Western Europe -- and specifically about American troops in Europe and the structure of NATO. If the Soviets are going to move toward some version of &quot;Finlandization&quot; in Eastern Europe, which is the most one can expect, they will demand a price. Perhaps it will be too high a price for the nations of NATO to contemplate. But we shall never know until we start negotiating the issue.    Hitherto, all discussions of NATO and all proposals for its reformation have focused on the tension between the American national interest -- the national interest of a world power -- and the parochial, regional interest of the Western Europeans. This tension is real, and will doubtless result in major changes in NATO's structure in any case. That handwriting is already on the wall, and has been for several years now, even though the leaders of Western Europe keep pretending it is in invisible ink.    But now a new focus is emerging. If the West is going to do anything to help &quot;liberate&quot; the peoples of Eastern Europe, it must begin seriously to re-think NATO. And that is no longer a voluntary option. For the peoples of Eastern Europe are not going to be indefinitely passive and quiescent. It is they, as much as we, who are now partners in this discussion.    There is no way we in the U.S. can close our eyes to this issue. Unless we seize the opportunity to negotiate now, we may yet find ourselves, in the not too distant future, withdrawing U.S. troops from Continental Europe and restructuring NATO -- either for budgetary reasons or as the end result of a series of &quot;arms-control&quot; negotiations. This would leave our West European allies to negotiate with the Soviets about Eastern Europe under far less favorable conditions than prevail today. Rather than permit ourselves to be overtaken by events, we should be eager to negotiate from the strength we still possess.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>