<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Tool of Trade:As Arms Makers OfferForeign Buyers More,Opposition Is Growing---Critics Say Offsets Give AwayTechnology and Jobs,Hurt U.S. Subcontractors---A Host of Conflicting Goals---By Eileen WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN BA EUROP FREST JAPANAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Countries buying expensive U.S. weapons often want a little something to offset the cost: some subcontracts, purchase of some of the customer country's goods, an investment in local development, maybe even assembly of the weapons on the home turf.    Competition is keen, and such requests aren't lightly ignored. Offsets, as they are called, have taken root solidly in the world weapons trade.    In fact, they are growing tall. To clinch sales of Awacs command planes to Britain and France, Boeing Co. recently agreed to so many offsets that they totaled more than the price of the contracts.    But while the practice clearly helps big defense manufacturers sell abroad and while the Defense Department is pleased to see Allies getting weaponry compatible with America's, the offset system has other effects that aren't so benign. Increasingly, critics are complaining of the work lost to foreign subcontractors, of the American technology transferred abroad through licensing, of the nurturing of foreign industries that later compete with U.S. businesses, and of what sometimes amounts to the direct promotion of imports.    Says Paul Freedenberg, the assistant commerce secretary for trade administration: &quot;It's not Boeing or General Electric that loses&quot; through the offset system. &quot;It's the subcontractors that lose.&quot;    Among the most worrisome effects, the critics say, is injury to defense industries the U.S. would need in wartime. Offsets are hurting U.S. makers of machine tools, precision ball bearings and optical gear, for instance. And in a Joint Chiefs of Staff survey of missile-system subcontractors, one in seven said offsets had led it to reduce capacity or discouraged it from expanding.    Because the offsets often involve bartering of unrelated goods, trade officials say, they sometimes give a competitive advantage to foreign goods and services or cause other distortions. As a result of aircraft sales, for instance, Lockheed Corp. is promoting travel to Australia and McDonnell Douglas Corp. to Canada.    A full tally of these arrangements isn't available because defense contractors try to keep them secret from rivals. But nearly half of the $47.8 billion in international weapons sales by U.S. companies between 1980 and 1984 included offsets, the International Trade Commission says. They come in many varieties:    --To sell Saudi Arabia an air-defense system, a team led by Boeing agreed to spend $500 million to create, from scratch, a Saudi aerospace industry.    --To sell F-16 fighter planes to Turkey, General Dynamics Corp. agreed to invest $800 million in Turkish development projects, including a power plant, four hotels and a fruit-exporting business.    --To sell Patriot missiles to Japan, Raytheon Co. agreed to share production, selling some of its technology to Japanese companies and arranging for American subcontractors to license theirs.    Offsets grew out of postwar efforts to re-establish European Allies' defense industries. As the arms trade grew more competitive in the 1960s, manufacturers began offering them to win governments' orders. Now they are a central feature of international arms dealing -- so central that they probably couldn't be stopped without costing U.S. arms makers much of their foreign business.    At least 20 U.S. allies now require offsets as a condition of most weapons purchases. Joseph Serrano, who oversees offsets for General Dynamics, says, &quot;We have no choice in the matter, because the market is filled with French, British, Brazilian or German competitors.&quot;    But the ante keeps rising. Boeing's recent $1.85 billion Awacs sale to Britain included offsets that added up to 130% of the contract price. It was &quot;the Guinness world record for offsets,&quot; says Mr. Freedenberg of the Commerce Department.    He and others worry that the deal may have set a new industry standard. France, a subsequent Boeing Awacs customer, soon got its contract price offset to the tune of 130% as well.    B. Dan Pinick, an executive vice president at Boeing, says its U.S. subcontractors will be asked to &quot;do their part&quot; to meet the offset commitment by buying goods from British and French firms where possible. And some subcontracting, in commercial as well as in military units, will be done in Britain and France.    &quot;To some degree, offsets mean exporting jobs,&quot; Mr. Pinick concedes. But he and other executives of big defense contractors contend that offsets &quot;bring more business to this country than we send&quot; overseas.    A national-security argument made in support of offsets -- particularly the licensing of U.S. defense technology in friendly nations -- is that it promotes compatibility of American and Allied weaponry. &quot;Interoperability,&quot; the Pentagon calls this.    But this goal, notes a Reagan administration study of offsets, &quot;may compete with considerations of trade balance and industrial competitiveness&quot; -- including industries essential to national defense.    The effects may not be evident until years later. When the Pentagon was trying to get four NATO Allies to buy American-made F-16 fighter jets in 1977, it promised them subcontracts equal to at least 58% of the planes' $2.5 billion price.    The sale was a boon for the prime contractor, General Dynamics. Not so for one of its American suppliers, Menasco Texas, a builder of landing gears. General Dynamics required Menasco to teach a Dutch company called DAF how to make the gears, and now DAF competes with Menasco around the world.    Dynamics also sold F-16s to Japan, and for that sale, Menasco, a Colt Industries Inc. unit, had to agree to license its know-how to a Japanese subcontractor. &quot;They take your technology and become a competitor,&quot; says a Menasco official, Charles Moritz. But, he adds, &quot;If you want to stay in business, half a pie is better than none at all.&quot;    Landing gears are specialized items, but a broad industry like machine tools bears on weaponry of many kinds. And offsets are among the reasons the U.S. machine-tool industry is hurting.    To sell F-5 fighters to Switzerland beginning in the mid-1970s, Northrop Corp. assembled the planes there with Swiss labor and many Swiss parts. It also promoted the sale of $429.3 million in Swiss products and services, including machine tools.    The U.S. machine-tool industry was at that time beginning to crumble under pressure from foreign producers, and a Commerce Department official, John A. Richards, says Northrop and other defense contractors have been responsible for &quot;a significant portion&quot; of the imports. The Pentagon warned President Reagan of a national-security danger, after which he ordered it to curb purchases of foreign machine tools and help the surviving U.S. manufacturers improve their technology.    A spokesman for Northrop concedes it helped the Swiss sell $43.3 million of machine tools in the U.S. but contends the sales weren't &quot;significant&quot; because they were spread out over a dozen years.    Precision ball bearings make up another industry that is essential to defense but has been affected by the offset system. Kaydon Corp. of Muskegon, Mich., has frequently seen its defense-contractor customers buy ball bearings abroad as a way to win foreign contracts. In four cases where it continued to be a supplier, Kaydon has had to buy goods abroad itself to help the contractor meet its offset pledge.    &quot;Our customers {the prime contractors} will say, 'Over the next five years we want you to buy $50,000 a year' from a certain nation,&quot; says Warren Klinkner, a Kaydon executive. &quot;But we are a basic industry, and we buy very little product.&quot; The small company sends buyers to Europe searching for things it can use.    Recently, the Pentagon has said it won't buy weapons containing foreign ball bearings. But the rule doesn't affect most offsets, as they involve arms sold abroad.    A third troubled U.S. defense industry, optical equipment, also is affected by offsets. For example, Martin Marietta Corp., in making weapons sales some years ago, agreed to buy some optical gear abroad. As a result, it &quot;found some excellent companies in Germany and Israel as vendors for electronics and electro-optic displays,&quot; says a Martin Marietta executive, Neil Hayward.    After fulfilling its offset commitments, the company continued to buy from the foreign suppliers because their prices &quot;allowed us to be competitive,&quot; Mr. Hayward says, adding that he was unaware the U.S. optics industry was in trouble.    The Defense Department informally curbs the use of some foreign optical parts in arms it buys, and Pentagon logistics chiefs recently urged that optics get the same protection as ball bearings. Such a rule, however, wouldn't stop offsets.    The most troublesome form of offset, in some critics' view, is technology licensing, in which other countries buy U.S. know-how and make the equipment themselves. &quot;You're really creating a competitor who extracts not just technological expertise but marketing expertise,&quot; says Wolfgang Demisch, a defense-industry analyst with First Boston Corp.    For example, a new Italian missile called the Aspide &quot;was primarily designed and developed&quot; through offsets related to the sale to Italy of the U.S. Sparrow missile by Raytheon, the study done for Congress says, and now the Aspide is &quot;a viable competitor to U.S. missile programs.&quot; Raytheon will say only that offsets are &quot;a fact of life with which we must cope.&quot;    The Japanese have licensed technology for building 12 kinds of U.S. weapons since 1982. They include several types of missiles, and, not coincidentally, Japan now is focusing its defense research on developing its own missiles -- potential competitors to the U.S.-made Stinger, Sidewinder and Harpoon.    U.S. trade officials say Japan has gone a step further, using technology bought in connection with U.S. arms purchases to broaden its lines of commercial aircraft. When congressional investigators visited Japanese factories to review an offset for McDonnell Douglas F-15s in 1982, they found engineers rotating between production lines for the fighter plane and those for commercial aircraft. &quot;Now you see technology from the F-15 in the Japanese small commercial jet,&quot; says Mr. Richards, the Commerce official.    Australia, meanwhile, has a policy that encourages technology transfer. In calculating Lockheed's fulfillment of its offset pledge, Australia gives triple credit for American technology passed to an Australian company.    In Congress, sentiment has been rising to do something about all this. A law passed last December calls for more detail in what now is a sketchy annual assessment of offsets' effects. However, no law requires contractors to provide the data for such an assessment.    The pending trade bill would require detailed reporting of any foreign arms sale above $2 million involving offsets. The provision has met fierce opposition from defense-industry lobbyists, who say the information would be misleading, could hurt their competitive positions and might even increase offset demands from abroad.    Other proposed legislation would go further. Under a House bill, the Commerce Department would monitor U.S. policy on offsets and the president would have to open international negotiations aimed at regulating them. Industry lobbyists are fighting this bill as well, and the Defense Department is also opposed.    Yet executives of several big defense concerns have quietly asked the Pentagon to start talks with allies seeking limits on offsets, possibly through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. One hope is to stem further erosion of the U.S. trade surplus in aerospace. It slipped to $11.8 billion in 1986 from $12.6 billion in 1985.    Contractors also say that making good on commercial promises given to obtain orders has become increasingly burdensome. Northrop has a staff of 30 devoted solely to the chore.    One company that wouldn't mind seeing a global curb on offsets is Eagle-Picher Industries Inc., a maker of batteries for missiles. Concessions made by prime contractors have required it to teach foreign companies how to make the batteries. Says an Eagle Picher executive: &quot;The one thing we have in the U.S. is superiority in the defense industry, and now we're being forced to send that overseas.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>