<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880217-0038 </DOCNO><HL> How Eccentric Chief Built Up Hutton, Hastened Its Demise --- Fomon's Failure to Adapt To '80s Led to Takeover; Booze and Young Women </HL><AUTHOR> Steve Swartz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EFH SLH </CO><IN> SCR </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   From the macaw that squawked incessantly in his office to his all-night drinking sessions with staffers, Robert Fomon symbolized the eccentric entrepreneurs who helped build Wall Street.    During the 17 years he headed E.F. Hutton Group, he lived by the motto &quot;work hard, play hard,&quot; and he reveled in taking risks and making quick decisions. To him, budgets and organization charts were a waste of time, and 4 a.m. phone calls to staffers were routine.    In the 1970s, it was tough to argue with Mr. Fomon's success. He assembled the best sales force on Wall Street, and Hutton's profits were the envy of many competitors.    But the 1980s called for a new type of leader, and Bob Fomon wouldn't -- or couldn't -- make the transition. As the industry, and Hutton, grew in size and complexity, Mr. Fomon grew mean and eccentric. He began drinking more, and he became obsessed with the thought that his power was slipping away. &quot;People regarded him almost as a pathetic figure,&quot; says Warren Law, a longtime Hutton director and Harvard Business School professor.    Last May, Mr. Fomon, now 63 years old, was forced out as chairman. But the die was cast: In December, Hutton succumbed to a takeover by Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., and about 5,000 Hutton people were out of jobs.    The seeds of the downfall of Mr. Fomon and his firm were sown in 1975, when the government forced Wall Street to open brokerage rates to competition. Slowly but surely, a new era dawned: Securities firms spawned a host of new products and services, and many Wall Street firms were surprised to find that they had become large corporations requiring strong, foresighted leadership.    The transition hasn't been smooth at other firms either, and even today many lack effective management structures. But no firm entered the new era with as much potential, yet failed so miserably, as E.F. Hutton.    Mr. Fomon pressed for results but didn't monitor excesses. Under him, Hutton adopted what one executive calls a &quot;play now, pay later&quot; mind-set. Mr. Fomon allowed many of his old investment-banking associates to report directly to him, thus turning the department into what some Hutton officials say was a haven for cronyism, where expense accounts grew faster than revenue.    Hutton's passive board was dubbed &quot;the friends and entertainers&quot; board, because it consisted at times of a few famous personalities -- like baseball commissioner Peter V. Ueberroth and actress Dina Merrill, whose father founded Hutton in 1904 -- and some close Fomon associates, including a friend from law school.    In later years, as Hutton's losses mounted, Mr. Fomon built an expensive corporate headquarters, leased a company jet and maintained a Hutton apartment in Paris that was used primarily by him and associates for vacations.    Edward J. Lill, who left the accounting firm Deloitte Haskins andamp; Sells in 1986 to become Hutton's chief financial officer, says, &quot;This place was shocking to those of us who were newcomers.&quot;    In an interview, Mr. Fomon concedes that he wasn't one to get involved in details, that he has &quot;always been a good drinker&quot; and that he sees himself more as an entrepreneur and a marketer than as an executive. &quot;I'm not blameless&quot; for Hutton's fall, he says, but he adds that others must share the blame: &quot;I could have done a better job selecting executives, but whether that implies that I should have stepped down myself, I don't see anyone who could have replaced me.&quot;    It was in 1970, to ward off a major internal crisis, that Mr. Fomon, the young and relatively unknown head of West Coast corporate finance, was catapulted over many senior contenders to the Hutton helm. His main rival for the job was John Shad, who 11 years later would become the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.    Mr. Fomon successfully quelled warring factions and retained many of his rivals, including Mr. Shad. He acquired retail offices and built a top-notch municipal-finance business. He gave managers plenty of leeway for new ventures, and while other firms slogged away selling routine stocks and bonds, Hutton pushed tax shelters, mutual funds, insurance and other securities products.    Even today, Mr. Fomon's hands-off managerial approach evokes nostalgia from Hutton veterans: &quot;Ever Flexible Hutton, we called it,&quot; says a former branch manager in the Midwest.    Mr. Fomon's aversion to detail wasn't viewed as a problem in the early days. A senior executive recalls arriving to pick Mr. Fomon up for an early-morning meeting and finding him still in bed. Mr. Fomon would often race up to the Hutton executive floor in the morning to borrow a few dollars to pay the cab driver waiting downstairs.    One of the key people at Hutton was George Ball, who took over as president in 1977, when Mr. Fomon was named chairman. While Mr. Fomon liked to arrive in mid-morning and work late into the night, Mr. Ball was in at dawn. When Mr. Fomon offended an employee, Mr. Ball would apologize for him. When Mr. Fomon couldn't recall a top broker's name, Mr. Ball remembered the broker's wife's birthday.    But even as the firm was expanding rapidly, nobody was really minding the store. From 1970 to 1980, the number of retail offices grew to 275 from 83, and the payroll jumped to 10,000 from 3,200. While other firms were installing budgeting systems and other controls, Hutton was still a seat-of-the-pants operation, albeit a highly profitable one.    &quot;I remember a meeting in New York in the late 1970s when our controller stood up and said we needed a formal budgeting process,&quot; says Ralph Williams, who ran Hutton's Southeast region. &quot;I agreed with him, and people hooted at me.&quot;    Other executives say that they argued with Mr. Fomon that things had to change, but that he either wouldn't listen or begged for more time. Mr. Fomon disputes this. &quot;Hutton was always focused on costs,&quot; he says. &quot;We were always watching the costs of everything.&quot;    By 1982, Hutton, though still very profitable, slowly began to deteriorate. Mr. Shad and several other corporate-finance executives left. Then, in July of that year, Mr. Ball announced that he was becoming head of rival Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. Those close to Mr. Ball, who declines to comment, say he was tired of working under what he believed was Mr. Fomon's arbitrary and freewheeling leadership. Mr. Fomon &quot;was devastated,&quot; says Ms. Merrill, the Hutton director. &quot;It was like a father-son relationship.&quot;    Without Mr. Ball, the retail brokerage operation, which had long set the industry standard for productivity, started falling in the rankings. And the firm dragged its heels in certain related areas; as the stock market began its roaring five-year rise that summer, Hutton was slow to expand over-the-counter stock trading and gather sophisticated marketing data.    Meantime, as the securities business grew more complex, other irregularities cropped up. In 1983, Hutton set up a mortgage-brokerage business in Little Rock, Ark., because &quot;that's where the people lived&quot; who proposed setting up the business, a Hutton spokesman recalls. In 1985, Hutton took a $14 million charge because of losses tied to the unit.    Yet the high living continued. In New York, Hutton kept a number of swank Fifth Avenue apartments at the ready for top executives. When a young corporate finance associate, stranded in the city, used one of the apartments, he found it littered with pornographic magazines.    While other firms formalized executive compensation, bonuses at Hutton were set by often raucous, one-on-one bargaining sessions between Mr. Fomon and department heads. The sessions became known as &quot;the taffy pull,&quot; because executives who argued long and loud enough usually got what they wanted, Hutton officials say.    Then came a scandal that showed all that was lacking at Hutton. In May 1985, the firm pleaded guilty to 2,000 counts of federal mail and wire fraud, admitting that it had been engaged in a check-kiting plot to defraud banks across the country. A subsequent, Hutton-commissioned study by former Attorney General Griffin Bell found that although Mr. Fomon had no knowledge of the plot, Hutton's management controls were inadequate.    The scandal forced Mr. Fomon to seek additional management help, and he turned to Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.'s chief administrative officer, Robert Rittereiser, who came aboard in 1985 as Hutton's No. 2 executive.    Mr. Rittereiser says that he knew Hutton had problems but had no idea how big they were. &quot;I had a sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach about a day after I got there,&quot; he says. He recalls that when he asked the manager of the firm's poorly performing bond-sales department how he measured the unit's performance, the manager replied, &quot;I just know.&quot; When Mr. Rittereiser asked for the organizational chart, he was handed the Hutton telephone directory. He eventually determined that 34 people reported to Mr. Fomon, which, he says, &quot;meant they reported to themselves.&quot;    The 1980s had also taken a heavy toll on Mr. Fomon. He suffered two minor strokes and a compound fracture of the leg. Divorced from a former Miss America and with few friends, he turned to the party circuits of Manhattan's Upper East Side, Long Island's Hamptons and Palm Beach, Fla. -- in particular, to the company of very young women. &quot;I just like to look at them,&quot; he says. &quot;There was no sex involved.&quot;    In an embarrassing interview published by M magazine in August 1986, Mr. Fomon spoke of preferring young women because they are &quot;decorative&quot; and said that most older women &quot;have emotional problems.&quot; And he concluded: &quot;Basically, I'm very shallow when it comes to women.&quot; Accompanying the interview were pictures of him with two very young women and with his teddy bear, Ralph.    Senior Hutton officials say that Mr. Fomon insisted that Hutton hire some of his lady friends, and Mr. Fomon concedes that he hired five or six young women at Hutton. He denies, though, that he was sexually involved with any of the women he hired.    At about the same time, according to senior Hutton officials, Mr. Fomon was drinking heavily, though he says that alcohol never affected his ability to do his job. Officials say he sometimes became abusive at Hutton outings and at the office. A member of Hutton's public-relations department saw Mr. Fomon emerge from his office one morning and spot a secretary carrying a birthday cake for a surprise party. Mr. Fomon said he wanted a piece of the cake. The secretary pleaded with him to wait until later, but Mr. Fomon said he wanted a piece &quot;now,&quot; and his wish was granted. Mr. Fomon remembers the incident as &quot;a joke.&quot;    Mr. Fomon's business decisions became equally eccentric. Informed at a meeting that the bond-trading department had posted losses of about $60 million in May 1986, Mr. Fomon turned to the head of securities processing, who had never traded a bond, and asked him to take over bond trading. The man shot back, &quot;Are you crazy?&quot; and the idea was dropped. Mr. Fomon says that he was just being &quot;facetious.&quot; Hutton eventually hired a Citicorp official to take the post.    In November 1986, with losses mounting, Mr. Fomon was forced by the board to cede the chief executive's job to Mr. Rittereiser. But Mr. Fomon was still chairman, and he maintained a back channel to his pals. Other Hutton officials complained to the board that he was countermanding Mr. Rittereiser's orders. He would walk in on meetings uninvited. And when invited, he would often leave suddenly. &quot;You tend to get impatient dealing with a bunch of amateurs,&quot; he says.    At his final Hutton board meeting last May, Mr. Fomon tried a final power play. He nominated Mr. Ueberroth as chairman in an attempt to dilute the authority of Mr. Rittereiser, whom Mr. Fomon had come to hate. When Mr. Ueberroth declined, Mr. Fomon glared at him and said, &quot;You wimp.&quot;    He then told the directors that he would see that the firm was sold out from under them -- his efforts to do so failed last fall -- and walked out. Later that day, in a speech, he told the firm's employees: &quot;I have really considered myself the prime keeper of the good name of E.F. Hutton.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>