<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870923-0097 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> GOVMTENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   Interior Secretary Donald Hodel may go down in history as the only Machiavelli in Ronald Reagan's court.    A few months ago Mr. Hodel suggested that the wearing of wide-brim hats, neckerchiefs and other devices for protection against strong sunlight would greatly reduce the millions of deaths due to skin cancer that had been forecast to result from destruction of the ozone layer above Earth by chlorofluorocarbons.    It was a sound suggestion and one that Mexican peasants, Arab sheiks, Wyoming cowboys, Argentine gauchos, Australian sheepherders, Chesapeake Bay crabbers, and farmers all over the world have been following for a long time. If Mr. Reagan had protected his nose with a sunscreen lotion during his days as a lifeguard, he might not be having problems with skin cancer of the nose today.    Nevertheless, Mr. Hodel was hooted at so vigorously by Sierra Club members and other &quot;sophisticated&quot; environmentalists who long to save the world from itself by sweeping measures that do not depend on common sense that he was forced to retreat.    (The catcalls were almost as loud as those that greeted President Reagan's truthful claim in 1980 that trees and other forms of vegetation release billions of tons of organic pollutants into the air each year. The jeering then was so intimidating that the president never brought the subject up again despite the fact that the autumnal haze in the Poconos, the yearlong blue smog in the Great Smoky Mountains, the overwhelming odor of orange blossoms in Florida each spring and thousands of other natural phenomena have kept proving him right, year after year.)    But Mr. Hodel is a bold fellow. He now has come up with a proposal that has thrown his foes into a state of confusion and may teach the nation some things about the Sierra Club that the club would like to keep secret.    Mr. Hodel has proposed to tear down the 300-foot-high dam across the valley of the Tuolumne River in California, drain the lake behind it and convert what was the bed of the lake into an addition to Yosemite National Park. Since the Sierra Club has long been opposed to dams as a matter of principle and in favor of adding to national parks, it might be assumed that its members are cheering, but this is not the case.    It does make a difference whose ox gets gored. The dam across the Tuolumne forms the Hetch Hetchery reservoir, which produces a good portion of the water and electricity required by San Francisco and its environs, where many Sierra Club members live. Mayor Dianne Feinstein and many other Democrats are denouncing Mr. Hodel for going too far in his efforts to restore the nation to its pristine purity of bygone years.    Mr. Hodel almost certainly will not succeed in this proposal, but he has succeeded in bringing confusion to his foes. While a mind as fertile as his hardly needs advice about how to keep the opposition confused, let me make a few suggestions anyway.    For example, he might return to the matter of skin cancer caused by depletion of the ozone layer by chlorofluorocarbons and propose that all automobile air conditioners be removed and the refrigerant in them recovered and burned to less stable compounds in a high-temperature incinerator. All car air conditioners use chlorofluorocarbons as the refrigerant, and they all leak because of the vibrations in the automobiles as they move along the highway. Removing air conditioners would help protect the ozone layer, even though it might create some resentment in Los Angeles, Phoenix, Dallas, Miami and just about all other points south of Maine. However, as the Sierra Club is fond of telling us, people should be willing to put up with small inconveniences designed to promote the common good.    If the above proposal is not sufficiently controversial to suit Mr. Hodel's Machiavellian schemes, he could propose that the federal government buy up all of Kansas, Nebraska and Iowa and convert the whole territory into one vast public park where the buffalo and the prairie dog could roam as freely as they did in bygone days. After all, when the framers of the Constitution were doing their job, the nation got along without a single bushel of corn, wheat or soybeans from these three states. At least a few members of the Sierra Club should applaud this proposal even though wide-hatted farmers out there might object and lose patience with the club.    Finally, there is the matter of electromagnetic waves from power lines doing harm to people who live near such modern devices. There is speculation that these waves may cause cancer, and it might be argued that the way to avoid such hazards is to keep people a safe distance away from power lines. But who can say what is a safe distance? Such energy is detectable at the distance of a mile or more. So Mr. Hodel might propose to protect the public by ordering the immediate removal of all power lines throughout the nation. After all, our founding fathers and the fathers of some members of the Sierra Club got along without power lines.    Even if Mr. Hodel does not resort to any of these extended strategies, he already has created enough confusion among the ranks of his detractors to guarantee him a more respectful audience the next time he comes up with something as sound as his suggestion that people try to avoid prolonged exposure to strong sunlight.    ---   Mr. Wingate wears a hat in the sun. </TEXT></DOC>