<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880930-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Flawless Launch: Smooth Shuttle Liftoff Has Viewers Relieved And NASA Hopeful --- The Space Agency's Programs Hinge on Flight's Success; The Candidates' Soapbox --- A Big Plate of Beans for All </HL><AUTHOR> Bob Davis and Laurie McGinley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT EUROP CANDA JAPAN </CO><IN> ARO TEL </IN><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The space program put nearly three years of frustration and humiliation behind it when the shuttle Discovery roared into orbit in a spectacular liftoff. The sense of relief was profound, from Cape Canaveral to the countless clusters of people around television sets across the country.    Workers at the launch room cheered when the shuttle's booster rockets dropped away evenly two minutes into the flight, while one manager, in a reference to the meal traditionally served after a successful launch, unfurled a banner saying &quot;Go for Beans.&quot;    In a school in Mount Ayr, Iowa, a class that as third graders had watched the horror of the Challenger explosion now saw Discovery soar, and celebrated by throwing their arms into the air (they had been asked not to disturb other classes by cheering). &quot;I sensed a feeling that we had done it,&quot; said teacher Bette McNeill, &quot;that we weren't that far from Florida.&quot;    In Kansas City, a &quot;very tense&quot; Kathryn Atkinson, 42, watched the launch on TV at the headquarters of the American Hereford Association, where she is ad manager for the cattle group's journal. &quot;Come on, separate!&quot; she pleaded as the time approached for the huge booster rocket to drop away. When it did, her dominant emotion wasn't so much pride as &quot;total relief.&quot;    No one could be more relieved than the managers at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and they moved quickly to portray the successful launch as a victory for all Americans. The shuttle mission won't end till Monday, but the launch was the riskiest part, and &quot;it was a great day for America,&quot; said Forrest McCartney, who runs Kennedy Space Center here. &quot;Everyone stood tall.&quot;    NASA is sure to use a burst in patriotic feeling toward the agency to rally support for manned space exploration and for bigger budgets. For starters, it will push for $2 billion next year to begin work on a permanently manned space station. NASA also will try to persuade the next president to launch a program -- ultimately perhaps costing hundreds of billions of dollars -- to explore Mars and build manned colonies on the moon.    The shuttle launch also promises to help NASA's tarnished reputation abroad. During the 32 months the shuttle was grounded, European nations hadn't any way to launch a $1 billion space laboratory they had built. Shuttle budget problems also led the U.S. to back out of a plan for NASA and its European counterparts to launch joint space probes to the sun from the shuttle. Now NASA is trying to make amends. As Discovery soared into orbit, agency negotiators were signing an agreement with nine European nations, Canada and Japan to build the permanently manned station.    And the launch has plenty of political ramifications as well. It may vault space into the center of the presidential campaign from its current spot on the far periphery. Space has largely been a regional issue till now, used by the candidates when campaigning in states like Florida, Texas and California that are home to big NASA centers and aerospace contractors.    George Bush wasted no time bringing Discovery into the campaign. &quot;We're going to keep the edge in space -- America is back,&quot; the vice president told a rally in St. Charles, Mo. He clearly is hoping the launch will do for him what he had hoped the Olympic Games would do but haven't: fire patriotic feelings of the sort that benefited Ronald Reagan's popularity during the Los Angeles Olympics. Mr. Bush will watch the shuttle landing in Southern California on Monday, then head for Silicon Valley, a stop tailor-made for trumpeting American technological achievements.    Gov. Michael Dukakis, for his part, pledged to &quot;make America once again the unquestioned leader in space&quot; by the end of the decade. But a campaign spokesman, Dayton Duncan, alluded to the launch's potential help to Mr. Bush, observing derisively that &quot;I suspect his duties as vice president will require Mr. Bush to be at the landing.&quot; Mr. Bush specifically ruled out inviting the Massachusetts governor along; &quot;that would be making a political event out of it,&quot; he said.    The Discovery launch, while representing a giant step for NASA, was only a small step for space exploration. The shuttle's main goal, for instance, was to launch a communications satellite, something that unmanned rockets have perfected over the past two decades. Some space experts, such as James Van Allen of the University of Iowa, have been arguing that astronauts' lives shouldn't be endangered for such a mundane mission. &quot;It not only puts individuals at risk, but it puts our whole national {space} policy at risk,&quot; he said before the launch.    John Logsdon, head of George Washington University's Space Policy Institute, cautions that NASA's toughest challenges lie ahead. &quot;They're betting the company every time they launch -- at least for the first few times,&quot; he said.    This launch did have its share of high-stakes drama. On Wednesday, Richard Truly, associate administrator for space flight, insisted that the space agency wouldn't deviate from strict weather rules, drawn up after the Challenger disaster, that determine when shuttles could fly. &quot;We're not going to bend any rules,&quot; he told reporters.    But early yesterday morning, readings showed that upper atmospheric winds were unexpectedly mild, leading to fears that the shuttle could be harmed because its engines were programmed to respond to rougher conditions. Most at risk were the orbiter's wings.    Thomas Utsman, deputy director of Kennedy, said that NASA and contractor engineers worked all night refining the computer model of how the shuttle would perform under the new conditions. The new calculations showed the shuttle could fly safely, he said. But NASA had to grant a waiver from its own weather rules.    Questions also arose about the performance of the shuttle's solid-rocket boosters made by Morton Thiokol Inc. Hot gases escaping from a flawed booster were responsible for the Challenger disaster in January 1986. After yesterday's flight, video recordings by television stations appeared to show flames around the bottom of a booster. But a NASA spokesman said that engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Ala., who reviewed tapes of the launch, didn't see any problems with the boosters.    The weather and booster controversies illustrate the problems NASA faces in trying to stick to a regular schedule of shuttle launches. NASA plans to launch seven shuttles in 1989 and 10 in 1990. But it is unclear whether NASA can keep to that schedule without bending safety and weather rules. At the shuttle program's peak in 1985, when the rules were more lax, NASA launched only nine shuttles -- and even then, it worked its crews to exhaustion.    &quot;They'll be under time and cost constraints, so they'll be under pressure to cut back&quot; on safety, says Edward Price, a Georgia Institute of Technology engineering professor who was a member of the National Research Council panel that oversaw the redesign of the shuttle booster.    NASA next plans to launch the shuttle Atlantis on Nov. 17 carrying a secret Pentagon spy satellite. John Pike, a space expert at the Federation of American Scientists, believes the satellite, called Magnum, will be used to pick up missile test data from Soviet launches relayed to earth and other electronic communications.    The third launch is scheduled to carry NASA communications satellites. It won't be until April, on the fourth shuttle flight, that NASA plans to launch a spacecraft with broad public appeal and scientific merit. That mission, called Magellan, will send an unmanned probe to map Venus in great detail. In October, NASA plans a follow-up launch, by shuttle, of a spacecraft to Jupiter.    These will be the first interplanetary probes launched by the U.S. in about a decade. Shuttle delays and cost overruns were largely responsible for the big gap in planetary exploration. And planetary scientists, scarred by their shuttle experiences, fear NASA won't be able to meet its scientific commitments because of delays or another accident.    Yesterday, though, the stress was on the positive. For Vice President Bush, the successful shuttle launch is something he can cite to show the effectiveness of the Reagan administration's space policy since the Challenger tragedy. A few months after the explosion, the president banned nearly all commercial payloads from the shuttle, spawning a private space industry and relieving pressure on NASA.    Mr. Bush also seems to be enamored of space exploration. Earlier in the campaign he enthusiastically endorsed NASA's $25 billion space station and a $500 million-ayear program to study the earth from space, called Mission to Planet Earth, and he has spoken favorably of a landing on Mars. The Republican platform went him one better -- and NASA too, for that matter -- by advocating a manned Mars mission by the year 2000.    But the Bush forces didn't explain how such expensive projects could be paid for, and yesterday they seemed to back away. While continuing to support a space station, Mr. Bush seemed to acknowledge that the budget deficit might force him to drop his support for Mission to Planet Earth and the manned mission to Mars. &quot;As a long-term goal and objective, {going to Mars} is an outstanding goal and objective, but I can't do that and then try to keep us inside some reasonable budgetary constraints,&quot; he said at a press conference.    Gov. Dukakis, meanwhile, has tried to use space to establish a link between himself and President John Kennedy. After prodding from Democratic senators and his running mate, Sen. Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, Mr. Dukakis has endorsed Mission to Planet Earth and a permanently manned space station, though probably a cheaper one than NASA wants.    The Dukakis campaign seems skeptical of NASA's ability to run a space program that won't bust the treasury. Speaking before the launch, a campaign aide, Nancy Soderberg, complained that at NASA today there are &quot;no goals, no direction, no pride, no leadership.&quot;    That obviously isn't how NASA managers feel, and they were especially upbeat after the Discovery's smooth liftoff. &quot;The launch greatly enhances America's prestige throughout the world,&quot; said the Kennedy Space Center's Mr. McCartney. &quot;It demonstrates that America is a leader in space.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>