<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0054 </DOCNO><HL> ---Computer Maker Battles IBM, DigitalAs Others Run for Safe Niches---By William M. BulkeleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DGNCOMPUTERS (EDP)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN><DATELINE> WESTBORO, Mass.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Data General Corp. prides itself on making faster and less-expensive computers than its archrival Digital Equipment Corp. An internal study for its sales force is brashly headlined, &quot;Digital Has It Wrong&quot; -- a gibe at the rival's &quot;Digital Has It Now&quot; ad campaign.    Yesterday, for example, when it introduced three new mid-range superminicomputers, Data General pointedly claimed that all were at least 33% cheaper than comparable Digital models.    But despite hot products and bold words, Data General is struggling in the soft computer market while Digital is soaring. Customers increasingly view Digital as the alternative to industry giant International Business Machines Corp.    Data General is convinced its only viable strategy is to compete with Digital and IBM in that high-stakes business as one of a handful of broad-based suppliers of computers and software for elaborate networks for factory and office automation.    Largely because it had geared up for explosive growth, Data General has been hit harder than most by the two-year-old computer industry recession. Sales growth has slumped. By most accounts Data General is executing its strategy well, but that strategy may be feckless at a time when many corporate buyers are paring down their list of computer vendors. Last year, Data General reported its first losses as a public company and laid off employees companywide for the first time in its 18-year history.    &quot;There is a feeling in users' minds that they don't really have to investigate further than IBM and Digital. That is beginning to be very, very threatening and frightening,&quot; Adam Zais of International Data Corp., a Framingham, Mass., market research firm, says of that end of the computer business. Adds Patricia Seybold, a Boston-based office-automation consultant, &quot;Office customers are stampeding toward the comfort of DEC and IBM solutions.&quot;    With $1.27 billion in revenue in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, Data General is a fair-sized company. But it is just one-seventh the size of Digital and 1/40th that of IBM. That is a problem because &quot;customers are looking for ever-increasing breadth in their suppliers,&quot; says Stephen Smith, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. Data General might be better off focusing instead on fast-growing niche markets, Mr. Smith suggests.    But Edson D. de Castro, president and chief executive officer, who left Digital in 1968 to start Data General, says: &quot;I'm still convinced we need to be a broad-based supplier. We shouldn't be deterred from the right path long-term because we're going through a down period&quot; in the market.    That market is in disorder as the computer industry undergoes a long-predicted consolidation. This year several big companies gave up on being independent suppliers of a broad line of computer systems: Control Data Corp. is now concentrating on certain niches; Sperry Corp. joined with Burroughs Corp. to form Unisys Corp., and Honeywell Inc. has decided to merge its computer operations with those of two big overseas computer makers.    Today, Data General executives say, their company is in a select group that includes IBM, Digital and Hewlett-Packard Inc. as makers of a broad line of computer products for offices and factories. They add that even though Data General reported a net loss of $29 million, including a $34.7 million extraordinary charge for settling a lawsuit, for the year ended Sept. 30, the company's finances remain strong and it has improved its product and market positions.    For example, a recent survey by Datamation Magazine, a trade publication, found that Data General's share of the integrated office market grew to 11.6% this year from 10.6% a year earlier, edging the company into third place past Wang Laboratories Inc.    Data General set its current strategy in the early 1980s. Before that, the company had concentrated since its founding on selling fast, inexpensive minicomputers -- &quot;hot iron&quot; in industry parlance -- to technical customers. Many of these so-called original-equipment manufacturers put the computers in their own products such as blood analyzers or machine tools. But those sales fell sharply in economic slumps, and Data General decided to sell more to end-users.    To attract corporate customers, Data General hired a raft of managers from IBM, beefed up its repair operations, turned over most of its sales force and tried to tone down its image as a cocky upstart. It surprised competitors by selling multimillion-dollar office-automation systems to big customers such as the U.S. Forest Service, Beneficial Corp. and E.F. Hutton andamp; Co. And it continued to introduce new computers that were praised by industry consultants and that met internal goals of being at least 20% cheaper than comparable Digital computers.    The strategy looked great in fiscal 1984, when earnings set records. One analyst called it &quot;the most dramatic turnaround we've seen&quot; in the computer business. But shortly thereafter, many large companies scaled back their computer budgets. Meanwhile, some longtime customers switched to new suppliers.    Raymond Fortune, Data General's vice president, sales, says that in boom times, corporate customers look at many options, but &quot;when things are flat, buyers bet on safety. That doesn't play to Data General's strengths.&quot; Moreover, Data General still doesn't have a big installed base of computers in corporations providing a stream of replacement business.    In fact, customers who are adventurous enough to buy from Data General are often willing to try out other vendors as well. E.F Hutton, which has spent about $60 million on Data General office automation systems, this year gave NCR Corp. a $20 million contract for workstations because NCR's had better screens and took up less space. Bernard A. Weinstein, a Hutton vice president, says Data General's office-automation software &quot;is the class of the field,&quot; but when it comes to other products, &quot;we've always had the philosophy we'd go with the best solution available.&quot;    Data General's size hurts it in other ways as well. At a time when buyers hold time-consuming competitions for major orders, the 1,000-person Data General sales force is stretched thin. The sales force is expanding, but competitors' forces are growing even faster.    While IBM and Hewlett-Packard advertise on television, and Digital advertisements crowd business publications, Data General must concentrate its smaller ad budget in trade magazines. Because it spends its research and development budget on surpassing competitors' products, it sometimes misses hot new markets such as engineering workstations. When Data General was innovative, marketing the first battery-powered portable computer with a large screen in 1984, the product flopped because it was hard to read and too expensive.    Despite these weaknesses, Robert C. Miller, senior vice president, says that &quot;by making smart and efficient decisions, Data General can compete.&quot; Some analysts concur. Craig Symons of Gartner Group says that in developing new products, &quot;it appears that the company has executed its plan flawlessly.&quot;    To overcome the dearth of software written for its computers, Data General pushes the use of UNIX, an operating system that runs on many computers. Like other minicomputer makers, it is steadily improving communication links between its computers and IBM's mainframes and personal computers.    It has convinced a number of software developers to write software for Data General machines. It trains its own sales people to understand and push the software packages. And it has signed several joint marketing agreements. For example, General Electric Co. recently agreed to jointly sell a factory-automation system GE developed at its Schenectady, N.Y., turbine facility.    While Data General continues to make a broad line of computers and software, it is focusing on fewer markets. For example, it is pushing sales in banking, insurance, health care and transportation markets and deemphasizing retailing and distribution, says David Lyons, vice president, marketing. &quot;The key is to identify markets and get the best-of-breed software relationships,&quot; Mr. Lyons says.    The strategy shows some signs of success. Data General says 15 of the nation's 16 biggest petroleum companies use some Data General computers, up from a handful three years ago. Six of the 10 largest makers of computer systems for the health care industry are Data General customers.    But the market may be stacked against Data General. Jit Saxena, a former software developer who left to found Applix Inc., a Westboro, Mass.-based software concern, says: &quot;Data General certainly has the technology and management expertise to turn it around. The only concern is that the positioning of the players this time has changed for good. We may have already gone to a situation where it's IBM and DEC, and then everybody else in their own niches.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>