<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870911-0124 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Voter Apathy in Chile Is Good News for the General---By Tyler Bridges</HL><DD> 09/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> CAMPAMENTO FRESNO, Chile  </DATELINE><TEXT>    One might expect thisshantytown just south of Santiago to be a hotbed ofopposition to Chile's strongman, Gen. Augusto Pinochet. WhileGen. Pinochet's free-market economic policies have boostedprofits of industrial companies and produced a boom inagricultural exports, residents here rarely eat three times aday and no more than 40% have steady work. The flimsy woodroofs of their homes tend to collapse during heavy rains.   But despite their economic woes, people here don't seem likely to vote to oust Gen. Pinochet in a national plebiscite expected to be held a year from now. The reasons why illustrate how Gen. Pinochet, who today celebrates the 14th anniversary of the coup that overthrew Socialist President Salvador Allende, could win the single-candidate plebiscite and continue as Chile's ruler until 1997. Foreigners don't seem to have grasped this point, with Gen. Pinochet rating no higher than 20% in independent polls and with his reputation abroad as a latter-day Attila the Hun.    Ivan, a 22-year-old resident of Campamento Fresno, which is named for the leader of Chile's Catholic Church, would seem a natural opponent of the military dictatorship. Without regular work for three years, his latest job has been selling small plastic flags for Independence Day celebrations on Sept. 18. His income is so meager that he and his wife haven't eaten in a day. Things weren't any better before: They say they haven't eaten meat since New Year's Day.    Yet his hunger has not led him to register to vote in order to defeat Gen. Pinochet at the polls. In fact, Ivan (who like others declined to give his last name for fear of government reprisals) doesn't know anybody who has registered. Asked whether he'd support Gen. Pinochet if he voted, he responds, &quot;Better the devil you know than the one you don't know.&quot;    Jose, who earns $2-$5 a day selling candy on buses, has so little faith in the military regime that he doesn't believe there was an assassination attempt against Gen. Pinochet a year ago. He hasn't sought to seek change by registering to vote, however. &quot;I'm afraid to register,&quot; he says, &quot;although I'm not sure why.&quot;    Julio, an unemployed 25-year-old, says he'd like to see Gen. Pinochet go. But he doesn't plan on doing anything to try to bring this about. &quot;I'm not interested in voting,&quot; he says, standing outside a two-room shack he is building. &quot;Things aren't going to improve for us, the poor will continue to be poor regardless of who's president.&quot;    The apathy and skepticism that pervade Campamento Fresno abound throughout the country. There have been few street demonstrations in the past several months, and Chileans seem more interested in talking about sports or their money worries than politics. Leaders of the democratic opposition have given up hope of fomenting a Philippines-style &quot;People Power&quot; mobilization that could convince the four-man junta to choose someone other than Gen. Pinochet to be its candidate in the upcoming yes or no vote.    Only two million of the nearly eight million possible voters have registered for the plebiscite, which has to be held by early 1989 but which Gen. Pinochet is expected to call for September 1988. Edgardo Boeninger, a leader of the Christian Democrats, the largest of the 12 or so opposition parties, says that the inscription rate will have to increase sharply for them to reach their target of six million registered voters. Both government and opposition leaders say that the fewer people who register and vote, the better chance Gen. Pinochet has of winning.    Poor people seem to be resigned to Gen. Pinochet's retaining power by hook or by crook. Middle-class and university activists seem burned out from massive protests in 1983-84 that came close to toppling the military regime but were beaten back by intense repression. Yet people from all sectors agree that the most important reason for the lack of political activity has been the opposition's failure to rouse voters.    The opposition parties remain badly divided on most key issues. Even though three of the four groups pressing Gen. Pinochet to hold direct elections agreed this week to combine their efforts, opposition leaders admit that reconciling their disagreements will prove difficult.    The Socialists, Christian Democrats and conservative businessmen haven't been able to overcome their historic differences to agree on any sort of platform to present to the electorate. This has left voters confused and mistrusting a civilian alternative to Gen. Pinochet. Despite acknowledging that they would campaign far more effectively by settling on a single candidate to carry their banner against Gen. Pinochet, the opposition parties show no signs that they will be able to agree on someone.    Gen. Pinochet, a deft politician, has shrewdly exploited the opposition's division. As he stumps the country trying to drum up support, he tells voters at every stop: &quot;It's either me or chaos.&quot; This message could find a sympathetic ear especially among older Chileans, who while chafing under the military's harsh rule, remember the economic disorder of Allende's final months.    While it took the opposition six months just to put out posters calling for free elections, Gen. Pinochet has the entire state apparatus aiding his campaign. Like presidents running for reelection everywhere, Gen. Pinochet is expected to try to win over skeptical voters by pumping the prime. Housing projects for the poor, roads, bridges and other public works are expected to increase in the coming months. Another weapon in the 71-year-old general's arsenal is the government's control over the nation's airways. With some 80% of Chilean households owning a television set, millions of people watch the government-managed news every evening. Opposition newspapers and magazines have a combined circulation of no higher than 100,000. And if opposition demonstrations get too popular, the president has the nation's security forces at his disposal.    Opposition politicians are currently concentrating their efforts on trying to pressure Gen. Pinochet to step down. They are hopeful following recent statements by three of the junta members -- Adm. Jose Toribin Merino, Air Force Gen. Fernando Matthei and &quot;Carabineros&quot; (uniformed military police) Gen. Rodolfo Stange -- that they'd prefer to have a civilian candidate who is in his 50s. The junta members were undoubtedly signaling the opposition to get its act together and rally Chileans behind a credible alternative. But as it stands today, with apathy reigning, the opposition unable to earn the support and trust of voters, and Gen. Pinochet's campaign in high gear, the junta's candidate will be the general, despite his unpopularity. And Gen. Pinochet could very well win his bid to stay in office an additional eight years.    Back in Campamento Fresno, residents shrug their shoulders when asked if Gen. Pinochet's continued rule would polarize the country. &quot;Nobody here knows anything about politics,&quot; says Julio, noting that opposition party members have not visited the shantytown. &quot;We're just trying to get by, day in and day out.&quot;    ---   Mr. Bridges is a free-lance writer. </TEXT></DOC>