<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880812-0141 </DOCNO><HL> Next, a Free-Trade Pact With Japan? </HL><AUTHOR> Ernest H. Preeg </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN EUROP </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> EXE CNG TRE </G><TEXT>   A free-trade agreement between the U.S. and Japan boggles the traditional, most-favored-nation mind. Peter Murphy, deputy U.S. trade representative, recently dismissed the idea as moot, because &quot;it almost certainly would not win U.S. congressional approval.&quot;    Nevertheless, the idea is receiving persistent attention. Ambassador Mike Mansfield is known to favor a free-trade agreement. Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita discussed it with Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd during his Washington visit in January. Treasury Secretary James Baker has alluded to the possibility, and Sen. Lloyd Bentsen has requested the International Trade Commission to assess the pros and cons for bilateral negotiations on the subject.    The problem is that discussion of the pros and cons of entering formal negotiations is taking place before an examination of what the substance of an ultimate agreement might look like. Parallels are often drawn with the pending U.S.-Canada free-trade agreement, but this is a limited and potentially misleading comparison. The U.S.-Canada agreement reflects the distinctive characteristics of the two nations' relationship. This is seen especially in the energy and investment provisions. Major bones of contention between the U.S. and Japan, such as bidding on public procurement contracts and intellectual property protection, are treated very lightly in the U.S.-Canada agreement.    The specifics of a possible U.S.-Japan arrangement have not yet been addressed publicly in any detail in either country. The Japanese have at least three studies on the subject under way, in and out of the government, but there is no counterpart American effort. Sen. Bentsen's request to the International Trade Commission is limited to examining the pros and cons of entering into negotiations with Japan and does not address the substance of a possible agreement.    Despite the paucity of analysis, three distinct lines of reasoning in support of considering a U.S.-Japan agreement have emerged.    The first might be called the stalking horse Uruguay Round/European Communities concept. There is growing concern on both shores of the Pacific that the GATT Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations will not achieve much in terms of multilateral trade liberalization because the EC and some developing countries, such as Brazil and India, are unprepared to open their markets. The EC is becoming increasingly preoccupied with an internal unified market by 1992, and statements about the &quot;reciprocity&quot; expected from outsiders sound ominous to U.S. and Japanese observers.    In a January article in International Economy, principally about the U.S.-Canadian agreement, Secretary Baker wrote: &quot;The rewards of this agreement offer an incentive to other agreements. If possible, we hope this follow-up liberalization will occur in the Uruguay Round. If not, we might be willing to explore a 'market liberalization club' approach, through minilateral arrangements or a series of bilateral agreements.&quot; Yoshiji Nogami, economic counselor at the Japanese Embassy in Washington, was more pointed. In a Journal of Commerce article last month, he was quoted as saying that Asian nations should be prepared to negotiate free-trade agreements with the U.S. if slow-moving GATT talks don't produce results during the next two years.    The second line of reasoning, attributed to Ambassador Mansfield and others on both sides of the Pacific concerned about the trade frictions of recent years, is that a free-trade agreement somehow will produce greater harmony and less &quot;Japan bashing.&quot; This might well not be borne out in practice. The coming year inevitably will bring more difficult trade issues between the two countries, and a formal bilateral arrangement conceivably could raise the decibel level of public debate. It all depends on what the major points of contention will be, and how bilateral mechanisms for handling them would be structured.    This leads to the third line of reasoning, the leapfrogging concept, which is the least clear, yet the most important of the arguments under consideration. The point of departure is that bilateral negotiations in recent years have resolved most outstanding direct barriers to trade and now it is necessary to come to grips with the next tier of far more complex impediments to open, reciprocal trade. On the Japanese side, there is intellectual property protection, government procurement, and various institutional and regulatory problems. Issues on the U.S. side include anti-dumping procedures and growing resistance to Japanese direct investment. The idea is that to handle this broader economic relationship, a broader bilateral mechanism is needed. The item-by-item approach of recent years for dealing with trade issues is simply inadequate.    What do these three lines of reasoning add up to? Is a U.S.-Japan free-trade agreement simply a pipe dream? Or is there a real prospect that such an arrangement will come to fruition?    The answer depends largely on a more detailed and imaginative assessment of the possible components of an arrangement, one that goes beyond the issues enumerated above. The U.S. and Japan are at the forefront of a technological revolution, with roots in the information-technology sector, that is having unprecedented impact on a global scale, and for which the policy implications are only dimly perceived. Much of the strain in the U.S.-Japan trade relationship results from the frenetic pace of new technology development, its commercial application and its wrenching impact on existing firms and workers. Is it not reasonable that the two leading-edge innovators be equally creative in their policy relationship, not only for bilateral issues, but in support of global economic objectives as well?    It is time a comprehensive and forward-looking assessment of possible U.S.-Japanese economic cooperation got under way in this country as it already has in Japan. What are the priority issues that will present problems or opportunities over the next three to five years? What bilateral intergovernmental mechanisms might be created to help bring about greater harmony in trade between the two countries and a more concerted approach to global trade liberalization and economic development in poorer countries? How would a phase-out of tariffs affect bilateral trade, the trade relationships among the Pacific Rim countries, and the GATT multilateral trading system?    It is premature to enter formal negotiations on a possible U.S.-Japan free-trade area, to answer the question posed by Sen. Bentsen to the ITC. However, some hard analysis within the U.S. government is clearly in order. In addition, since the private sectors in both countries are in many respects ahead of governments in adjusting to the new international economic realities, leadership for assessing the future structure of the bilateral economic relationship should come from the two countries' corporate pioneers as well.    It is highly unlikely that formal negotiations for a U.S.-Japan free-trade agreement will develop over the next year or two unless there is a major impasse in the Uruguay Round. But this does not make the idea of a U.S.-Japan agreement moot. The very discussion and examination of its possible contents could help us understand better this complicated and important bilateral economic relationship. And stalking horses do occasionally help the hunter bring home the prey.    ---   Mr. Preeg, former chief economist at the Agency for International Development, is a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C. </TEXT></DOC>