<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880202-0178 </DOCNO><HL> Beneficial Corp.'s Cry of 'Swindle' Is Finally Heeded --- Reinsurance Imbroglio Dating From 1978 May Lead to Indictments </HL><AUTHOR> Jonathan Kwitny (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> BNL HME ENS </CO><IN> INS FIN UTI </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   After several years of false starts, the government is finally taking seriously Beneficial Corp.'s charges that it was the victim of a giant swindle.    A federal grand jury in Manhattan is weighing indictment of insurance executives whom the big financial services concern has blamed in civil court for causing some of the nearly half-billion-dollar bath it took in the reinsurance business.    But federal investigators also are looking at charges that Beneficial itself indulged in fraud by covering up the problem so that its own reinsurers would take much of the hit.    The case is so complex that for years the Federal Bureau of Investigation and various prosecutors shunned it. Now, federal investigators are examining evidence that suggests that executives of reputable companies lied about loss histories to entice other companies to accept reinsurance from a Beneficial unit; lined up reinsurance with firms they secretly controlled and that didn't pay claims; and pocketed millions of dollars in premiums.    The extent of financial harm caused by the alleged fraud isn't clear. Wilmington, Del.-based Beneficial asserts that its business loss -- the amount by which claims and other costs exceed premiums -- will run as high as $40 million. But current arbitration involving 12 reinsurers that have refused to pay claims could raise that figure a lot. Other large insurance companies, including units of Mutual of Omaha Insurance Co. and Newark, Del.-based Home Group Inc. may have incurred losses in the tens of millions of dollars.    Reinsurance is what goes on behind the scenes after a customer buys a big policy. Insurance companies sell off portions of the risk to other insurers so that no one company gets too badly hurt when a disaster results in big claims.    Beneficial's reinsurance troubles trace back to 1978, when it insured big electric and gas utilities -- 40 at first, then 200 -- against gas explosions, toxic-waste leaks and other calamities. Premiums were tens of millions of dollars, and Beneficial says it was told there had only been one minor claim in recent history. It lined up other firms to share the risk.    Premiums came in for two years and claims mostly didn't. In 1980, a Beneficial executive -- unknowingly, he says -- signed an unusual noncancellation pact. Instead of the standard annual renewal based on each year's loss claims, Beneficial committed itself to the apparently lucrative business for five more years. With the hook swallowed, Beneficial got what it calls &quot;a flood&quot; of claims, which it says had been coming in to the utilities for months but were concealed by the men it accuses of swindling it.    By 1981, Beneficial suspected fraud, according to two former executives and other sources. Three years later, in October 1984, the company filed suit in federal court in Newark, N.J., charging fraud against many of the men and companies with which it had worked. Then Beneficial notified its reinsurers.    Last October, one reinsurer -- Commonwealth Insurance Co., a unit of Home Group -- sued in the same court, claiming Beneficial's three-year delay was a coverup, and a fraud in itself. Commonwealth says it wouldn't have accepted the business had it known the true loss history. It claimed large, undetermined damages.    Meanwhile, Commonwealth has withheld payment to Beneficial on claims believed to be in the tens of millions of dollars on utility and other business, arguing that its deal with Beneficial was invalid because of the alleged fraud.    Beneficial says the notion it did anything wrong is &quot;ridiculous,&quot; and notes it was investigating the fraud in the three years before filing its suit.    The mess began when the utilities had problems buying insurance and formed their own insurer, known as Aegis (for Associated Electric andamp; Gas Insurance Services Ltd.). Aegis's business was managed -- for a total fee of $9.1 million -- by Ebasco Services Inc., a consulting unit of Enserch Engineering andamp; Construction Inc. Aegis would pay the first $1 million of a claim, but expected Ebasco to spread further risk on the reinsurance market.    At first, Paul Wilson, the vice president Ebasco assigned to run Aegis, couldn't find takers. Then he teamed up with a friend, Joseph Ambriano, an executive and former chairman of Davis Dorland andamp; Co., a venerable New York insurance brokerage. Mr. Ambriano placed the Aegis business through two men he had worked with before on utilities policies: John A. Kraeutler, an independent contractor who managed underwriting for Beneficial's main insurance unit, American Centennial Insurance Co., and Donald K. Smith, the unit's senior vice president.    But some of the reinsurance that Messrs. Wilson, Ambriano and Kraeutler lined up for American Centennial wasn't exactly blue chip. Mr. Ambriano went to Louis Mazzella, a powerfully built Long Island broker who once smashed a chair over the head of an underwriter he thought was cheating him, and who had recently bought Colonial Assurance Co., a firm now in liquidation.    Colonial reinsured American Centennial. So did some Caribbean-based companies linked to Messrs. Ambriano and Kraeutler, and Interamerica Reinsurance Co., a New York concern partly owned by Mr. Ambriano. All later failed to pay the Beneficial unit when claims arose.    Seeking other reinsurers, Messrs. Wilson, Ambriano, Kraeutler and Mazzella went to Bermuda to recruit Nicholas Jones, a broker Mr. Ambriano had met at trade conventions. Mr. Jones accepted some reinsurance for Commonwealth (the firm suing Beneficial), which he represented. Then, as Mr. Jones testified in one civil suit, Mr. Ambriano said Aegis wanted an offshore broker to be of record on the business, and asked Mr. Jones's firm to handle it for a 10% commission -- later increased. Aegis denies it wanted such an arrangement, and American Centennial says it was told that the only commission would be Mr. Kraeutler's 7%.    Because Mr. Kraeutler was handling the paperwork, Mr. Jones testified that all he had to do was collect $4.5 million in commissions. He testified that he kept half as his share, and sent the other half to a company Mr. Ambriano owned in Florida. That company paid rent on a luxury Manhattan apartment for Mr. Wilson, who had given the Aegis business to Mr. Ambriano. Ebasco, then Mr. Wilson's employer, declines to comment.    Mr. Jones also testified that Mr. Kraeutler ordered part of his own 7% fee sent to Bermuda, where Mr. Jones paid it to Mr. Kraeutler and two associates in cash and, on occasion, gold coins.    Commonwealth says in its complaint that the payments to its agent, Mr. Jones, were a &quot;bribe&quot; to get him to place flawed business with Commonwealth.    American Centennial says in its complaint that Mr. Ambriano and its own manager, Mr. Kraeutler, suckered it into the Aegis business by providing a false history of the utilities' past claims.    Mr. Ambriano says in a brief interview that he got the claims data from a New York law firm, Mendes andamp; Mount. Mendes andamp; Mount won't say whom it was representing or comment otherwise, citing attorney-client privilege. Mr. Kraeutler won't discuss the events, citing pending suits, but in civil court, he and Messrs. Ambriano and Jones vigorously denied wrongdoing.    Mr. Ambriano's lawyer, Bernard Hubscher, says his client was forced to leave Davis Dorland last Nov. 2 because of the grand jury inquiry, and that he assumes Mr. Ambriano is a target. (The firm says Mr. Ambriano agreed to leave in a routine shuffle.) Mr. Ambriano says that he acted on his own in the Aegis matter, and that Davis Dorland wasn't involved, though he used its letterhead.    After Mr. Smith signed the five-year noncancellable renewal, American Centennial says in court filings that it suddenly got socked with 10 or 11 claims totaling more than $28 million. The company says in the filings that Mr. Wilson was sitting on the claims when the pact was signed, and that they &quot;were undoubtedly known to Ambriano and Kraeutler.&quot;    In the fall of 1981, Ronald Ade, American Centennial's vice chairman, became suspicious of the Aegis business. Commonwealth asserts in its complaint that Mr. Ade ordered an audit &quot;despite resistance from&quot; R. Donald Quackenbush, then chairman of American Centennial and an officer of Beneficial. Mr. Ade, in an interview, says, &quot;Basically speaking, that is true,&quot; but won't discuss it further. Beneficial says the audit was routine.    At any rate, an internal Beneficial memo indicates that the five-year agreement was discovered. An investigation, using a lie detector test, concluded that Mr. Smith didn't knowingly sign the agreement, as Messrs. Wilson, Ambriano and Kraeutler said he did. New investigations were started, but the only apparent action Beneficial took was to fire Mr. Ade.    Mr. Quackenbush, now retired, says Mr. Ade was removed for &quot;a lack of management skills,&quot; and that Beneficial at that point blamed its problems on mere bad judgment, not on fraud. But he concedes &quot;there was increasing evidence (at the time) that there was chicanery involved.&quot; He says Mr. Ade had &quot;started to allude to&quot; fraud, and that &quot;we had already commenced to employ people to investigate the possibility.&quot; Mr. Ade agrees.    Asked why Beneficial waited three years to blow the whistle, Mr. Quackenbush says, &quot;I'm not going to answer that on advice of counsel because that gets involved in the litigation.&quot;    In March 1983, American Centennial dumped Mr. Kraeutler for reasons it won't discuss. About the same time, Aegis told Ebasco it would dump the management firm and run its own affairs starting later that year -- a move that made it likely that Mr. Wilson's dealings would be exposed.    In June 1983, Mr. Wilson was found dead in the apartment Mr. Ambriano's company rented. Police say there were three others at the scene, along with large amounts of cocaine, marijuana, cash and at least one unregistered handgun. The medical examiner blamed the death on heart failure due to cocaine abuse. Police say they never pursued the case because it wasn't clear who owned the contraband. All three survivors vanished.    In April 1984, Mr. Kraeutler's company sued American Centennial, Beneficial and two of its officers in a New Jersey state court, seeking damages over the business breakup. Only six months later did Beneficial file suit and notify its reinsurers.    In 1985, Mr. Mazzella's company, Colonial, was insolvent, and he was indicted in federal court, Philadelphia, for diverting $2.4 million in premiums Colonial had received on Aegis reinsurance to his personal account. He insisted he had used the $2.4 million to cover losses caused by fraud, and that he was a scapegoat for a bigger scandal. After failing to persuade several Justice Department offices to investigate, he went last May to the House Judiciary Committee. Its call to the Justice Department provoked the current grand jury investigation. Mr. Mazzella recently pleaded no contest and was sentenced to five years probation and various business penalties.    Meanwhile, Beneficial, having injected a reported $460 million (it says somewhat less, but won't be precise) to bolster reserves, unloaded its insurance units last May to management under an accord in which the only cash paid, $10 million, was taken from assets of the sold units. Beneficial also received $98 million in notes.    Aegis, now with 291 utilities, won't give figures but says the premiums it paid exceeded its claims, and that things &quot;would have worked out fine for American Centennial&quot; except for the brokers and reinsurers it chose. Mr. Kraeutler also has asserted in court that the business was profitable for American Centennial. Beneficial flatly denies that. Court papers say valid claims from the utility business have reached $130 million and are still coming in. </TEXT></DOC>