<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870720-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Concessions FailTo Halt MovesAgainst Toshiba---Sanctions Appear InevitableDespite Japanese Effort,Trade Minister Is Told---By Walter S. Mossberg and Eduardo LachicaStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FREST GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   New concessions by the Japanese government have failed to quell sentiment in Congress for stiff U.S. punishment of Toshiba Corp. over a subsidiary's sale of sensitive technology to the Soviet Union.    Last week, Japanese Trade Minister Hajime Tamura, on an urgent visit here, offered to meet longstanding U.S. demands that Tokyo beef up its efforts to curb the sale of militarily important technology to the Soviet bloc. He announced that Japan will double its small enforcement force attempting to stop such exports, increase its financial backing for multilateral export-control efforts and toughen criminal penalties for violating such controls.    The offer was well-received by Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige, whose main goal in the Toshiba affair is to extract concessions from Tokyo on exporting to the Soviets. But Mr. Tamura received a much cooler reception in Congress, where there is strong support for making an example of Toshiba.    &quot;The atmosphere was extremely severe,&quot; admitted the Japanese trade minister after three days of trying to talk congressional leaders out of supporting a bill that would ban the sale in the U.S. of most Toshiba products for at least two years. The Senate approved the measure, 92-5, on June 30.    U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter warned Mr. Tamura in a private meeting Friday that it now seems inevitable Congress will impose some sanctions on Toshiba. According to an aide, Mr. Yeutter, who knows Mr. Tamura well, put the issue on a highly personal basis, saying he was &quot;deeply, deeply, deeply&quot; distressed about the Toshiba sale of milling equipment that could allow the Soviets to make nuclear submarines much harder to detect.    Toshiba, which has hired prominent Washington lawyer Leonard Garment and others to represent it, is hoping to fend off the ban, especially on products of the parent company and of units other than the Toshiba Machine Co. that made the illegal sale. As another step in its campaign, the company was planning to run large advertisements in U.S. newspapers today explaining its position.    Though Secretary Baldrige promised Mr. Tamura that he would try to soften congressional sanctions in light of the Japanese concessions, administration officials are privately reluctant to put up much of a fight to get Toshiba off the hook. For one thing, congressional anger is so strong that the task would be very difficult. For another, the administration is much more concerned about many other features of the trade bill to which the Toshiba ban provision was added. And, finally, many in the executive branch, like Mr. Yeutter, are themselves privately fuming at Toshiba's action.    The only part of the Senate language the administration may press hard to kill, officials say, is a section authored by Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) that would require the government to sue Toshiba in court for restitution of increased military costs resulting from Soviet submarine advances made possible by the sale.    The Japanese government and Toshiba argue that the guilty subsidiary has already been barred from exporting to the Eastern bloc, and its top officials have been indicted. Moreover, they insist that the giant Toshiba parent company had nothing to do with the sale and shouldn't be punished, even though it owns just over 50% of the machinery unit and its two top officers have resigned over the incident.    But members of Congress and Trade Representative Yeutter reject the argument that the parent company can be held harmless. In the Senate's debate on the Toshiba ban, senators of all ideological stripes repeatedly stressed the need for direct punishment of the company. &quot;We wish to penalize them where it really hurts, in their pocketbooks,&quot; said Sen. Jake Garn (R., Utah), a conservative who sponsored the measure.    Liberal Sen. Dale Bumpers (D., Ark.) said, &quot;If we were in wartime and you could locate the culprits you would try them for high treason. But it is not wartime and all we do here is punish them economically.&quot;    Moderate Sen. John Heinz (R., Pa.) declared, &quot;I do not object to taking careful aim at the offenders and pulling the trigger. They deserve it.&quot;    Even Mr. Baldrige says that, in order to avoid U.S. sanctions, Japan must somehow punish giant Toshiba itself. But senior Japanese officials in Washington last week said privately that sanctions against the parent firm would be legally and culturally impossible.    One ray of hope for Toshiba -- and the Norwegian company Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk, which also faces a ban for helping export the Toshiba equipment -- is that the Senate language contains some loopholes. While the amendment is tough, it does allow continued sale of defense equipment, spare parts and some other items.    What's more, the president could end the ban altogether after two years. And even during the first two years he could &quot;limit the scope of sanctions&quot; on units of Toshiba unrelated to the illegal shipment. The president could also ease the ban if Toshiba or the Japanese government improves export controls to his satisfaction, and he could limit its scope if the costs of the ban to Toshiba reach a level &quot;proportionate&quot; to increased U.S. defense costs caused by the incident.    However, the parent company itself couldn't be exempted unless it agrees to pay &quot;suitable compensation, as determined by the president.&quot;    The reforms announced by Mr. Tamura, which included a pledge to undertake surveillance and on-site inspection of cargo destined for the Soviet bloc, would be precautions that export-driven Japan has never bothered with before. Moreover, if accomplished, Japan's pledge to play a &quot;major role together with the U.S.&quot; in fighting technology diversion through the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom, would be a diplomatic boon for Washington.    For years the U.S. got little help from Japan or the 15 other allies that belong to this Paris-based watchdog body. Paul Freedenberg, assistant secretary of commerce for trade administration, believes that if Japan does back the U.S. on tightening controls on technology exports from the allies, they could pull the rest of Cocom along because of their combined weight in the technology trade. </TEXT></DOC>