<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880603-0161 </DOCNO><HL> Painful Choices in Pet Protection vs. Research </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Stuart Loop </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Two versions of a Pet Protection Act are working their ways through Congress. The essence of the proposed legislation is to prohibit scientists at institutions receiving National Institutes of Health funding from obtaining animals from sources that did not breed and raise the animals themselves, e.g., animal shelters. This raises three questions: First, will it achieve its stated goal; second, is the stated goal worth achieving; third, will there be any foreseeable, undesirable side effects?    Some pets do find their way from shelters into biomedical research. Therefore the proposed legislation will achieve its stated goal. Is this goal worth achieving from either the animals' standpoint or the public's standpoint? The answer to this question depends mostly upon what is meant by &quot;protection.&quot;    Shelters generally hold animals for a fixed time to permit the original owner to claim the animal or the animal to be adopted by another person (28% annually). If the animal is not claimed, it is either killed by the pound (70% annually) or sold/donated to a research organization (2% annually).    The rationale for killing the animals at the pound, rather than making them available for biomedical research, is presumably that use in research constitutes, literally, a fate worse than death. As almost all animals used in research are killed, the &quot;fate-worse-than-death&quot; argument must hinge upon either the method of killing or the procedures involved in conducting the research, or both. Although animal shelters and research organizations use several methods to kill dogs and cats, if there is a trend it is for shelters to use atmosphere vacuum while researchers typically use anesthetic overdoses. If a meaningful distinction exists between these two methods, the preference would surely go to the anesthetic overdose, where unconsciousness and death occur more quickly.    As for the many procedures conducted in biological studies of animals, the Department of Agriculture has for years conducted an annual survey of research-animal use, and categorized that use into three levels according to pain/discomfort. The first category involves procedures that produce no more pain or discomfort than a standard veterinary examination.    The second category involves procedures accompanied by anesthesia to avoid discomfort or pain. And the third involves discomfort or pain without anesthesia because its use would interfere with the purpose of the research. The Agriculture Department annual reports to Congress for fiscal years 1984, '85 and '86 indicate that 1% of dogs and cats were used in category-three research.    From the point of view of an unclaimed dog or cat dying at the shelter or dying in an experiment in category one or two is probably a distinction without a difference. The possibility of being used in a category-three experiment is a real enough difference that -- it is impossible to avoid anthropomorphism -- might or might not be offset by contributing to research that improved the health of other animals or being adopted as a pet following conclusion of the study. (This latter possibility is of unknown prevalence, but at least a half-dozen research groups have done so.)    It is easier to obtain evidence on the public's wishes regarding the use of unclaimed shelter animals. Last year saw a flurry of regulatory decisions at both state and local levels. Thirteen states introduced legislation restricting the use of pound animals in research, with New York's proposal passed into law. Of 13 county/city elected bodies, 10 decided to permit the use of shelter animals in research, three to ban the practice. In local referendums in Arizona, Florida and California, voters approved the research use of shelter animals by wide margins.    Although opinion is plainly divided on the merits of the direct effect of the Pet Protection Act there are several obvious side effects that have little to recommend them. Rep. Robert Mrazek (D., N.Y.), sponsor of the House bill, says his bill is not intended to prevent or slow research using dogs and cats. If his bill is passed and researchers no longer can obtain animals from shelters, the reasonable supposition is that 200,000 additional dogs and cats would be raised by commercial breeders every year to replace the animals no longer available from shelters. By any calculus, this is more, not fewer, animals killed.    Second, the cost of the research is certain to go up. The median cost of a shelter dog is $30, while the median price of a dog from a commercial breeder is $437. Based on estimates by the U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment, the additional cost in research funding could total $81 million.    Money isn't everything, but it's difficult to see what, if anything, worthwhile would be purchased by the Pet Protection Act. The unclaimed shelter animals would all die at the shelter as would the commercially raised replacements used in their stead. This is not pet protection. But the prospects of a shelter animal would be improved by an approach adopted in Albuquerque last year that is approximately the opposite of that of the Pet Protection Act. Albuquerque's City Council voted to continue the sale of abandoned animals to medical research but raised the price, with the increase going to finance a longer holding period.    If the federal government wishes to do the lost dogs and cats of the country a service, it should pay the shelters $200 an animal and require a one-month holding period before an animal is sold for research or killed. Such an approach would greatly increase a shelter animal's opportunity to be adopted, permit biomedical research to use the animals not claimed, and avoid the costly need to purchase research animals from commercial breeders.    ---   Mr. Loop is associate professor of physiological optics at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. </TEXT></DOC>