<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870811-0123 </DOCNO><HL> The New Liberal Isolationism---By Irving Kristol</HL><DD> 08/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)PETROLEUM (PET)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   In a summer that, Washingtonians claim, is unnaturally hot and humid, the air has been made even less breathable by three torrid controversies: the nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the Supreme Court, our Persian Gulf involvement, and the Iran-Contra TV spectacular.    Judge Bork is without a doubt the best-qualified nominee for the Supreme Court in recent decades. Nevertheless he faces rabid -- there is no other word for it -- opposition from liberal organizations, most liberal politicans, and most of the liberal media. They argue that he will give the court a conservative tilt that &quot;will turn the clock back&quot; on such &quot;social issues&quot; as abortion, racial quotas in the name of affirmative action, maybe even school prayer.    Actually, any such radical reversal is unlikely. Judge Bork is an authentic legal conservative, in the Edmund Burke tradition of conservatism, who believes that legal precedent, if not totally binding, must be approached with respectful caution. What really inflames the opposition is not his traditional conservatism but his constitutional philosophy, which asserts that, except in extreme cases, those social issues are not constitutional issues at all but are best left to our democratically elected legislatures to cope with, one way or another. It is his democratic bias, not his conservative bias, that horrifies them.    That elected politicians should be so horrified is less paradoxical than it seems. As my colleague at the American Enterprise Institute, former Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Perle, has remarked in another connection: &quot;As nature loathes a vacuum, the Congress loathes responsibility. Give senators or congressmen half a chance and they will shape any legislation into an opportunity to vote on both sides of an issue.&quot;    This holds for state legislatures as well, and is especially true for these very controversial social issues. Most elected officials are profoundly grateful to the Supreme Court for &quot;getting them off the hook,&quot; by allowing them to plead constitutional impotence. They are appalled at the prospect, however remote, of having to speak plainly and vote unequivocally.    As for the liberal political community in general -- and its voice, the national media -- its loyalty to the democratic idea is entirely a function of circumstance. If regulatory agencies provide them with liberal results, they will want them to be as free of legislative supervision as possible. And if the courts give them liberal verdicts, they they will opt, in effect, for a doctrine of judicial supremacy. If the situation is reversed, their views will be reversed. In short, and to put it bluntly, American liberalism today is wholeheartedly committed to liberal results rather than democratic principles, and regards democratic procedures as mere contingent expediencies to be discarded when ineffectual.    This anti-democratic bias is also scandalously visible in the more prestigious law schools, dominated by liberal and left-liberal faculties, who have the presumption to assert that Judge Bork's legal views are &quot;outside the mainstream&quot; of contemporary judicial thinking. Since they also believe that Ronald Reagan is &quot;outside the mainstream&quot; of American political opinion, and ought to be impeached for having dared to be elected, one knows just how much weight to give to this indictment. What it really comes down to is their belief that it is surely unconstitutional, and perhaps even sacrilegious, for the Supreme Court to have a conservative majority.    The fuss about the Persian Gulf reveals that American liberalism has also abandoned the principles that have guided the foreign policy of previous Democratic administrations. Today, the Democratic Party is well on its way to becoming the isolationist party. It is the isolationism preached as socialist or &quot;progressive&quot; doctrine by such as Norman Thomas prior to World War II, rather than the nationalist isolationism of conservative Republicans of that era, but isolationism it unquestionably is. For if it is wrong for us to help friendly Arab states in the gulf, with the risk, not of war, but of a brief naval-air conflict that we would surely win, then it is impossible to envision our intervening anywhere, for any reason.    Our main interest in the Persian Gulf is as clear as it is urgent: We must not allow Iran to emerge from its war with Iraq as the dominant power in the Middle East. That would be an unmitigated disaster for the region and for the world. If Iran can successfully bully Kuwait into acquiescence to its hegemony, the other Arab states will have no alternative but to follow suit; an Islamic-Israeli war is inevitable; and the whole Islamic world, including such nations as Turkey and Pakistan, could well go up in flames. To avoid this we don't have to invade Iran. At most, a &quot;bloody nose&quot; delivered by our naval and air power would suffice.    Yes, we might suffer some losses, the prospect of which has sent many congressmen (not all liberal, not all Democratic) into hysterics. &quot;We don't want American boys dying in foreign lands,&quot; they declaim. Quite right: American boys should stay home and play with American girls. But American soldiers -- &quot;fighting men,&quot; we used to call them -- are there precisely to fight and, if necessary, to die in foreign lands. They understand this, even if others do not. They did not volunteer for the armed forces in order to enjoy PX privileges.    The new liberal isolationism, it should be noted, is far more extreme than its predecessors, since it now applies, for the first time, to the Western Hemisphere, previously covered by the Monroe Doctrine. That is the real message of the Iran-Contra hearings. Or at least that was the intended message, until Ollie North so splendidly made his successful takeover bid for this species of political theater. That the administration had previously failed to focus public opinion on this issue reveals that its &quot;public diplomacy&quot; has been as feeble and incoherent as its private diplomacy.    Political theater is exactly what it was -- congressmen and their lawyers asking questions to which they already knew the answers, these having been provided (except in the case of Lt. Col. North) in preliminary private hearings. In no other democracy is such a degradation of the political process imaginable. It has been a nauseating spectacle, brimming over with feigned astonishment and hypocritical self-righteousness. Everything that Congress thought the American people ought to know could have been conveyed in its final report, for which no public hearings were necessary.    But, like all political theater, it had a propagandist purpose, aside from providing a batch of congressmen with presumably valuable television exposure. This was to undermine further popular and congressional support for the anti-Communist resistance in Nicaragua. When Lt. Col. North seemed to be defeating that purpose, one congressman, pointing to opinion polls, retreated to the question: &quot;Don't the American people have the right to be wrong?&quot; Of course they do. But the real question is: &quot;Does Congress have the right to be wrong?&quot; It is because Ollie North candidly posed that question that his inquisitors suffered such severe disorientation.    One wishes the administration would pursue this issue with more energy than it seems to possess. Whatever the polls show -- and they are notoriously fickle and uninformative, with most Americans having only the fuzziest notion of what's happening in Nicaragua -- it is impossible to believe that the American people are as unconcerned as Congress seems to be about a Soviet-dominated Central America or South America. The lesson of Ollie North to this administration is unambiguous: &quot;You have a strong case -- argue it forcefully, determinedly, passionately.&quot;    One wonders. Can Ronald Reagan, George Shultz and Caspar Weinberger act on this message?    One wonders even more as one observes the latest desperate, bewildering manueuvers from the White House.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>