<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0084 </DOCNO><HL> With Japan Fails to AidU.S. Firms, as Intended---Instead, Prices Fall in Tokyo,A Gray Market DevelopsAnd Chip Users Get Mad---Time for an Industrial Policy?---By Brenton R. Schlender and Stephen Kreider YoderStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN NIPNY HIT FREST GOVMT AMD MOT NSM INTC DRAM TXN LLSIELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMPUTERS (EDP)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   When the U.S. and Japan signed a semiconductor trade agreement last July 31, President Reagan hailed it as a &quot;landmark pact&quot; that would &quot;help prevent future unfair trade practices.&quot;    The accord has turned out to be a landmark pact, all right, but not because it has shored up the ailing American semiconductor industry, which last year lost more than $1 billion. Rather, it has shored up the conviction of many manufacturers that quasi-protectionist measures designed to keep a strategic industry healthy in the face of Japanese competition don't necessarily work.    The agreement was an unusually sweeping one, setting minimum prices for certain Japanese-made chips sold in any country other than Japan. The measure, which is designed to halt allegedly unfair pricing of Japanese chips in the U.S. market and elsewhere, also commits the Japanese government to help U.S. companies sell more of their chips in Japan. But, so far, it has led mainly to charges that the Japanese are cheating, to deep-seated Japanese animosity toward the U.S. and to anger among chip users throughout the world.    It has also created anomalies that work against U.S. chip makers. Among other things, the accord has created a glut in Japan, causing chip prices there to drop sharply and hurting American companies trying to penetrate the Japanese market, which now is the biggest in the world. Meanwhile, in this country, the pact has slightly raised prices of all chips, but not enough to help domestic manufacturers much. What's more, it has accelerated the Japanese purchase of weakened U.S. chip makers to gain freer access to the market here.    The disparity between the prices of Japanese chips in Japan and the prices that the Japanese are supposed to charge for them abroad has spawned a &quot;gray market&quot; throughout Asia for smuggled, cut-rate Japanese chips. And the pact does nothing to help U.S. companies overcome structural disadvantages imposed by the more impatient shareholders and capital markets on this side of the Pacific.    This past Monday, the U.S. industry's trade group asked President Reagan to impose punitive &quot;trade measures&quot; against the Japanese to better enforce the agreement. Earlier, in January, a senior U.S. official visiting Japan implied that the Reagan administration might cancel the chip agreement if it didn't &quot;begin to work, and work fast.&quot;    The official, who asked not to be identified, also accused Hitachi Ltd., Toshiba Ltd., Fujitsu Ltd. and NEC Corp. of continuing to dump chips in third-country markets at as little as 40% of the companies' manufacturing costs. The Japanese companies denied the charges.    Even as general protectionist sentiment is stirring in Congress, the chip accord is increasingly seen by many as a protectionist failure. But many experts and industry leaders think the answer lies in going beyond protectionism rather than retreating from it. They think the U.S. chip industry would be better off with a Japanese-style industrial policy that employs not only market protection but also government support and direction in financing chip manufacturing and research and development.    &quot;You would think we would be able to come up with something better than what amounts to an obviously dated and ineffective cartel arrangement . . . and a poor attempt at protectionism,&quot; says Chalmers Johnson, a professor of political science at the University of California at Berkeley who specializes in Japanese industrial policy.    The Japanese, who only grudgingly acceded to the agreement, seem just as confounded by how little the accord has done for the U.S. &quot;It was supposed to help revive the U.S. industry, but the price of American chips hasn't gone up as much as it should,&quot; says Junji Yoshihara, the deputy director for semiconductors at Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, or MITI, the agency responsible for making sure that Japanese companies honor the accord. He adds, &quot;The whole thing is meaningless unless U.S. companies take advantage of it.&quot;    In fact, MITI and Japanese makers charge that U.S. companies themselves are dumping chips on world markets to undercut Japanese minimum prices.    Semiconductors -- small slices, or chips, of photographically etched silicon that channel electricity along microscopic pathways -- are the brains of almost everything called &quot;high technology,&quot; from modern weapons systems to toaster ovens. Although U.S. companies invented the industry, they no longer dominate it.    Currently, Japanese companies occupy the top three slots in the list of the industry's biggest concerns and six of the top 10. A decade ago, U.S. companies claimed seven of the top 10 positions while Japan held only two.    For most of the industry's 28-year history, the chip market seemed to grow fast enough for all comers to flourish. But when computer sales abruptly slowed in late 1984 and early 1985, triggering a plunge in the demand for chips, the Japanese adopted an aggressive strategy of cutting prices, which plummeted in less than six months by about 70% for the most common chips -- dynamic-random-access memory chips, or D-rams, and erasable programmable readonly memories, or Eproms.    Together, D-rams and Eproms, both of which are used in practically every type of computer, account for about 10% of the $36 billion world market for semiconductors.    By the end of 1985, three U.S. manufacturers, Intel Corp., National Semiconductor Corp. and Motorola Inc., all quit making 256-kilobit D-rams, the industry's biggest-selling chip, to concentrate on chips under less pricing pressure. Advanced Micro Devices Inc. followed suit in 1986. Now only two U.S. companies, Micron Technology Inc. and Texas Instruments Inc., make 256-kilobit D-rams for commercial sales, and they account for less than 10% of the world market.    Japanese companies, most of which are part of large, diversified conglomerates and hence have deeper pockets than U.S. companies, continued to sell chips even at a loss. They were counting on recouping their losses when markets revived and when they, having driven some U.S. producers out of some key markets, would hold a larger share.    But U.S. companies, contending that the strategy was unfair and illegal, asked the U.S. Department of Commerce to stop the &quot;predatory pricing.&quot; Those complaints prompted the talks that led to the agreement signed last July 31. Japan's semiconductor makers reluctantly went along with the agreement at MITI's behest.    &quot;Japan went too far&quot; in flooding the market with memories, concedes Tsuyoshi Kawanishi, senior vice president and the top executive of Toshiba's semiconductor group, adding that the trade pact was &quot;an unavoidable consequence.&quot;    But the prices set under the agreement, while they didn't greatly help the U.S. manufacturers, wound up hurting most of the Japanese companies. The Japanese were aghast when the Commerce Department released its first minimum prices for chips covered by the pact. Assigned prices for 256-kilobit D-rams, for example, ranged from about $3 to $7.50, compared with a $2.25 average price before the agreement.    Accordingly, in the first few weeks after the agreement, average prices for 256-kilobit D-rams went up about 15% in the U.S., according to Mark Giudici, an analyst for Dataquest Corp., a market-research firm in San Jose, Calif. Since then, however, prices have fallen back down to pre-agreement levels for many chips -- currently as low as $1.90 for 256-kilobit D-rams and $3.95 for 256-kilobit Eproms.    The agreement hasn't done much to raise chip prices because chip makers in both the U.S. and Japan built too much manufacturing capacity during the boom years and because chip buyers have delayed purchases or found sources not bound by the accord.    &quot;The difficulty is that there is still overcapacity and oversupply,&quot; says Clyde Prestowitz, a former Commerce Department trade negotiator who took part in the talks that resulted in the chip accord. &quot;What the agreement tried to do was put the full cost of the overcapacity on the Japanese, but that is hard to do given the way the Japanese do anything to avoid closing factories.&quot;    Only NEC Corp. and Toshiba, which were assigned the lowest prices for most chips, were able to keep selling many in the U.S. A half-dozen other Japanese makers saw their U.S. sales practically evaporate when prices for some chips more than tripled overnight.    Meanwhile, in Japan prices dropped even lower than before the accord, because of oversupply created by falling U.S. demand. &quot;Prices just cratered,&quot; says Wilfred Corrigan, the president of LSI Logic Corp., a Milpitas, Calif., concern that makes chips in the U.S., Europe and Japan. &quot;They had to do something with all those chips they couldn't sell over here.&quot;    Those low prices make it even harder for U.S. companies, which currently account for about 9% of the chip sales in Japan, to increase their sales much there, even with the help of a weak dollar. MITI was having a tough time anyway complying with the accord's provision for helping to increase U.S. makers' market share in Japan, partly because Japanese chip consumers complained that the U.S. industry doesn't make many of the chips they really need in Japan.    &quot;U.S. access to Japanese markets has hardly increased at all and may have declined,&quot; a U.S. trade official said last month. &quot;There are no cash registers ringing.&quot; MITI's Mr. Yoshihara contends that U.S. market share has &quot;grown somewhat&quot; since 1985 and continues to increase, and Japanese companies say that it is unreasonable to demand marked results so soon.    The glut in Japan has prompted some chip makers to sell their surplus to brokers who have found ways to dodge pricing controls on chips bound to U.S. customers. Participating in the gray market, many of these brokers smuggle chips out of Japan to other Asian countries, where the chips are plugged by the hundreds into dummy circuit boards that U.S. companies buy at prices 20% to 40% lower than prices set by the agreement. The pact doesn't cover chips wired onto circuit boards.    Gray marketeering may help account for the most recent U.S. cheating charges. &quot;We aren't allowing it deliberately,&quot; contends Tomihiro Matsumura, a senior vice president of NEC who heads the corporation's semiconductor group. It happens anyway, he says, because assigned prices in the U.S. &quot;go against the fundamental principles of business.&quot;    &quot;No matter what you do,&quot; he explains, &quot;what is cheap is going to flow to where it's expensive. It's like putting a high tax on cigarettes. It just encourages smuggling, and semiconductors are easy to move around.&quot;    One broker who deals in the gray market asserts that &quot;there's absolutely no problem buying anything you want.&quot; An American businessman living in Tokyo, he says that most brokers use &quot;suitcase brigades&quot; -- squads of runners who fly with suitcases full of chips to the U.S. or to Hong Kong, South Korea, Taiwan or Singapore. And some U.S. buyers go to Japan carrying only a suitcase of money, returning on the next flight with another bag holding as many as 40,000 chips worth more than $150,000. Few get caught, the broker says, and those who do aren't arrested but simply are told they can't carry the chips through.    MITI has tried to crack down on dumping in third countries since November, when U.S. trade officials first threatened to cancel the accord and impose in its place stiff duties on Japanese chips. Companies say MITI instructed them to charge at least 90% of their assigned price for any chips sold outside Japan. The agency also tightened restrictions on small export shipments often used by gray marketeers and extended the waiting period for export licenses to two or three weeks, from the two or three days previously. The delay, says the broker, ruins legitimate export business because customers usually aren't willing to wait.    Nevertheless, disparities remain between the Asian prices of Japanese chips and their official U.S. prices. A 256-kilobit Eprom, a chip used in most personal computers, costs $3.95 in the U.S. but can be purchased in Japan or on the gray market for $2.53, a 35% discount, according to Dataquest.    Those disparities hurt much larger U.S. industries -- chip-consuming industries such as computers and telecommunications -- by preventing them from buying chips at the lowest possible prices unless they resort to the gray market.    Some do buy on the gray market but are angry that they have to go to such lengths. &quot;These {U.S.-assigned} prices make us less competitive. They make us import more chips rather than buy them here, which hurts the trade balance, and it makes more of us think about moving manufacturing overseas,&quot; says Scott McNealy, the president of Sun Microsystems Inc., a maker of minicomputers based in Mountain View, Calif. &quot;How am I going to be competitive if we have to pay an average of $200 more for each work station we make?&quot;    Sun hasn't yet moved any manufacturing overseas, but Mr. McNealy says the company might, if lower chip prices overseas persist. Even before the chip agreement was signed, many U.S. companies started looking around Asia for potential factory sites. &quot;It's like a mob scene in Hong Kong and Singapore,&quot; says an executive of Convergent Technologies Inc., a Santa Clara, Calif., maker of microcomputers. &quot;American companies are trying to find manufacturing space there to avoid paying the premium.&quot;    Those same pricing disparities encourage Japanese companies to circumvent the accord by simply buying parts of the U.S. industry, in a strategy designed to combine their manufacturing edge with acquired U.S. technology and marketing. The incentive is that prices of chips made in the U.S. aren't controlled. NEC, which already makes D-rams in the U.S., plans to expand its capacity here. Toshiba and Hitachi have announced plans to start making Drams in the U.S., and Mitsubishi Electric Corp. says it might. Meanwhile, last October, Fujitsu said it planned to purchase Fairchild Semiconductor Corp., a pioneering Silicon Valley company previously owned by Schlumberger Ltd.    And a recent study by Dataquest notes that 26 Japanese companies have invested in, or entered joint ventures or licensing agreements with, 34 small U.S. semiconductor companies since 1984. Many of the target companies build &quot;application-specific integrated circuits,&quot; or Asics, a kind of small-volume, high-priced chip custom-made for a particular customer. Many industry experts think the market for Asics, which aren't covered by the agreement, will be the fastest-growing and most profitable part of the industry in the next decade.    Some Japanese executives warn that such acquisitions may backfire, however, stirring up new anti-Japanese sentiment in the U.S., and indeed the accelerating trend has led to charges of &quot;predatory&quot; Japanese investment on top of the previous charges of predatory pricing. &quot;We now see an effort by the Japanese to acquire small companies that have been wounded by dumping so they can acquire technology without the initial costs,&quot; says Bruce Smart, an undersecretary of commerce and one of the negotiators of the trade agreement.    Beyond that, Japanese companies are redoubling their efforts to sell chip products not covered by the agreement. &quot;Now they're moving on to new markets and starting the whole thing all over again,&quot; says Joseph Parkinson, the chairman and chief executive of Micron.    &quot;The movement was already happening, but now it is speeding up, {especially} the generation change between 256-K and one-megabit D-rams&quot; and the movement toward Asics, says Sutezo Hata, the senior executive managing director of Hitachi Ltd. &quot;What should have taken a cycle of three years now will take only two because we're being forced to look on to the next generation.&quot;    With all the unforeseen anomalies, many chip-industry experts predict that the agreement will be fully scuttled before long. &quot;I don't think it will last to the end of the year,&quot; says Gene Norrett, a vice president in charge of Dataquest's semiconductor-industry group. &quot;It doesn't seem to be doing anybody any good.&quot;    &quot;If the trade agreement isn't the right medicine, the question follows: What is?&quot; says Mr. Johnson, the political-science professor at Berkeley. &quot;Whatever it is -- a consortium, stronger protectionism, industrial policy -- the government is involved in it whether it likes it or not, because the threat to our best industries doesn't end with the Japanese. It's just beginning.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>