<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Managua Tightens Grip on Former Contra Strongholds---Regime Exploits Fighting LullTo Build Up Military, Woo Countryside---By Clifford Krauss and Frederick KempeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> CAMOAPA, Nicaragua  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Kicking up dust and gravel, dozens of cattlemen ride into town on horseback and in trucks for a Sunday rodeo sponsored by the Sandinista government to inaugurate a dairy project.    Only two years ago, these rough-and-tumble cowboys sheltered and fed the Contra rebels who then roamed freely through the eastern mountains of Boaco province. Conservative by nature, these country folk wanted nothing to do with the Marxist-led regime.    The cowboys are still grumbling about government policies that keep milk and beef prices low. But their appearance at a Sandinista function shows they recognize a new political reality: The Nicaraguan regime is taking advantage of its adversaries' dwindling fortunes to boost its military hold in areas where the Contras were once stronger.    After Congress cut off military aid to the Contras in 1984, the Sandinistas had time to restructure their army into highly effective anti-guerrilla units. Increasing military aid from the Eastern bloc greatly enhanced the Sandinista army's firepower and ability to employ sophisticated military equipment.    The two-year lull -- during which the undersupplied Contras mostly stayed in their Honduran border camps -- not only allowed the Sandinistas to build up their armed forces. It also gave them time to devise measures for countering the popular resentment that had fueled the Contra cause in the first place.    Managua, for instance, took some of the sting out of the unpopular draft by releasing conscripts after two years of duty. It also sought to appease regions known for their resistance to the revolution with special social and economic benefits.    &quot;This is a political war,&quot; says Nicaraguan Vice President Sergio Ramirez. &quot;They either have the people on their side or they don't.&quot; He adds: &quot;They don't have any opportunity to win. They lost that over the last two years.&quot;    Whether the people are on the Sandinistas' side is another question. Indeed, there are signs of growing disenchantment toward the regime, including a sharp decline in membership of the so-called revolutionary committees that were set up to keep an eye out for supposed enemies of the state.    At the same time, the government has moved to silence the last independent voices of influence in Nicaragua, shutting down the opposition newspaper La Prensa and the Roman Catholic station Radio Catolica.    Contra leaders dispute Managua's claims that they've already lost the struggle. They say $100 million in fresh U.S. aid has enabled them to quicken the pace of their infiltration into Nicaragua. They predict they'll make military progress in the next three months. &quot;Our plan is to activate the highest percentage of our troops to be everywhere,&quot; says Contra leader Adolfo Calero.    Adds Luis Rivas Leal, a top Contra military strategist based in Miami: &quot;As long as there is Sandinismo inclined toward Marxism-Leninism, there will be a fight against it. We have the capacity to show the Congress and the Nicaraguan people that the Sandinistas are vulnerable.&quot;    Discontent in Nicaragua, however, hasn't yet boiled over into insurrection. Nor have the Contras been able to crack the Sandinistas' urban security apparatus, largely designed and advised by East Germans and Cubans.    Moreover, it now appears that an escalating power struggle among Contras might rob them of the advantage they gained last summer with Congress's approval of the Reagan administration's aid package.    Arturo Cruz, the anti-Sandinista leader most respected in Washington, has cleared his desk at the Contras' Miami office and his colleagues expect him to resign formally next week. The crumbling of his coalition with more conservative Contras led by Mr. Calero could jeopardize renewed U.S. assistance next spring and even increase resistance to money already approved.    The infighting will give the Sandinistas more time to coalesce. Here in Boaco province, for example, the Sandinistas are forming a defense cordon of militarized agricultural cooperatives in which peasant militiamen armed with assault rifles and mortars patrol the countryside. Meanwhile, the government is attempting to build support by handing state farms over to landless peasants and offering foreign exchange incentives to cattlemen to boost meat production.    The Caribbean coast, which only three years ago was engulfed by an anti-Sandinista Indian rebellion, is now largely peaceful. The government is repairing and painting schools and medical clinics and bringing movie projectors for the first time to Indian villages.    The last couple of years of breathing space have also enabled the Sandinistas to reinforce defenses around several potential Contra targets, including the economically important Bonanza and Rosita gold mines, as well as the port of Puerto Cabezas. Such improvements make it more unlikely that the Contras can seize territory and establish a provisional government.    The Sandinistas showed off their increased military prowess in December during two impressive exercises that demonstrated their ability to execute a highly mobile combined armed assault using the increased firepower of Soviet Hind helicopters and antiaircraft weapons.    &quot;They never would have been able to pull off an exercise like that even a year ago,&quot; said one U.S. administration official. &quot;For a little, dumpy Third World country, they have a lot to be proud of.&quot; U.S. military experts say the Sandinistas now have about 60,000 active-duty soldiers and a reserve of 100,000 to 120,000 -- the largest national security force in the region.    Western military specialists say the Sandinistas in the past two years have improved preparation of soldiers for the front through 60-day to 90-day basic training programs established by the Cubans. They also have expanded their counterinsurgency intelligence, which relies on East European technology and their own experience as guerrillas who ousted Nicaraguan dictator Anastasio Somoza.    The Sandinistas' increased effectiveness can be measured in their claims that they are capturing larger numbers of Contra operatives and suffering fewer battle casualties. Tomas Borge, one of the nine members of the directorate that leads the country, says there are now seven Contra casualties for each Sandinista casualty, in contrast to a ratio of about one-to-one at the height of the Contras' effectiveness in 1983 and 1984.    The Contras brush aside those claims as propaganda, though a U.S. administration official agrees that the Sandinistas have slashed casualty rates.    The Sandinista army has particularly benefited from the creation of mobile units in 1984 and 1985 that specialize in counterinsurgency warfare. Some of these units are rapid deployment forces, known by the acronym BLI, largely patterned after elite Salvadoran army units designed by U.S. advisers.    The Sandinistas have also established 350-man forces known as Hunter batallions, patterned after similar counterinsurgency units in Venezuela and El Salvador. These are regionally based and made up of local forces whose familiarity with local terrain and customs improves their effectiveness against the Contras.    At the same time, Moscow and its East European allies increased military assistance to the Sandinistas last year after a decline the year earlier, a U.S. administration official said. He said Moscow has made Nicaragua &quot;a higher priority project&quot; in response to increased U.S. backing of the Contras. </TEXT></DOC>