<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870728-0016 </DOCNO><HL> Meese Is Plagued by Twin Controversies---Iran, Wedtech RenewQuestions on Judgment---By John J. Fialka and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Edwin Meese III is a man under siege, with his political survival hanging in the balance.    The beleaguered attorney general, who has survived frequent troubles since coming to Washington in 1981, now faces serious new questions raised on two fronts -- the Iran-Contra affair and the Wedtech Corp. corruption scandal.    When the 55-year-old Mr. Meese appears today at the Iran-Contra hearings, he will encounter tough questions based on evidence that he was more deeply involved in the arms-for-hostages scandal than he has admitted. He also will be pressed on whether his inquiry into the affair was part of a coverup.    Investigators for the congressional committees and for independent counsel Lawrence Walsh now believe that Mr. Meese was quietly giving the White House legal advice about its secret dealings from the beginning of 1986 and perhaps earlier.    People familiar with the grand jury probe of the affair say two former National Security Council staff members have told the grand jury that they questioned the legality of Lt. Col. Oliver North's activities in late 1985 or in 1986, and were told by White House officials that Mr. Meese had examined the North operation and had found no problems.    Meanwhile, the Wedtech scandal looms like another dark cloud over the peripatetic attorney general. Another independent counsel is investigating Mr. Meese's role in helping Wedtech obtain defense contracts after the small Bronx, N.Y.-based manufacturer was touted to him by an old lawschool classmate, E. Robert Wallach, a San Francisco attorney who profited handsomely from Wedtech's government business.    In a rare interview, Mr. Wallach, a liberal Democrat, says he had a confidant relationship with Mr. Meese and even rented an apartment in Washington in 1982 to be more available to him. He also used the opportunity to promote Wedtech and to persuade Mr. Meese to entrust his life savings in a lucrative &quot;blind trust&quot; managed by a Wedtech financial adviser now accused of fraud.    Mr. Meese denies doing anything improper to promote Wedtech and denies receiving any benefits from the company. Moreover, he has described himself as a peripheral player in the high-stakes decision to sell arms to Iran, and is expected to vigorously defend his actions in a lengthy opening statement. He didn't, he says, give legal advice to guide Col. North's effort to aid the Contras.    The twin controversies have renewed the questions about Mr. Meese's political and ethical judgments that were raised in 1984 when another independent counsel investigated a pattern of questionable loans to Mr. Meese at the onset of his previous job as the president's counselor. Though the counsel found no evidence of a crime, Mr. Meese subsequently promised the Senate Judiciary Committee that the experience had taught him a lesson. &quot;I can assure you that I have a much higher level of sensitivity to these matters.&quot;    Sen. Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat whose Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee has been examining Mr. Meese's financial disclosure statements, contends that the insensitivity that attracted the earlier investigation continues: &quot;When it comes to ethics issues, the attorney general is mighty sloppy.&quot;    And the Iran-Contra scandal threatens to dangerously damage Mr. Meese's public credibility. For example, investigators have sworn testimony alleging that Col. North claimed to have personally asked the attorney general to sidetrack a criminal investigation late last year that threatened to expose covert White House activities. After hearing Mr. Meese himself testify last year, the Senate Intelligence Committee reported that Mr. Meese had &quot;considerable contact&quot; with Col. North &quot;in and out of the White House on a casual basis.&quot;    Former National Security Adviser John Poindexter testified recently that Mr. Meese worked closely with him on the 1986 intelligence finding that authorized an arms trade with Iran. Mr. Meese, he said, came up with a way to avoid notifying Congress of the deal, a procedure that would have normally been required. As Rear Adm. Poindexter put it, in many dealings with the White House, Mr. Meese &quot;had two hats&quot; -- one as attorney general and one as a trusted, &quot;special adviser to the president.&quot;    Mr. Meese was also in frequent touch with an old friend, the late former Central Intelligence Director William J. Casey. And the attorney general consulted NSC members on two issues Mr. Meese follows in detail: espionage and counterterrorism. Mr. Meese, however, has denied improperly interfering with any criminal probes, and his spokesmen say the attorney general doesn't recall any one-on-one meetings with Col. North.    Whatever Mr. Meese's role was in the arms-to-Iran initiative as the president's adviser, his investigation of the Iran-Contra affair as the nation's top law-enforcement officer is stirring ridicule. New Hampshire Sen. Warren Rudman, the Republican vice chairman of the Senate Iran-Contra committee, accuses Mr. Meese of &quot;gross incompetence.&quot; Sen. David Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat who is also on the committee, calls the early investigation a &quot;Keystone Kop&quot; operation.    Testimony and other material gathered by the various investigators suggest that in the beginning of November Mr. Meese told an aide to begin a top-secret, preliminary inquiry to determine the legal justifications for the arms-for-hostages swap. Despite his concerns, Mr. Meese seems to have failed to take any steps to safeguard critical documents or to confront key witnesses.    When President Reagan personally authorized a more formal &quot;fact-finding&quot; effort later that month, according to investigators, it took nearly a week more before the Justice Department moved to safeguard documents. Meanwhile, a large volume of evidence disappeared into government shredders.    Mr. Meese has complained that he and other administration officials have been victimized by &quot;a lot of half-truths and false information,&quot; and has urged &quot;the American people to reserve judgment . . . until the whole story comes out.&quot;    Ed Meese has been feeling pressure since he came from California to follow his longtime friend Ronald Reagan, a man whom Mr. Meese has served since 1967 when he joined Mr. Reagan's staff in California as the governor's legal aide. In some ways, it was those pressures that led to his connection with Wedtech.    After arriving in Washington in 1981, Mr. Meese, a staunch California conservative, spent many hours commiserating with his old friend Mr. Wallach. &quot;He was doing way too much,&quot; says Mr. Wallach, who found Mr. Meese involved in guiding President Reagan toward major decisions on both domestic and foreign policy issues.    &quot;He was having a tough time, almost from the beginning in terms of pressures, leaks and innuendo about his skills and his relationship with the president. He needed a friend and we're good friends. . . . Here was an opportunity to make at least a particle of a contribution.&quot;    Mr. Wallach used the opportunity to promote Wedtech, both in conversations with Mr. Meese and in memorandums mailed to his home. Here was a small manufacturing company in the Bronx that was run by a man of Puerto Rican ancestry and that appeared to be carrying out the Reagan agenda by taking its workers off the welfare rolls in one of the poorest neighborhoods in New York.    &quot;It was a chance to go to Ed Meese and say, 'You are regarded as being hostile to blacks, Hispanics and so forth. Here is an opportunity to bring free-market opportunities to these areas.' He accepted it on that basis,&quot; Mr. Wallach says.    Wedtech eventually received more than $160 million in military contracts set aside through the Small Business Administration for minority-run companies. After the company went public in 1983, Mr. Wallach received more than $1 million of stock and legal fees and another $1.6 million of stock options.    Wedtech is now in bankruptcy-law proceedings. Four of its top officials have pleaded guilty to a corporate life style that involved bribery, fraud and conspiracy. More than a dozen local, state and federal officials have been implicated. Last week, Wedtech's current management filed a civil suit accusing Mr. Wallach of defrauding the company, a charge that he denies.    Independent counsel James McKay is investigating Mr. Meese's multiple connections to Wedtech, including his admitted intervention while serving as counselor to President Reagan to help it secure a $32 million Army contract. Mr. Meese has acknowledged helping Wedtech obtain a &quot;fair hearing,&quot; but nothing more.    Mr. Meese was drawn more deeply into the Wedtech tangle a few days ago when former White House political director and longtime Meese crony Lyn Nofziger was indicted on charges of illegally lobbying federal officials, including Mr. Meese, on behalf of Wedtech. Mr. Nofziger denies any wrongdoing.    The independent counsel also is investigating whether Mr. Meese or his wife received any benefits from a Wedtech financial adviser who established a &quot;blind trust&quot; for the attorney general. As Mr. Wallach explains it, the trust was an effort to help his old friend manage his money.    After Mr. Meese became attorney general in 1985, he was working 12-hour days at that job while continuing to also serve President Reagan. For example, Mr. Meese still heads the Domestic Policy Council, which shapes all major domestic policy. His sprawling workload was a familiar pattern to Mr. Wallach, who recalls that when the two were in law school Mr. Meese was involved in a jumble of other activities that tended to distract him. &quot;Ed was not a focused scholar,&quot; Mr. Wallach says.    While Mr. Meese's financial record-keeping has always been somewhat ragged, the Meese philosophy in investing -- seen through federal financial disclosure statements -- had been solidly conservative. He and his wife, Ursula, preferred a mix of blue-chip stocks, money funds and California utility bonds. That changed when in the spring of 1985 Mr. Wallach introduced the Meeses to a San Francisco investment counselor, W. Franklyn Chinn. Mr. Chinn had been named financial consultant to Wedtech a month earlier.    During a dinner chat with Mr. Wallach and Mr. Chinn at a downtown Washington hotel, the Meeses decided to entrust Mr. Chinn with their family savings. It consisted of $50,000 to $60,000 in stocks and bonds, most of which had been inherited by Mrs. Meese.    Mr. Chinn is a former encyclopedia salesman who operates an obscure, one-man business called Financial Management International Inc., in a residential apartment building in San Francisco. On May 23, 1985, he signed a limited-partnership agreement with the Meeses, agreeing to take over, liquidate and then manage their savings using &quot;trading techniques generally considered aggressive.&quot;    During the following two years, he performed 23 separate trades, mostly buying and selling stocks on the day of their initial public offering, and earned the Meeses interest of 20% to 40% a year. (Mr. Chinn's trades are being investigated by Sen. Levin's subcommittee because federal regulations required them to be cash trades, but the accounts Mr. Chinn was using appear to have been short of the necessary cash to carry out some of them.)    The blind trust was dissolved May 5 when the attorney general says he became aware that Mr. Chinn was being investigated in connection with Wedtech. Wedtech's new management has charged in a lawsuit filed earlier this month in federal Bankruptcy Court in New York that Mr. Chinn and another associate of Mr. Wallach's, R. Kent London, worked out an elaborate conspiracy with Wedtech's prior management to defraud the company of $1.4 million. Lawyers for Mr. London, a San Francisco doctor and former landlord of Mr. Wallach's, and Mr. Chinn insist that their clients are blameless, that the money was properly spent attempting to develop markets in Japan for a Wedtech metal-coating process.    On Jan. 29, according to the lawsuit, Mr. London received a $1 million check from Wedtech. The same day he and Mr. Chinn allegedly made a trip to Washington to &quot;divide the funds&quot; with others. Just who the two men may have visited in Washington that day remains as one of Wedtech's lingering mysteries.    Mr. Meese insists that he never received any benefits from Wedtech. Mr. Wallach says he was shocked to learn that there was another side to Wedtech &quot;that I never saw.&quot;    Mr. Wallach says he believes Mr. Meese's decision to turn his life savings over to Mr. Chinn stems from the attorney general's inherent innocence. &quot;Ed Meese is a man without guile. It is not that he is naive, it is that he essentially believes that people should be trusted.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>