<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870923-0004 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   THE PENTAGON SAID an Iranian ship crippled by U.S. fire had mines aboard.    Navy personnel found 10 mines on the vessel, which was taken under tow in the Persian Gulf by the USS Jarrett, which also fired warning shots to drive off an approaching Iranian hovercraft. Three Iranians on the crippled vessel were killed, two were missing and 26 were detained. At the U.N., Iranian President Khamenei vowed retaliation, saying the ship was a merchant vessel and that the U.S. had &quot;murdered&quot; four of its crew. The U.S. delegation walked out of the session in protest.    Several senators attempted to attach an amendment to a defense bill to force Reagan to invoke the War Powers Act to keep U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf.    ---   U.S. OFFICIALS REJECTED a Nicaraguan offer for a partial cease-fire.    The unilateral offer was termed inadequate by White House officials, who won some support from Costa Rican President Arias, architect of a five-nation Central American peace plan. &quot;Both parties have to agree,&quot; Arias said, referring to efforts to end the conflict between Managua and the Contras. Arias, in Washington for talks with Reagan, urged Congress to delay further Contra military aid.    Nicaraguan President Ortega announced that Radio Catolica, the country's Roman Catholic radio station, will be permitted to reopen immediately.    ---   Justice White said it &quot;would be all right&quot; if Bork joined him on the Supreme Court, according to a court spokesman. At the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on Bork's nomination, Laurence Tribe, a Harvard law professor, said confirmation &quot;could spell chaos,&quot; while Lloyd Cutler, counsel to President Carter, defended Bork.    Sen. Biden of Delaware conferred with top aides in an effort to decide whether to withdraw from the Democratic presidential race. The Judiciary panel chairman has been accused of plagiarism.    ---   Bush broke a tied vote in the Senate to defeat a plan to further cut funding of the administration's Strategic Defense Initiative. The vote leaves intact a funding level of $4.6 billion for the Oct. 1 fiscal year. The White House had sought $5.9 billion.    ---   Rep. Biaggi (D., N.Y.) was convicted by a federal jury of obstructing justice, accepting a gratuity and illegal interstate travel, but acquitted on bribery and conspiracy charges. He faces up to 12 years in prison. A former Brooklyn Democratic leader also was convicted on gratuity and travel charges, but acquitted on two others.    ---   South Africa will remain in the International Atomic Energy Agency, Energy Secretary Herrington said after a meeting with Soviet officials on Pretoria's announced willingness to sign a nuclear non-proliferation pact. Some African nations had sought to oust it because of its refusal to allow inspections of all its nuclear facilities.    ---   Sweden's ruling party voted to adopt stricter rules on weapons exports following allegations that officials of AB Bofors, Sweden's biggest arms maker, sold weapons to Iran and paid bribes to win an Indian order. The new rules adopted by the Social Democrats require nations buying Swedish arms to ensure that they won't be re-exported.    ---   Soviet officials told the Reagan administration they plan to repeal a law that makes defamation of the Soviet system a crime and sections of the penal code limiting religious freedom, a State Department official said. Separately, Moscow has invited an international human rights organization to send a delegation to the Soviet Union.    ---   Chun charged that leftists were planning a violent revolution in the transitional period before a democratic government takes over in South Korea. A crackdown on leftists was renewed recently and more than 50 people have been arrested. In Ulsan, meanwhile, Hyundai shipyard workers returned to work, ending the country's last major strike.    ---   Congress was urged to delay implementation of new guidelines for criminal sentences in U.S. courts. The Judicial Conference of the U.S. voted unanimously for delaying the guidelines, due to take effect Nov. 1. They are intended to increase the certainty of jail sentences for convicted criminals.    ---   Rival Tamil militias clashed in Sri Lanka and 17 fighters were killed two days after India warned the separatist rebels to give up their guns under a peace accord it brokered. The fighting occurred about 130 miles north of Colombo, the island nation's capital.    ---   Aquino plans to tour the Philippines in October to boost support for her government after a coup attempt last month, the fifth and most serious since she became president in February 1986. She said she plans to seek backing for her policy of nonviolence.    ---   Stassen announced his candidacy for the 1988 GOP presidential nomination. It is the former Minnesota governor's eighth campaign for the White House since 1948. </TEXT></DOC>