<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0010 </DOCNO><HL> West German Rate Cut Seems ImminentAs Part of Economic-Stimulus Package---By Thomas F. O'Boyle and Terence RothStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><DATELINE> FRANKFURT, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>    The West German central bankappears almost certain to cut its discount rate tomorrow aspart of an economic-stimulus package that also will featureexpansive fiscal steps by the Bonn government to be announcedtoday.   But senior government officials suggested that implementation of the fiscal measures, which will be announced jointly by Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg and Economics Minister Martin Bangemann after a cabinet meeting, is contingent on a meeting of the Group of Seven, or G-7, industrial nations. German officials are anxious for a G-7 gathering soon because they fear that without such a comprehensive meeting, their package may do little to stem the dollar's slide.    &quot;Stoltenberg will say, 'We will do this, but only'&quot; when the U.S. commits to a meeting date for the G-7, said one senior government official following talks yesterday between Messrs. Stoltenberg and Bangemann. &quot;We want a G-7 meeting and we are well prepared for it,&quot; added Matthias Wissmann, an economics spokesman for Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic party.    U.S. officials stressed on Monday that basic understandings still haven't been reached that would be needed for a new accord on coordinating economic policies and stabilizing the dollar, but they said pressures from abroad could prompt a meeting sooner than previously expected.    Outlines of the German fiscal package have been previously reported. The government's plans to stimulate the sluggish West German economy include the offering over the next three years of 21 billion marks ($12.84 billion) in additional subsidized credits by a state-supported lending unit, Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau. The additional capital, to be lent at rates two percentage points lower than prevailing market rates, would be on top of loans the unit typically extends, which are expected to total about 13 billion marks this year.    Government officials said the 21 billion marks in additional capital could ultimately lead to new industry investment of twice that amount as companies add their own funds to projects begun with the borrowed capital.    Besides the offering of subsidized capital, the Bonn government has agreed not to impose new consumer taxes to offset growing budget deficits. In addition, Messrs. Stoltenberg and Bangemann will announce plans to deregulate the Bundespost, Germany's state-owned post and telecommunications monopoly, and have agreed to consider a possible increase of capital spending at the Bundespost, government sources said.    Bonn continues to resist bolder fiscal measures, such as enlarging or moving up scheduled tax cuts or increasing federal spending, that have been called for by critics both within Germany and abroad.    The Bundesbank, meanwhile, surprised financial markets yesterday with a decision to pump additional liquidity into the West German banking system to hold down money-market interest rates and support the dollar. The move was seen as a precursor to a cut in Germany's discount rate, which is the central bank's basic lending fee to financial institutions and which currently is 3%, at tomorrow's regular meeting of the Bundesbank's policy-setting council.    The Bundesbank invited tenders for today on unscheduled securities-repurchase agreements with a 34-day maturity, which will provide West Germany's banking system with additional funds through the end of this year. The repurchase agreements, a key bank-refinancing instrument and the Bundesbank's preferred tool for steering market interest rates, were offered at a 3.25% rate, the level to which the rate was lowered from 3.5% a week ago.    The central bank normally arranges one-month repurchase agreements on a biweekly basis. Today's action is an effort to pre-empt the usual year-end rise in money-market interest rates.    Claus Koehler, a member of the Bundesbank directorate, said the operation was meant to keep interest rates steady and wasn't a signal for lower interest rates. Nonetheless, the liquidity infusion was seen as another signal that the Bundesbank could cut its discount rate at its meeting tomorrow, which will be attended by Mr. Stoltenberg. Financial markets are expecting a cut to 2.5%.    Increasing pressure from Bonn is seen forcing the Bundesbank into cutting rates earlier than it had planned. Bundesbank officials privately concede the central bank has backed away from strict anti-inflationary policies but say they would have preferred delaying a discount-rate cut until a multinational stimulus package could be put together at a G-7 meeting.    Foreign-exchange traders in Frankfurt said yesterday that a discount-rate cut has become a foregone conclusion and already has been factored into currency levels. &quot;At this point only the announcement of an unchanged discount rate on Thursday will significantly move the market; and that means a plunge in the dollar,&quot; said Michael Koch, chief currency trader for Bank of America in Frankfurt.    One Bundesbank official conceded as much. He called the expected cut a &quot;defensive action,&quot; and added: &quot;A cut probably won't help the dollar, but if the board doesn't cut, then the dollar will really plummet.&quot; Even if the discount rate is cut, he said, the market's sentiments on the dollar are &quot;very pessimistic.&quot;    Indeed, economists looking beyond a West German discount-rate cut foresee little, if any, lasting support for the dollar, unless the U.S. raises its discount rate and Congress endorses the deficit-reduction accord. The Bundesbank's anticipated step also isn't expected to stimulate Germany's sluggish economy without additional federal spending programs in Bonn. </TEXT></DOC>