<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881027-0174 </DOCNO><HL> International: All Political Prisoners to Be Freed, Moscow Informs Visiting Germans --- Move Appears to Be a Bid For West's Acceptance Of Human Rights Event </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Gumbel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Soviet Union told visiting West German leaders that it will release all people regarded by the West as political prisoners before the end of this year.    German officials said Soviet authorities hope the move, which follows a relaxation of Soviet emigration policies, will win international support for Moscow's desire to host a human rights conference in the early 1990s. So far only the French government has said it is prepared to support such a conference. West Germany now appears to be moving toward support.    Gennady Gerasimov, the Soviet spokesman, refused to confirm the prisoner release, which was announced by West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl following three days of talks here.    German officials, however, said Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze stated during a meeting with his German counterpart, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, that political prisoners will be released this year. Mr. Genscher told a news conference that Mr. Shevardnadze had made a similar statement to French leaders during a recent visit to Paris. In Washington, a State Department spokesman said that U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz received a similar assurance from Mr. Shevardnadze in late September.    If carried out, the release would be a dramatic gesture by a country long reviled for locking up people who dared to speak out against official policy. Mikhail Gorbachev is allowing greater openness and criticism in Soviet society as part of his wide-ranging reforms, but the idea of completely free speech remains an alien and virtually untested concept here.    Diplomats urged caution about the release because of the unusual way it was announced, and because of disagreements over the definition of a political prisoner.    The Kremlin, which long denied that there were political prisoners here, now concedes they do exist. The most recent official Soviet estimates put the total between 12 and 29. Moscow defines political prisoners as people sentenced under two articles of the Soviet criminal code that make behavior loosely defined as anti-Soviet a criminal offense. Both articles of the code were widely used in locking up dissidents in the 1970s.    The U.S. and some other Western countries estimate there are many more political prisoners. The human rights organization Amnesty International said last month that about 200 prisoners of conscience are still jailed, in exile or held in psychiatric hospitals against their will.    German officials declined to give the number or names of those the Soviets say will be released. But Moscow is expected to act on the basis of lists handed to it by Germany and other Western countries.    In the past two years, Mr. Gorbachev has moved to reduce international criticism of Moscow's human-rights violations. Several hundred political prisoners have been released, and emigration policies have been relaxed. One of the most celebrated dissidents of the 1970s, nuclear physicist Andrei Sakharov, has been rehabilitated to such an extent that he has held officially sanctioned press conferences and can now travel abroad.    Perhaps the most significant change now under consideration here is a plan to revamp the criminal code as part of a broader reform of the Soviet legal system. Mr. Gorbachev, a lawyer by training, has frequently said that Soviet society should become law-based.    Under the reform, Soviet sources say at least one of the two criminal code articles used to imprison dissidents may be revised or eliminated. But the legislative overhaul isn't completed and Mr. Gerasimov said &quot;there are lots of differing opinions voiced&quot; about proposed modifications.    Among measures taken to clean their international image of the dark stain of human rights abuses, the Soviets have set up a human rights committee that is spreading the word that Moscow has shifted its policies. Moscow also is quietly seeking to re-enter the World Psychiatric Association, which they left five years ago just before they would have been expelled. And, for two years, the Soviets have tried to win international support to hold a Moscow human rights conference.    Mr. Genscher said the release of political prisoners was one of three conditions the Bonn government had placed on its participation at such a conference. The other two were an end to the jamming of foreign radio stations and greater freedom to emigrate. Jamming has been reduced and the Soviets appear to have satisfied the last demand in the past two years by allowing several tens of thousands of the two million ethnic Germans living in the Soviet Union to leave the country for West Germany.    The number of Soviet Jews allowed to emigrate also has risen. In 1986, about 2,000 were permitted to leave. Last year the number climbed to 8,155 and this year about 10,000 have departed.    The Reagan administration has said it would consider the proposal for a Moscow conference if the Soviets meet certain criteria, including releasing political prisoners, generally improving their human rights performance, guaranteeing that any group that wished to would be allowed to attend the session, demonstrate and hold press conferences, and resolving a number of pending family reunification cases. </TEXT></DOC>