<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0156 </DOCNO><HL> After 15 Years, the Indian BureaucracyStill Is Unable to Rule on Silicon Project---By Matt MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><DATELINE> NEW DELHI, India  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Fifteen years ago, Indian officials began discussing a project to manufacture silicon crystals, a substance basic to both microelectronics and solar energy.    They're still talking.    Disputes over silicon-crystal production have divided the scientific community and bureaucrats. A little-known Indian company has been pitted against the subsidiary of a multinational. A domestic-is-best lobby is fighting against a group that believes there isn't time for home-grown development and that imported technologies are superior.    Protracted negotiations and reversed decisions have caused rumblings in Indian-U.S. relations. Continuing advances in silicon technology threaten to render the whole project obsolete.    India is renowned for bureaucratic indecision. But rarely has the government dragged its feet for so long on an industrial project as it has on the manufacture of polycrystalline silicon, or polysilicon.    &quot;There's been an enormous amount of flopping around,&quot; says an observer close to the negotiations, who, like most others involved, declines to be identified. &quot;It is a prime example of India's inability to determine where indigenous technology is as good as foreign technology.&quot;    India's polysilicon efforts began in 1960, when scientists at the Bangalore-based Indian Institute of Science started making silicon tetrachloride, a starting material for more-advanced silicon compounds. In 1969, the institute tied up with a little-known Madras company, Mettur Chemical andamp; Industrial Corp., to make silicon tetrachloride commercially.    Institute scientists followed that development with experiments on polysilicon, a substance best known as the basis for semiconductors, or computer chips, and photovoltaic cells, which convert sunlight into electricity.    Polysilicon has been produced since the 1950s in the U.S., Japan and Europe. In 1972, Indian government officials began discussing a project to manufacture large quantities of the material. But the Indian Institute of Science didn't conclude its research on polysilicon until the late 1970s.    Concerned about having to depend on imports, in 1978 the government signaled its approval of an Indian facility to make polysilicon. The following year, Mettur received a letter of intent to produce the substance. In 1982, the company received a license and broke ground for its plant.    Until the government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi began to tinker with the country's longstanding policy of industrial exclusivity, an industrial license often took years to obtain. Once received, however, it usually ended any competitive worries.    Not so with polysilicon manufacture. Mettur was slow off the mark. Full commercial production is only expected next month. And although some tests have been completed, government officials have yet to certify that Mettur's product meets the standards necessary for semiconductors. Mettur polysilicon also is more expensive than imports -- $65 a kilogram vs. a world price of $55.    About the time Mettur's license was approved, some government planners also began to predict enormous demand for the material, especially for solar power.    Enter Hemlock Semiconductors Inc., a Dow Corning Inc. subsidiary and a leader in silicon technology. In 1983, Hemlock began negotiations to sell the Indian government a plant with annual capacity of 200 tons and technology for what was to be called the National Silicon Facility.    At $93 million, the silicon project was one of the most expensive commercial ventures involving a U.S. company India had ever undertaken, as well as one of the most advanced transfers of U.S. technology to India. By contrast, the Mettur plant cost $3.5 million.    In April 1984, after a government committee dismissed the Mettur technology as unproven, India signed an agreement with Hemlock. But New Delhi then discovered that the plant required Washington's clearance because of export restrictions. The Indian government held the Hemlock plant as a major test of U.S. willingness to provide high technology. In late 1984, after months of hard negotiations, the U.S. granted permission.    But the controversy continued. Less than a month before the export license was cleared, Indian government bureaucrats again questioned the Hemlock agreement. They reopened Mettur's case and raised the possibility of acquiring East German technology. In January 1985, shortly after Mr. Gandhi was appointed prime minister, he ordered a review of the whole polysilicon project &quot;within one or two days of the (U.S.) license being issued,&quot; says a member of the negotiating team.    The prime minister also referred the matter to the Central Bureau of Investigation, the Indian equivalent of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation. By this point, bureaucrats and scientists (many of whom function as both) were hopelessly divided on the project. Accusations began to fly that the Hemlock plant is second-hand and its technology obsolete; the company disputes the charges.    The fact that a U.S. company was involved added a political dimension. It became not only a question of whether India could produce similar technology, but whether the U.S. could be trusted.    In March 1985, the government sprang its next surprise. New Delhi announced that it would pay $6.7 million for access to the Hemlock technology but would defer its decision on the U.S. company's plant for one year, during which time it would assess the Mettur technology. The payment was a kind of option on the plant because the government, under the agreement, couldn't provide the technology to another company.    Almost two years later, the government still can't make up its mind. &quot;A decision will be taken shortly,&quot; says an official.    A source close to Hemlock says the company hasn't given up on the project. But Hemlock shouldn't hold its breath, say several people involved in the negotiations. Many of those who championed the Hemlock project have been transferred, some as a result of their stand. </TEXT></DOC>