<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880414-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NEGOTIATIONS CONTINUED in Algeria with the hijackers of a Kuwaiti jet.    Algerian officials said Kuwait's &quot;intransigence&quot; had created a deadlock in negotiations with Shiite Moslem hijackers, who have killed two passengers during the nine-day-old hijacking and are holding about 32 hostages. Separately, some freed hostages, among 12 released Tuesday, said another hijacker and more arms were brought aboard the plane after it had been forced to Iran. U.S. intelligence analysts said Iran may be resuming terrorist activities after a lull of almost a year.    The hijackers told Algerian officials they would try not to harm any more hostages, but repeated demands for release of 17 terrorists held in Kuwait.    ---   U.S. MARINES SAID they traded fire with intruders at a Panama military base.    A spokesman for the U.S. Southern Command said no one was injured or captured in the two-hour firefight between 100 Marines guarding a fuel tank farm at Howard Air Force Base and about 40 infiltrators wearing dark uniforms and military hats. The incident followed the killing of a Marine in the same area the night before. U.S. sentries apparently shot him while hunting for about eight intruders that the Pentagon suggested may have been Panamanian soldiers.    Panama's military criticized the suggestion that its soldiers were involved in the incident, saying it was aimed at justifying U.S. military intervention.    ---   Israeli troops shot and killed three gunmen trying to infiltrate from Lebanon, and an elderly Palestinian woman died after inhaling tear gas during a clash in the Gaza Strip. A U.N. doctor who worked in the West Bank said Israeli troops are using new types of anti-riot gases that are proving deadly and causing miscarriages.    ---   Meese's wife, Ursula, received a $40,000-a-year job with the help of a Washington real estate family that later signed a lease to provide office space to the Justice Department. The attorney general, however, doesn't appear to face legal problems because there isn't any evidence he had a role in the lease talks.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci predicted Afghanistan's Moscow-backed regime will fall after the withdrawal of Soviet troops. The U.S., the Soviet Union, Pakistan and Afghanistan are to sign an accord today calling for withdrawal of Soviet troops over nine months starting May 15. Afghan rebels have vowed to fight on after the withdrawal.    ---   South Korea's former president resigned two quasi-official posts and apologized for wrongdoing by his brother in an effort to head off calls that he be investigated for corruption. The moves appear to be the culmination of a struggle between Chun Doo Hwan and his handpicked successor, President Roh Tae Woo.    ---   China's Li Peng sought to counter the perception that he is more cautious about reform than his predecessor, Zhao Ziyang. In his first news conference since becoming premier, Li portrayed himself as a technocrat whose views reflect the consensus of central leadership, and made no new policy statements.    ---   The Honduran government lifted a five-day-old state of emergency it imposed after violent anti-American demonstrations last week that left five Hondurans dead and the U.S. consulate in Tegucigalpa gutted. The Honduran armed forces denied that a police official aided the protesters by waiting two hours before sending in riot squads.    ---   Women who smoke run a risk of stroke that is 2.2 times greater than that facing nonsmokers, even if they smoke as few as 14 cigarettes a day, according to researchers at Harvard University and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. The report is the first major study of smoking and stroke among women.    ---   Iran and Iraq traded missile attacks, with Tehran radio reporting four dead in attacks on the capital. The report also said Iran fired two missiles into al-Amarah, about 40 miles inside Iraq. Tehran also said Iranian troops, backed by warplanes, had broken through Iraqi lines on the south-central front in the Persian Gulf war.    ---   The State Department said it has been assured by West German officials that Mohammed Hamadi, charged with air piracy and murder in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jet to Beirut, would be sentenced as an adult even if convicted in juvenile court. The difference in the sentences is 10 years for a juvenile as opposed to life for an adult.    ---   Protesters in Bangladesh fought police and political opponents after voting resumed in local elections. Four people were reported killed and more than 100 were injured. The voting for local council seats began Feb. 10, but election violence killed at least 100 people and officials postponed the balloting. Voting had resumed on Saturday. </TEXT></DOC>