<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880722-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS PLEDGED to lead the nation into &quot;a new era of greatness.&quot;    Accepting the Democratic presidential nomination at the close of the party's four-day national convention in Atlanta, the 54-year-old Massachusetts governor celebrated ethnicity, optimism and opportunity, and vowed to &quot;rekindle the American spirit.&quot; The son of Greek immigrants, Dukakis offered broad themes appealing to those Democrats who supported Reagan and to middle-class suburbanites whose ballots in the fall election may be the margin between victory or defeat.    Bentsen was nominated to be the vice presidential candidate. The Texas Senator, in his acceptance speech, said he and Dukakis &quot;have differences. . . but stand united&quot; on basic principles.    ---   Iraq's President Hussein said he was &quot;astonished&quot; that Iran rejected face-to-face peace talks in favor of U.N.-mediated negotiations to end the Persian Gulf war. He said &quot;Iraq's desire for peace is profound,&quot; and he accused Tehran of seeking a tactical advantage by agreeing to accept a U.N. resolution calling for a truce in the gulf.    U.N. officials said two teams of observers will travel to Iran and Iraq within the next few days to work out details of a cease-fire and investigate the situation of war prisoners. Repatriation of POWs in both countries is part of a U.N. plan to end the nearly eight-year-old gulf war.    ---   Cambodia's president said a withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia will be completed in 1990, even if a political settlement isn't reached in talks next week with the rebels opposing Phnom Penh. China and the Soviet Union also have agreed to hold talks next month to end the Cambodian conflict.    Hanoi invited the U.S. to participate in searches for the remains of nearly 1,800 U.S. servicemen missing since the Vietnam War. U.S. and Vietnamese officials are to meet next week to discuss the joint effort. The offer came amid increasing signs that communist officials in the Southeast Asian nation seek improved ties with the West.    ---   Israeli soldiers clashed with Palestinian demonstrators in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, killing at least three Arabs and wounding 23 others in what was considered the worst Arab-Israeli violence in more than two months. Israel's police also battled with Arab protesters in East Jerusalem.    ---   Police in Bolivia seized Roberto Suarez Gomez, considered one of the top cocaine traffickers in Latin America. The country's Interior Ministry said Suarez Gomez, who is wanted on drug charges in Miami, would be flown to La Paz from the city of Trinidad, where he was arrested at a ranch.    ---   A former Navy intelligence aide said the U.S. targeted the French Embassy when it bombed Libya in 1986. Glenn Michael Souther, who defected to Moscow, said on Soviet TV that he had access to photographs used to plan the attack on Tripoli. A Navy official said the Pentagon was &quot;concerned&quot; about possible data given to the Kremlin.    ---   Top White House aides met in California to map out what Reagan's chief of staff called an &quot;active last six months&quot; for the administration. Issues under discussion included a renewal of aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, drought-relief legislation and getting Senate action on 26 federal judicial nominations that have been sent to Capitol Hill.    ---   Armenians ignored activists' calls for a strike to protest the Kremlin's rejection of their demand to take control of the NagornoKarabakh region from neighboring Azerbaijan. A recent threat of a crackdown by Moscow was cited. The official news agency Tass denounced the strike organizers, and said that several had been arrested.    ---   The European Space Agency launched an Ariane-3 rocket, which successfully placed into orbit Indian and European satellites. The spacecraft's liftoff, the 24th for Arianespace, was conducted at a launching pad in the jungles of French Guiana.    ---   North Korea proposed talks with the Seoul government to debate a non-aggression pact drafted by the North. South Korea didn't immediately respond to the plan, which called for negotiations to be held in Pyongyang. North Korea refused earlier this month to accept two offers by Seoul to hold political and economic talks.    ---   The Abu Nidal terrorist group denied responsibility for the attack last week on a Greek cruise ship in the Aegean Sea. At least nine people were killed in the assault. In a statement released in Beirut, the Palestinian group also said that an Arab suspect accused by Greece of leading the attack has been dead for three years.    ---   A Contra spokesman insisted that &quot;there is no crisis&quot; in the anti-Sandinista movement despite the resignation of seven field commanders protesting the election of military leader Bermudez to the rebels' political directorate. The seven officers abandoned their southern front posts Tuesday.    ---   Pakistan's President Zia barred political parties from contesting national elections, which he scheduled for Nov. 16. The move is expected to infuriate the opposition, which already has faulted Zia for delaying the balloting. The elections were expected to be held by Aug. 27, three months after Zia dismissed Premier Junejo's government. </TEXT></DOC>