<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880630-0142 </DOCNO><HL> 'How Frightening It Must Be' </HL><SO> </SO><G> SUP EXE CNG JUS </G><TEXT>   These are excerpts from Justice Antonin Scalia's dissent yesterday from the Supreme Court ruling upholding independent counsel.    It is the proud boast of our democracy that we have a &quot;a government of laws and not of men.&quot; Many Americans are familiar with that phrase; not many know its derivation. It comes from the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780:   &quot;In the government of this commonwealth, the legislative department shall never exercise the executive and judicial powers, or either of them; the executive shall never exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either of them; the judicial shall never exercise the legislative and executive powers, or either of them; to the end it may be a government of laws, and not of men.&quot;    The framers of the Federal Constitution similarly viewed the principle of separation of powers as the absolutely central guarantee of a just government. In No. 47 of The Federalist, Madison wrote that &quot;no political truth is certainly of greater intrinsic value, or is stamped with the authority of more enlightened patrons of liberty.&quot; Without a secure structure of separated powers, our Bill of Rights would be worthless, as are the bills of rights of many nations of the world that have adopted, or even improved upon, the mere words of ours. . . .    That is what this suit is about. Power. The allocation of power among Congress, the President, and the courts in such fashion as to preserve the equilibrium the Constitution sought to establish -- so that &quot;a gradual concentration of the several powers in the same department,&quot; {Federalist No. 51} can effectively be resisted. Frequently an issue of this sort will come before the Court clad, so to speak, in sheep's clothing: the potential of the asserted principle to affect important change in the equilibrium of power is not immediately evident, and must be discerned by a careful and perceptive analysis. But this wolf comes as a wolf. . . .    By the application of this statute in the present case, Congress has effectively compelled a criminal investigation of a high-level appointee of the President in connection with his actions arising out of a bitter power dispute between the President and the Legislative Branch. Mr. {Theodore} Olson may or may not be guilty of a crime; we do not know. But we do know that the investigation of him has been commenced, not necessarily because the President or his authorized subordinates believe it is in the interest of the United States, in the sense that it warrants the diversion of resources from other efforts, and is worth the cost in money and in possible damage to other governmental interests; and not even, leaving aside those normally considered factors, because the President or his authorized subordinates necessarily believe that an investigation is likely to unearth a violation worth prosecuting; but only because the Attorney General cannot affirm, as Congress demands, that there are no reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation is warranted. The decisions regarding the scope of that further investigation, its duration, and, finally, whether or not prosecution should ensue, are likewise beyond the control of the President and his subordinates. . . .    Besides weakening the Presidency by reducing the zeal of his staff, it must also be obvious that the institution of the independent counsel enfeebles him more directly in his constant confrontations with Congress, by eroding his public support. Nothing is so politically effective as the ability to charge that one's opponent and his associates are not merely wrongheaded, naive, ineffective, but, in all probability, &quot;crooks.&quot; And nothing so effectively gives an appearance of validity to such charges as a Justice Department investigation and, even better, prosecution. The present statute provides ample means for that sort of attack, assuring that massive and lengthy investigations will occur, not merely when the Justice Department in the application of its usual standards believes they are called for, but whenever it cannot be said that there are &quot;no reasonable grounds to believe&quot; they are called for. The statute's highly visible procedures assure, moreover, that unlike most investigations these will be widely known and prominently displayed. Thus, in the 10 years since the institution of the independent counsel was established by law, there have been nine highly publicized investigations, a source of constant political damage to two administrations. That they could not remotely be described as merely the application of &quot;normal&quot; investigatory and prosecutory standards is demonstrated by, the following facts: Congress appropriates approximately $50 million annually for general legal activities, salaries and expenses of the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice.' By comparison, between May 1986 and August 1987, four independent counsel spent almost $5 million (one-tenth of the amount annually appropriated to the entire Criminal Division), spending almost $1 million in the month of August 1987 alone ... .    If the removal of a prosecutor, the virtual embodiment of the power to &quot;take care that the laws be faithfully executed,&quot; can be restricted, what officer's removal cannot? This is an open invitation for Congress to experiment. What about a special Assistant Secretary of State, with responsibility for one very narrow area of foreign policy, who would not only have to be confirmed by the Senate but could also be removed only pursuant to certain carefully designed restrictions? Could this possibly render the President &quot;unable to accomplish his constitutional role&quot;? Or a special Assistant Secretary of Defense for Procurement? The possibilities are endless, and the Court does not understand what the separation of power, what &quot;ambition ... counteracting ambition,&quot; {Federalist No. 51} is all about, if it does not expect Congress to try them. As far as I can discern from the Court's opinion, it is now open season upon the President's removal power for all executive officers.... The Court essentially says to the President &quot;Trust us. We will make sure that you are able to accomplish your constitutional role.&quot; I think the Constitution gives the President -- and the people -- more protection than that. . . .    How frightening it must be to have your own independent counsel and staff appointed, with nothing else to do but to investigate you until investigation is no longer worthwhile -- with whether it is worthwhile not depending upon what such judgments usually hinge on, competing responsibilities. And to have that counsel and staff decide, with no basis for comparison, whether what you have done is bad enough, willful enough, and provable enough, to warrant an indictment. How admirable the constitutional system that provides the means to avoid such a distortion. And how unfortunate the judicial decision that has permitted it.    ---   A related editorial appears today. </TEXT></DOC>