<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880707-0185 </DOCNO><HL> After the Ball: Texas 'Cinderella City' Suffers Consequences Of a Building Binge --- Inquiries Hint That Officials Of Addison Used Taxes As Entertainment Fund --- Suicide of the Town's Mayor </HL><AUTHOR> Marj Charlier (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> REL CON </IN><DATELINE> ADDISON, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Residents have long considered this north Dallas community a suburban fairy tale, dubbing it Cinderella City.    No wonder. It has a glitzy $3.8 million public health club that offers residents a $10 lifetime membership. It will soon build a $7 million publicly financed theater, a home for the town-financed acting troupe. If a resident forgets to put out the garbage, town workers will be dispatched to pick it up. Until recently, Addison cops dispensed traffic tickets from Volvos.    But like a Cinderella who returned drunk from the ball, Addison these days is suffering from a mighty hangover. It results from a long binge by a group of businessmen and developers who gained control of the town's politics and mingled the town's business with their own. While lulling voters with lavish town-provided perks, certain current and former town officials are accused of cozying up to builders, voting for town projects involving their own businesses and using Addison's bulging tax coffers as a private entertainment fund.    While the Addison Police Department was pressing an investigation of Addison's affairs, a key player in the scandal, the town's mayor of 13 years, Jerry Redding, cracked. One clear February afternoon, he called the police chief on the phone and said, &quot;Come and find me before anyone else does.&quot; He walked a few yards down a wooded jogging trail and shot himself.    The 7 1/2-month investigation (chronicled in a report on file at the town hall) and the shock of Mr. Redding's death have caused many Addison residents to re-examine what constitutes the good life here. Moreover, while many small towns are trying to woo business and developers, Addison illustrates what can happen when a town essentially sells out to the boosters and builders.    In a building frenzy fed by its anything-goes attitude, Addison has become snarled in the traffic of commuters who weekdays swell its ranks to 50,000 from a permanment population of 9,500. Although maintaining the expensive perks has caused the town's checkbook to glow red, some essential city services, from streets to sewers to schools, have gone neglected.    &quot;If this is the Cinderella City, did the chariot turn into a pumpkin and is the pumpkin rotten inside?&quot; asks former town councilman Stewart Beatty. Mr. Beatty, a frequent critic of the council's easy ways, was ousted in an election two years ago by a friend of the late mayor.    Elizabeth Sweeney, 57, and a five-year resident, adds: &quot;It was like a little clique, and everybody had a finger in the pie. It makes me angry this went on for so long and was kept so quiet. I'm anxious to see the whole thing cleaned up.&quot;    No criminal charges have been filed in the Addison investigation, which was begun by the police department but subsequently turned over to an independent investigator. The Dallas County District Attorney's office, which is conducting a separate investigation, declines to talk about it.    In little more than 10 years, as a booming Dallas spread northward, Addison blossomed from sparsely populated, dusty cotton fields into a bustling business mecca by taking the &quot;can-do&quot; attitude about which Texans are fond of bragging. Like the situation in much of Texas, Addison's building spree wasn't justified by any realistic economic evaluation. The result was bankruptcies and failures of banks and thrift institutions. After Vernon Savings andamp; Loan Association, a major lender to Addison developers, failed in 1987, the bailout cost the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. $1.3 billion. From virtually zero five years ago, the vacancy rate in the town's overbuilt office buildings has skyrocketed to 40% today.    &quot;We allowed any and all developers to build whatever they wanted,&quot; says Jerry Scott, an Addison businessman and frequent town critic.    But Addison's downfall was more than a matter of poor economic judgment. The investigator's report, and interviews with town residents and officials, paint Addison as a town where the developer was king. Did he need a street widened? Was he having trouble with zoning commissioners or a restrictive town ordinance? A visit to the mayor's office -- and perhaps a campaign contribution -- would take care of it.    Addison officials, says John Dodd, former mayor of neighboring Farmers Branch, ran a big business. &quot;Their mission was development,&quot; he says. &quot;The town council was like a board of directors, {the mayor} was the chairman of the board and the developers were the stockholders.&quot;    Addison wasn't always so cozy with businessmen. Some say the seeds of its pro-business metamorphosis were sown in the early 1970s when Ray Ratliff, an Addison businessman, had trouble getting the town to build a road in front of his building. A councilman at the time told him, &quot;If you don't like what we're doing vote us out,&quot; Mr. Ratliff recalls. &quot;I did just that.&quot;    Together with Daryl Snadon, president of Beltway Construction Corp., a major Addison developer, and a member of the Addison Business Association, Mr. Ratliff went to the local chamber of commerce to find a mayoral candidate. The chamber suggested Mr. Redding. Although the insurance underwriter had never even been to a council meeting, he had what they were looking for: &quot;He had a willingess to embrace the Addison Business Association,&quot; Mr. Ratliff says.    They supported his campaign for mayor, and Mr. Redding championed their successful campaign to lift the town's ban on liquor sales. In a sparsely populated town, businessmen filled the power vacuum, electing cronies to the council who weren't above using their positions for personal gain.    In this environment, restaurants, hotels and office developments proliferated. Land values soared, much to developers' delight. And whatever developers wanted, they apparently got -- if they knew the right people in Addison. The investigative report says that Councilman Richard Roder, who works for Beltway Construction, voted 10 times on projects involving his own company, including requests for sign-ordinance variances and a motion to reduce curb and street assessments for Beltway.    Councilman Jim Duffy voted to approve a permit for a landscaping nursery proposed by Folsom Investments, although he works for Spring Valley Construction Co., a Folsom unit. And Councilman John Nolan, who has been a subcontractor for Beltway projects, also voted on issues involving the company.    The mayor cut corners for other developers. He circumvented the planning and zoning commission and took a project proposed by a friend, Diana Cheng, straight to the council for approval, according to the public investigation report. The council acquiesced. Developers familiar with the system bragged to planning and zoning commissioners that it didn't matter whether they approved proposed projects -- the projects had already been cleared by the mayor, says Jerry King, a former zoning commissioner.    When another developer was denied approval of his hotel project twice by the council, colleagues suggested a closed-door meeting with the mayor. Without changes, his project sailed through the council on the next vote. And when a developer wanted to build a tall hotel next to the town airport, the town council went to bat for him, passing an ordinance to sidestep Federal Aviation Administration height restrictions, according to minutes of an Addison town council meeting. (The ordinance didn't stand up in court.)    Mr. Ratliff, whose influence earned him the ceremonial title of Addison's ambassador-at-large, also benefited from his relationship with the mayor, according to the town's investigative report. In 1984, he donated to the town an airplane he had been unable to sell for $53,000 and took a $90,000 income-tax deduction for the gift, the report says. The town eventually sold the plane for $19,000 -- a loss after storage and repair costs. &quot;It appears the only one who profited from this donation was Ratliff,&quot; the investigative report states.    According to investigators, Mayor Redding lined his own pockets as well. He pocketed a $5,000 campaign contribution from Ms. Cheng, well above the state's legal limit of $100. (He also got free room and board at Ms. Cheng's inn for four months in 1985, a gift worth about $10,000, the investigative report says.)    Before his death, Mr. Redding admitted to investigators that he had diverted $25,000 in campaign contributions from local businesses and residents to his own account. He also admitted receiving $50,000 from Mr. Snadon as a loan for a real-estate project that was never completed. The loan was never repaid. The investigation also showed that $40,000 in campaign contributions was never reported. Some donations from companies and corporations violated state election laws, the town's investigative report says.    Mr. Snadon, Mr. Roder and Ms. Cheng didn't return numerous phone calls. Mr. Ratliff had no comment on the investigative report.    At the helm of a booming, rich Texas town, Addison officials began to spend as lavishly as the big businessmen to whom they catered. It started small -- the mayor was criticized for using an Addison police Volvo for his own personal use -- but it soon escalated. The mayor, the council members and their wives, husbands, girlfriends and boyfriends flew first class to Taiwan on an economic-development mission that has yet to bear any economic fruit. The city's tab: $60,000. The mayor took cronies and businessmen to lunches. A lunch at Ms. Cheng's Chinese restaurant cost $800. Two retreats at posh Texas resorts where city officials discussed the town's budget cost taxpayers $40,000 -- including tanning sessions and golf equipment, the investigation report and other town hall records show.    The town also coughed up $350,000 to support a local song and dance troupe that performed at conventions. To study theaters similar to the one Addison plans for its troupe, Mayor Redding flew to Canada and Colorado by Lear jet, rented with city funds, according to the investigative report and other city records.    Residents, however, were conspicuously silent through all this. Very little public discussion took place at city council meetings. By tossing voters goodies like the snazzy public health center shortly before election time, Mr. Redding enjoyed the status of a beloved, benevolent dictator. &quot;Nobody ever questions things in good times,&quot; says Kevin Maiman, a former city employee.    Many still gush about living here, and for good reason. Strict sign restrictions, enforced on most developments, and a $1 million annual landscaping budget make this one of the prettiest suburbs anywhere. Every Christmas, city employees hand-deliver a colorful Addison calendar to each resident. Policemen check homes daily for vacationing residents and generally respond within two minutes to any police call.    Some residents, such as Holly Couch, an airline attendant who lives in the late mayor's neighborhood, remains unfazed by the scandal. &quot;I don't have any problem with that,&quot; she says. &quot;It's the niceties that I live here for.&quot;    But the necessities have gone wanting. To hold the property-tax rate low, Addison never built a system to process the sewage flowing from its many developments. Nearby Farmers Branch tired of handling its rich neighbor's waste, and sued successfully. Now Addison must pony up at least $10 million for its neighbor's sewer-system expansion. And while the town created a beautiful running trail and health club for grown-ups, it is sorely missing parks, schools and libraries for the children of its rising population.    Moreover, the town now faces a $1.7 million shortage in its $25 million annual budget and is facing the painful need for hefty tax increases to cover its burgeoning expenses. Its bond debt has swollen from less than $1 million in 1979 to more than $56 million today, with interest payments of $7.1 million annually, to pay for its health club, tree-lined boulevards and brick-paved intersections.    &quot;We've been living on credit, and eventually we're going to have to pay,&quot; said two-year council member Jim Duffy at a recent public hearing.    With its bubble burst, Addison is increasingly looking inward. It has appointed a commission to examine the town's charter and reduce the mayor's power. Bobby Hatfield, a council member who considered himself a friend of the late Mr. Redding, was ousted in the last election.    The town adopted a tough new ethics policy to rein in city officials' spending powers. The town's new mayor, Lynn Spruill -- who twice voted in favor of development projects proposed by her husband's employer -- now vows to open up the decision-making process to citizens. She insists that she didn't realize her votes represented a conflict of interest.    A new attitude about development also is emerging. &quot;Next time around,&quot; says town administrator Ron Whitehead, &quot;I don't think we'll be so impressed with every development that comes in the door.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>