<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Taking Charge---Giving Patients Their Due:Doctors Get Better, the Ill Get HealthierWhen One Clinic Shares the Whole Truth---By Jerry E. Bishop</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   BEFORE GEORGE CARLSON started taking a different drug for his high blood pressure, the doctor told him about the possible side effects of the new drug, Vasotec.    &quot;Apparently Vasotec affects different people in different ways,&quot; Mr. Carlson explains. &quot;So the minute I didn't feel quite right I got my copy of my medical record out and looked up what the doctor said about Vasotec. Then I called the medical center and told them to make a note in my records that I'm taking myself off Vasotec and going back to Inderal and if that's not okay then have the doctor call me.&quot;    The doctor didn't countermand the decision and Mr. Carlson is continuing to take Inderal for his blood pressure and feeling the better for it.    Doctors elsewhere might not have tolerated such assertive medical decision-making by a patient, at least not without a $30 or $50 office visit. But Mr. Carlson, a retired utility executive, happens to be a regular patient at the Given Health Care Center in Burlington, Vt.    For the past dozen years, doctors at this primary care clinic have been indulging in a highly unusual practice: They give patients a copy of their medical record and then urge them to get involved in making decisions about the course of their health care. In turn, patients like Mr. Carlson say they have a far better understanding of what their medical problems are and what the doctor is trying to accomplish.    &quot;When I lived in Summit (N.J.) I had a good doctor; I liked him and we were friends,&quot; Mr. Carlson recalls. &quot;But you'd go to him and he'd give you some pills and say, 'These should make you feel better.' Maybe he'd even tell you all about the pills. Then you'd go home and you wouldn't quite remember everything he said and you'd wonder a bit and maybe worry. But here they not only take the time to tell you about your problems, they give it to you in writing. Having your medical record gets you educated about your health. Besides, it gives you some place to go instead of the telephone at two o'clock in the morning.&quot;    Giving patients copies of their medical records is anathema to most physicians. Even if the records were legible and comprehensive -- and often they're not -- doctors argue that the patients wouldn't be able to understand them. The result, they say, would be increased anxiety and confusion as patients tried to interpret the implications of laboratory tests and attempted to read between the lines of prognoses.    There's also the fear that a patient is likely to show his record to another doctor or, heaven forbid, a lawyer, who may challenge the original doctor's competence in court.    But the experience at the Given Center belies such concerns. &quot;So far, we haven't had a single instance of litigation, knock on wood,&quot; says Henry M. Tufo, an internist and director of the clinic.    Moreover, there's every indication that informed patients with access to understandable records are healthier patients, able to work with their doctors to keep medical problems under control.    A recent check of Blue Cross health-insurance claims in the Burlington area found that patients at the Given clinic are hospitalized less often and visit an emergency room less frequently than patients in the care of other doctors in the area.    During fiscal 1984, for example, the Given patients spent 290 days in the hospital for each 1,000 patients, compared with 544 days per 1,000 patients in the care of other Burlington physicians. Emergency room visits averaged 235 per 1,000 Given patients compared with a rate of 356 visits per 1,000 patients for non-Given patients.    Patient records kept by most doctors usually consist of a patient's vital statistics and notations about each visit the patient has made, including a brief description of the complaint, the diagnosis and treatment prescribed, and the results, if known.    The Given doctors, however, use a lay-language version of what is known as the problem-oriented medical record. Developed in the 1960s, this form of medical record follows the patterused by scientists in tackling a scientific question.    &quot;The first thing you do before making any decisions is collect a data base,&quot; explains Dr. Tufo.    For Given patients, this means filling out a detailed questionnaire covering medical history and information about the individual's job, family life and any emotional or mental stresses and strains, plus the results of a physical examination. &quot;Anyone who comes in for a first visit and seems likely to be a regular patient is urged to have the physical exam,&quot; says Dr. Tufo. (With the complete physical, a first visit to Given costs between $200 and $250.)    The patient is then interviewed by the doctor, who asks about everything from life at home to performance on the job. The doctor next lists in detail all the patient's medical, emotional and environmental problems. &quot;You have to look at all the patient's problems, not just the one he's come to see you about,&quot; Dr. Tufo says.    For each problem, the doctor sets down a goal and plan of treatment. &quot;This is so you don't forget two weeks from now where you were going,&quot; Dr. Tufo explains. &quot;A patient with diabetes and heart disease is different than a patient with just heart disease,&quot; so the goals and treatment plans may be different.    This problem-oriented medical record was adopted when the Given clinic was established at the University of Vermont medical school in 1971. At first, patients got letters describing their treatment program, but not their complete medical records. It wasn't long, however, before the staff decided to share all information with patients, meaning that henceforth, medical records would be legible and kept in language that patients could understand.    In some cases -- the results of an electrocardiogram, for instance -- a record is highly technical. &quot;We explain to the patient this is information that a doctor might need in the future,&quot; Dr. Tufo says.    &quot;It's the doctor who gets the most help out of making his notes in lay language,&quot; he adds. &quot;If the doctor is making his notes clear, it means he is thinking clearly,&quot; he explains. &quot;You can't send a sloppy record to a patient.&quot;    The patients are asked to correct any mistakes in the record and to discuss or challenge anything they disagree with. The clinic's doctors say this practice affects them more than it does the patients.    &quot;We had to change the way we viewed patients,&quot; says Richard E. Bouchard, another Given physician. &quot;The process of writing down what you think and giving it to someone else to criticize made us more honest and more sensitive to how patients view themselves. It forces us to see problems as they are perceived by the patient. After all, you don't just deal with diabetes, you deal with a person who has diabetes.&quot;    &quot;I had a woman come in the other day with unexplained abdominal pain,&quot; Dr. Bouchard says. &quot;She had had a hysterectomy. But now she felt that the doctors had given up on her. Now I'm no better or worse than any other doctor, but she and I got into a dialogue using her medical record as the focus. She began to feel that she was participating in trying to solve her problem. We still don't have a diagnosis but her symptoms are improved.&quot;    When the doctor knows the patient is going to see what he writes down, &quot;It makes you a more careful listener,&quot; Dr. Bouchard says.    &quot;I've gotten chastised for not doing a good job. There's one woman who's had a lot of difficult family problems and I had focused so much on these marital problems I didn't deal fully with her other concerns. I probably didn't listen too well one day and got some facts wrong about her past life and illnesses. She got angry and came in and told me I wasn't doing a good job and she was right. That turned into a very useful encounter. We talked things over and she had a chance to say a lot of things she wanted to say. We got back on the track and she left happy.&quot;    Giving a medical record to a patient with a terminal illness is sometimes difficult, and the Given doctors are careful not to say in the record that a patient is terminal. Nevertheless, the record does list the patient's problems and therapies -- or lack of therapies. From this, patients can and do reach their own conclusions.    &quot;We don't lie to them,&quot; Dr. Tufo says. &quot;Actually, I don't think I've had a patient who hasn't known he's terminally ill at about the same time I know.&quot;    Seeing the medical record &quot;makes a world of difference&quot; in dealing with doctors, says Virginia Clark, a 57-year-old English professor at the University of Vermont.    &quot;When my first two children were born I was given absolutely no information by the obstetrician. One obstetrician gave me some pills when I was pregnant. I didn't know what they were and he didn't explain, he just said take three a day for 10 days and then call him. He was very intimidating, very mysterious and kind of bullying; he treated me like a child.&quot;    The pills, it turned out, were Nembutal, a sedative. &quot;If I'd known that I never would have taken them, certainly not while I was pregnant,&quot; she says.    The Given practice of supplying the record &quot;recognizes that the patient has to be an informed participant in her own medical care. After all, it's your health and your body. I like the sense of being in control,&quot; she says.    ---   Mr. Bishop reports on science and medicine from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>