<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Mozambican Misconceptions---By Peter Godwin</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><TEXT>   In Mozambique, unlike many other parts of Africa, famine is a direct consequence of war. Sending aid treats only the symptoms, not the causes. Much of the aid is disrupted, looted or destroyed. The only way to really help the Mozambican people, of whom 1.5 million are displaced, 4.5 million face starvation and at least a quarter million have fled into neighboring states, is to help end the war.    Three possible ways exist to achieve this. The one increasingly popular in the West is to beef up the forces of the Frelimo government, by giving military as well as humanitarian aid. Ignore for the time being, proponents say, that it is Marxist and heavily dependent on Soviet patronage. Together with soldiers from Zimbabwe, Tanzania, Zambia, Malawi, the East Bloc (including Cuba), Nigeria, and lately Ethiopia, Frelimo could be helped to drive the rebel guerrillas into the ground.    This view holds that a much more pro-Western, pragmatic Mozambique would then rise from the ashes of one of the world's poorest countries. The West continues to be tantalized by the theory that Frelimo is just about to turn conclusively pro-Western, dumping its Marxist baggage and Soviet Bloc partners. This is more a tribute to the charm of Frelimo officials in winning over locally based diplomats and aid officials, and in playing East against West, than to the sober realities.    But anyone who believes this is an easily winnable war cannot have seen the battle ground. Thousands of square miles of thickly vegetated countryside surround isolated, run-down towns: a perfect environment for the guerrilla, as Frelimo found when fighting the colonial Portuguese.    Who or what is primarily to blame for the desolation, queues, and empty shops of the nation's towns and cities can be endlessly argued over: the abrupt exit of the colonial Portuguese in 1976 after a rule that denied blacks all but the most menial jobs? Rhodesia, South Africa and Renamo for waging a war of attrition in Mozambique for the past decade? or Frelimo, first for scaring whites into flight and later for its ponderous collectivization policy?    To some extent, London accepts the colonial explanation. Mozambique is now the biggest single recipient of British aid -- $153 million so far this year -- despite not even belonging to the Commonwealth. The British army is training Frelimo officers in battle camps in neighboring Zimbabwe. President Joaquim Chissano's first visit abroad as president was to Britain.    The U.S., meanwhile, has provided Frelimo with $78 million in direct assistance since 1981 and has backed $154 million more in multilateral aid, all nonmilitary.    Those who argue that the West should give Frelimo direct military aid say this would leave Frelimo finally free to boot out the East Bloc, whose paltry economic aid Frelimo has long realized is vastly inferior to what the West can offer. Military hardware, it is argued, is the last link, and if the West could offer this too, that would be the end of the Soviet hold on Maputo. A strong, peaceful Mozambique could then play its full role as a front-line state in breaking reliance on South Africa.    London's policy has flowed from its former colony Zimbabwe's commitment to underpinning Frelimo's survival. Zimbabwe's prime minister, Robert Mugabe, has a debt of honor to Frelimo, which despite the appalling cost to itself allowed his Zanla guerrillas to fight their way into power from Mozambique.    But what is dubbed in some quarters as Zimbabwe's &quot;silent war&quot; is rapidly becoming its Vietnam. Although Harare conceals the true cost of its 12,000 soldiers now fighting alongside Frelimo, it is estimated at as much as $350 million a year, depriving the country of scarce foreign exchange. And not all of Mr. Mugabe's men share his commitment to the war.    Soldiers I met at a Zimbabwe garrison in Mozambique were clearly demoralized and unmotivated. They were not happy to die far from home, in a war they said was not their concern, among a local people they said did not help them. The Mozambican bush could probably suck in double the number of foreign battalions without the course of the war being significantly altered. Zimbabweans and their allies are falling back on the old losing formula of depending too much on air support, patrolling in large groups, sticking to the roads, and hurrying back to base.    Zimbabwe's special forces are still very competent, scoring notable successes in attacks on Renamo base camps. But Renamo withdraws only to return when all the fuss is over. The war continues to show all the signs of being unwinnable by the Frelimo alliance.    In any case, South Africa would probably be unwilling to sit idly by watching any conclusive defeat of Renamo. Maintaining the Mozambique pot on the boil, with Zimbabwe's energies diverted by the war, its coffers draining into it, and the Beira corridor (Zimbabwe's only non-South African route to the sea) unreliable, is all to Pretoria's advantage.    If Frelimo can't perform the coup de grace, how about Renamo? It, too, is stymied. It has no air support and so cannot occupy towns for long without becoming a sitting target for the other side's planes. Renamo claims to control as much as 75% of the countryside, but it is unlikely to be able to increase this significantly, and will certainly be unable to march on the cities so long as many of Africa's armies are deployed to assist Frelimo.    It also has the albatross of its origins, as a fifth column created by Rhodesian intelligence to fight against Frelimo in the mid-1970s. With the demise of Rhodesia, patronage passed to South Africa, with equal damage to credibility. Pretoria's claim that it ended logistical support to Renamo after the Nkomati accord was signed between South Africa and Mozambique in 1984 is generally disbelieved. But from what one sees of Renamo soldiers, Pretoria's support must be very low-key or uncharacteristically inefficient.    The bulk of Renamo's operations are designed with looting in mind. They claim that their weapons, ammunition, clothes and much food is captured from the other side; it certainly looks secondhand.    In stark contrast to Unita guerrillas on the other coast, Renamo members are not an impressive sight. But this archetypal barefoot army belies its appearance and has even won grudging respect from the Zimbabwean soldiers ranged against it.    Battle-weary Zimbabwean NCOs, without their superiors present, also conceded that the local people mostly supported the guerrillas. This support comes from a brew of fear and volition. Renamo is accused of great brutality and destruction. Stories of Renamo &quot;slave camps&quot; compete with those of Frelimo &quot;work camps.&quot; Refugees fear both armies. But such is the nature of war in Africa. Not all Mr. Mugabe's guerrillas abided by the Marquess of Queensberry rules, but that did nothing to undermine his war's legitimacy.    But however well Renamo does, with or without external support, it realizes its own limitations. For there is a sting in the end of the Frelimo tail. If beaten, ultimately, it too can return to the bush, where Frelimo fought a 20-year guerrilla war against the Portuguese, and so the cycle would continue.    Renamo claims it is ready to negotiate with Frelimo. It says it would be prepared to hold democratic elections, a novel experience for Mozambique. This is the third possibility, and probably the one that the U.S. should support. But there are some important pre-conditions.    The first is that Renamo has to be taken seriously. It may not have Unita's slick PR operation, or its lobbyists, or a contiguous external base, or even the open commitment of South Africa (and the U.S.) that Unita has. But it controls more of Mozambique than Unita does of Angola, and Renamo is no longer merely the bunch of bandits Frelimo wishes it were. Until Renamo is taken seriously, it can be neither defeated nor negotiated with. President Samora Machel, shortly before his death last October, realized this. He was clearing his desk to take on personal responsibility for the conduct of the war when his airplane plunged from the sky.    Because of its lack of publicity, Renamo is still shrouded in mystery. Jonas Savimbi has an image as an anticommunist African folk hero, but Renamo leader Alfonso Dhlakama is a parochial fellow whose name is still largely unknown. Mr. Dhlakama claims to be an anticommunist fighting for real democracy against a communist regime. From its origins as a surrogate Rhodesian intelligence group, Renamo has grown into a catch-all for opponents of Frelimo. Many of its officers and men are Frelimo defectors. Many say they left because they objected to the seizure of land by Frelimo to create communal state farms. Some bear other grudges. They include black former Frelimo officers who criticize Frelimo as an elitist urban clique disproportionately influenced by radical Goan and mulatto Mozambicans.    In the areas Renamo penetrates, it has tended to run a minimalist administration, in effect restoring a pre-colonial status quo. Traditional tribal structures are revived, and in return local chiefs must supply a quota of food and recruits. The system is in sharp contrast to an intrusive, hands-on Frelimo administration. Renamo claims there is no starvation in the areas it controls. Visiting reporters concur.    To push negotiations, the U.S. would risk antagonizing Frelimo and sending it scurrying back into the Soviet Bloc hug it is alleged to be on the verge of leaving. Even to talk to Renamo boosts the rebels' status and legitimacy. President Chissano reiterated in March that he would not consider even talking to the &quot;bandits.&quot; But Western muscle, combined with the lure of considerable economic aid, might just persuade him otherwise. After all, Frelimo has a precedent in talking to the devil. It signed the Nkomati accord with South Africa, so maybe it can talk to Renamo.    ---   Mr. Godwin covers southern Africa for the London Sunday Times. In April, he was briefly kidnapped into Renamo territory. </TEXT></DOC>