<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0028 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Corn, Soybean Prices Continue to Climb As Drought Persists in Growing Regions </HL><AUTHOR> Scott McMurray (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PCS PET </IN><TEXT>   Corn and soybean futures prices opened at the upper limit of their daily trading ranges and stayed there for the entire session as drought fears dominated the Chicago commodity markets.    Wheat futures prices closed higher, pulled upward by the action in the corn and soybean pits, but below daily price limits.    Meanwhile, rumors swept the commodity industry that spiraling grain prices were choking off export sales of grain. Analysts said a scheduled sale to China of 500,000 metric tons of soft red wheat for October delivery fell through yesterday.    The transaction reportedly was rejected by the U.S. Agriculture Department because of the high subsidy &quot;bonus&quot; it would have had to pay to the trading firm handling the sale under the government's export enhancement program.    Late last week a wheat sale to India, which is also suffering from a drought, reportedly fell through due to escalating prices, analysts said.    &quot;The government is going to be very careful about outlandish expenditures in an election year,&quot; one analyst said.    The Agriculture Department, as is its policy, declined to comment on the rumors.    Yesterday's dry, blistering heat across much of the country and forecasts for 100-degree plus temperatures today in many growing regions -- coupled with no significant rainfall in sight -- also led some analysts to cut their estimates of crop yields.    The nation's corn crop, nearing its tassling phase, which is crucial for the development of mature ears of corn, faces the most immediate danger from the drought. &quot;We lowered our corn estimates to 91 bushels an acre from 105,&quot; said Daniel Basse, a futures analyst with GNP Commodities Inc., Chicago. For the past three years, corn yields have been at about 120 bushels an acre.    Richard Loewy, a futures analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York, said he cut his estimate of corn yields to 105 bushels an acre from 118 bushels.    &quot;If we don't get any significant rain in the next 10 days, we'll be lucky to get the 81 bushels an acre we had in 1983,&quot; when the corn belt weathered its last major drought, he said. &quot;This stuff is burning up out there,&quot; he said.    &quot;If there ain't no rain, there ain't no grain, it's that simple,&quot; said Dan Markey, a futures analyst with Agri Analysis in Chicago.    The soybean crop, planted later than corn and more drought-resistant at this stage, is nonetheless dropping in yield under such withering conditions. Mr. Basse said his firm had cut soybean yield estimates about 10% to roughly 30 bushels an acre. Soybean yields across much of the country over the past three years were about 33 bushels an acre.    After the commodity markets closed, the Agriculture Department released its six-day to 10-day weather forecast calling for continued hot, dry weather over much of the country's midsection, excluding the northern portions of Wisconsin and Michigan.    Some private weather forecasters were predicting a half-inch of rain later in the week for portions of Northern Illinois, Indiana and Ohio, but that wouldn't be enough to reverse the effects of the drought, analysts said.    &quot;The market is the ultimate weatherman,&quot; and traders say a small amount of rain won't make much of a difference, one analyst said.    Corn futures prices rose their 15 cent-a-bushel daily limit on the Chicago Board of Trade, and soybean futures advanced their 30-cent limit at the opening bell as well.    As of today, the limits change for both crops. The daily limit on corn drops to 10 cents, since all contracts for the year didn't close limit bid up two days in a row. Soybean contracts fulfilled that requirement, so the daily limit was expanded to 45 cents, the Board of Trade said.    Margin requirements for speculative traders in both contracts also were increased to reflect the increased volatility in the contracts, the exchange said. The CBOT said that effective today, it will raise the initial margin to $5,250 a contract from $2,500 for soybeans; to $1,200 from $800 for corn, and to $1,400 from $900 for wheat.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   COTTON: Futures prices continued to rise in sympathy with grains and soybeans. December delivery cotton settled at 67.83 cents a pound, up 1.91 cents. The December contract, along with most of those maturing in 1989, rose their daily permissible limit of two cents a pound during the session before easing slightly later in the day, analysts said. While there has been no perceptible damage to cotton in the Mississippi Delta, there is concern among traders that a continuation of the Midwest drought eventually could affect Delta cotton, one analyst noted.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures price eased despite continuing strength in grains and soybeans. August delivery gold declined $3.80 an ounce to $454.50. September silver was down 5.8 cents an ounce to $7.2950. July platinum fell $3.60 an ounce, to $585.60. Gold traders are ignoring the strong grain and soybean markets and are already discounting possible damage because of the drought, said Peter Cardillo, futures trading adviser for Josepthal andamp; Co., New York. Mr. Cardillo said he was surprised that silver didn't follow the soybean advance. &quot;Typically, the silver price trails that of soybeans by about $1; now, it's trailing by more than that,&quot; he said. According to Jeffrey Nichols, president of American Precious Metals Advisors Inc., New York, &quot;There are still some unbelievers in the inflation theory because of drought or other reasons. Traders haven't fully adjusted to the prospect of inflation, but in the months ahead, assuming inflation does take hold, the markets will react.&quot;    COCOA: Futures prices fell sharply to new life-of-contract lows, depressed by ample available supplies and slow demand. September delivery cocoa declined $36 a metric ton to $1,500. According to one analyst, the significant factor was that prices fell despite the efforts of the Ivory Coast, the world's top producer, to support the market by withholding sales and shipments of cocoa beans. The analyst said that Denis Bra Kanon, the Ivory Coast's agriculture minister, was quoted in a news report as saying that the Ivory Coast was adamant in withholding supplies from the market until prices turned higher, even if it meant a greater storage buildup. Storage capacity in that country could be expanded to 420,000 tons from the current 200,000 tons, the minister was quoted as saying, adding that the Ivory Coast has the means to pay for the policy of retention.    ENERGY: Prices slumped as traders turned their attention to the continuing excess of world-wide crude-oil supplies. Although there was little additional information about the current surfeit of stockpiles, the absence of last week's hype surrounding the meeting of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries left the markets with little support. Selling was particularly evident in the crude-oil contract for July delivery as traders rolled their positions into later months. </TEXT></DOC>