<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880831-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Gould to Be Bought by Nippon Mining For $1.1 Billion; Shares Jump $7.125 </HL><AUTHOR> Michael J. McCarthy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GLD </CO><IN> ELE EDP TNM </IN><TEXT>   Nippon Mining Co. agreed to buy Gould Inc. in a $1.1 billion transaction aimed at giving the Japanese industrial giant greater access to the U.S. electronic-parts market.    Under the definitive agreement, a U.S. subsidiary of the Tokyo metals, petroleum refining and petrochemical concern will pay $23.25 a share for each of Gould's 45 million common shares outstanding.    The price was at the high end of Wall Street expectations, reflecting Nippon Mining's eagerness to gain market share in the U.S. Gould, a troubled maker of computers and electronic products, sought the buy-out several months ago as part of its quest to shore up its weak balance sheet.    Gould's stock jumped $7.125 to close at $22.75 on heavy volume of 1,295,700 shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.    The planned sale poses regulatory issues for the federal government, which prohibits the sale of U.S. defense contractors to foreign owners. James F. McDonald, Gould's chairman and chief executive officer, said federal officials agreed to allow Gould to proceed with the sale. However, Gould must put its NavCom Systems defense operation into a trust, which will be run by current management.    Gould said Nippon Mining plans to sell NavCom Systems. Gould has been trying to sell the operation for two years, but has been bogged down by a continuing contract dispute with the government.    If Nippon Mining sells NavCom Systems, there likely won't be any U.S. objection to the acquisition on national-security grounds. Officials at the Pentagon and the Commerce Department, the two federal agencies that look at such acquisitions from a security perspective, didn't have enough information about Nippon Mining's plans to comment.    A provision inserted by Sen. James Exon (D., Neb.) in the newly signed trade bill authorized President Reagan to review foreign acquisitions of U.S. companies on national-security grounds. But Senate aides familiar with this legislation weren't sure whether it would create problems in the Gould case.    The sale would be the final chapter in a doomed attempt by Gould to become a diversified electronics giant. It was the dream of William Ylvisaker, Gould's former chairman, to transform the company from a Rust Belt industrial manufacturer -- which originally was a battery maker -- into a high-technology concern in the fast-growing computer and defense industries. But amid big losses and charges in recent years, the company has been forced to sell off some of the businesses it acquired in that transition. To try to cut its losses, Gould shed units in industries ranging from defense to industrial automation to medical equipment.    More recently, analysts have suggested that Gould hasn't had the financial muscle to operate successfully in highly competitive high-tech businesses, and that it desperately needed a parent with deep pockets. As Gould's revenue dwindled to $933.4 million last year from more than $2 billion a few years ago, several securities analysts abandoned the stock, and some of those that remained hoped for a buy-out.    &quot;Hallelujah,&quot; said H.P. Smith, an analyst with Smith Barney Harris Upham andamp; Co. &quot;I've been following this company for 10 years, and it's been straight down the tubes in terms of stock price (in recent years).&quot;    The stock of Gould, based in Rolling Meadows, Ill., has been hovering in the midteens recently. The price Nippon Mining has agreed to pay -- nearly double book value -- was at a premium because the Japanese company was interested in gaining market share in the U.S, analysts said.    Mr. McDonald said he approached Nippon Mining to suggest the buy-out. Among the key executives who will continue to run Gould after the acquisition, Mr. McDonald said he was interested in &quot;size, globalization&quot; and &quot;adequate financing.&quot;    Peter Rona, president and chief executive officer of IBJ Schroder Bank andamp; Trust Co., which is a financial adviser to Nippon Mining, said the Japanese company was interested in Gould's technology and research and development expertise in electronic-parts businesses. In particular, analysts cited Gould's business that makes copper foil, a key material used in printed circuit boards.    Other mining and metals companies, such as Mitsubishi Metal Corp., have been successfully diversifying into electronics and high-tech materials. More are expected to follow suit by moving downstream from raw materials to high-tech products, said Minoru Udono, an analyst in Tokyo at James Capel Pacific Ltd. He said the Nippon Mining move &quot;is part of the strategy of Japan's non-ferrous metals industry.&quot; It's not advantageous, he noted, for such a company to keep a large part of its business in such a rudimentary industry.    Tokyo-based Nippon Mining is Japan's biggest non-ferrous metals smelting company and a major mining concern. The company holds a 25% share in Japan in the non-ferrous metals market. Last year 65% of its business was in petrochemical refining, 35% in non-ferrous metals and other businesses.    As part of the acquisition, Gould granted Nippon Mining an option to buy its half stake in the companies' Nikko Gould Foil Co. joint venture for $60 million. Under the agreement, Nippon Mining could exercise the option if there were a change in control of Gould. In addition to the copper-foil joint venture, Nippon Mining, which has annual sales of about $6.5 billion, has familiarized itself with Gould operations through other ventures that produce fiber-optic parts, fuses and computers.    Yukio Kasahara, Nippon Mining's president, was traveling and couldn't be reached for comment, a spokeswoman said. But in a statement, Mr. Kasahara said, &quot;This is an industrially driven acquisition that will enable Nippon Mining to continue its planned expansion in the global marketplace.&quot;    Gould said the acquisition, on which it received a fairness opinion from its investment adviser, First Boston Corp., was approved by its board and by directors of Nippon Mining.    Nippon Mining has had ties with Gould since 1981, when the two set up a Tokyo-based joint venture, which manufactures copper foil. Earlier this month, the two established another venture to sell Gould's mini-supercomputers and super-minicomputers in Japan.    In Washington, it's generally expected that the Committee on Foreign Investments in the U.S. will continue to have responsibility for conducting national-security reviews of acquisitions, such as the Gould transaction, despite the new tradebill provision. The interagency panel, which is headed by the Treasury Department, tends to have a liberal, open-door attitude toward foreign investments.    In 1985 the committee called for a review of Fujitsu Ltd.'s offer to acquire the majority shares of Fairchild Semiconductor Corp., but the Japanese concern backed out before the panel could reach a decision. Fujitsu's representatives later acknowledged that the deal was soured by Commerce Department's objections to it. The late Malcolm Baldrige, then the commerce secretary, and some Pentagon officials feared that the purchase would put sensitive defense-related technology in Japanese hands.    ---   Eduardo Lachica, Stephen Kreider Yoder and Yumiko Ono contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>