<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0107 </DOCNO><HL> End Cheating -- Pay College Athletes---By Paul R. Lawrence</HL><DD> 03/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   With all the backslapping and self-congratulating among NCAA officials, sportswriters and athletic directors, it is easy to get the impression that by canceling Southern Methodist University's 1987 football schedule and crippling its gridiron hopes for the remainder of the century, the National Collegiate Athletic Association has saved amateurism and sent a strong message to all of college football. Nothing could be further from the truth.    Throughout its 81-year history, the NCAA has sought ineffectively to prevent member schools from violating its rules -- i.e., cheating. Sure, it frequently exposes and punishes cheaters, but the NCAA's enforcement record is well-documented: Voluntary restrictions did not prevent cheating between the world wars; introduction of NCAA penalties after World War II did not stop cheating in the 1950s and '60s; and sanctions of increasing severity have not halted the athletic scandals of the '70s and '80s.    Thirty years before the NCAA was formed, other football associations attempted unsuccessfully to have member schools follow rules limiting athletic recruitment and compensation. These early schools flouted those rules for the same reason schools cheat today: Cheating induces blue-chip athletes to attend their universities. Today, these athletes help produce winning teams and sold-out stadiums, which translate into increased gate receipts and television revenue. This money is used by athletic departments to hire additional coaches, pay current coaches more or build new athletic facilities.    In light of the tremendous incentive to cheat, it is no surprise that many schools and their alumni don't play by the rules. Logistically, the NCAA can do little to stop it. With an investigative staff of less than 20 and part-time help from a Kansas City detective agency, the association is hopelessly outmanned when it tries to police nearly 1,000 schools and tens of thousands of athletes.    An important question that remains unasked in the NCAA-SMU hoopla is why the NCAA pursues cheaters in the first place. As keeper of the amateur rules, the NCAA dictates that athletes should receive only room, board and tuition. (This is a much simplified version of the NCAA's 411-page rulebook.) But why should amateur status be required of the athletes and not coaches, NCAA administrators and game officials? A trip to the &quot;final four&quot; of this year's NCAA basketball tournament will earn each team $1.3 million. The winning coaching staff will receive pay raises and the head coach will star in his own television show next season, but its athletes can receive only mementos limited in value by NCAA rules to $300. Even to a casual observer this distribution of the spoils seems disproportionate.    Why not pay the athletes for their performances? Under such a system the marketplace, not the NCAA, would determine the wages of athletes. Such a plan has two appealing features.    First, recruiting would become more open and honest. Schools could readily bid for athletes much as they do for professors, and competition similar to that for research funds would emerge. This would end secret alumni deals and bring more honesty to the recruiting process.    Second, the cost of administering intercollegiate athletics would decrease. Less time and effort would be devoted by schools to recruiting and by the NCAA to investigating its members. These savings could be devoted to ensuring that athletes graduate.    Ironically, the NCAA is not the morally superior organization it appears to be. It was convicted in 1982 of an antitrust violation for manipulating college football television; its control of athletic recruiting and compensation flirts with new legal trouble. Perhaps intercollegiate athletics would be better served if the NCAA organized tournaments, provided counsel, but did not regulate the participants.    ---   Mr. Lawrence is the author of &quot;Unsportsmanlike Conduct: The NCAA and the Business of College Football,&quot; to be published by Praeger Press in September. </TEXT></DOC>