<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0049 </DOCNO><HL> The Reagan Legacy -- Political Imprint:Reagan Era RestoredFaith in Government,Until Recent Slippage---President Also Helped ShiftConsensus to the RightAnd Power to the States---Top Problems: Budget, Trade---By James M. Perry and David ShribmanStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>      {Last of a series}   WASHINGTON -- In the final days of Jimmy Carter's administration, a bare 25% of adult Americans felt that they could trust their government to do what is right &quot;most, or all, of the time.&quot;    It was a time when prominent people were suggesting -- as former White House counsel Lloyd Cutler did in an article in Foreign Affairs magazine -- that governmental institutions couldn't function efficiently without radical restructuring.    Enter Ronald Reagan. By 1984, 44% of adult Americans in the University of Michigan national election survey agreed that their government was likely to do the right thing almost all of the time, and nobody was talking anymore about basic reform.    That may be Mr. Reagan's most striking political legacy. After four presidents who were widely perceived, one way or another, as failures -- Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter -- he restored the nation's confidence. He convinced skeptical Americans that a vigorous president could run the country.    &quot;The idea there isn't enough power or capacity to do the job,&quot; says Richard Neustadt, a Harvard political scientist, &quot;went out the window.&quot;    But the years of triumph for Mr. Reagan were cruelly short. After 1984, according to Arthur Miller and Stephen Borrelli, political scientists at the University of Iowa, the gains Mr. Reagan had made in restoring confidence in government eroded steadily, especially following the Iran-Contra affair and the stock-market crash.    &quot;He may leave a sad legacy to his successors,&quot; ventures Robert A. Divine, a University of Texas history professor. Adds Rep. Dick Cheney of Wyoming, the GOP caucus chairman, &quot;If we have a recession and a lot of economic pain, the legacy will be very bad.&quot;    Whatever happens in the months ahead, historians will surely remember the first term as a political triumph. Mr. Reagan entered office without broad public expectations that he would be a strong president with a significant agenda. But he impressed and surprised voters by doing what he said he would do: He whipped inflation, lowered taxes, strengthened the military. And, in the process, he restored Americans' confidence in themselves, which had fallen to historical lows under Mr. Carter.    Some of that lingers.    The agenda Mr. Reagan set in his first term was conservative, and his opponents still haven't been able to regain the ideological offensive. &quot;Now that he is such a picture of indecision and drift, some of the shine has gone from conservatism,&quot; says James MacGregor Burns, a Williams College historian. But, he adds, Mr. Reagan &quot;brought a sense of respectability and a sense of responsibility to conservatism. If he had left at the end of his first term, it would be almost unassailable.&quot;    Mr. Reagan helped to shift the consensus in both parties. Today, moderates are a diminished minority in his own party, and the New Deal coalition is less important in the Democratic Party.    The country -- thanks in no small part to Mr. Reagan -- is more conservative and a little more Republican. Just before he took office, 24% of Americans as measured in a Gallup poll described themselves as Republicans. The figure today is 29%, and it rose as high as 33% in 1985, the peak Reagan year. In the same period, Democratic allegiance has slipped to 42% from 46%. (The last time Republicans led the Democrats in such a survey was 41 years ago.)    The nation's oldest president has been particularly successful with young people: Today, among people between the ages of 18 and 29, nearly as many identify themselves as Republicans as call themselves Democrats. (Two years ago, though, the GOP was actually ahead.)    The rise is also evident in how Americans view the two parties. Ever since the Depression, Americans had regarded the Democrats as the party better able to handle economic problems; these days, according to a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, they favor the GOP by 43% to 33%. By an almost identical margin, they think that Republicans can better handle Soviet relations as well.    Under Mr. Reagan, it was the Republicans who began to &quot;seem more positive,&quot; says John Sears, a Republican political strategist. &quot;The people who were once the negativists are the ones who have the 'can-do' feeling today -- and Reagan's the reason.&quot;    Although the president's reputation has suffered in his second term, his achievements remain formidable. Mr. Reagan has strengthened his party's position in the South, especially in presidential elections. &quot;Reagan has just about convinced Southern Democrats to move toward us -- or at least to think about it,&quot; says Republican Rep. Connie Mack of Florida. &quot;Now it's up to us to seal the deal.&quot; But it isn't easy. Some Southern counties still have no GOP officeholders at any level, and on election day this year, Democrats easily elected governors in Mississippi and Kentucky. Republicans, moreover, don't control a legislative chamber in any of the 11 states in the Old Confederacy.    Mr. Reagan did achieve some success in transferring power to state and local governments. &quot;He gave us issues to work with and control of a lot of programs,&quot; says Carroll Campbell, who last fall became South Carolina's second GOP governor since Reconstruction. &quot;He opened up a whole new arena for us. Before him, Republicans ran against government. Now, particularly at the local level, we can be positive -- to solve problems.&quot;    Perhaps Mr. Reagan's most lingering legacy is in the courts, which he has sought to remake in his own conservative image. He has made more than 325 lifetime judicial appointments, including almost half of the active federal district judges and the active regional appeals judges. He has gone out of his way, moreover, to appoint younger judges, who will be on the bench well into the next century. And he has strengthened and solidified the conservative bloc on the Supreme Court -- although the political fallout from the ill-fated Bork and Ginsburg nominations robbed him of the chance to add yet another hard-line conservative to the court.    Conversely, despite some gains in the last year, the Democrats remain largely where Mr. Reagan put them -- on the defensive. Americans now favor some modest military cuts, and the next president probably won't be able to reverse that. But Americans also believe that Mr. Reagan was right to rebuild the nation's defenses, and the presidents who follow will find it difficult politically to make deep cuts. As they approach the post-Reagan era, Democrats, who were torn apart by the Vietnam debate, are especially sensitive to the political consequences of seeming to be weak on defense.    Looming over everything else -- the biggest problems Mr. Reagan leaves his successors -- are the budget and trade deficits. The political implications are vast. &quot;In effect,&quot; says William Schneider of the American Enterprise Institute, the budget deficit &quot;institutionalizes the Reagan revolution. It de-funds the welfare state.&quot;    In Mr. Reagan's early years, voters agreed that spending for social programs had to be cut. But that attitude began to change as early as 1984, according to the two University of Iowa political scientists, with public opinion &quot;drifting back toward increased government social spending.&quot; The result is that the Democrats, historically the party of big spending, are frustrated: There is no money to spend.    &quot;Democrats are in a real box,&quot; says former Vice President Walter Mondale, the party's nominee in 1984. &quot;Reagan has practiced the politics of subtraction. He knows the public wants to spend money on the old folks, protecting the environment and aiding education. And he's figured out the only way to stop it is to deny the revenues. No matter how powerful the arguments the Democrats make for the use of government to serve some purpose, the answer must be no.&quot;    Tax overhaul also leaves the Democrats frustrated. The force of Mr. Reagan's appeal prompted the Democrats to embrace the concept in his second term, but as a result, Mr. Reagan also forced the Democrats to relinquish one of their principal policy tools, the use of the tax code to achieve social goals. Legislators of both parties are loath to tinker with individual rates in this new atmosphere.    &quot;By 'cleaning up' the code, we've eliminated the opportunity to use credits and preferences to implement our agenda,&quot; says Rep. Robert Matsui of California, a Democratic member of the House Ways and Means Committee. &quot;There is an aura to tax reform, but we've hurt ourselves politically.&quot;    What makes the situation especially painful for the Democrats is that they still get blamed for the budget deficit and still aren't trusted by the voters as a party capable of managing the economy.    &quot;Despite all that's happened, the public thinks the Republicans are the party best able to keep the nation prosperous,&quot; says Alvin From, the executive director of the Democratic Leadership Conference. &quot;They've stolen our best issue.&quot; The only way the Democrats can get it back, says Kevin Phillips, a Republican political theorist, &quot;is for the economy to go into a tailspin.&quot; And that, of course, is something well beyond the party's control.    Democratic presidential candidates, Mr. From says, should be making some tough decisions. They should be talking about cutting back on some entitlement programs and getting rid of some major weapons systems. &quot;But,&quot; says Mr. From, &quot;they aren't facing up to it.&quot;    Mr. Schneider of the American Enterprise Institute sees two unintended consequences of the Reagan years. The military buildup convinced Americans that the nation was sufficiently secure to consider once again a policy of detente with the Soviet Union -- hardly what hard-liners in the Reagan administration set out to do. And Mr. Reagan, who was swept into office on a wave of anti-government sentiment fueled by roaring inflation, enjoyed such success against inflation that he also curbed the revolt against government, something he never intended.    Hardly anyone believes that there is anything out there in the post-Reagan years except trouble.    Both parties face internal stresses at a time when political parties are in sharp decline. The Democrats must grapple with the demands of their special-interest groups -- the poor, blacks, labor unions and feminists. But the coalition that Mr. Reagan helped to build includes religious fundamentalists, whose social agenda -- abortion, school prayer and creationism -- frightens many middle-class Republicans. &quot;That Reagan could hold such a coalition together was an extraordinary achievement,&quot; says the Brookings Institution's A. James Reichley.    What worries many political analysts is that by the end of Mr. Reagan's troubled second term he may be seen as a failure. And if he is succeeded by a Democrat who is defeated by mounting problems at home and abroad, voters will come to believe that it is twilight time, not the morning for America that Mr. Reagan promised in his 1984 re-election campaign. Both parties would have had their chance, and both would have failed. That is the gloom-and-doom scenario.    The scenario would be postponed if a Republican succeeded Mr. Reagan. But it is unlikely that George Bush, Robert Dole, Jack Kemp or any of the other candidates could breathe new life into the Reagan agenda in a post-Reagan era. The next president will be forced to make unpopular decisions, and he won't be able to draw on the kind of good will that frequently sustained Mr. Reagan.    Ronald Reagan is going to be a tough act to follow. </TEXT></DOC>