<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NSC PAPERS SHOW an intricate Contra supply network was in place in 1985.    The National Security Council documents show that the corporate network, overseen by Lt. Col. North, was supplying arms to the Nicaraguan rebels when Reagan decided last year to begin direct arms sales to Iran. The papers show that the network, which was operating as early as November 1985, was larger and more complex than previously known. Meanwhile, despite calls by congressional leaders, the White House said Reagan doesn't plan to apologize over the Iran-Contra affair.    Weinberger said that any imposition of limits on Reagan's power because of the Iran affair could have &quot;dangerous&quot; consequences on U.S. foreign policy.    ---   WEST GERMANY ARRESTED a suspect in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jet.    Officials in Bonn said the Lebanese man was arrested at Frankfurt airport upon his arrival from Beirut. The suspect, identified as Mohammed Ali Hamadi, 22, was taken into custody after customs agents found that he was carrying a fluid used in making explosives. Hamadi is one of three suspects charged in the June 1985 hijacking of the TWA jetliner, which was en route to Rome from Athens before being diverted to Beirut. A U.S. Navy diver was killed in the incident and 38 Americans were taken hostage.    A Justice Department spokesman said Washington would ask West Germany to extradite the suspect to stand trial for murder and air piracy.    ---   Afghanistan's government began a ceasefire in its battle with Moslem guerrillas, but said soldiers would respond to any violation of the truce by the insurgents. In Kabul, Afghan leader Najibullah announced that the government and Moscow had reached accords paving the way for a full withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.    ---   A commuter airplane collided with a private aircraft over Salt Lake City, killing at least 10 people and scattering debris over a residential area, authorities said. Falling wreckage damaged three houses, but there apparently weren't any injuries on the ground, fire officials said.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union opened a new round of arms-control talks in Geneva with a luncheon meeting between chief U.S. negotiator Max Kampelman and his new Soviet counterpart, Yuli Vorontsov. It wasn't known when the next session of talks on nuclear and space weapons would be held.    ---   The White House was faulted by Senate Labor and Human Resources panel members for taking money from other health projects to pay for the fight against AIDS. An HHS official told the panel that the administration plans to defer $334 million in research grants from fiscal 1987 to 1988.    Scientists reported that the drug azidothymidine, or AZT, may at least temporarily reverse some of the dementia and other neurological disorders associated with AIDS.    ---   The Navy successfully conducted the first test flight of its Trident II nuclear missile at a land launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla. The Pentagon said the missile, the Navy's most powerful, is designed to improve the strategic deterrence of U.S. and British submarines in the 1990s.    ---   Reports circulated in China that the Communist Party would dismiss its leader, Hu Yaobang, for his handling of recent student protests. Amid rumors that the party was meeting to decide Hu's fate, a party official wouldn't confirm that Hu was still general secretary. A Western diplomat said that indicated Hu was in &quot;deep trouble.&quot;    ---   Officials in Puerto Rico said the busboy accused of helping set a New Year's Eve fire at San Juan's Dupont Plaza hotel has been charged with 96 counts of first-degree murder. Another hotel worker had been charged with murder Tuesday. One suspect was taken into protective custody at a U.S. Navy base following death threats.    ---   The Reagan administration lifted an eight-year ban on exports of most U.S. oilfield equipment and technology to the Soviets. Commerce Secretary Baldrige said the action was taken because of the &quot;widespread foreign availability of like products&quot; and the &quot;significant&quot; injury to U.S. equipment producers.    ---   Freezing temperatures continued throughout Europe, with hundreds of thousands of people isolated by snow-clogged roads. More than 200 people have died this month as a result of sub-zero temperatures and heavy snow. The cold was expected to last until at least next week.    ---   Chile's military government approved a law permitting the legal formation of political parties for the first time since the 1973 coup. The law, which specifically excludes recognition of Marxist parties, was cleared at a special session of the country's four-member military junta in Santiago.    ---   Anglican envoy Terry Waite met with Lebanese leaders in Beirut in an effort to win release of American and other hostages held in Lebanon. While Waite said his mission was &quot;going well ahead,&quot; militia escorts said he hadn't made any contact with those holding the foreign captives.    ---   Thousands of workers gathered in the streets of Athens and other cities to protest the Greek government's austerity policies. A 24-hour strike against the program, which includes a wage freeze, affected almost every sector of the Greek work force and caused power blackouts and the closing of public transportation in the capital.    ---   Philippine troops battled Moslem rebels who seized a government building on Mindanao island. It was the third consecutive day of violence involving Moslem guerrillas on the island. In Manila, communist negotiators said peace talks with the Aquino government were stalled over rebel opposition to the government's draft constitution.    ---   Sikh gunmen killed seven people in Punjab state, including an Indian army officer who participated in the 1984 army assault on Sikh temples against extremists fighting to create an independent nation. Police and news reports said at least 15 people were injured in the latest Sikh violence.    ---   Died: Ray Bolger, 83, actor and dancer, in Los Angeles, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>