<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880311-0011 </DOCNO><HL> Stocks Plunge On News of Oil, Gold and Dollar --- Industrials' Decline of 48.24 Is Also Tied to Rumors; Program Traders Active </HL><AUTHOR> Douglas R. Sease (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK NDX </IN><TEXT>   Nervous investors bailed out of the stock market yesterday, sending the Dow Jones Industrial Average plummeting nearly 50 points.    A combination of factors -- including a weaker dollar, higher gold and oil prices, apparently unfounded rumors of new indictments on Wall Street and a takeover deal gone awry -- prompted stockholders to sell. The resulting slide was exacerbated by big selling programs that are part of trading strategies related to stock-index futures.    The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at 2026.03, down 48.24. Just two days earlier, investors had been in a buying mood and pushed the industrials up 24.70, to 2081.07, its highest level since the October crash.    Yesterday's decline was just shy of the 50-point swing at which the New York Stock Exchange would deny use of its computerized order-execution system to program traders. This rule has never been tested because the industrial average hasn't moved that much in a day, since the rule was instituted Feb. 5 to help prevent a recurrence of the October crash.    &quot;You certainly did have some sell programs during the day, but the problem was really more one of fundamentals than program trading,&quot; said Jeffrey Tabak, managing director of Miller Tabak Hirsch andamp; Co., a New York investment firm.    Although opinions varied, several analysts suggested that yesterday's broad decline had its roots in a weaker dollar. The currency eased slightly against the West German mark and the Japanese yen.    That, alone, wouldn't have triggered a stock-market selloff, market professionals said. But coupled with a $7-an-ounce rise in the price of gold and a 51-cent-a-barrel increase in oil futures, it raised the dual fears of increased inflation and higher interest rates.    If that wasn't enough to chill investors' enthusiasm, a major takeover bid went sour, the first to fall apart since the current wave of merger mania swept Wall Street.    Forstmann Little andamp; Co. backed out of its proposed takeover of AFG Industries Inc. after studying the company's financial situation. AFG plunged $5 a share, to $31.625, in heavy trading and left takeover speculators wondering what other deals might unravel.    Investors are more skeptical about takeover fever than before the October crash. Charles Clough, the chief investment strategist for Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., said the current round of proposed takeovers differs from previous periods of high merger activity because the junk-bond market, which financed some of the earlier big deals, isn't as liquid. That means banks will have to provide some of the financing and they might not be as willing to support questionable takeover bids.    &quot;The banks might just question whether all this takeover mania can be sustained,&quot; Mr. Clough said.    Another sign of how dependent the market's recent rally is on the prospect of continuing merger activity appeared late in yesterday's session. A rash of rumors of new indictments in the insider-trading scandal swept Wall Street, and several analysts said the rumors were responsible for some of the market decline.    Responding to the rumors, a spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan said, &quot;no public announcements are scheduled for the next few days.&quot;    Yesterday's selloff didn't spare the over-the-counter market, which through Wednesday had rallied more than 15% this year. The Nasdaq composite index fell 3.52 points, to 376.76, on heavy volume, only its second decline in the past month.    The same program selling that exacerbated the Big Board's losses pulled down the Nasdaq index, too. The decline was concentrated in the biggest Nasdaq stocks, which are included in some of the indexes used for stock-index arbitrage.    Meanwhile, prices of many smaller OTC stocks rose as investors continued to buy into what they hope will be a sustained rally in these &quot;tertiary&quot; stocks. But money managers warned that the small stocks, too, may be headed for the kind of plunge that hit the big stocks yesterday.    &quot;The whole environment is one in which people are ignoring reality,&quot; said Don Yarling, a partner in Lemley, Yarling andamp; Co., a Cleveland money management firm. &quot;They're calling here wanting to buy stocks and they don't even know the name of the company. I have no idea how long it can continue before prices cave, but all these people have forgotten how hard it was to get out of small stocks in the week after Oct. 19.&quot;    The question is whether prices will continue sliding. Two government reports to be released this morning -- February retail sales and the producer-price index -- will initially help set the tone for trading.    But even if these reports are encouraging, investors may remain wary until the announcement next week of the nation's January trade deficit. If the deficit turns out to be worse than expected, the dollar's recent downward drift could speed into a sharp decline. That is especially worrisome in light of the market's apparent sensitivity to even small downward pressures on the currency.    But many market analysts continue to be cautiously bullish. Lon Gorman, senior equities manager at First Boston Corp., suggests that if the dollar stabilizes and interest rates remain steady, yesterday's drop in stock prices could be only a minor blip on the way to higher levels. He said he is especially encouraged by the number of takeover deals that are likely to be concluded in the next month or so.    &quot;I haven't done any homework on the numbers, but there's got to be $25 billion to $40 billion in deals that will close in the next 30 days,&quot; he said. &quot;That's a lot of money sitting on the sidelines. When you pile that on top of the cash that portfolio managers still have, that's going to put the onus on them to put their toes, and maybe their whole foot, into the market.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>