<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   WALSH WON Iran-Contra victories in both U.S. and Swiss courts.    The independent counsel's appointment by Attorney General Meese and his authority to conduct an investigation were upheld by an appeals court in Washington. The three-judge panel also upheld a grand jury subpoena reportedly for North's fingerprints. In Lausanne, Switzerland's Supreme Court issued a ruling that set aside Swiss bank secrecy laws and ordered that bank records relating to Walsh's Iran-Contra inquiry be turned over to the U.S. About $8 million related to the affair remains in three Swiss bank accounts.    The transfer of the Swiss documents had been delayed by a challenge filed by Maj. Gen. Secord and Iranian-born businessmen Hakim and Ghorbanifar.    ---   Reagan will give the Nicaraguan rebels &quot;his personal assurances&quot; of commitment to their cause at a meeting Thursday in Los Angeles, the White House said. The president is to hold talks with the six-member Contra directorate. The Contras have complained about being poorly consulted on Central American peace efforts.    Managua's archbishop was among three clerics named by the Roman Catholic Church for a seat on a panel to oversee Nicaragua's efforts to meet terms of a Central American peace plan. His nomination came as the foreign ministers of five regional nations ended a two-day meeting in San Salvador on an agenda for the peace proposal.    ---   A safety board official said the crew of the Northwest Airlines flight that crashed Sunday near Detroit could have aborted the takeoff had a warning system alerted them that the jetliner's wing flaps were in a wrong position. The official said a preliminary inquiry didn't find any evidence to show that the warning system sounded.    ---   Iran's parliamentary speaker offered to help negotiate a swap to free foreign hostages in Lebanon. Rafsanjani, in an NBC-TV interview, said the exchange would involve the transfer of Western captives for Shiite Moslem prisoners held in Israel and Kuwait. The U.S. rejected the bid and called for an &quot;unconditional release&quot; of hostages.    ---   The Tehran government denied planting mines in international waters, but admitted it has been using the underwater explosive devices in the Persian Gulf for &quot;defensive operations.&quot; In the gulf, a storm halted a convoy of Kuwaiti tankers and U.S. warships, and Iranian commandos attacked and searched a Yugoslav freighter.    ---   Federal health officials issued new AIDS protection guidelines for health-care workers, warning that all patients should be treated as potentially infected with the disease. In an 18-page report, the Centers for Disease Control said gloves, masks and goggles should be used by workers any time contact with body fluids is anticipated.    ---   Japan ordered a Soviet trade official to leave the country after the Soviets expelled Tokyo's defense attache and the head of Mitsubishi Corp.'s Moscow office for alleged illegal activities. The expulsions came as ties between the two nations have been strained by the furor over a Toshiba unit's sale of equipment to Moscow.    ---   South Korea's chief prosecutor warned against violence in the nation's growing labor protests after police detained 126 people in strike-related clashes. While seven Hyundai plants reopened, hundreds of other workplaces remained closed in the work stoppages that have spread throughout the nation this month.    ---   Mine owners in South Africa closed a gold mine shaft in Transvaal province, and threatened action against as many as 50,000 strikers at three other sites. About 3,000 black miners forfeited their jobs Wednesday, rejecting a return-to-work ultimatum. The wage dispute in the coal and gold industries began nearly two weeks ago.    ---   Sri Lanka's Parliament convened under heavy security and extended a state of emergency, following Tuesday's attempt to assassinate President Jayewardene. Authorities in Colombo began inquiries to determine if those involved in the assault, in which one lawmaker was killed and 15 others were wounded, had help from abroad.    ---   Legislation was introduced by members of Philippine President Aquino's ruling party in the Senate to outlaw nuclear weapons from the country. The measure, if passed into law, could jeopardize two major U.S. military bases in the Philippines.    ---   Solidarity founder Lech Walesa said the outlawed trade union has decided to use $1 million in U.S. aid to help upgrade Poland's &quot;poor hospital facilities&quot; and restock the health service's &quot;insufficient supply of medicines.&quot; Warsaw had faulted Solidarity for accepting the U.S. grant, accusing it of being a &quot;paid agent of the U.S.&quot;    ---   A nationwide strike in Brazil failed to rally much support. Although some workers joined the 24-hour general strike, called to protest the government's economic policies and to demand wage increases, large labor groups refused to participate. </TEXT></DOC>