<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890804-0053 </DOCNO><DD> = 890804 </DD><AN> 890804-0053. </AN><HL> Flow of Money From China Uncertain@  ---@  Region's Future Depends@  On Incentives, Immigration@  ----@  By Steven Jones@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/04/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> FREST JAPAN </CO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Nearly two months after the Tiananmen Square massacre, there isn't any clear indication that a substantial amount of investment is moving to other Asian countries from China and Hong Kong.    Business executives and government officials around the region say they have been receiving inquiries about new investments and manufacturing orders since the June 4 killings in Beijing, but they say it's too early to tell if money that would have gone to China is coming their way.    For the moment, however, manufacturers operating in China, particularly in the south, say production and deliveries have returned to normal after slight disruptions in early June.    Given this quick recovery, few foreign businesses are considering walking away from their investments. Many expansion plans and new investments are on hold, however, hurt by austerity measures Beijing imposed earlier, as well as by the political uncertainty.    More problematic are foreign buyers who place orders with China-based factories. Hong Kong executives with operations in China say some buyers, particularly Americans, have canceled orders with China and shifted some of them to Hong Kong and elsewhere in the region. But the executives say they believe the orders eventually will go back to China, assuming there is no further political upheaval or severe change in economic policy.    Whether the rest of the region ultimately benefits from uncertainty over China and Hong Kong's future also will depend in part on whether incentives are provided to attract capital and people.    With Hong Kong due to revert to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, the killings spurred worries that accelerated emigration would undermine the colony's economy and its status as a financial center.    The confidence crisis has yet to fade in Hong Kong, and emigration seems certain to rise from already-troubling levels, but there doesn't appear to be an exodus of business under way or even a significant loss of interest by companies considering whether they should set up in the colony.    The major worry for Hong Kong businesses remains the &quot;brain drain&quot; of skilled workers and managers. Emigration is expected to grow, averaging between 50,000 and 60,000 people annually during the next few years, from the estimated record 45,000 emigrants in 1988.    Here is a survey of the impact of the China turmoil on investments and immigration in the Asian-Pacific region:    Indonesia    With its large population and low labor costs, Indonesia is widely seen as an alternative for manufacturers anxious about operating in China. Jakarta businessmen report a rise in foreign-investment inquiries since June 4, but it isn't clear if they will translate into investment or new orders for Indonesian manufacturers.    A foreign business consultant predicts that turmoil in China will result in only &quot;a trickle&quot; of additional investments.    Hong Kong garment makers say Indonesia received some orders shifted out of China, but they expect business will return to China if political conditions stabilize.    Foreign investors' interest in Indonesia has been rising during the past few years, partly as a result of state efforts to deregulate the economy. Hong Kong investors already rank second in Indonesia, after Japan, on the Investment Coordinating Board's list of total foreign investments outside the country's huge oil industry.    Japan    A move away from China or Hong Kong seems unlikely for Japanese companies.    While those operating in China have clearly become more cautious since the Tiananmen shootings, it appears that investment projects and discussions are continuing.    Japanese employees are returning to their posts in China and the general feeling among businessmen is that no one with any significant commitment is likely to pull out now.    Japanese commitment to Hong Kong seems even more solid. While there have been news reports in Singapore suggesting that some of Japan's leading securities firms might be considering moving operations there from Hong Kong, Tokyo officials deny this.    Like Indonesia, Japan isn't likely to alter its stiff immigration rules to allow large-scale entry of Hong Kong residents.    The Philippines    During the past year, the Philippines has attracted considerable interest from Hong Kong investors. Hotels, resorts and garment-making ventures have been among the popular investments. Whether there will be a boost in Hong Kong investments because of the Tiananmen massacre remains to be seen. Similarly, the Philippines hasn't experienced a surge in manufacturing orders or investments that were planned for China.    Officials of the Board of Investments and business consultants say investment inquiries rose in early June but the interest seems to have waned. Because the Philippines has economic and security worries of its own, its ability to capitalize on China's misfortune may well depend on offering further investment and immigration incentives. A revision of the country's investment-visa program is under discussion.    Singapore    The country that has made the boldest attempt to attract money and people from Hong Kong may well be the biggest beneficiary to date of the fallout from the killings in Beijing.    Political jitters before June 4 had already sent Hong Kong money into Singapore shares and residential properties, analysts say, and the trend is expected to continue. International fund managers fleeing the volatile colony market also are buying Singapore shares.    However, a large number of Hong Kong people could be moving to Singapore in the next few years, considering the initial reaction to a change in immigration rules and a new visa system that would let Singapore absorb as many as 100,000 Hong Kong people in eight years.    South Korea    The political crackdown in Beijing seems to have had little impact on the already cautious stance South Korean businessmen maintain toward trade and investment in China.    When the long-standing political freeze between the two countries began to thaw three years ago, Korean businesses rushed into China seeking export markets, new sources of raw materials and investment opportunities. But the Koreans soon realized the depth of China's economic problems and saw that the country wasn't such a compatible business partner.    In the past few months, several Korean business groups have sent representatives back into China to assess the climate for trade and investment. An executive of the giant Samsung Group says Koreans are undaunted by the political repression in China, having lived and thrived in a similar atmosphere for years in Korea.    As for potential Hong Kong immigrants, analysts say Seoul isn't likely to amend its strict regulations on granting residency. </TEXT></DOC>