<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880804-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Quiet Crisis: Small-Town America Battles a Deep Gloom As Its Economy Sinks --- People Flee as Jobs Disappear, Off Farms as Well as On; Despair in Eastport, Maine --- A Parent's Plea: Leave Home </HL><AUTHOR> Marj Charlier (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> IND </IN><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   EASTPORT, Maine -- There are two Americas now, and they grow further apart each day.    Metropolitan America is wallowing in nervous prosperity. Times are so good that people are afraid they can't last. In the other America, the forgotten one beyond the patches of urban and suburban wealth, people would like the chance to be afraid about good times lasting.    In this town of 3,000 huddled on the cold blue coast, the bars are full of the unemployed and the underemployed. They have been waiting out hardship for years, and time is wearing them down. Their vision of a rural idyll, the dream that lured them from the cities, is fading.    Outside, the deepest port on the Eastern seaboard waits for ships. Few come. The shoreline is lined with abandoned sardine canneries, a local industry killed off years ago by foreign competition. Inside the bars, young patrons swap rumors about possible -- and usually temporary -- jobs. A 26-year-old house painter without work (a condition he shares with almost 12% of the residents) inspects a photo of the sardine factories in boom times and says wistfully: &quot;I'd like to have been here when the town was like that.&quot;    With variations, the same scene is being played out all across the country. The magnitude of what is happening has been obscured by the emphasis put on certain parts of it, such as the farm crisis and the drought. But the U.S. has been suffering more than a farm crisis or a drought, more than a cyclical downturn in the Western resource belt. It is in the midst of a coast-to-coast, border-to-border collapse of much of its rural economy.    In many places, it has been going on for 10 years, even as the nation's roaring economy brought about a rebirth of tired cities and enfeebled industries. Among the reasons for the collapse: cheap imports, low commodity prices at home, policy shifts in Washington and even predation on Wall Street. More than a quarter of the nation's population, or 64 million people, may be feeling at least some of the effects of the collapse.    Some parts of rural America, particularly those attracting retirees or lucky enough to have large government installations nearby, are still above water or even thriving. But elsewhere, towns are marked by deserted factories, shut-down mines and sawmills, boarded-up stores, and industrial-park sites sprouting weeds.    New industries, when they can be found at all, generally don't come close to replacing all the jobs lost, and the percentage of unemployed in rural counties is commonly double or even triple the rate in cities. In California, where San Diego and San Francisco boast jobless rates under 5%, more than a score of the state's 58 counties have double-digit unemployment. They are mostly the rural counties.    Depressed towns suffer without much attention being paid. The 1,400 residents of Thompson Falls, a western Montana hamlet isolated in mountainous country one resident describes as &quot;steeper than a cow's face,&quot; are 100 miles from the nearest shopping center -- and farther yet from the prosperity they once enjoyed.    In the late 1970s, logging operations, sawmills and an antimony mine were going full blast, employing hundreds. Only two people were drawing unemployment compensation. Today, logging is in decline, the mine is closed -- cheap imports again -- and the unemployment rate is 12%. Signs that advertised close-out sales are fading in the windows of shops long vacant.    &quot;We used to have jobs and no one to fill them,&quot; says Ron Calvert, head of the town's employment services office. &quot;Now we have good people and no jobs for them.&quot; About 15% of the work force has left town within the past year or two.    Many distressed communities around the country are emptying out; half of all the nonmetropolitan counties in the U.S. have lost population since 1983. As people and businesses leave, the tax base shrinks, and towns begin to cut services.    In Eastern Maine, this means cuts in programs aiding battered wives, alcoholism treatment centers, and other services. Elsewhere, schools are closing, roads are crumbling, and young people are leaving for the cities.    Their parents watch them go with resignation. Why stay when there is so little opportunity? Eastport resident Richard Klyver, who came there from New York 14 years ago in part to get his children out of city schools, hopes his son, now in college at Bar Harbor, won't come back. &quot;I don't want him caught up in the dead-end cycle kids get into here,&quot; he says, &quot;working minimum-wage jobs and spending everything on their cars.&quot;    In Dawson, Ga., hard-hit by two plant closings that wiped out 2,000 jobs, a visitor to a high-school class asks students where they will settle when they finish their education. Only two of 20 want to stay in Dawson. &quot;You can't go very far here,&quot; says Duncan Moseley, a senior.    He probably is right. Dale Milner, a manager for Georgia Power Co. in Dawson, says that in the 1970s any economic development director in this area who didn't have two or three industrial prospects cooking wasn't working very hard. In the past couple of years, he adds, there hasn't been one good industrial prospect in all of south Georgia.    Meanwhile, existing jobs have evaporated. Since 1980, the rural South has lost at least 69,000 of them, mostly to foreign production, in industries ranging from electronics to transportation to textiles. Other regions have had heavy industrial job losses, too.    This is an especially bad blow for rural counties. City dwellers might think of them collectively as a vast expanse of corn, cows and mine shafts, but fully 40% of rural residents live in counties mainly dependent on manufacturing.    In the heady times of the so-called rural renaissance a decade or so ago, the comparatively cheap, willing and usually nonunion labor available in the countryside attracted many of these plants. Now, even cheaper workers can be found overseas. &quot;The things that made rural areas competitive in the 1970s make the Third World competitive in the 1980s,&quot; says Cornelia Flora, a rural sociologist at Kansas State University.    There is more behind the rural crisis, however, than simply the globalization and increased ferocity of business competition. Until recently, a web of law, policy and subsidy helped maintain rural America and cushion it in hard times. That web has been torn, and some bitterly believe their government has forsaken them.    &quot;None of this is the hand of God,&quot; insists Osha Davidson, a writer in Mechanicsville, Iowa. &quot;It's the effect of policy.&quot;    The merger mania that gripped corporate America has had a far-reaching impact. Impelled to reduce the debt load they incurred in takeovers, acquiring companies often sell off some of the assets they bought, or consolidate operations to save money. Scattered rural plants are frequent victims.    The deregulation of transportation also hit rural areas hard. Airlines dropped or cut back service to small cities, leaving them and the countryside around them even more isolated -- and less able to hold or attract industry. Bus service also diminished. When Greyhound cut back or ended stops in 1982, more than 90% of the towns affected had fewer than 10,000 residents.    Moreover, Congress further restricted the use of tax-exempt municipal bonds in financing private development, a practice that rural communities relied on more heavily than cities did. General revenue sharing, which poured $4.1 billion of federal funds into local towns and counties in fiscal 1986, was eliminated the following year. Cities have other ways to get federal money. Most rural areas don't.    To many, such policies almost seem designed to destroy rural America. At the very least, they argue, the policies are blind to the fragility of rural economies. Country towns and counties often depend on one product, one crop, even a single mine or factory. So, while a city can weather hard times in one segment of its economy, a single adverse development in a small town can mean disaster.    Like Leadville, Colo. Tucked into the Rockies southwest of Denver, it has a colorful, rip-roaring past and great views of the Continental Divide.    Not that long ago Leadville was thriving. The Pasttime Bar on Second Street, the town's old red-light district, was packed at 8 a.m., when the night shift at Amax Inc.'s huge Climax molybdenum mine got off work, and packed again at night. The mine dominated town life. It provided some 3,000 jobs and 85% of the property-tax base. When Amax closed it in 1982, Leadville went into a slide that it hasn't been able to reverse.    Today, many of its buildings are rundown, its stores vacant. More than 200 homes are on the market. Many have been there for years, despite offering prices as low as half what the owners paid. The streets are crumbling, but dispirited voters have rejected bond issues to repair them. Weeds grow in the yards of shut-down schools. Leadville's population has shrunk to half the 7,000 before the crash.    The Pasttime Bar is quiet now. Owner Jerry Seme, the daughter-in-law of the professional gambler who opened the place, says bitterly: &quot;Anybody who tells you the U.S. is a bed of roses, they're crazy. The local people still support us, but they're all leaving. It's scary.&quot;    Thomas Jefferson believed in a republic rooted not in the cities but in the virtues of the country, a republic supported mainly by the labors of small farmers and tradesmen. Though events proved him wrong and the nation became urbanized, that Jeffersonian ideal never died. In the 1970s, in fact, it seemed that the U.S. might be moving back toward it.    People were fleeing the cities then, looking for places where you didn't have to lock your doors, where there was affordable housing, clean air, better schools, a quieter life closer to nature. The country absorbed them. It could afford to.    High commodity prices were pouring money into the towns. Factories and businesses were opening. Grocery stores became supermarkets, driveways sprouted boats and campers, and remodeled cafes were full of people after high-school basketball games. Then, for the first time in history, the population growth rate of rural America consistently outstripped that of urban America.    Now, the confidence people felt then has collapsed into a deep, corrosive gloom. In Calumus, Iowa, hammered into the ground by the farm bust, homes stand empty and the business district, strangely silent, is dotted with casualties -- shut-down shops, including two taverns, a farm implement dealer, the grocery, and three gas stations. Resident Gary Eden sees more than that. &quot;It's a whole way of life being lost,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>