<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870626-0033 </DOCNO><HL> Top Reagan Aides Permitted DraftingOf False Iran Testimony, Official Says---By David Rogers and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper testified that top Reagan administration officials last fall acquiesced to the drafting of false testimony to Congress in order to conceal the U.S. role in a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran.    Appearing before House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, Mr. Cooper portrayed a pattern of deception and delay that encumbered the Justice Department's own inquiry into the unraveling scandal last fall. While stoutly loyal to Attorney General Edwin Meese, the testimony by the Alabamian raised new questions over the department's failure to alert its criminal branch sooner and secure classified documents in the White House.    Thrust into the controversy last November, Mr. Cooper was privy to high-level discussions, including a Nov. 20 White House meeting when testimony was prepared for former Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey to give before House and Senate Intelligence Committees about the Iran initiative.    Mr. Cooper testified that Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North successfully argued that Mr. Casey's testimony should indicate that no one in the government knew that American Hawk surface-to-air missiles were being sold to Iran from Israeli stocks.    Both the late director and then-National Security Adviser John Poindexter deferred to Col. North on the issue, Mr. Cooper said. But NSC records show Adm. Poindexter and Col. North had advance knowledge of the Hawk shipment, and the committees have established that high-ranking CIA officials -- including Mr. Casey -- learned of the shipment within days of the weapons being flown to Tehran.    Mr. Cooper's testimony came as the committees released testimony by State Department and U.S. intelligence officials bolstering prior evidence of efforts to disguise the U.S. role in early arms sales to Iran. The records show the NSC and CIA were intimately involved in facilitating the Hawk shipment, and that there are missing cables and false statements concealing the operation, which had been kept secret from Congress.    Though absent from the Nov. 20 meeting, State Department legal adviser Abraham Sofaer intervened immediately afterward and ultimately succeeded with Mr. Cooper in striking the language before Mr. Casey testified the next morning. In a deposition released yesterday, Mr. Sofaer corroborated major points in Mr. Cooper's account. But Mr. Sofaer, a former judge, was blunter in his assessment of what was happening.    The account of Mr. Sofaer, who testified that he said he would resign if the testimony was given as proposed by Col. North, reflects a distrust at the State Department toward NSC players in the Iran-Contra affair. Mr. Sofaer advised Secretary of State George Shultz not to share his confidential notes with former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, and Mr. Sofaer appears to have quickly discerned a link between the Iran initiative and covert military aid to Nicaraguan insurgents.    Mr. Sofaer disclosed that early drafts of Mr. Casey's testimony were altered to strike all references to Southern Air Transport, a Miami-based freight carrier linked to both the Iran initiative and covert aid to the Contras. Southern Air's dual role was an early clue for Mr. Sofaer that the two operations were linked, and the decision to conceal the carrier's name bolsters other evidence that this issue was a concern within the White House.    During a day of frequently sharp questioning by lawmakers, Mr. Cooper also provided new details about the genesis of the attorney general's preliminary investigation, along with early Justice Department concerns about the veracity of information supplied by Col. North, Adm. Poindexter and others.    The White House has asserted that it was the president who prompted Mr. Meese to begin his fact-finding effort last Nov. 21. But Mr. Cooper testified that the attorney general two weeks earlier gave him a &quot;heads-up&quot; signal to prepare to analyze the legal questions raised by the secret arms sales to Iran. By the time a Nov. 21 meeting with Mr. Reagan was set up to discuss the matter, Mr. Cooper recalled, the attorney general already intended to seek permission to conduct a preliminary investigation to get to the bottom of &quot;very serious&quot; discrepancies.    When Mr. McFarlane was interviewed by Justice Department officials a few hours later, according to Mr. Cooper, the answers suggested that the former national security adviser wasn't &quot;entirely straightforward and entirely forthcoming.&quot;    Nevertheless, Mr. Cooper told the committees, investigators still didn't see &quot;a hint of criminal activity,&quot; and Mr. Meese informed Adm. Poindexter, who succeeded Mr. McFarlane and supervised Col. North, that NSC documents wouldn't be examined until the next day, Nov. 22. In fact, White House offices weren't sealed until three days later, hours after Col. North was fired.    In hindsight, Mr. Cooper acknowledged, that was a mistake because it gave Col. North a chance to alter and shred important evidence. &quot;Somebody obviously made him aware we were going&quot; to examine the documents, the assistant attorney general told lawmakers, without identifying anyone.    Even after confronting Col. North with a copy of an unsigned, undated memo outlining a plan to divert proceeds from the Iran arms sales to the Contras, the Justice Department's investigative team didn't bring in experienced criminal lawyers and continued to rely on his version of crucial events.    During questioning on Nov. 23, the Marine officer asked if a cover memo to the document had been found, possibly indicating presidential approval of the plan. According to Mr. Cooper, the attorney general asked: &quot;Should we have found one?&quot;    &quot;No, I just wondered,&quot; Col. North answered, and &quot;offered to reexamine his files and documents to search for such a cover memo, if there was one,&quot; Mr. Cooper testified.    Investigators didn't doubt Col. North's assertions during the same interview that &quot;he didn't think that the memo had gone to the president,&quot; and that Mr. Reagan wasn't briefed on its contents, Mr. Cooper recalled. While maintaining that the president didn't know of any such diversion, Mr. Cooper told lawamkers that now &quot;I have to regretfully say&quot; that Congress shouldn't automatically believe Col. North's testimony on other key points.    Mr. Cooper also told lawmakers &quot;it doesn't really surprise me&quot; that Mr. Meese apparently failed to confront Mr. Casey with the so-called diversion memo during subsequent meetings. Despite the urgency of the investigation and questions about the CIA's role, Mr. Cooper acknowledged, the attorney general at one point acceded to Mr. Casey's penchant for secrecy, and determined that Justice Department officials didn't need to receive certain information that they had sought about the Iranian arms sales.    Excerpts released yesterday of Mr. Casey's classified testimony to Congress show the late director obscured the record even after Col. North's suggested change was deleted. In describing the 1985 shipment, Mr. Casey said the crew was informed it was carrying oil-drilling equipment, when in fact CIA records show the pilot believed that he was carrying missiles.    In his comments about the 1985 shipment, Mr. Cooper supported earlier testimony that the transaction posed potential violations of the Arms Export Control Act. Though a presidential finding was later drafted to authorize the CIA's role, the assistant attorney general said he never was able to establish whether Mr. Reagan signed this authorization.    Mr. Meese is slated to testify before the committees next month, and lawmakers are likely to question him not only about his fact-finding effort, but also about the extent of his involvement in the early Iranian arms sales.    Mr. Meese has consistently said he didn't know the true nature of the shipment until last November, when he began his investigation. But at least three other cabinet members as well as lower-ranking officials at the State and Defense departments learned soon after the November shipment that the cargo consisted of Hawk missiles.    The same sale involved the first known case of funds' being diverted to the Contras, and was linked to an arms network used by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord in Portugal. Most of an estimated $1 million that an Israeli arms dealer paid on Nov. 20, 1985, for the transportation of the weapons was never used for that purpose, and an estimated $800,000 was ultimately funneled to Mr. Secord's Contra network, according to the committees' records.    The November 1985 sale involved U.S. arms from Israeli stocks. Though the Israeli role was diminished when the Iran initiative was revamped months later to include only weapons from U.S. stocks, Jerusalem's involvement remains an important issue. Under an agreement announced yesterday, investigators won't be permitted to directly question Israeli government officials and middlemen, but the panels have been promised new financial information and a chronology based on interviews with major witnesses.    Gen. Raphael Vardi, who has overseen a parallel inquiry in Israel, will be interviewed. And while the committees have promised to be sensitive to classified information, they will be permitted to present the data publicly as required by the investigation. </TEXT></DOC>