<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870213-0093 </DOCNO><HL> ATandamp;T Favors Pragmatic Route to Resuming Growth---Olson Pins Hopes on 'Data Networking,'Selling Equipment Abroad---By Janet GuyonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> T FORGNTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)COMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   Those expecting a quick turnaround at telecommunications giant American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. shouldn't hold their breath. The man at the top, James E. Olson, says it won't come soon or easy.    Mr. Olson, who is in his sixth month as chairman, is taking a pragmatic approach to the New York-based company's troubles. In a recent interview, he said he still wants double-digit profit and revenue growth, but acknowledges that the individual businesses he is targeting to engineer such growth aren't likely to produce until next year at the earliest. In the meantime, profit improvement &quot;has to come from existing sales in our product line and attacking costs,&quot; he says.    Mr. Olson, who at 61 has only four years before retirement to position the company for the next decade, has already announced a massive cost-cutting campaign that resulted in a $3.2 billion write-off in last year's fourth quarter. Nonetheless, the company has already expressed little hope for profit improvement this year. In addition to cost cutting, Mr. Olson says he is redirecting ATandamp;T's existing businesses to evolve the company into the sort of information-age company that has eluded its executives since the breakup of the Bell System three years ago.    Three main ATandamp;T businesses are key to Olson's growth strategy. The first is long-distance phone service, which he calls &quot;a hell of a good business.&quot; It could produce double-digit growth if it were deregulated, aggressively expanded overseas and launched into selling databases and information services. A second is the company's much maligned computer business, which is being retooled into a &quot;data-networking&quot; business called Data Systems that will sell software, computers, phone equipment and long distance service as a total package to big businesses. And the third is the company's Network Systems operation, which makes and sells phone equipment to the divested Baby Bells, as well as to ATandamp;T's own long-distance network, and hopes to sell such equipment to phone systems overseas.    But all three will take years to make good on their potential. Analysts say most unclear is ATandamp;T's concept of data networking, derided by some as &quot;a pipe dream.&quot; Mr. Olson acknowledges that ATandamp;T will spend this year just developing new products and services to implement that strategy. It will cost between $400 million and $500 million this year to retool local area networks, computers and phone equipment to attain compatibility with existing world-wide telecommunications and computer standards.    Still, &quot;that isn't going to produce large revenue increases suddenly,&quot; Mr. Olson says. &quot;Data networking isn't something you can snap your fingers at and tomorrow or six months from now see a gun go off and say that ATandamp;T has X percent of that market.&quot; Moreover, analysts and executives in the computer industry point out that many standards simply don't exist, and that ATandamp;T doesn't have enough clout to create standards and force them upon customers. Mr. Olson says he disagrees with critics who say that by the time ATandamp;T gets data networking products and services developed, customers will have already bought such products from the likes of Digital Equipment Corp. and International Business Machines Corp.    ATandamp;T tentatively has scheduled some new minicomputer, software and local area network product announcements for late March, but the products to be announced aren't technological breakthroughs. Many already in the market are simply being re-announced. The annoucements are intended to reassure customers -- many of whom doubt ATandamp;T's long-term commitment to computers -- that the company intends to remain in the business, although in a more focused manner. Major products in data networking won't arrive until 1988 and 1989, says Mr. Olson. The strategy is &quot;evolutionary, not revolutionary,&quot; he says.    In long distance, &quot;we can squeeze costs out and improve our marketing and introduce new services,&quot; but until the company gets some regulatory relief, &quot;we have got some limitations on how profitable we can be,&quot; says Mr. Olson. In the short-term, the only way to boost long-distance profits is to add new services that expand the $9 billion rate base, he says.    ATandamp;T is aggressively lobbying the Federal Communications Commission to relieve the company from rate-of-return regulation that limits earnings to 12.7% of the company's $9 billion interstate rate base. But deregulating the company's long-distance operations could take &quot;two, three or five years,&quot; Mr. Olson acknowledges.    Industry analysts believe ATandamp;T will get new revenue growth soonest from selling switching and transmission equipment to phone companies overseas. The company hasn't been as successful at that endeavor as it would like, but Mr. Olson expresses optimism about sales in both Europe and Japan, as well as in Third World countries. If the company got a major Japanese order, he says, it would probably establish manufacturing operations there, though it doesn't have any current plans to do so.    In the meantime, Mr. Olson is demanding better profit margins from all units of the company, particularly those that aren't essential to his strategy, such as the Consumer Products division and General Business Systems, which sells telephones and office switchboards to businesses with less than 80 phone lines. Without profit improvement, ATandamp;T won't have the money to expand into new faster-growing areas, former executives point out.    Though ATandamp;T hasn't lost its appetite for the computer business, which sources say had a pre-tax loss of $1.2 billion last year, that business is under pressure to become profitable. One company source says Data Systems is budgeted to post a $600 million loss this year. Vittorio Cassoni, the head of Data Systems, wants the unit to be profitable within two years, a spokesman says.    ATandamp;T's recent agreement with Ing. C. Olivetti S.p.A., its Italian partner in the computer business, should improve costs for both companies, Mr. Olson says. Among other things, ATandamp;T agreed to concentrate on the development of minicomputers while Olivetti develops personal computers and workstations. Mr. Olson adds that personal computers aren't as strategically important for ATandamp;T to sell as minicomputers and office switchboards -- both of which he envisions as directing private corporate networks and feeding voice and computer traffic to ATandamp;T's long distance operation.    Still, the company intends to continue distribution of the Olivetti-made personal computers, though sales have dropped off so severely in recent months that InfoCorp, a computer industry research firm, says ATandamp;T's market share in personal computers sold through retailers dropped to 1% in December from 5% in October.    While ATandamp;T considered exiting the business of selling phone equipment to consumers and small firms, executives running the Consumer Products and General Business Systems units say they have turnaround plans in place that should improve profit margins and keep the units a part of the company. General Business, for instance, recently told customers renting and leasing phone equipment that it will freeze rates for the next 18 months and give customers credits on new ATandamp;T equipment when they decide to buy. The goal is to keep profitable renters renting while convincing them to buy ATandamp;T equipment when they decide to make purchases.    ATandamp;T also plans to halt manufacture of unprofitable products such as 256K commodity memory semiconductors, flexible circuit boards, flat display screens and cellular telephones. Some of those businesses are up for sale. </TEXT></DOC>