<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871014-0129 </DOCNO><HL> Who's News:Ford Motor Shifts Its Senior Executives---By Joseph B. WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> F WNEWSAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DEARBORN, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ford Motor Co., in a reorganization affecting more than a dozen senior executives, named Philip E. Benton Jr. to run world-wide automotive operations and Allan D. Gilmour to head its car and truck business outside the U.S.    The changes appear aimed at broadening the experience of the handful of executives who will contend to succeed Donald E. Petersen, 61 years old, who remains chairman and chief executive officer, and Harold A. Poling, 62, who moves from president to vice chairman but remains chief operating officer. The president's post isn't being filled.    The moves were in the works before the death two weeks ago of long-time company Chairman Henry Ford II. In fact, Mr. Ford had reviewed the changes before he died, a company spokesman said.    The broadening of experience is most obvious for Mr. Gilmour, a 53-year-old financial man thought to have a good shot at becoming Ford's chairman and chief executive one day. He leaves the post of executive vice president, finance, and with it membership in Ford's four-person office of the chief executive. But he is getting his first experience in operations and in Ford's international business -- both of which are major requirements for the top posts at the No. 2 auto maker.    Mr. Benton, 58, who started in Ford's financial ranks but already has wide operating experience, had been executive vice president, international operations, the post that Mr. Gilmour now assumes. Both men remain executive vice presidents and directors of Ford Motor. Mr. Benton's title becomes president, Ford Automotive Group, a new position.    Mr. Poling will oversee three reorganized groups whose heads essentially split the duties he had as president. The groups are:    --The new Ford Automotive Group run by Mr. Benton.    --The new Ford Financial Services Group headed by James W. Ford, 64, former chairman of Ford's Credit and Insurance subsidiary. Mr. Ford isn't related to the company's founding family.    --The Diversified Products Operations Group, which includes Ford's aerospace, auto component, farm vehicle and land development subsidiaries. After Jan. 1, it will be led by John A. Betti, 56, currently executive vice president, technical affairs and operating staffs. He will succeed Edson P. Williams, 64, who will retire Dec. 31.    Mr. Gilmour's successor as executive vice president and chief financial officer is Stanley A. Seneker, 56, formerly vice president and treasurer. Mr. Seneker was elected a Ford director and will assume the chief financial officer's place in the office of the chief executive. The other members are Messrs. Petersen and Poling and Vice Chairman William Clay Ford, the representative of the Ford family. Mr. Ford is a grandson of the company's founder, and chairman of its executive committee.    By moving to international auto operations, Mr. Gilmour is following Mr. Benton to one of the traditional way stations on the road to the top at Ford. Messrs. Petersen and Poling both had served as top executives in Ford's international and European operations.    Indeed, Mr. Petersen portrayed the moves as part of an effort to groom executives for the top posts. &quot;These are important steps in meeting the challenges facing the company and assuring that our executives have the diverse training and experience required for successful leadership in the years ahead,&quot; he said in a statement. The changes &quot;represent a normal evolution,&quot; he added.    In related moves, Ford named David N. McCammon, 52, to succeed Mr. Seneker as treasurer, and appointed him to the new position of vice president, finance and treasurer. John L. O'Connor, 60, former vice president, administration, for Ford's North American Automotive Operations, will succeed Mr. McCammon as vice president and controller.    William E. Odom, 51, former president of Ford's Credit and Insurance unit, will succeed James Ford as chairman of that subsidiary, which includes Ford Motor Credit Corp. and First Nationwide Financial Corp., the company's California-based savings and loan holding company. Kenneth C. Merrill, 57, succeeds Mr. Odom.    L. Lindsey Halstead, currently vice president, Latin American auto operations, will take on additional duties overseeing Ford's Asian and Pacific Basin automotive activities.    Stuart M. Frey will take the new position of vice president, technical affairs, reporting to Mr. Benton. He had been vice president, engineering and manufacturing.    A new office of diversification planning, reporting directly to Mr. Petersen, will be headed by Bruce L. Blythe, 42, as executive director. He formerly was executive director of business strategy for Ford of Europe.    One man whose duties weren't changed yesterday, but who remains a leading candidate for one of the posts held by Messrs. Poling and Petersen, is Louis R. Ross, executive vice president, North American auto operations. Mr. Ross, 55, now reports to Mr. Benton.    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: Ford Motor Co.&quot; -- Oct. 15, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>