<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Academic BoycottOf South AfricaWould Backfire---By Maurice McGregor</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><TEXT>   The liberal universities in South Africa, already under attack from persons on both the left and the right in their own country, now face a challenge from overseas -- an academic boycott.    Academic boycott means, in this context, the policy of deliberate isolation of South African universities and academics. It ranges from the refusal of foreign academics, largely from the U.S., to visit South Africa or to evaluate a South African thesis to the refusal of institutions to receive South African students or academics, irrespective of their politics or race. Total boycott means total isolation and includes refusal to publish articles from South Africa in overseas journals and refusal to sell scientific journals and books to persons or institutions in South Africa, as is already enforced by law in Denmark.    The objectives of boycotts vary and often are poorly understood. The usual intention is to modify behavior. Thus, when the objective is limited, as in the integration of sports, for example, boycotts may be applied to specific targets, such as sports organizations and sporting events, with the implied promise the boycott will be relaxed when the objective is achieved. Although such limited-objective boycotts were common some years ago, they are no longer relevant in South Africa, where the object of all boycott activities is now a general one -- that is, &quot;to end apartheid.&quot;    Since apartheid has been the policy of a political party for which 90% of the population of South Africa has never voted, a boycott, in the minds of most of its advocates, is intended to modify the behavior of the governing 10%, persuading it to accelerate reform. In the minds of others, however, it is meant to destabilize South African society so much that the governing 10% will be overthrown by revolution.    If an academic boycott is designed to secure the end of apartheid, whether to institute it must be decided by considering the size of the benefit to be obtained, the probability that the boycott will contribute substantially to this end, and the price that must be paid. The benefit hoped for -- namely, the abolition of apartheid and the institution of a just and democratic society -- is so great that it would justify a heavy price. Whether a simple change to majority rule would necessarily secure this benefit may be open to question, but most consider it an essential prerequisite.    The effectiveness of an academic boycott as a tool to bring about change is much more uncertain. Three years ago, when the rand was still strong, before the application of economic sanctions and before the words &quot;comrade,&quot; &quot;target,&quot; &quot;necklace&quot; and &quot;emergency&quot; had the special meanings in South Africa that they now have, the government may well have been sensitive to such evidence of foreign displeasure. Today, however, after the detention of thousands and the death of hundreds, when the government is fighting desperately to maintain some sort of law and order, it is utterly unbelievable that the boycotting of some relatively trivial academic activities would attract the slightest interest in government circles.    Although this form of boycott may have little or no impact on national events, its effect on the universities -- particularly the English-speaking liberal ones, which traditionally have been open to all races and which participate in the greatest international exchange -- will be disastrous.    The salt of academic life is research. Not only do researchers require access to the results of others, but they must have the ability to publish their own results. To prohibit access to overseas journals and books will virtually end this form of activity and ensure the migration of the best brains in the land to some place where they can use their skills. Without them, the liberal universities will be severely damaged, and the new South Africa will be deprived of the heritage they embody.    Other serious consequences eventually will be felt by society at large, when the long-term denial of access to recent advances in technology and knowledge hurts such fields as agriculture, engineering and medicine. (South African academics are already excluded from all meetings held under the sponsorship of the World Health Organization or in any country such as Canada, that obstructs the visa process for South Africans.)    Black South Africans who support academic boycott may do so for two reasons. The first is to politicize -- &quot;to conscientize&quot; -- South African whites, particularly those who do not support the national Party. This would be logical if those whites could in turn do anything to influence state policy, which they clearly cannot.    The second reason, which is to do something -- even something admittedly futile -- is understandable but not logically supportable. The argument that a boycott is justified because no other method short of violence is available involves a non sequitur. In medicine, for example, however strong the urge to &quot;do something,&quot; physicians do not institute dangerous treatment simply because no cure exists. Instead, they carefully weigh the chance that the treatment will achieve the desired effect against the chance that it will cause serious unwanted side effects.    When both the chances of success and the costs are too uncertain, we in medicine act according to the aphorism &quot;primum non nocere&quot; (first, do no harm). This principle would suggest that in the South African situation, however great the desire to identify with and support the struggle for freedom, an academic boycott should not be undertaken at this time.    Those who take this stand must do so with the realization that many with whom they sympathize will interpret it as support of &quot;the system&quot; and acceptance of apartheid. Hard as this may be to bear, logic and common sense must lead to a rejection of an academic boycott at present on the grounds that the price for what is probably no more than a gesture is too high.    ---   Dr. McGregor, a professor at McGill University in Montreal, recently completed a term as dean of medicine at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. This is adapted from an article in the New England Journal of Medicine. </TEXT></DOC>