<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870723-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Will Bork's Nomination Go the Way of Fortas's?---By Bruce Allen Murphy</HL><DD> 07/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   In many ways Robert Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court is nearly a mirror image of 1968 when another lame duck president, Lyndon Johnson, nominated Associate Justice Abe Fortas, his ideological ally, to be chief justice of the Supreme Court. Now, as then, there is no question about the nominee's legal qualifications, which are impeccable. It is his political philosophy that many deem unacceptable: Fortas as a liberal and Judge Bork as a conservative.    As Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Joe Biden (D., Del.) prepares for hearings on Judge Bork's nomination and considers how to block the appointment, he should turn for advice to his colleague Sen. Strom Thurmond (R., S.C.), who knows exactly how to do so. He knows this because he did it to Fortas in 1968. (A year later Sen. Thurmond won the war as well as the battle when Fortas was forced to resign from the court following entirely separate allegations of financial irregularity.)    Here's how the &quot;delay game&quot; of Sen. Thurmond and his conservative colleagues Sam Ervin and Judiciary Committee chairman James Eastland could be used to put Judge Bork's nomination into a six-month holding pattern and, ultimately, derail it.    1.Delay the opening pitch. Sen. Ervin claimed he would need to study all of Fortas's opinions before the game could start. The decision by Sen. Biden and the Democrats to hold off the hearings until after the summer recess not only delays the hearings for two months, but also gives the opposing interest groups a chance to mobilize while scholars and journalists search for the chinks in the nominee's biographical and judicial armor.    2.Launch a phony war. Sen. Robert Griffin pressed the lame duck issue and the nature of Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren's resignation letter, which was open-ended enough to allow Warren to resume his seat if a nominee was not confirmed by the Senate. (Despite statements to the contrary, Warren clearly resigned to give the nomination to Johnson and keep it away from the man he feared would be president, Richard Nixon.) Griffin also raised the issue of Fortas's personal friendship and legal relationship with Johnson by calling him a &quot;crony&quot; of the president. In line with this strategy, prior to the Judiciary Committee hearings on Judge Bork, senators on the floor (and on the presidential campaign trail) can spend time swaying public opinion by talking about Judge Bork's Watergate role, Mr. Reagan's waning presidency and whatever else they can find.    3.Start a &quot;minibuster&quot; in the Judiciary Committee. Sen. Thurmond and the conservatives extended what should have been a four-day hearing into one lasting two weeks, including 12 hours and 30 minutes of questioning of Fortas himself. In addition, the conservative senators raised the issue of Fortas's role as a political adviser to Johnson even after he was appointed to the court. Sen. Biden could open the forum to every liberal group in America opposing Judge Bork, and, like Sen. Thurmond, question the nominee on every opinion, article and speech he ever wrote. (It won't be enlightening because Judge Bork will properly say that he cannot comment on issues that might come before the court, but it will use up time.)    4.Reconsider and reflect. Like Sen. Thurmond did 19 years ago, Sen. Biden and the liberals can ask for more time after the hearings to study the impact of the new evidence before them.    5.Call new hearings. Of course, if properly done, Step 4 requires that the senators explore those new leads to be sure of their decision.    6.The committee report. It takes time to write a good report.    7.Thanksgiving recess. Why not take some time to be home with the family (or someone else's family in Iowa or New Hampshire)?    8.A filibuster. Once the nomination hits the floor of the Senate in December, the liberals can talk it to death. Maintaining the 41 votes needed to keep a filibuster going requires only that Majority Leader Robert Byrd do what Majority Leader Mike Mansfield did in 1968. Liberal Sen. Mansfield inexplicably limited the filibuster to daytime debate rather than the all-night sessions that are designed to defeat filibusters and allowed other business to interrupt it.    9.Christmas recess. See 7 above.    As a filibuster eats up week after week, we will turn into the new year and the public will begin to reconsider the merits of the &quot;lame duck&quot; argument. Eventually, Mr. Reagan will be forced to admit defeat, as Johnson did, and withdraw the nomination. (Unlike Johnson, though, who nominated Fortas in the last six months of his presidency, Mr. Reagan will still have nearly a year to nominate someone else.)    Also by the new year, most of the court's important oral arguments will already have been heard, making it impossible for any new justice to help decide those cases. By delaying six months there no longer will be any urgency to place another justice on the court for the remainder of the court's term. That just may be enough to kill the nomination.    All it takes for this to happen is the iron-clad resolve of the opponents to the nomination. Can it happen? Ask Strom Thurmond.    ---   Mr. Murphy is associate professor of political science at Pennsylvania State University and author of &quot;The Brandeis/ Frankfurter Connection&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1982). His biography of Fortas will be published by William Morrow. </TEXT></DOC>