<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0132 </DOCNO><HL> People's Choice:Mexico InstitutesRadical Innovation:Local Primaries---All Candidates Still BelongTo One Party, but MoveGalvanizes Many Citizens---Gunslingers Capture City Hall---By Mary Williams WalshStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> EBANO, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Long ago, after the oil fields began to run dry, the hot, hazy flatlands around this town of 50,000 were turned over to cattle pasture. The cattle ranchers built up a village economy, and then small merchants moved in. Later, peasant farmers joined them.    But the oil men stayed on. Year after year, they elected themselves mayor, appointed themselves to City Hall, neglected the streets, lighting and water. Always, they had the blessing of Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI.    By 1985, Ebano was a moonscape of dust and chuckholes in the dry season, a sea of mud in the autumn rains, a monument at any time of the year to bad government. Then, in 1985, the PRI conducted an experiment in Ebano and several towns nearby: It staged primary elections and let citizens pick their own ruling-party mayoral candidates. In Ebano, excited ranchers, farmers and merchants snubbed the oil men and swept into office a young PRI doctor, Armando Minor.    Democracy, Ebano has learned since then, can be painful. Four days after the inauguration of Dr. Minor, whose two-year term began on Jan. 1, 1986, oil-union gunslingers commandeered City Hall and stayed there for about two weeks. A couple of months after they abandoned the building, one came back and punched the mayor's private secretary in a dispute over asphalt. Vandals slashed municipal vehicles' tires. Some citizens say they won't go downtown at night anymore, and Dr. Minor drives around with a rosary on the rear-view mirror and a Colt .38 on the front seat.    But for all that, there has been a renaissance in Ebano. &quot;For the first time, the authorities took what we wanted into account,&quot; beams shopkeeper Leocadia Carrizales, who sells crockery, straw hats and vegetables in the front room of her house down by the railroad tracks. People in Ebano now talk with pride about the lessons their bleak little town may have for the rest of Mexico, where citizens are clamoring for political change.    The PRI has come under unprecedented criticism since the Mexican economy crashed in 1982. In response, the party has been trying to adapt itself to public opinion. At a convention in Mexico City in March, PRI delegates decided to make Ebano-style primaries the law of the land. That doesn't mean that Mexico will have a multi-party democracy soon or that there will be a presidential primary. But it does mean townspeople will be able to choose local PRI candidates -- something they haven't been able to do in more than half a century of PRI rule.    Whether the reform will satisfy the many Mexicans who would rather vote for an opposition party than for the PRI is an open question. But there is no doubt that it will anger the men who have traditionally held the power in the PRI -- local political leaders who have helped keep Mexico so remarkably tranquil throughout the current economic downturn.    A clear example of what that means is seen during a recent visit to Ebano. Most of the town's streets are dirt tracks, shrouded with veils of dust. In the central plaza, someone has dumped a mound of garbage next to the bandstand. On the church steeple above, the clock is missing its five, six, eight and eleven.    On the books, Ebano isn't a town at all; it is considered a government-owned oil field. People have built their houses wherever they pleased; and until Dr. Minor took office, no one held a deed to a lot. Consequently, no one paid taxes. Ebano limped through its history with no municipal revenues.    The idea was that the oil workers' union would provide. Certainly, the union had the money to run a town. Oil is the bedrock of the Mexican economy, and the union that pumps it is the richest and most powerful in the land. For years, the oil union has had rights to as many as half the drilling contracts issued by the government oil company, Pemex. It resells the contracts at a profit -- and also sells jobs and collects a percentage on drilling contracts handled by outside firms.    The millions of pesos that slosh through the union's till finance an empire of oil-union farms, fish hatcheries, stores, movie theaters, trucking companies and factories. A Mexican baby can be delivered by an oil-union doctor, live out his life in an oil-union house, and be buried by an oil-union undertaker. The system has served the oil rank and file well enough; but more than that, it bolsters the oil-union leaders. They make fortunes, hire bodyguards, build up power bases. In oil towns across Mexico, their support or opposition can make or break a local government. In Ebano, they simply were the government.    Consider the tale of Eladio Ledezma, who keeps 26 cows on the outskirts of Ebano and who has spent the past 18 years heading various PRI peasant groups. Once, when the leader of the oil union was running for congress on the PRI ticket, Mr. Ledezma approached him &quot;because I was trying to get a loan {the union} had offered the peasants.&quot; Since Mr. Ledezma's peasant group was dutifully attending the union leader's campaign rallies and cheering, Mr. Ledezma figured the oil man owed them his help with the loans. But the oil leader apparently knew he would be elected whether he was nice to the peasants or not.    &quot;I spent the whole day,&quot; says Mr. Ledezma. &quot;First they would tell me to go to his house. Then they would tell me to go to his office. Then they would tell me to go back to his house. Then to his office. I never got to see him -- forget about the loan.&quot;    And why did the peasants keep on cheering the union leader? &quot;Because we belong to an organization, and the organization belongs to the sector, and the sector belongs to the PRI, and the PRI supports the candidate,&quot; says Mr. Ledezma.    Politics in Mexico have been organized by sectors since the PRI was founded in 1929. The country was in post-revolutionary chaos then, with former generals commanding regional armies and society badly split over how the new government should be shaped. The founders of the PRI made peace by grouping citizens according to the kind of work they did, then affiliating the groups with the party.    Thus, the PRI has a labor sector, a peasant sector and a popular sector, which is for urban middle-class professionals. At election time, the PRI would call sectoral meetings, where the labor, peasant and popular representatives would divvy up candidacies. On election day, the PRI candidates nearly always won.    But today's complex Mexican society chafes under the sectoral system. Ebano's experience bears this out: Even as ranching and commerce blossomed, sectoral leaders kept sending in oil men.    The result: &quot;We lack drinking water; drainage; electricity in some places; pavement; a general hospital,&quot; says Dr. Minor, the new mayor. &quot;Basically, we lack everything a civilized town should have.&quot;    Dr. Minor is a 33-year-old general practitioner, the son of a farmer and a midwife. He grew up in Ebano, left to study medicine at a regional university, and then -- unlike many educated Mexicans, who move on to greater opportunities in the cities -- came back to his hometown to marry and set up a practice.    Dr. Minor, who joined the PRI in the early 1970s, says he always hoped he could one day run for mayor. Over the years, he performed free surgery for peasants, helped form cooperatives, wrangled some sewer lines from the oil men. People liked him. When PRI reformers came to town in 1985 with the news that there would be a primary election, Dr. Minor was a natural candidate.    But the oil workers had a candidate, too; and as the primary drew near, strange things started happening in Ebano. Neighborhoods with tap water suddenly found themselves cut off. Phones rang with death threats.    &quot;One day, we were coming home from a meeting, and all of a sudden we found a Pemex pickup truck full of chickens in the middle of the street,&quot; remembers Mrs. Carrizales, the shopkeeper. &quot;They unloaded the chickens right there and said, 'Go on! Get as many chickens as you want! But you have to cheer for our candidate.'    &quot;They thought we were very hungry, and that they could buy our votes with chickens,&quot; she adds. &quot;But my husband said, 'No -- I'd rather eat black beans in my house than take your chickens.' They tried very hard, but they couldn't beat us.&quot;    On primary day, armed voters stood guard over election headquarters as the ballots were counted. When Dr. Minor's victory was announced, some people cried for joy.    But the oil men lashed back. They had been laying drinking-water pipes as election season approached, digging with Pemex machinery and financing the work with a federal-government loan. As soon as they found they had lost, the oil men signed documents saying the pipes were up and running, took away all the machines and left Dr. Minor with yawning holes in the streets, a federal loan to pay off and no water revenues.    Later, Dr. Minor started a low-budget pave-your-own-street program, using ersatz asphalt extracted from tar pits on the edge of town. But the oil men parked Pemex trucks in the middle of the streets, blocking construction.    And when the Minor administration built a new street linking the outskirts with the downtown, an oil man built a garage right in the middle of it. Dr. Minor says he spent some 15 hours negotiating with the man. Finally the mayor had the garage bulldozed.    &quot;There have been men in our party who have abandoned the principles of the party,&quot; he says. &quot;But it's not the party {that is culpable} -- it's people.&quot;    Jose Angel Quinta is one of the people Dr. Minor has in mind. If primary elections hadn't intervened, Mr. Quinta, a local oil-union official, would be sitting behind the mayor's baize-covered desk today.    Mr. Quinta readily concedes the oil men tried to overthrow the Minor government. &quot;The union has had the mayor's job ever since Ebano became a town,&quot; he explains. And that is only fair, he says, explaining that, after all, the union had always financed local politics in Ebano. He says his men relinquished the town hall only because union higher-ups told them to leave the new mayor alone.    &quot;We would love to recover our positions,&quot; he says. &quot;But we are part of the system, and we have to respect our instructions.&quot;    Today, instead of attempting coups, the oil men are trying to outshine the Minor government. Oil trucks no longer block the streets; now they lay pavement themselves and post little signs giving the oil union credit. Laborers who donate their time to working on the roads are promised jobs with the union.    &quot;We're doing an infinite number of public works,&quot; says Mr. Quinta, ticking off budget stores, clinics and recreation centers.    Still, now that townspeople have tasted victory at the polls, they seem unlikely to vote for the oil men in next year's primary.    Nearly a year and a half after the last primary here, the tap water still hasn't been restored in Mrs. Carrizales's neighborhood. In the street in front of her store, shouts of &quot;Water! Water!&quot; split the afternoon stillness. A delivery truck heaves into view.    &quot;We Indians are very enduring,&quot; says Mrs. Carrizales, getting up to watch the delivery. &quot;We'll put up with anything.&quot;    &quot;But that doesn't mean we'll go back to supporting those bad guys,&quot; says her husband, Leonardo. &quot;We're sure we'll never have anything like them again. It would be against the people's will.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>