<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0044 </DOCNO><HL> An Intricate Deal and Its Results</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   A look at the origins and results of one major transaction arranged by Sweden's Karl-Erik Schmitz shows how closely the arms-trade network operated -- and how formidable could be the obstacles to getting munitions out of Europe and into Iran.    The transaction was pieced together from documents and correspondence that form part of Sweden's case against Mr. Schmitz and munitions producer Nobel Industrier Sverige AB. The scenario was corroborated by Swedish investigators and some participants in the transactions.    The Order: On Jan. 2, 1985, Mr. Schmitz discloses in a telex to Nobel that he has several big contracts worth at least $164 million at current exchange rates. The contracts are part of a complex arms-for-oil barter engineered by Mr. Schmitz. The materiel he has agreed to supply could produce nearly 900,000 field artillery shells, enough to fire one of the heavy explosive shells every second for more than 10 days.    The Camouflage: Apparently knowing that he must disguise the eventual destination of the Iran-bound products, Mr. Schmitz arranges to send the goods to legal destinations. Belgian, French and West German companies he has lined up as subcontractors will ship their output directly to Nobel. Nobel, in turn, will ship all the products to Pakistan, where it has a joint venture with a state-owned arms company. Iran then can buy the goods from Pakistan, a friendly government.    Blank End-User Certificates: To get the munitions past Swedish customs, the Pakistani company apparently produces the required end-user certificates to buy the products from Nobel. Its cooperation with Mr. Schmitz is generous: Swedish customs officials later searching Mr. Schmitz's offices find copies of end-user certificates that are blank except for the signatures that authorized them.    A Clampdown: In the spring of 1985, Swedish customs and police investigations of previous transactions at Nobel and its arms and explosives divisions prompt closer government scrutiny of Nobel's export orders. The Pakistan deal is blocked, and Nobel President Anders Carlberg orders all suspicious contracts frozen. Hungry for supplies, Tehran urges Mr. Schmitz to expedite any shipments outstanding.    The Airlift: Having been stopped in Sweden, Mr. Schmitz turns to the European suppliers. He begins working from Fribourg, Switzerland, where he owns a private company, Serfina SA, and arranges for chartered aircraft to carry some explosives to Iran. He hires the aircraft from a Panama-based company called HRD Holding SA. The planes will fly from Lille, France, to Tehran's Mehrabad Airport. Lille is chosen because of more lax French customs and safety regulations on the shipment of explosives, Mr. Schmitz says.    The First Shipment: Documents say that the Netherlands' Muiden Chemie BV and France's Societe Nationale de Poudres andamp; Explosifs SA deliver nearly 20 tons of powder and explosive to Mr. Schmitz, although SNPE denies involvement. A separate delivery from Belgium's PRB is stopped at the French border. On July 24, a Boeing 707 numbered 9-JACX leaves Lille for Tehran's Mehrabad airport.    The Second Shipment: Three weeks later, according to the documents, a second flight leaves for Tehran. Aboard are millions of explosive devices needed for artillery shells. In addition, the plane carries a small sample of C4 plastic explosives on behalf of Israel, the first taste of a 400-ton shipment that Israel may be planning and the beginning of that country's growing role in a trade that gradually is being choked out of other Western countries.    Mr. Schmitz says that the overall transaction was organized only to legally ship the goods to Pakistan and that he had nothing to do with the final shipment to Iran.    In fact, Mr. Schmitz denies that the second flight from Lille took place or that he has any connections to Israel. But a list of his orders obtained by Swedish authorities indicates that he used the state-owned Israeli Military Industries to supply many contracts that Nobel companies backed out of in 1985. Swedish customs officials say Mr. Schmitz has told them that Israel, directly and through a marketing office in Brussels, has since become his biggest supplier of military goods for Iran. Officials at IMI decline to comment on their business relationships.    (See related story: &quot;Explosive Issue: Europe Arms Network That Supplies Iranians Begins to Draw Fire --- Sweden's Karl-Erik Schmitz Emerges as Major Dealer; Why Nations Bend Rules --- Dwarfing Iran-Contra Affair&quot; -- WSJ Sept. 4, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>