<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Two InterstateBank MergersAre Announced---Latest Moves Attest to RiseOf a New Breed of Firm,So-Called Superregionals---By Robert Guenther and Clare AnsberryStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FFB FICR PNCF CBANTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Two more major interstate mergers involving banks in New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Ohio attest to the rise of so-called superregionals and the growing competitive pressure this new breed of bank poses for money-center institutions.    First Fidelity Bancorp., the second-largest bank holding company in New Jersey, and Fidelcor Inc., whose Fidelity Bank has become the largest depository in Philadelphia, plan to merge, creating the nation's 18th-largest bank holding company with $27 billion in assets. The stock transaction's value is $1.34 billion, the largest such merger to date.    And in the first linkage between Pennsylvania and Ohio banks, one of the most highly regarded superregional banks, Pittsburgh-based PNC Financial Corp., said it entered a definitive agreement to acquire Central Bancorp., Cincinnati, for stock valued at $719 million. With combined assets of $32.7 billion, the acquisition will boost PNC to the 16th-largest bank holding company from the 17th-largest.    Edward E. Furash, whose Furash andamp; Co. is a consultant to financial institutions, said: &quot;These two mergers represent a continuing consolidation in banking. Limited groups of banks in regions around the country will basically grow and combine until they are of such a size that they will control 75% to 80% of the assets in a region.&quot;    The emergence of the superregional banks stands in stark contrast to what is happening among the money-center, or largest, banks. A handful of local banks have broken into the ranks of banking's giants through purchases and mergers as states have gradually relaxed laws restricting acquisitions by out-of-state banks. But the money-center banks, with some notable exceptions, are on the sidelines with their plans for geographic expansion, nursing portfolios of bad loans to developing countries and the oil industry.    &quot;The message in this is that being the largest bank doesn't create the most profitable institution,&quot; said Mr. Furash. &quot;The money-center banks have no monopoly on management wisdom. The superregionals will give them a run for their money.&quot;    No better example of this exists than in Pittsburgh where Mellon Bank Corp., once the area's dynamic bank and an important international lender, is trying to recover from a string of bad energy, real estate and foreign loans that earlier this year cost David Barnes his job as chairman.    Meanwhile, PNC's Pittsburgh National Bank, which once lived in Mellon's shadow, is now one of the banking industry's highfliers in terms of performance. As one admiring bank observer said, &quot;PNC is the premier bank in Pittsburgh, and not just because Mellon stumbled. Well before Tom O'Brien came in (as PNC's president and chief executive officer), the strategy was in place that has gotten them where they are.&quot;    The First Fidelity-Fidelcor merger isn't likely to cheer the New York money-center banks. Beginning next January, New Jersey law permits New York banks to acquire banks in the state. Though some say First Fidelity's size -- $15.3 billion in assets -- would make it difficult for a New York bank to acquire, many analysts cited it as one of the state's most attractive banks for acquisition.    But by merging with a Pennsylvania bank, First Fidelity is no longer attractive to New York banks. Not only is it definitely too large, but Pennsylvania law precludes New York banks from acquiring banks in that state until 1990.    Asked if the the merger puts First Fidelity beyond the reach of New York banks, Robert R. Ferguson Jr., president and chief executive officer of First Fidelity, said, &quot;My God, I certainly hope so.&quot; He added, &quot;That's not the objective of this merger. The large banks don't have the cash to acquire us, and the dilution of their existing shareholders would be too great if they did it for stock.&quot; Mr. Ferguson acknowledged, however, that in recent months he has been contacted by New York banks about possible mergers.    Mr. Ferguson said he expects to see &quot;lots more&quot; mergers between New Jersey and Pennsylvania banks, partly because of the geographic proximity of the two states. The first Pennsylvania-New Jersey matchup occurred in February 1986 when Midlantic Corp. acquired Continental Bancorp. of Philadelphia. Since then, Pennsylvania-based CoreStates Financial Corp. bought New Jersey National Corp., and two weeks ago United Jersey Banks Inc. of Princeton, N.J., agreed to acquire First Valley Corp., Bethlehem, Pa. Notably, one New York bank, Chemical New York Corp., agreed to acquire New Jersey-based Horizon Bancorp. in January.    Investors have punished the stocks of New Jersey banks once they have taken themselves out of range of the New York banks.    On Friday, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, First Fidelity closed at $39.50, down $4.25 a share. Meanwhile, Fidelcor closed at $42.50, up $4.375 a share, in national over-the-counter trading. Two weeks ago, in Big Board trading, United Jersey's stock dropped to $25.50 from $30 a share following its merger announcement.    James Rosenberg, analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., called the drop in First Fidelity's stock an overreaction to the fact that First Fidelity is no longer a takeover candidate.    If approved by shareholders, the two existing bank holding companies will be brought under a new umbrella holding unit called First Fidelity Bancorp. The new company would have 500 offices in a rapidly growing region with one of the lowest unemployment rates in the country.    One of the advantages of the First Fidelity-Fidelcor merger is that the only community where the two companies both now have operations is Cherry Hill, N.J.    Mr. Ferguson, 63 years old, will serve as chairman of the new company for two years, and Harold W. Pote, 40, now chief executive officer of Fidelcor, will be the president and chief executive officer. When Mr. Ferguson retires, Mr. Pote will assume his positions.    Analysts had high praise for Mr. Pote. Felice Gelman, an analyst with Fox-Pitt, Kelton Inc. in New York, said, &quot;Hal Pote turned Fidelcor around from being a mediocre bank and grew it. First Fidelity hasn't been as good a performer because they never really consolidated the two predecessor banks.&quot;    The new holding company's New Jersey unit will be headed by Edward D. Knapp as chief executive; he is now chief executive of First Fidelity Bank in Newark, N.J. At the Pennsylvania unit, Bernard J. Morgan, currently chief operating officer of Fidelcor, will be the new chief executive.    Under terms, Fidelcor holders will receive 1.16 shares of the new First Fidelity's common. The existing First Fidelity's holders will get shares on a 1-for-1 basis. After the merger, Fidelcor common holders who now receive an annual dividend of $1.52 will get an annual payout of $1.95. Mr. Ferguson said the dilution to the existing First Fidelity's holders -- about 6% -- will be recovered within a year.    PNC's acquisition of Central Bancorp. gives it a firm foothold in a third state. Last year PNC acquired Louisville, Ky.-based Citizens Fidelity Corp. in a $700 million stock transaction.    Under terms of the agreement, each Central Bancorp. common share will be swapped for 1.067 PNC common shares. Central Bancorp. also gave PNC an option to buy unissued stock.    Based on PNC's closing price Friday of $45.50 in national over-the-counter trading, the transaction has an indicated value of $719 million, or 2 1/2 times Central Bancorp.'s book value at June 30. The price represents about 13 times Central Bancorp.'s estimated 1987 earnings.    Thomas H. O'Brien, PNC president and chief executive officer, said Central was attractive for three main reasons: its strong earnings record, its emphasis on retail banking and its location. &quot;We had a hole between Louisville and Pittsburgh we wanted to fill,&quot; he said. At this point, he said, PNC probably would use Central as its vehicle to expand throughout Ohio, instead of making further acquisitions. Currently, about 60% of Central's assets are concentrated in the Cincinnati area.    PNC said the transaction would reduce its 1987 per-share earnings by about 3% on a fully diluted basis, excluding the effect of any other significant transactions such as the sale of PNC's mortgage banking unit and Third World loan-loss provisions.    Brent B. Erensel, senior bank analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., said PNC will easily recoup the dilution by consolidating operations and expanding existing PNC services, thus generating revenue, throughout the Central Bancorp. system.    &quot;It seems to be a classic PNC deal of picking up a high-quality company to join the PNC fold,&quot; Mr. Erensel said. Central Bancorp. has achieved a five-year compound growth rate in per-share earnings in excess of 20%. Like other PNC acquisitions, Central Bancorp. would retain its name and existing management, although Oliver W. Birckhead, president and chief executive of Central, is scheduled to retire effective Jan. 1.    Kenneth Puglisi, analyst with Keefe, Bruyette andamp; Woods Inc., said Cincinnati is one of the most attractive Ohio markets. &quot;You have strong corporate presence with such companies as Procter andamp; Gamble Co., and the economy there isn't as cyclical as it is in other Ohio cities,&quot; he said.    PNC consistently has edged out Mellon in expanding regionally. It beat Mellon into the Philadelphia market when it acquired Provident National Corp. in 1983. Mellon has yet to make any moves either west or south of Pennsylvania. PNC's merger with Citizens last year gave it access to the thriving mid-South region. </TEXT></DOC>