<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871007-0130 </DOCNO><HL> German, Japanese Rate Trends ThreatenTo Raise Trade Tensions, Spur U.S. Rise---This article is based on reports fromTerence Roth in Frankfurt, West GermanyAnd Kathryn Graven and Masayoshi Kanabayashi in Tokyo</HL><DD> 10/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><TEXT>   An increase yesterday in an important West German interest rate and continued pressure for higher rates in Japan are raising expectations of increased trade tensions and the possibility of a rate rise in the U.S.    West Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank, yesterday called for bids on one-month repurchase agreements -- a key refinancing facility for the banking system -- at a minimum rate of 3.6%, up from the 3.5% minimum in a similar operation two weeks ago. Analysts expect the Bundesbank today to accept bids at a rate of 3.7% or 3.75%, up from the 3.65% it accepted at the earlier tender. This is the third increase in the rate since late July.    In Japan, meanwhile, many economists and investors are convinced that the Bank of Japan is moving toward an increase in its discount rate, which is its lending fee to financial institutions, despite denials from central bank officials that such action is planned.    Just last week, President Reagan, addressing the joint meeting in Washington of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, renewed the U.S. call for Germany and Japan to stimulate their economies. Officials in Washington believe expansive fiscal and monetary policies in those countries would stimulate domestic demand for imports, helping to narrow the U.S. trade deficit.    Besides running counter to that scenario, higher interest rates in Germany and Japan threaten to weaken the dollar by narrowing the differential between returns from deposits denominated in dollars and those denominated in marks and yen. That could force U.S. rates higher to counter the inflationary pressure that a weaker currency causes by raising the price of imports.    Such considerations were apparent in the U.S. move to raise its discount rate on Sept. 4, to 6% from 5 1/2%. It was later revealed that the day before that increase was announced, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan and Treasury Secretary James Baker held a meeting at which they are believed to have talked about whether to try to get Japan and Germany to actually lower their interest rates in conjunction with the U.S. move.    In trading yesterday, U.S. Treasury bond prices recovered from a deep slump with a late rally, but analysts said the mood remained bearish amid expectations that market interest rates will rise along with rates overseas. The dollar, meanwhile, declined against the mark in response to the German rate increase    Officials in both Germany and Japan are concerned aboutthe potential inflationary impact of persistently strongmoney-supply growth. Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehlyesterday acknowledged the trend toward higher Germaninterest rates and said the increases engineered by thecentral bank were meant to &quot;convince the public that theBundesbank won't allow any uncontrollable potential forinflation to arise from the monetary side.&quot;   The repurchase agreements, under which banks borrow from the Bundesbank using securities as collateral, have become the central bank's favored tool in steering interest rates. By contrast, analysts said the less-flexible discount rate, currently at 3%, has faded in significance. But they said it might not be long before the discount rate, too, is raised.    &quot;The discount is being used less and less to steer West German interest rates,&quot; said Richard Reid, senior European economist for the brokerage Phillips andamp; Drew in London. &quot;But if the hardliners on the Bundesbank council had full say, they would raise all official rates, including the discount rate,&quot; he said. &quot;What we are seeing is a compromise worked out by Mr. Poehl and other pragmatic members of his board.&quot;    Opposition to more-restrictive German monetary policy isn't limited to foreigners. &quot;The direction the Bundesbank is taking is the wrong one,&quot; said Prof. Ruediger Pohl, a university economist and a member of the Bonn government's independent panel of economic experts. &quot;I can't imagine that the U.S. would tolerate this. Higher German interest rates aren't good for our economy or for the U.S. should dollar-Deutsche mark currency rates begin to react.&quot;    Economists also have criticized the fiscal policies of Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg, whose 40 billion marks ($22 billion) in tax cuts scheduled through 1990 have been decried as insufficient to generate fresh domestic demand. They widely anticipate little more than a 1.5% expansion in the West German economy this year.    The Bundesbank's Mr. Poehl said Germany's economy was showing signs of improving in recent months. But he conceded that the country's unemployment problem remains unresolved. &quot;I can't deny that economic growth in the Federal Republic so far hasn't been strong enough to achieve a noteworthy reduction in joblessness,&quot; he said.    The Japanese economy, meanwhile, has been growing faster than expected, putting upward pressure on prices. And the money supply has been growing at a double-digit pace for the past four months. As a result, interest rates are expected to rise as well.    Some economists said a half-point increase in the discount rate, from the current post-war record low of 2.5%, is inevitable. &quot;The Bank of Japan is laying the groundwork for the increase,&quot; said Kazutoshi Habamura, a senior analyst at Nikko Research Center. William Sterling, an economist at Merrill Lynch Securities Co., said: &quot;One discount rate hike has already been built into the market. The market is already concerning itself with the next one.&quot;    The Bank of Japan governor, Satoshi Sumita, and other central bank officials have reiterated several times in the past few days that there aren't any plans for an increase in the discount rate. But Mr. Sumita also has said that greater consideration than in the recent past will be given to &quot;price questions&quot; and that his statements denying any plan to increase the discount rate don't constitute an international pledge.    While a Japanese rate increase is widely expected, the timing of such an increase is a subject of greater uncertainty. Some economists and reports in the Japanese press suggest that the Finance Ministry and the Bank of Japan are growing increasingly at odds over the discount-rate issue and the direction of monetary policy as a whole. That appearance of a division is contributing to the uncertainty over when a rate increase might happen.    Economists suggest that the Finance Ministry is chiefly concerned with stabilizing exchange rates and financing the government deficit at the lowest possible rates, while the Bank of Japan is primarily concerned with monitoring the money supply and checking inflation.    Another factor that some analysts believe may delay any increase in the discount rate is the government offering of Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp. shares in November. These observers believe the Finance Ministry wants to insure favorable conditions in the stock market for that offering.    Officials of the Bank of Japan and the ministry are quick to deny any discord. &quot;We are hoping, and I think Mr. Sumita will agree, to keep the interest rate as it is,&quot; Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said at a press conference yesterday. And a senior Bank of Japan official, reiterating that there are no plans for a discount-rate increase, said yesterday, &quot;I don't think there is any disagreement.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>