<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Daimler-Benz Is Struggling to Get Off Its Bumpy Road --- West German Auto Maker Has Trouble Handling Spate of Acquisitions </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas F. O'Boyle (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> AUT </IN><DATELINE> STUTTGART, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Once there was a steamroller and its name was Daimler-Benz.    Its cars stood for excellence. Its profits were the envy of the auto industry. Its people were smug in the belief that they worked for the best-managed company in Germany, if not the world.    But the steamroller has come to a screeching halt. Consider:   --Although the famed Mercedes star is still synonymous with first-rate engineering, it has lost a little luster. Daimler gave away about 100 cars last year to longtime customers who had complained about the quality of their automobiles.    --In its home market, Bavarian rival Bayerische Motoren Werke AG has scored big gains with a new limousine. BMW's domestic sales in the limousine class -- once Daimler's exclusive domain -- quadrupled last year and now almost equal Mercedes-Benz's, which were down 26%.    --Last summer, the company's largest shareholder, Deutsche Bank, engineered the ouster of Chairman Werner Breitschwerdt following months of board turmoil and embarrassing publicity.    --Since the stock market crash, Daimler's share price has been halved. Sales in the critical U.S. market fell to 90,000 units last year from 99,000 in 1986 and may slip again this year. As a result, the company, for only the second time in two decades, plans to cut its passenger-car output about 2% in 1988 (the other drop was caused by a strike).    &quot;This year will be a difficult one for Daimler,&quot; predicts John Lawson, an auto analyst at the research unit of Nomura Securities in London. Recent events have brought it &quot;back to the ranks of normal European industry. They actually have to work hard for their money now.&quot;    The turning point in the company's fortunes probably came in 1984. That was the year that Daimler, now Germany's largest company, introduced the 200-300 Series car that was to develop so many problems. It was the year the company began diversifying into non-automobile businesses that would ultimately muddy its focus. And it was a time of conflict over strategy in the top ranks of management, between the down-to-earth chairman who would later be ousted and his urbane finance chief, who would succeed him.    For a company that long has felt it was a breed apart, last year was a sobering experience. For more than a generation, Daimler-Benz AG has been one of the brightest stars in the automobile industry (which, by the way, Daimler executives claim began in 1886 when Carl Benz invented the first practical car).    To some extent, it still is. After all, Americans bought more than eight times as many Mercedes-Benzes last year as they did in 1965, paying $29,190 to $76,380 each. Profits have risen every year since 1971; sales have grown from just 12.7 billion German marks then ($7.8 billion at current exchange rates) to an estimated 66 billion marks in 1987. And though net income is expected to decline this year, Daimler-Benz is still more than three times as profitable as Volkswagen AG.    In retrospect, Daimler-Benz, perhaps convinced of its invincibility, bit off more than it could chew. The early 1980s were phenomenally successful for the company. It introduced the 190 &quot;baby Benz&quot; in 1982, a car that now accounts for more than one-third of its auto output. But Daimler pushed production too fast. The 200-300 Series car had serious mechanical and design defects. Since then, competitors have stolen its thunder with snappier models.    And while troubles were brewing in the company's core business, executives were distracted by acquisitions that made Daimler a manufacturer of hundreds of products, ranging from toasters to airplanes and from vacuum cleaners to radar systems. The company is still trying to sort out and effectively manage those operations.    The Daimler empire's new leader and the man who urged the diversification, 59-year-old Chairman Edzard Reuter, has spent his first four months on the job trying to restore calm to a company unaccustomed to infighting. To that end, the normally candid Mr. Reuter has shied away from publicity.    &quot;The Daimler-Benz name was in the headlines too often in 1987, which we didn't like and which shouldn't be customary,&quot; he recently told shareholders.    Behind the scenes, Mr. Reuter is preparing for what he fears may be lean years. His strategists are studying ways to lower costs, including the politically sensitive transfer of some production out of Germany to the Third World. Joint ventures with other auto and truck producers are under negotiation, such as one with Japan's Mitsubishi Motors Corp.    Son of postwar West Berlin Mayor Ernst Reuter, the new Daimler chairman is a striking contrast to his predecessor, Mr. Breitschwerdt. Mr. Reuter is a cosmopolitan lawyer who grew up in Turkey and Berlin, holds liberal political views and speaks four languages; Mr. Breitschwerdt was a conservative engineer who spoke with the Swabian accent of Stuttgart, where Daimler-Benz is based.    Before becoming chief executive, Mr. Reuter was finance chief and had been passed over for the chairmanship in 1983. Despite that setback, he won support for his vision of a diversified, technology-based company. Daimler took a giant step in that direction when it acquired majority stakes in the AEG AG electrical products group and the Dornier G.m.b.H. aerospace company. It also raised its holding in jet-engine maker Motoren andamp; Turbinen Union G.m.b.H. to 100% from 50%.    Ultimately, the aim is to reorganize parts of the non-auto operations, which account for about 25% of corporate sales, into new companies in common product categories. But problems at some acquired companies have slowed that effort. One consultant says AEG, which accounts for 70% of Daimler's non-auto sales, was a &quot;mess,&quot; and is only barely profitable.    While it is too soon to judge the wisdom of the diversification, its success or failure may decide Mr. Reuter's own fate. &quot;He must lead this concept to success,&quot; says a Daimler executive and Reuter confidant. &quot;It is connected with his name.&quot;    Still, Daimler executives have great confidence in their new chairman -- something they never had in Mr. Breitschwerdt. &quot;Things are moving ahead again,&quot; says one plant manager. &quot;Reuter is decisive and he inspires a lot of confidence.&quot;    Daimler also has had to restore confidence among customers. Soon after it introduced its 200-300 Series cars, reports surfaced that something was amiss. The engines in some cars accelerated rapidly for no reason. Others had a faulty sunroof, a noisy rear axle or cracking of the windshield. The University of East Anglia in England counts 30 to 40 specific defects on the new model.    Though Daimler says it quickly responded to complaints, customers say it refused at first to recognize that troubles existed. &quot;I've never had so many problems with anything in my life as I did with that car,&quot; says salesman Rolf Hansbuer of Muelheim of the model 230E Mercedes he purchased in 1985. Mr. Hansbuer says he made about two dozen trips to the repair shop and wrote the company six letters before Daimler gave him a new 260E last June, almost free.    Perhaps more disturbing than the questions about its cars' quality has been the recent success of BMW's 700 Series limousine. Daimler concedes 15% of the people buying the new car are former Mercedes owners. And it vows to fight back by quickening the pace of its own model introductions. Juergen Hubbert, a top executive in the newly formed passenger-car division, promises to unveil major changes in the 190 &quot;baby Benz&quot; this year and an entirely new coupe roadster early in 1989.    Meanwhile, Mr. Reuter is said to be encouraging a more-open atmosphere at tight-lipped Daimler-Benz. The company expects soon to make its first formal financial presentations to U.S. securities analysts. Still, old habits die hard. Daimler-Benz won't mention its management shake-up in this year's annual report, for instance. &quot;Why should we?&quot; asks one incredulous Daimler executive. </TEXT></DOC>