<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870707-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Rural Clouds:End of Crop Subsidies,Sought in Trade Talks,Imperils Many Farms---Despite Global Budget Pinch,Proposal Is Likely to MeetStiff Domestic Resistance---Effects in Germany and U.S.---By Wendy L. Wall and Thomas F. O'BoyleStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD) </IN><TEXT>   At a dairy in the West German village of Remels, a spigot fills another 55-pound container of butter every few seconds.    Before the day is out, about five tons of butter will be stacked in the dairy's cavernous refrigerator. But of the total output, only 10% will wind up on store shelves. The West German government will buy the other 90%. The price the government will pay the dairy is four to five times higher than the price it will receive when it sells the same butter to countries like the Soviet Union.    &quot;We couldn't survive without the government,&quot; admits Johann Jelden, the dairy's white-coated manager.    Across the Atlantic, in Minnesota's lush Red River Valley, sugar-beet farmers similarly would succumb if not for the help of the U.S. government. An intricate network of import quotas and price supports keeps U.S. sugar prices three to four times above depressed world levels. Without such programs, the nation's sugar-beet capital would vanish under a flood of imports. &quot;We'd lose our shirts,&quot; declares Charles Holmquist, who makes equipment used by the beet farmers.    Now, farmers in both nations and in scores of other countries face losing their shirts if world leaders are able to carry out their intentions. But that is a big if.    Trade negotiators have begun trying to slash global farm programs through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. In a move heralded by President Reagan at the economic conference in Venice last month, U.S. trade negotiators yesterday proposed that all nations drop all forms of government farm subsidies by the year 2000.    U.S. negotiators hope global budgetary pressures will muster support for their proposal. In the past five years, agriculture around the globe has become a black hole for government dollars: Last year, the U.S. and the 12-nation European Community alone shoveled some $48 billion into price supports, income supplements, interest and export subsidies, and other farm programs. That doesn't include higher prices consumers paid because of protectionist tariffs and quotas. A 1986 World Bank study concluded that farm programs cost world consumers and taxpayers more than $100 billion annually.    But, severe as the budget pressures are, they probably won't be enough. Farm programs, once simply a security net for agriculture, have become a crucial life-support system for rural sectors on both sides of the Atlantic. Making any deep cuts in those programs will be a formidable, and perhaps impossible, task.    &quot;Subsidies keep a lot of farmers alive,&quot; says Franz-Josef Feiter, an agricultural adviser to West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, whose government already is fighting Common Market proposals to lower price supports. &quot;Politically, we just cannot accept the threat to such an important segment of our population.&quot; A spokesman for the U.S. trade representative agrees: &quot;The next president is going to have a tough battle&quot; with Congress.    In the U.S., a deluge of federal dollars is keeping farmers and farm banks afloat across the Midwest after six years of farm depression. In Europe, the subsidies keep a vast rural population out of unemployment lines. &quot;It is the government's responsibility to supply food to the population, regardless of cost,&quot; declares Mr. Jelden, the German dairy manager.    Even a slow weaning, spread over a decade or more, would probably mean sharp declines in rural life styles and a farm exodus on both continents. A close look at two farm communities shows both the sprawl of the subsidies that critics want to cut and the depth of the dependence that may well make such cuts politically impossible.    Uplengen, West Germany   Each year, around Christmas, farmer Justus Ackermann receives what he refers to, with a laugh, as his &quot;gift&quot; from the German government. The gift is money. Mr. Ackermann and all other farmers in this northwest German district receive the money because they farm in an area designated by the government as &quot;disadvantaged.&quot;    By his own admission, Mr. Ackermann is hardly disadvantaged. The 29-year-old farmer owns a comfortable home and some 120 acres of land, where his cows and calves graze contentedly. Yet last year's check was 2,825 German marks, or about $1,600. And Mr. Ackermann wasn't alone: Half the farmland in Germany is disadvantaged by the government's measure.    The gifts don't stop there. Although German farmers don't receive direct payments to plant their crops, the government subsidizes just about everything else: the machinery they buy, the diesel fuel they consume, the social-security payments they make, and the grain, milk and livestock they sell.    Like most West German farmers, Martin Kaling doesn't pay any federal income tax even though he drives a new Mercedes and owns one of the largest dairy farms in the district. Seven years ago, he built a new eight-room home on property that has been in his family since 1744. The $152,000 loan cost him about 2%; the government picked up the other five or six percentage points of interest, he says.    In Remels, the largest of 18 villages in the district of Uplengen, the German government supports one-third of the private loans made each year by the local bank. Some 80% of the customers who buy new tractors at the farm-equipment store do so with government-assisted loans. When Mr. Ackermann built a new pig sty recently, he received a $16,000 rebate from the government to help defray the $68,000 cost.    Remels has new tennis courts, a new recreational facility and a new sewage-treatment plant; Bonn paid about half their cost because Remels is in a rural area.    &quot;Without subsidies, we couldn't exist. We would go broke and so would the community,&quot; says Gerd van Ohlen, seated at a table with eight fellow farmers from Uplengen. In April, Mr. van Ohlen and his friends -- all lifelong residents of the district -- joined about 20,000 other farmers who descended on Bonn to protest cuts in farm prices proposed by the executive body of the European Community.    &quot;The government is standing up for us now,&quot; adds Otto Harms, the president of the local farm union who helped organize the protest.    Uplengen is wholly dependent on agriculture, with farming accounting for 42% of the district's jobs. The town hall in Remels is easy to find: It is the building next to the windmill. At a school play, the first actress on stage is a milkmaid, carrying a pitcher of milk. Even the local Lutheran church owns about 100 acres of land, which the pastor was once expected to farm.    Government handouts are as important as weather in sustaining West German agriculture. The country's climate is cold and damp, and the farms tend to be small: The average German farm is just 40 acres, one-tenth the size of the average U.S. farm. As a result, German farmers need more subsidies to farm profitably. Last year, they each received about $14,700 in government payments, a large amount even by U.S. and European standards.    By far the biggest subsidy is the European Community's system of price supports. It allows the dairy in Remels -- one of some 400 in Germany -- to pay about $1.40 for each gallon of milk it receives from the dairy farmers. Without price supports, farmers would probably get about 55 cents a gallon, says Mr. Jelden, the dairy manager. Just a 3% drop in milk prices would mean more than $1 million in lost income annually for the district.    Meanwhile, the government's butter stockpiles are growing unchecked. In desperation, the country recently sold 136,000 tons of butter to the Soviets at rock-bottom prices. &quot;When you fix a price without any relation to the market, then every farmer produces as much as he can,&quot; says Mr. Feiter, the adviser to Chancellor Kohl.    Even efforts to harness output can create new subsidies. The EC imposed dairy quotas this year to lower community milk production. For Mr. Harms, the union president, that meant an 8.5% income drop. But the EC has since approved another subsidy, supplemented by the government, which refunds about half his lost income.    Norman County, Minn.   On the wall of the Agriculture Department office in Ada, Minn., hangs a brief ode scrawled by a grateful farmer. Its first stanza invokes past and present branches of the department:    To Pa it was the triple A   To me the ASC   My Dad went there just once a year    But weekly they see me.   Those brief lines tell much about the history of farming in this area. This rich, rolling county is still farmed by descendants of the Norwegian immigrants who first settled the region. But today they have a crucial partner in their venture: Uncle Sam.    Each year, the federal government parcels out payments to local producers of oats, barley, wheat, honey, wool, corn and soybeans. Indirectly, it supports the price of milk and sugar beets, making both profitable. It offers farmers cheap credit, storage payments and free advice. This year, it is paying dozens of farmers to seed their cropland to grass.    All told, the Agriculture Department pumped about $35 million in direct payments into Norman County last year, accounting for roughly one-third of the area's total farm income, local officials say. A government program that pays farmers to take thousands of acres of poor cropland out of production has stabilized plunging land values, shoring up farmers' collateral and slowing farm auctions. Farmers jokingly refer to Bruce Brainerd, the department's local representative, as &quot;the biggest banker in the county.&quot;    It isn't hard to see why. Donald Ogaard, a 60-year-old Ada farmer, has enough wheat stored on his farm to fill nearly 150 railroad cars. Until this spring, he hadn't sold any wheat in three years; he could collect more cash by turning it over directly to the federal government. Now, he is marketing grain again, but only because another federal program allows him to glean additional money by doing so.    Mr. Ogaard isn't fond of current farm programs. But he covered most of his costs last year with the roughly $400,000 in federal payments he collected for growing and storing the mountain of grain. (About one-fourth of the money covered disease damage to his crop.) If forced to rely on the market alone, Mr. Ogaard says, he would lose $1.30 on every bushel of wheat he produced. His sugar beets, a steady moneymaker, would also lose big if sugar import quotas were dismantled. &quot;We live off the government,&quot; the farmer says.    Gerald Visser, a burly dairyman, has been using subsidized federal credit since 1978, when a tornado tore out his barn and silos. Deep in debt, he couldn't borrow any more planting money this spring. He sowed his fields with cash Washington gave him, in advance, for simply planting the grain.    But Mr. Visser is optimistic. He thinks he has persuaded his federal lender to forgive $400,000 in debt in exchange for land appraised at less than half that value. And milk prices are slightly higher this spring, thanks to lower production: The government recently paid one-fifth of the dairymen in the county to send their herds to slaughter.    Even local lenders are banking on Washington. Maynard Okeson, executive vice president of the Twin Valley Bank, complains that &quot;there are so many different kinds of payments, I can't even begin to keep track of them.&quot; Yet without the direct handouts to grain farmers, he would have to cut off half his farm borrowers. Dismantling such farm programs would be &quot;devastating,&quot; the banker says. &quot;We'd have some tremendous losses. I don't think we could hang on.&quot;    Neither could many of the other employers in this valley, whose lifeblood is the sugar-beet industry. Norman County residents commute to two of the valley's six sugar-beet processing plants and work at farm-equipment factories in Shelly and nearby Fargo. The county's tax base, 85% dependent on farmland, would erode even further if the programs were abandoned and land prices fell.    &quot;We can't have free enterprise in agriculture,&quot; declares Mr. Holmquist, the general manager of WIC Inc., a maker of sugar-beet farm equipment. &quot;It would be a total disaster,&quot; agrees Robert Sharpe. The lean, blond farmer says he might not have made it without the 30-odd payments he received from Washington last year.    That theme is echoed often in this county, even by those who denounce the complexities of the current farm program. Although U.S. farmers have long prided themselves on being the world's most efficient producers, some now concede that they really meant the most productive. Some worry that they can't compete against Third World farmers who forgo expensive equipment and are used to lower standards of living.    &quot;A few years ago, I saw the most efficient sugar farmer in the world,&quot; says Mr. Ogaard, who raises 660 acres of sugar beets with machines and hired hands. &quot;He was in Jamaica. He had a donkey and a two-wheeled cart and a shack on the hill. I can't compete with him.&quot;    But many people here don't believe he will have to. In the mid-1970s, the U.S. sugar program was briefly dismantled, only to be quickly restored after sugar prices collapsed. &quot;We've had farm programs for 50 years,&quot; declares Fayville Moen, a local real-estate agent. &quot;And we're going to have them for another 50.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>