<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0003 </DOCNO><HL> USAir IntensifiesWar for PiedmontBy Raising Its Bid---By Teri Agins and Betsy MorrisStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> U PIE NSCTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><TEXT>   USAir Group Inc. pushed the bidding war for Piedmont Aviation Inc. into a new round by sweetening its bid for the airline.    Washington-based USAir said it proposed to pay $71 a share in cash for 50% of Piedmont's stock, plus between 1.55 and 1.9 USAir shares for each of the remaining Piedmont shares. USAir said each Piedmont common share not acquired for cash would be converted into USAir common shares with an average market price of $73, based on the price of USAir shares over a 10-day period.    Based on Piedmont's 18.86 million primary shares outstanding, the USAir bid would have an indicated value of $1.36 billion. If Piedmont's 23 million fully diluted shares are taken into account, the acquisition would be valued at considerably more, about $1.6 billion, according to one analyst.    The proposal comes a day after Piedmont's outside directors recommended that the airline accept Norfolk Southern Corp.'s competing acquisition proposal for Piedmont. Norfolk Southern's $65-a-share bid, which has an indicated value of more than $981 million, is for the Piedmont shares it doesn't already own. Norfolk Southern currently holds a 20% stake in Winston-Salem, N.C.-based Piedmont.    The Piedmont outside directors also had rejected two previous proposals from USAir. Under one proposal, USAir would have paid the equivalent of $71 a share, but all in stock rather than in cash. Under the other proposal, USAir would have paid the equivalent of only $68 a share in a combined stock-cash offer.    The full board of Piedmont is scheduled to meet today to review the Norfolk bid and will consider the new USAir bid.    By last night, Norfolk, Va.-based Norfolk Southern hadn't matched the USAir bid, putting the Piedmont board in a touchy position. It's believed that Piedmont management has long leaned toward Norfolk Southern because of previous friendly ties. In addition, the railroad is considered likely to let Piedmont management operate the airline more independently than an acquiring carrier would. The Piedmont board is dominated by management; only four of the 12 members are considered true outsiders.    One Piedmont director conceded that the board's decision would be difficult. &quot;On the face of it, it sounds like yes, (the new USAir bid) is an improvement on what was offered earlier,&quot; said Thomas H. Davis, Piedmont's founder and a director. &quot;But there are other matters involved such as shareholder interest, employee interest, customer interest and the opportunities ahead going one way as opposed to the other.&quot; Mr. Davis added that as of last night he didn't know which way the board was leaning.    Mr. Davis also said, &quot;There is public interest, and I hope and believe the board would consider that.&quot; The board, which includes seven Winston-Salem residents, is likely to feel pressure from the community -- which is about to lose the headquarters of RJR Nabisco Inc. -- to keep the company as independent as possible.    A Piedmont spokesman declined to make any comment beyond saying the new USAir bid would be considered along with Norfolk Southern's proposal. A spokeswoman for Norfolk Southern declined to comment on USAir's latest bid.    In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Piedmont shares closed at $65.875, up 50 cents. USAir shares closed in Big Board trading at $44.125, up 75 cents.    Some analysts were surprised at USAir's determination to acquire Piedmont, particularly at such a high price. &quot;The cost of buying Piedmont would be enormous -- nearly $800 million for 50% of the company and all that stock for the rest. And what is USAir getting?&quot; asked Edmund Greenslet, an analyst at Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.    Mr. Greenslet noted that USAir wouldn't get a computer reservation system, considered critical to survival in the current fierce marketing battles in the airline industry. Nor would USAir gain any marketing clout in the Midwest or Far West, since both Piedmont and USAir are concentrated in the eastern U.S. And USAir wouldn't gain major international routes. Also, Mr. Greenslet said, USAir wouldn't gain sufficient mass to match the industry's Big Five, the Texas Air group, United Airlines, American Airlines, Northwest Airlines and the Delta Air Lines-Western Airlines combination.    &quot;Somewhere along the line a strong carrier, instead of becoming stronger by acquisition, is going to merge itself into weakness, and maybe this (USAir transaction) is going to be it.&quot;    But another analyst argued that the transaction would be a good one for USAir. &quot;If they get Piedmont, USAir will cover the eastern U.S. like Sherwin-Williams paint, and they will have enormous marketing clout,&quot; the analyst said.    Edwin I. Colodny, USAir's chairman and chief executive officer, also said in a statement that &quot;the company estimates that the combination will generate significant operational benefits for the two companies and is therefore not expected to be dilutive to USAir Group's earnings.&quot; Some analysts, however, noted that the history of airline mergers indicates savings are hard to realize. Typically, unions clash over merging seniority lists, maintenance facilities are hard to combine and operations are often scrambled for months, resulting in late flights, lost bags and other problems.    Whether a combined USAir and Piedmont would work well or not, analysts were surprised by Mr. Colodny's turnabout in style. In the airline industry, he has been one of the most cautious executives, avoiding purchases of wide-body jets, failing to push hard for international routes and steering clear of the acquisition binge in the industry, until recently.    &quot;Ed Colodny has been one of the most conservative airline chief executives around, and suddenly he is throwing all this money at Piedmont,&quot; Mr. Greenslet of Merrill Lynch said.    A spokesman for USAir said Mr. Colodny refused to comment on any aspects of the USAir bid.    In its statement, USAir said that in the stock portion of its bid for Piedmont, no fewer than 1.55 and no more than 1.9 USAir shares will be issued for each Piedmont share. USAir added that its latest proposal would be designed as a tax-free exchange with respect to the USAir common stock exchanged.    Completion of the merger would be subject to prior approval by the Department of Transportation and stockholders of both carriers. However, shares tendered would be deposited in a voting trust so that tendering stockholders would receive payment for their shares promptly following expiration of the tender offer, and in advance of the Transporation Department's approval. Such approval can take several months.    USAir asserted that it foresees no difficulties in obtaining the agency's approval, and that, based upon discussions with its commercial banks, it is &quot;confident&quot; that it will have the necessary financing for the cash offer.    Approval by the transportation agency would hinge largely on antitrust issues. But since USAir has its main hub in Pittsburgh and Piedmont's is in Charlotte, N.C., analysts doubted there would be strenuous antitrust objections. </TEXT></DOC>