<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Texan May Have Last Word on Federal Phone System---Rep. Davis Seeks More CompetitionIn Bidding for Big U.S. Contract---By Bob DavisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT T MCIC UT GTE BA ML GM GMETELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Twenty-four years ago, Rep. Jack Brooks (D., Texas) made the first phone call on the federal government's new telephone system. Now it looks like he will have the last word on buying a multibillion-dollar replacement system.    The head of the House Government Operations Committee is pressing the General Services Administration to revamp its current plan to award a contract for the government's next-generation phone system to a single winner among competing teams of companies. Rep. Brooks wants the GSA to split the contract between two teams, which would rebid every three years for the bulk of the business.    The Brooks approach could mean new life for US Sprint Communications Co., which has bowed out of the competition. It also would nearly ensure that American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., which manages the current federal system, would get a part of the contract, but not all of it. And it would leave the door open for other bidders, including MCI Communications Corp., to win at least a share of the action.    Already, congressional sources say, the GSA has privately acquiesced to Rep. Brooks's primary demand and offered to split the long-distance portion of the contract 70% to 30% between two telephone companies, rather than give all the business to one company. The GSA won't comment, but a congressional staff member involved with the discussions says the agency characterized the offer as a &quot;last-ditch&quot; effort at compromise.    Rep. Brooks, who has long championed competition in contracting, rejected that offer, however, and is holding out for splitting the entire contract. Such a change would subsidize the fledgling competition in the telecommunications market but the delay in the bidding process would initially cost the government at least $50 million.    The betting in the capital is that the GSA will bend more to meet Rep. Brooks's concerns.    &quot;To win an argument in Washington, there are two questions you have to answer,&quot; says James Tozzi, a former official at the White House Office of Management and Budget who has tussled with Rep. Brooks. &quot;How good is someone's substantive position? And how much elbow grease can he put behind that position? Jack Brooks always scores in the 90s on both counts.&quot;    The so-called FTS-2000 contract has become a political wrestling match because of its size and prestige. The winner must design, build and operate the nation's largest voice, video and computer communications network. The GSA figures the value of the 10-year contract at roughly $5 billion; Rep. Brooks's staff pegs it at five times that amount. Bids are due at the end of the month -- after being delayed three times -- and the GSA promises to pick a winner, or winners, by New Year's Day.    With so much money at stake, the three largest long-distance companies have scrambled to set up or join teams of bidders. ATandamp;T, which currently collects nearly half the annual billings of about $450 million from the federal phone system, chose a Boeing Co. unit as its partner. MCI joined a team headed by Martin Marietta Corp.; and US Sprint, a joint venture of GTE Corp. and United Telecommunications Inc., signed on with a team headed by the Electronic Data Systems Corp. unit of General Motors Corp.    Because they are the only company to provide local service, the regional Bell companies would be a part of any team of bidders. But the regional companies stand to make more money as part of the Martin Marietta team, which proposes to use their services more extensively than ATandamp;T would.    US Sprint was the first casualty, bowing out of the competition in June, when EDS dropped out. But even before it officially withdrew, US Sprint started lobbying Rep. Brooks in hopes of getting back into the bidding. The Kansas City, Mo.-based company has long cultivated ties to the Texas lawmaker. US Sprint started as a Dallas-based company, US Telephone Inc., hired Texans as lobbyists and teamed with Dallas-based EDS for its aborted FTS-2000 bid.    Now if the GSA accedes to Rep. Brooks's demands that there be two winners, US Sprint will have time to find a partner and submit a bid. &quot;We're interested in the multi-vendor approach,&quot; says Robert Currey, US Sprint's executive vice president. &quot;We'd like to have a piece of the business.&quot;    Rep. Brooks, a slight, 64-year-old lawmaker with a penetrating glare, is reknowned for his sometimes-profane outspokeness, and he backs his bluster with action. When he was convinced that the Army had skewed a pistol contract to favor Italian arms maker Pietro Beretta S.p.A., he pushed through legislation to reopen the competition. His power has increased lately with the ascension of his confidant, fellow-Texan Rep. James Wright, to Speaker of the House.    Rep. Brooks has long considered the GSA his fiefdom. He sponsored the Brooks Act and other legislation that centralizes computer-and-telecommunications purchasing authority in the GSA -- and keeps it under the purview of his committee, which oversees the agency.    No one on Capitol Hill has risen to challenge the Texas lawmaker and defend the agency. Indeed, the GSA, which rents offices for federal agencies and stocks them with furniture and equipment, is resented in Washington the way a landlord is often loathed by his tenants. &quot;GSA is a department you'd rather have root canal than call,&quot; says Rep. Robert Wise (D., W.Va.), a member of Rep. Brooks's committee.    Rep. Brooks won't discuss the FTS-2000 negotiations. But sources closely involved in the competition say he next plans to present GSA Administrator Terence Golden with a detailed plan for splitting the contract between two bidding teams.    The lawmaker's staff now is working with GSA staff members and former ATandamp;T officials, the sources say, to decide, perhaps by late next week, whether it makes more sense to divide the contract by agency, geography or service. The congressman's staff also must document Rep. Brooks's claim that it will take only four to six months to revise the bid -- not one or two years, as Mr. Golden contends.    Mr. Golden says that choosing a single winner would be most cost-effective for the government, and a number of private telecommunications experts agree. He adds that the government could save $100 million to $150 million a year by switching to the new phone system, so even the six-month delay proposed by Rep. Brooks would cost the government dearly. But Thomas Giammo, who directed several studies critical of the GSA's telephone plans for Congress's General Accounting Office, says that requiring the companies to compete over the life of the contract could keep costs down in the long run.    Splitting the contract would likely mean that ATandamp;T, the heavy favorite to win the bidding, and one of its two struggling long-distance competitors would emerge as the victors -- thus ensuring competition in a field dominated by ATandamp;T. In the 1960s and 1970s, Rep. Brooks similarly pushed for computer-industry competition through legislation that effectively loosened International Business Machines Corp.'s grip on government computers.    Rep. Brooks &quot;was the salvation of several companies, including Control Data Corp., Honeywell and Burroughs,&quot; says Bob Dornan, vice president of Federal Sources Inc., a Vienna, Va., computer consulting company.    ATandamp;T says it has resigned itself to Rep. Brooks prevailing and now supports his views. The telecommunications giant is developing its own plan for dividing the contract, which it hopes to pitch to Mr. Golden and Rep. Brooks. At the same time, it is pursuing a lawsuit in federal court that could knock Martin Marietta, its major competitor, out of the bidding by limiting its use of the regional Bell companies. And if Martin Marietta withdraws, the GSA could be forced to scrap its plans because it would be left with only one bidder, ATandamp;T.    ATandamp;T benefits in Washington by appearing to favor competition. That is because the Federal Communications Commission, in a separate proceeding, has proposed to scrap regulation of ATandamp;T's profit margin and ATandamp;T wants to head off opposition in Congress. &quot;ATandamp;T will do anything to get&quot; deregulation, says Jack Grubman, an analyst at Paine Webber Inc. and a former ATandamp;T official. &quot;If that means taking less of the contract, they'll do it. They still get some of the business and they make their political point.&quot;    Even Martin Marietta, which has supported the winner-take-all approach, is working on a proposal to split the contract. But Jerry Thames, vice president for communications systems, says he fears that rewriting the bid will take so long that Martin Marietta, which has spent an estimated $50 million on the bid so far, would be forced to drop out. &quot;The time factor is crucial,&quot; he says. &quot;ATandamp;T can afford to wait it out. We can't.&quot;    Along with the rest of the telecommunications industry, Mr. Thames says he is trying to anticipate Rep. Brooks's next move. </TEXT></DOC>