<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880606-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: New Taiwan Pushes Out the Old Guard </HL><AUTHOR> David O'Rear </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> TAIPEI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Next month's 13th National Party Congress of Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang (KMT) will confirm or delay the island's political, social and economic development. In the months since the death of President Chiang Ching-kuo in January, the conservative Old Guard has fought a losing battle with the progressive-minded wing of the party, much as Deng Xiaoping's reformers have held off more orthodox communist factions on the other side of the Taiwan Strait. As in Peking, moreover, the prospects for continued progress toward liberalization are stronger than those for retrenchment.    Taiwan has undergone dramatic political change in the past two years, and the most remarkable aspect of the period is how smooth and orderly the process has been. Unlike South Korea, no one here died in street demonstrations calling for the violent overthrow of a military dictatorship. Indeed, Taiwan's political revolution from 1986 to 1988 has been from the top down, while South Korea's recent and continuing political maturation process has been forced on a reluctant leadership from below. In Taiwan, President Chiang deserves the lion's share of the credit for the changes that occurred during the last years of his life, changes that President Lee Teng-hui inherited and today is trying hard to nurture.    The response to the May 20 rioting in Taipei, the worst in years, confirms this analysis. Although the authorities report that 400 to 500 people were injured (including 382 policemen) and 128 people arrested, no one died. Among those arrested were dozens of opposition politicians, students and others with little stake in the agricultural causes on the agenda; indeed, only five farmers were among the arrested. More important, the government's controlled response to the all-night demonstrations and its early promise to address problems arising from Japan's import liberalization, rice purchase, farmers' insurance and fertilizer-pricing policies confirm that the leadership is committed to a course of guided political development: The government has seized the initiative while gaining support for its actions to protect social stability.    Although President Lee wields little of the influence his predecessor had, he quickly has proved himself to be the force to contend with at the upcoming KMT Party congress, which opens July 7. Mr. Lee has several factors in his favor, along with a few critical shortcomings that may limit his ability to act independently in the next two years.    On the plus side, Mr. Lee was born and raised in Taiwan. This automatically makes him the darling of most of the 16.5 million native Taiwanese, who have never quite accepted having mainland-born politicians governing their island since the 1940s. As an agricultural economist whose advice had been sought by the government, he rightly can claim a share in the credit for creating Taiwan's economic miracle. On top of this Mr. Lee is also personally popular, much more so than Prime Minister Yu Kuo-hwa, whom many see as the logical alternative to Mr. Lee. Finally, he was hand-picked by President Chiang in 1984 as the successor or, at least, one of the successors.    On the other side of the coin, however, one of the key issues that will trouble Mr. Lee, as a native Taiwanese, in the short and medium term is the fact that mainlanders may question his commitment to reunification, particularly in the face of increasingly public discussion of the potential of a formally &quot;independent&quot; Taiwan. More important, Mr. Lee did not earn the positions he holds in the traditional Chinese way, through close ties via long and deep personal bonds to the KMT Old Guard.    At the coming party congress Mr. Lee's main task will be to reshuffle the leadership so that fewer of the conservative Old Guard -- particularly people such as Prime Minister Yu -- remain in influential positions. In their place he and the moderate technocrats in the party and government would like to promote younger, progressive-minded legislators, party functionaries and bureaucrats. But to do this, the president must change the rules of the game.    At the party congress and its immediate aftermath, Mr. Lee has his work cut out for him to ensure that the government becomes more representative and more responsive to public opinion. He needs to institutionalize political power within the party and legislature at the expense of the personal bonds among faction leaders that are the essence of Chinese politics. This is very risky, because the men who must approve such a change -- or be swept aside -- are themselves beneficiaries of the old system.    Taiwan's next tier of leaders consists of a core of foreign-educated bureaucrats with extensive experience managing the affairs of the party and state. Among the Taiwanese, Lin Yang-kang, president of the Judicial Yuan, is considered most ambitious, a quality that may not endear him to cautious mainlanders. Vice Prime Minister Lien Chan, who was born on the mainland of Taiwanese parents, is not popular but has broad experience in domestic and foreign affairs. Ironically, some of the brightest prospects come from mainlander families, and walk a fine line between conservatism and pragmatic thinking. They include:   KMT Deputy Secretary-General James Soong, who has been charged with planning the party congress.    National Science Council Chairman Chen Li-an, son of a former prime minister, who has the widest possible experience in the party and government.    Robert and Frederick Chien, minister of finance and Taipei's representative in Washington respectively, are specialists (and brothers) who will guide affairs in their chosen fields.    Kuan Chung was promoted recently to director of the KMT organization department, a post in which he will be responsible for personnel appointments.    Under younger, better-educated leadership, Taipei will steadily shift its priorities. In place of political confrontation with the mainland, for example, the government already has put a greater emphasis on economic competition and a more equal footing in international organizations such as the Asian Development Bank and, in the future, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the International Monetary Fund. In place of a benevolent dictatorship will come a more participatory democracy where issues such as environmental cleanup, consumer protection and labor rights are the focus of elections. In place of protected markets and a managed currency may come an island-wide free market and a floating exchange rate that will enable Taiwan to thrive in the 21st century. Under the leadership group represented by President Lee, prospects for steady progress toward bringing the island up to the standards of the nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development are excellent.    ---   Mr. O'Rear is associate director, North Asia, for Business International Asia/Pacific Ltd. </TEXT></DOC>