<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880525-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Sanctions Are the Bane of Liberal South Africa </HL><AUTHOR> John Brimelow </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Two years ago, Congress seized control of Southern African policy. It scrapped the White House approach of &quot;constructive engagement&quot; and in its Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986 substituted the reverse-destructive disengagement.    Now, Congress is moving toward more sanctions. The bills under consideration would be harsher to U.S. citizens holding South African assets than anything experienced by American owners of assets in enemy countries in World War II, because they demand rapid and total liquidation.    Two years ago, whatever the rhetorical gloss, the essential effect on U.S. industry was protectionist. The South African products excluded, such as steel, textiles and foodstuffs, were competing with import-sensitive U.S. industries. But the proposed sanctions jeopardize access by U.S. industry to critical ingredients -- mainly metals -- of which South Africa is the cheapest and sometimes the only supplier, and U.S. holders of South African securities are threatened with huge losses.    This is particularly foolish in view of the failure of the 1986 legislation. The elegance, precision and power with which it bolstered those South Africans it was supposed to harm, and hurt those friendly to its objectives, is breathtaking.    Leading the casualty list was the Progressive Federal Party, the official opposition. With internationally respected leaders and a genuine commitment to change, this group of limousine liberals was in the same hopeless electoral position as liberals in the American Deep South before the Voting Rights acts. At private dinner parties throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, they would call for U.S. threats and gestures to strengthen their position within South African politics.    To a considerable extent, between the 1976 Soweto riots and the 1986 sanctions legislation, this strategy was successful. The National Party government began dismantling public segregation and legalizing black unions -- both measures immensely costly with white voters. The government would never have risked them if it, and the South African establishment, had not been convinced they would keep South Africa acceptable to the West.    The 1986 sanctions destroyed this hope, and the hopes of the Progressive Federal Party. South Africa received the message that as far as the U.S. Congress was concerned, nothing short of a transfer of power to the African National Congress would do. Liberal demoralization was rampant; many of the party's prominent leaders and supporters have emigrated. The party was shattered in the 1987 election, and seems destined for oblivion.    The 1986 sanctions also resolved the ferocious civil war on the right. The winner -- the Conservative Party led by Andreas Treurnicht -- went from almost no seats to the status of official opposition in the 1987 elections, with 22 of 166 seats, and many second placings. While five years ago it was extremely rare to hear of any declared Conservative supporters, even in Afrikaans-speaking institutions, now because of the party's anti-American rhetoric they are widespread and treated respectfully. Across the spectrum, there is talk of the Conservatives forming the next government. Under a Conservative government, aggressive opponents of the regime would be crushed, a path laid by the U.S. Congress.    The third effect of the 1986 sanctions has been the change of sentiment among the country's business elite.    South Africa's sophisticated industrial base is controlled mainly by a few conglomerates. Their management, from the English-speaking minority of the white population, was overwhelmingly liberal. This group, more than the political parties, forced many of the reforms and applauded international pressure.    But now, attitudes have changed. South Africans are loosening or terminating their U.S. business connections far faster than the legal environment warrants. Two years ago, the idea of &quot;countersanctions&quot; -- predatory and discriminatory pricing against American buyers in lines where South African producers combined could exert some monopolistic power -- was dismissed out of hand by the South African business elite. Now it is favorably discussed and, apparently, in some areas (like chrome) implemented.    Of course, before the 1986 sanctions, the business elite's enthusiasm for social change was being paid for by others -- white middle-management and blue-collar workers. And there unquestionably is bitterness that what in a South African context were brave and costly efforts at reform were spurned so totally. At bottom, however, the business leaders are reacting rationally. What Congress appears to want -- a transfer of power to the African National Congress -- is beyond their abilities to deliver, even if they wanted to. So there is no point in trying.    Moreover, businessmen in South Africa have come to recognize possible benefits in foreign divestitures. Humble managers of foreign-owned subsidiaries have been transformed into prospective or actual millionaires by organizing buy-outs -- deals paying for themselves in months through the rapid elimination of inefficiencies imposed by former head offices. The first casualties are often the expenses of the Sullivan Principles -- higher pay, recruitment, social contributions. The U.S. proposals mandating immediate liquidation of South African assets would give South Africans a wonderful opportunity to &quot;buy back the farm&quot; at fire-sale prices.    The termination of trading relationships seems to be stimulating a search for new possibilities. Manufacturers are intrigued by rumors that the government is considering moderating its traditionally vigorous enforcement of international patent and copyright law.    &quot;They keep poaching my Afrikaner boys!&quot; complained the head of a major Afrikaans-speaking insurance company recently. He had just learned another of his promising subordinates had been recruited by an English-speaking competitor. This is the greatest of the sanctions' paradoxes. As English-speaking whites despair and emigrate, their places are increasingly being filled by Afrikaners. Employers know they will stay. So the Afrikaner majority is finally infiltrating the commercial strongholds of the Anglophone minority -- courtesy of their overseas enemies. How can this possibly induce them to surrender?    This is not to say that sanctions have cost South Africa nothing. But the main impact is increasing the country's shortfall from its long-term potential growth. This is an intangible that most whites will cheerfully trade off to preserve institutions they believe enhance their security. Direct costs rose too, but they were borne mainly by the black workers who on the margin lost their jobs, and by a handful of owners of specialized items of capital stock (like fruit trees or coal mines) not easily redeployed. In the main, the economic and political costs have fallen on the government's liberal opponents, and the benefits on its supporters or those further right.    Twenty years ago it was an article of faith among many of those now calling for increased sanctions on South Africa that North Vietnam could not be bombed to the negotiating table. Effectively showering benefits on their South African opponents will accomplish even less. The role of clergyman to the world can produce worse fiascoes than that of policeman.    ---   Mr. Brimelow, New York based, directs international research at Keane Securities Co., a dealer in South African issues. </TEXT></DOC>