<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880414-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Human-Rights Ruling on Cuba Twisted Into Victory for U.S. </HL><AUTHOR> Alexander Cockburn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   No, the press here isn't exactly &quot;state-controlled.&quot; Commissars don't sit with blue pencils or cruder tools of persuasion in the news rooms or editorial suites. Mostly they don't have to. &quot;State-influenced&quot; is the way to describe the relationship between government and the mainstream, corporate press. No better illustration can be found to test this thesis than the way the press deals with news from abroad that is unpalatable to state interests and the propaganda menu of the day.    Take President Reagan's recent dispatch of 3,200 troops to Honduras. Opposition in Honduras became so intense that it could no longer be ignored here, particularly after the U.S. Embassy was sacked. (Opposition within the U.S., involving demonstrations by thousands of people in some 38 towns and cities was almost entirely ignored by the press, to a degree that would be the envy of pre-glasnost commissars.)    But the vehement protests of Latin American leaders were mostly passed over, as they have been in the case of U.S. attempts to evict Gen. Manuel Noriega in Panama. The presidents of Mexico, Peru, Colombia and Argentina all expressed harsh displeasure, relayed to this country by Associated Press bureaus, but not then deemed fit for further relay to the public at large.    An even better illustration came with the recent conference of the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva, which ended March 11 with a decision to dispatch a team to investigate the human-rights situation in Cuba. This was widely reported in the U.S. as a triumph for the Reagan administration's diplomatic maneuverings. Though the decision was taken only after the initial U.S. resolution had been withdrawn and a substitute drafted by a group of Latin American countries passed by consensus, American reporters claimed a smashing U.S. victory.    Paul Lewis, writing in the New York Times of March 11, said Cuba had made its offer to &quot;to avoid . . . a confrontational vote&quot; and cited unnamed diplomats who claimed &quot;Cuba's decision avoided the risk of Havana being voted down in the commission.&quot; Victory was so thorough, in fact, that the &quot;decision to send an investigatory team goes much further than the original United States resolution that merely expressed concern about 'allegations' of human-rights violations in Cuba.&quot;    Mr. Lewis's analysis was shared by his counterparts at the Washington Post. Edward Cody reported, also on the 11th, that the commission had acted &quot;after strong prodding from the Reagan administration.&quot; And Dan Podesta, on April 2, quoted Dennis Goodman, a State Department official and member of the U.S. delegation in Geneva, who said the outcome was &quot;not like winning with a slam-dunk in the last two seconds of the game, but nevertheless, it's pure gold.&quot; A second unnamed U.S. official was quoted by Mr. Podesta as saying the significant opposition from most Latin American countries to the original U.S. resolution may have been due to &quot;fear of retaliation from Cuba through terrorism or support for guerrillas.&quot;    Actually, the outcome in Geneva was not particularly favorable to the U.S. and was reported as such not only in Cuba but in a number of Western European accounts as well. Despite Mr. Lewis's assertion, the original U.S. resolution did not &quot;merely&quot; express concern about &quot;allegations&quot; of human-rights abuses. It accused Cuba of a wide range of abuses and said there were &quot;continuing and widespread violations of a broad range of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms including the execution of persons charged with political offenses.&quot; Also, passage would have placed Cuba under agenda item 12 for next year's conference, a spot reserved for the worst human-rights violators such as Chile and El Salvador.    The resolution that did pass was introduced by Colombia, and was worked out with Mexico, Argentina and Peru, with the cooperation of the Cuban delegation. After the resolution was introduced, the commission accepted an invitation from Fidel Castro to send six delegates to Cuba and assess the human-rights situation. The U.S., which had insisted throughout the session that it would accept no changes from its original resolution, accepted the Latin proposal, though it does not make Cuba a formal agenda item next year nor does it contain any allegations of human-rights violations in Cuba.    The U.S. delegation was headed by Cuban-born Armando Valladares, a somewhat unusual choice to represent the U.S., since he lives in Spain and speaks almost no English. He was a controversial representative, a fact receiving a good deal of attention in European accounts, particularly in a story by Noll Scott in the Guardian, a British newspaper, of March 2. Mr. Valladares served 22 years in a Cuban jail. Havana claims, with a fair amount of documentary evidence, that he worked for the police under the Battista dictatorship and went to prison for being part of a plot to set off bombs around Havana.    At all events, Mr. Valladares's tactics did not advance the U.S. position. He tried to strong-arm Western European countries with hints of economic sanctions; insulted the Colombian ambassador, and accused Argentina of supporting communism by voting to renew the mandate of the special rapporteur on human-rights violations in Chile. Mr. Valladares opposed his position, apparently believing that Gen. Augusto Pinochet's Chile has no particularly irksome problems in this area.    Mr. Valladares's positions on a number of other issues demonstrated the traditional American double standard on human rights. For example, in addition to the Chilean vote mentioned above, the U.S. delegation opposed sanctions against South Africa, was against the continued status of a special investigator in El Salvador, and would not condemn Israel's treatment of the Palestinians. All of these resolutions passed by large majorities. But, as in the case of Mr. Valladares's amateurish diplomacy, these votes were not deemed of significant import to be reported by the Post or the Times, though they greatly undermined U.S. credibility in Geneva. Finally, though Cuba does not have a perfect record on human rights, Mr. Valladares had no credible evidence to back up his portrait of Cuba as a totalitarian dungeon.    Despite the conjectures of the U.S. delegation, loyally reflected by Mr. Podesta, the Latin Americans did not support Cuba out of fear of &quot;terrorism.&quot; A better explanation for their position is resentment at U.S. intervention in the region and a preference for Latin solutions to the area's problems, as exemplified in the Contadora process and the Arias peace plan. The past few years have seen a significant warming of relations between Cuba and the countries of Latin America, with holdouts confined to such U.S. client states as El Salvador and Honduras, and democratic stalwarts such as Chile and Paraguay.    According to Deborah Evenson, an associate professor of law at DePaul University who provided some of the information noted above, &quot;the Latin countries were jubilant the night of the Cuba compromise and there was a big celebration at the Cuban mission.&quot; If Messrs. Lewis, Cody or Podesta were there to observe a mood so contradictory to their dispatches, they have certainly kept quiet about it.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>