<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): International---No Computers Need Apply:Automation Stops at the Office Door in Japan,Where Pencil, Paper and Calculator Still Rule---By Stephen Kreider Yoder</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANCOMPUTERS (EDP)OFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF) </IN><TEXT>   CONSIDER JAPAN'S reputation for technological prowess. Then consider this Tokyo office:    A haze of cigarette smoke hangs above discolored metal desks overflowing with stacks of paper. More paper fills file folders lining the window sills; below, the scuffed linoleum floor is crisscrossed with wires leading to dial telephones. The only trappings of the 1980s are a few microcomputers, and they're wedged in a corner between banks of gray steel lockers.    Welcome to the financial-district offices of Hitachi Credit Corp. Here, one floor above a sparkling new Hitachi computer showroom, clerks pencil numbers into ledger books and finger abacuses. Decidedly low-tech, this workplace is a carbon copy of offices throughout Japan, where computers are relegated to corners and the spreadsheet of choice is pencil, paper and pocket calculator.    When it comes to offices, Japan has changed little since American occupation forces introduced gray metal office furniture in 1945. In the decades that followed, Japanese industry spent billions modernizing factories and streamlining assembly plants. More recently, the country's research labs and engineering departments have been brought to state-of-the-art readiness. Offices, however, have been left behind: In the U.S., the ratio of office workers to desktop computers is 7 to 1, while in Japan, it's 26 to 1.    &quot;Japan's office productivity is low -- it's a cultural problem&quot; that the country is just beginning to recognize, says Yotaro Suzuki, vice president of the Japan Institute of Office Automation. &quot;Long ago we looked to American factories as our first models, and now we're looking at American offices. By comparison, ours are atrocious.&quot;    Ironies abound. While robots build cars in Nissan Motor Co.'s gleaming plants, for instance, officials back at headquarters produce market projections with pencil and paper. Nissan planners spend weeks working overtime to recalculate by hand the company's production costs every time the dollar weakens significantly against the yen.    Until the 1980s, office automation in Japan was blocked by an obstacle unknown in the West: a language based on characters rather than letters.    While Westerners have had access to the typewriter since the 19th century, the Japanese have had to write by hand through most of the 20th century. This situation began to change only in 1979 with the appearance of computers that could handle the thousands of ideograms used in written Japanese. (Slow, cumbersome Japanese-language printing machines have been around for some time, but only well-trained stenographers can operate them.)    And automation isn't always well-received when it does reach the Japanese office. White-collar workers confess to unease when confronted with a keyboard; so common is this reaction that the Japanese have come up with a term to describe it: &quot;keyboard allergy.&quot;    Mistrust of the new machines also occurred in the West, but the source of the antipathy here may be more deeply rooted. The handwritten word is important to the Japanese. (This explains the success of one aspect of office automation here: Japan has one facsimile machine for every 34 workers, or roughly three times the number found in the average U.S. office.)    One recent study found that a typical Tokyo office worker has personal files that, when stacked on the floor, would make a shoulder-high pile. Workers hoard paper because they &quot;are uneasy unless they have their own private copy of every document,&quot; says Ken Sukegawa, a Mitsubishi Electric Corp. manager.    Inefficient offices clearly haven't stunted Japan's economic growth. In fact, an argument can be made that American industry would do well to concentrate more on factory production and less on high-tech office furniture. But in Japan, economists warn that the nation's offices must adopt computer technology more quickly if Japan is to wean its economy from a heavy dependence on manufacturing jobs. Translating the competitiveness of its factories to its offices, they say, is crucial to building strength in the service industries that Japan sees as its future.    &quot;Until now all we had to do was to make things well and they sold themselves,&quot; says Taketsuyo Kanada, manager of Nissan Motor's information systems department. But from now on, he says, office automation &quot;will become the biggest weapon. . . . Corporate survival will depend on how fast we can get information to and from the individual worker. We can't survive if we just go on as we have.&quot;    True, not everyone believes Japan lags badly in office automation. &quot;Japan is quickly adopting the keyboard culture,&quot; says Mikio Suzuki, an NEC Corp. product-planning manager. Last year, for instance, the Japanese bought 2.2 million word processors, compared with 996,000 in 1985 and 33,000 in 1982. Mr. Suzuki concedes that offices still don't use computers as well as the West. But he says, &quot;Look how far we've come.&quot;    Those growth figures are deceptive, though. Word processors are used in Japan mostly as typewriters are used in the U.S., and many personal computers gather dust for lack of good software, managers say. Moreover, few of the new word processors and personal computers that companies are buying can communicate with each other or with the mainframe computers in data-processing departments.    The main office of Nikko Research Center Ltd., for instance, has seven different types of computers and terminals, each performing a different task. They can't communicate with each other. And like most Tokyo securities firms, Nikko has no software to perform such tasks as earnings projections. The pocket calculator is the norm.    Japan's touted management system, capable of working wonders in the factory, also may stymie efforts to automate the office. Japanese corporations foster generalists whose responsibilities aren't clear and thus are hard to computerize. Departments make decisions based on word-of-mouth consensus-building rather than on open analysis of a problem. By the time an idea has bubbled its way to upper management on paper, or in a computer memory, the decision has been made.    Also, Japan's bottom-to-top method of management, in which low-level managers decide on office procedures and policies, makes it hard for top executives to mandate computer use. &quot;There are these fundamental inefficiencies in the way we work,&quot; says Mitsubishi's Mr. Sukegawa. &quot;The Japanese office will never be as well-automated as America's.&quot;    One answer may be computers that adapt to Japanese ways. A University of Tokyo professor, Ken Sakamura, has devised a new computer-design standard that, he says, is &quot;Japanese-user friendly.&quot; More than 40 Japanese companies have joined his effort, called the Tron project.    A few Japanese companies are moving aggressively to automate offices. Toshiba Corp. wired its new headquarters with optical fibers so its computers can communicate more easily. Honda Motor Co. requires all employees to learn to use computers and has succeeded in cutting office paper to nearly half the national average.    Nissan this year began a program to create a companywide computer filing system that matches those found in U.S. offices. The program calls for managers to use such microcomputer programs as the Japanese version of Lotus 1-2-3 for decision making. To coax workers out of their keyboard allergy, the company requires them to use a computer when seeking reimbursement for expenses.    And then there is MITI, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, where bureaucrats map out Japan's high-tech strategies in dingy surroundings. From behind the stacks of papers on his gray metal desk, Shinichi Tsuji oversees MITI's efforts to create a blueprint of the ideal Japanese office. He talks of paperless offices with partitions, a computer on each desk and carpet on the floor. &quot;But Japanese workers are too docile to demand it,&quot; he says. &quot;It will take a generation.&quot;    ---   Mr. Yoder is a staff reporter in the Tokyo bureau of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>