<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880620-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Anti-Smog Bill Won't Clear the Air </HL><AUTHOR> Michael H. Levin </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ENV </IN><G> CNG EPA </G><TEXT>   This country's longest-running environmental debate concerns how the Clean Air Act should be strengthened to remove unhealthful levels of urban smog. Six months after the last set of deadlines, six years after the act expired, 18 years after the first national effort to eliminate this pollution problem, more than 100 million Americans remain exposed to excessive smog levels and some 70 urban areas lack adequate plans to reduce them.    This session's leading anti-smog bill, sponsored by Sen. George Mitchell (D., Maine) and due before the full Senate this summer, contains some good ideas for breaking this deadlock. It recognizes for the first time that identical deadlines may not be appropriate for a Los Angeles and a Dubuque; that steady overall emission reductions rather than great leaps downward will be the norm; and that emissions fees, sanctions, and further national requirements should all play a part. But its overwhelming thrust is more of the same -- more deadlines, more rules, more mandatory emission controls for more types of vehicles, processes or plants. The bill has been attacked by business for Draconian overkill and characterized by Lee Thomas, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, as &quot;inconsistent, impractical and unreasonable.&quot;    Both points have force. Congress's Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) reported in April that outside Los Angeles relatively few Americans are exposed to unhealthful smog for more than four hours a year, and that the annual cost of only those Mitchell measures it could analyze would top $10 billion in current dollars by century's end. EPA believes as much as $3 billion of this may be wasted in cities that could attain the health standard for smog without such measures.    Yet such points seem politically irrelevant in an election year when legislators are eager to salute the environment.    More important is the fact that stiffer rules simply won't work. Traditional regulation worked well when the problem was emissions from cars or large plants that could be subjected to standard engineering solutions; those gains must be preserved and extended. But cars and factories are generally well-controlled now. Remaining smog -- like groundwater contamination, farm runoff and household waste -- is a prime example of what most environmental efforts will face five years from now: problems that collide with the inherent limits of traditional regulation and cannot be solved by direct commands alone.    What are these limits?    --Poor agency knowledge about ways to control the thousands of processes or products that contribute the bulk of remaining emissions. Of the 17 new national rules required by the Mitchell bill, OTA could identify potential technology for less than half.    --Inability to respond to rapid change through cumbersome process-by-process rulemaking. Such rules are set by identifying available emission-control techniques, estimating the reductions they'll yield at &quot;model plants,&quot; and fixing emission levels that most plants installing these controls will meet. The process is tedious and fraught with argument over cost curves or technical feasibility. Going full-throttle to meet past congressional schedules, the EPA has never completed more than a fraction of such &quot;technology based&quot; rules on time.    --Lack of incentives for pollution sources to do or disclose more than the minimum required, since these acts make them targets for further regulation. The result: Information vital for further cleanup shrinks to a trickle, while environmental productivity stagnates.    --Soaring control costs, estimated by EPA at more than $40 billion annually to meet current air and water laws alone, with an added $30 billion a year for hazardous waste compliance. These costs represent a half-trillion-dollar investment in pollution control since 1970. The more costly such control becomes, the more disruption, delay and resistance it entails.    --The pollution problems of the 1990s, caused either by large, already controlled sources, or by small dispersed sources of local contamination such as delivery trucks and consumer products. Commuter traffic and small sources dominate the smog problem, and emissions from tiny establishments -- dry cleaners, print shops, furniture refinishers, auto-repair shops -- will grow 25% over the next 15 years. Their successful control involves major long-term changes in land use, life styles and local economies. They are not very amenable to traditional regulation.    OTA's conclusions confirm this stark fact. Even with all the vehicle, job-shop and product-control measures prescribed by the Mitchell bill, few cities with smog levels more than a tiny amount above the health standard will attain that standard this century. If all factories in Los Angeles or Houston disappeared tomorrow, those areas would still not attain the standard.    Indeed, air-tight controls could undermine support for environmental protection by demanding practical impossibilities of a regulated community that is no longer them -- impersonal conglomerates -- but us: citizens and small businesses.    EPA's use of positive incentives to address such limits has increased steadily through four administrations; it's now using or seriously exploring these methods in more than a dozen programs to protect air, water or land. Smog will not be erased solely by incentives either. But a genuine effort to secure clean air would use incentives to better match private interests with environmental goals, encouraging reductions in advance of specific rules. Unlike the Mitchell bill, it would employ percentage reductions affirmatively -- at reasonable levels and across whole cities, not as progressively impossible step-downs at each source. It would allow use of flexible emissions trades to meet all such requirements, taking full advantage of differences in control costs ranging from $500 per ton (fuel volatility) to $39,000 per ton (methanol conversion).    This better Clean Air Act would impose substantial fees per ton of excess emissions -- but, like a new California agreement, would use such fees to buy extra reductions, enhancing cleanups the way secondary markets for mortgage paper facilitate home loans. It would set binding goals but let market forces determine the location and method of individual reductions in the same way that the EPA used tradeable phasedown permits to secure dramatic reductions of lead in gasoline. It also would allow rules mandating &quot;life style&quot; changes to be implemented seasonally rather than year-round, to cut summer smog episodes as Los Angeles did during the Olympics.    Finally, that act would streamline procedures, allowing states to set or change individual permits without needless EPA review; EPA to issue targeted requirements rather than comprehensive federal cleanup plans that destroy local initiatives; and enforcement to become both swifter and fairer through self-executing citations reviewed by expert administrative law judges, not cases pursued in hundreds of backlogged district courts.    The Mitchell anti-smog bill bears no resemblance to this model, though some other congressional proposals come closer. But whether or not the bill becomes law, one thing seems plain. America cannot solve such environmental challenges solely by tightening regulation to restrict new jobs in New York and personal cars in California. That is a prescription for environmental and economic gridlock.    ---   Mr. Levin, a lawyer in Washington, directed EPA's regulatory reform and regulatory innovations staffs from November 1979 to April 1988. </TEXT></DOC>