<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0040 </DOCNO><HL> Telephone Switch:ITT-CGE Deal ShowsThe Change BuffetingTelecommunications---High Randamp;D Costs, DifficultyOf Winning Orders LeadsTo Cross-Border Linkups---The Talks That Led to Alcatel---By Janet GuyonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ITT EUROPTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS, Belgium  </DATELINE><TEXT>   During ITT Corp.'s heyday as a multinational conglomerate, Chairman Harold Geneen traveled here monthly to review the sprawling European telecommunications operation that was the heart of his company. Summoned to a conference room in the ITT tower, managers from a dozen countries were grilled on their contribution to profits.    Last December, a more humble ITT quietly closed the books on Mr. Geneen's European empire. From Brussels headquarters, facsimile machines transmitted documents confirming the sale of the entire operation.    The action transferred all of ITT's telecommunications-equipment manufacturing business to a joint venture controlled by France's state-owned Cie. Generale d'Electricite, known as CGE. One of the most Byzantine deals in recent years, it took 21 months to negotiate and involved hundreds of individual businesses on two continents. The initial agreement was an inch thick.    The result is Alcatel N.V., a company with the size to challenge American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. as the world's dominant telecommunications concern. The sale left ITT, after 60 years as a telecommunications giant, a shrunken company whose biggest line of business is insurance.    Though the deal stunned the business world, it was a natural result of forces that are reshaping the $85 billion industry of supplying telephone and office-automation equipment. Once a cozy, regulated business in which suppliers got orders by providing local employment, telecommunications has sharpened into a world-wide struggle between giants for market share. The conflicting pressures of deregulation, nationalism and the high cost of keeping up technologically seem to promise more such large-scale consolidations.    Development cost is the biggest factor. Telephone switches now are sophisticated computers that can do such things as trace calls and provide access to data bases, and developing a new switch may cost over $1 billion. To afford such outlays, it is often said, a company needs at least 10% of the world market.    But trying to increase market share in telecommunications can be a frustrating experience. For one thing, switches must be adapted for local markets. Worse, considerations of politics and national interest weigh heavily in many government purchase decisions. A prime example, at least according to the losers, was the French choice last week of Sweden's Telefon AB L.M. Ericsson, rather than ATandamp;T or Germany's Siemens AG, to be the foreign partner of a minority player in France, Cie. Generale des Constructions Telephoniques.    Meantime, suppliers rarely can promise local employment to clinch contracts; with the new technology, the manufacturers no longer need a factory full of local assembly workers.    Both the heavy development costs and the difficulty of winning business across national borders create pressure for international combines like the ITT-CGE arrangement. Thus, ATandamp;T has teamed with N.V. Philips of the Netherlands; GTE Corp. and Siemens have linked up; and Britain's Plessey Co. PLC has bought U.S.-based Stromberg-Carlson. Canada's Northern Telecom Ltd., Sweden's Ericsson and Britain's General Electric Co. PLC also are believed to have their eyes out for partners.    But putting together such an international joint venture can itself be a daunting task, as seen by details of the extended negotiations between ITT and CGE. With many experts predicting that the number of major telecommunications concerns will be whittled down to three to five by the century's end, a retracing of the ITT-CGE maneuvering gives an idea of what may lie in store for some.    The first approach, in April 1985, came from CGE's then-chairman, Georges Pebereau. An ambitious man with a penchant for deal-making, he was intent on turning CGE into one of the giants. He knew he needed help, and among the many executives in many nations he went to see was Rand V. Araskog, ITT's chairman and chief executive, at ITT headquarters in New York.    &quot;I explained that in the future it would be impossible for ITT and CGE to finance all developments&quot; individually, Mr. Pebereau recalls. &quot;If we wanted to compete with ATandamp;T, Siemens and the rest, it was necessary to find a way of cooperation between CGE and ITT or between CGE and someone else.&quot; He began with a modest proposal for CGE to help an ITT German unit gain a foothold in France. Meanwhile, he was making a similar pitch to ATandamp;T.    For Mr. Araskog, the visit was fortunate as well as fortuitous. His costly efforts to turn ITT into a high-technology company and a force in U.S. telecommunications weren't going well. Under him, ITT was selling subsidiaries and had cut its dividend, largely to raise money to pour into telecommunications. But the company's System 12 telephone switch was having problems in the U.S., merger talks with Sperry Corp. (now part of Unisys Corp.) had failed, and the ITT stock price had plunged. Some angry shareholders were touring Europe looking for a buyer for the telecommunications business.    In that field, the nationalistic hurdles all producers face were always particularly high for ITT. European regulators regarded it as an American competitor because of its U.S. base and many American shareholders -- yet the U.S. government thought of it as European because most of its telecommunications operations were abroad. As a result, &quot;U.S. trade representatives were running around Europe trying to open doors for U.S. product {from ATandamp;T} when ITT was already the largest supplier,&quot; Mr. Araskog says with exasperation.    So he was interested in Mr. Pebereau's ideas, and before long the talks focused on some kind of joint venture. It was a compelling idea to both sides, because they operated in different countries; thus, each company held for the other the temptation of entree to a new market.    &quot;Market share in this business means rather more than in most,&quot; notes Michel David-Weill, a director of ITT and managing partner of its investment adviser, Lazard Freres andamp; Co. Once won, &quot;it's close to a water concession.&quot;    But Mr. Araskog was having a market-share problem right at home, with the U.S. introduction of the System 12. Its complex design made it terribly difficult to write software for. The customers produced by U.S. telephone deregulation, the regional Bell companies, couldn't wait for ITT to solve its problems. In February 1986 ITT formally gave up on the switch in America. Suddenly, selling the entire telecommunications business became a real possibility.    The switch's failure in America, however, only underscored CGE's uncertainty about ITT technology. Talks slowed to a crawl while the French company began a full technical evaluation. &quot;It was absolutely essential that we have our own judgment on System 12,&quot; says Francois de Laage de Meux, a CGE executive. &quot;If we had a negative report . . . we would have hesitated much more&quot; to link up with ITT. Nine months after his first approach, Mr. Pebereau saw only a 10% chance of an agreement with ITT, say officials of his investment adviser, Morgan Stanley andamp; Co.    So Mr. Araskog made an approach of his own, to Canada's Northern Telecom. Like CGE, it needed to expand beyond its main market, in this case North America. In February 1986, Mr. Araskog went to see Northern's chairman, Edmund Fitzgerald, at a home he keeps in Tennessee.    Mr. Fitzgerald wanted to deal, and some top ITT executives thought the Canadian company a better bet than CGE. As a result, a sharp battle erupted within ITT. Robert H. Smith, then a senior vice president (he has since taken early retirement), argued for Northern because of its strong position in the important North American market. And some ITT officials deeply mistrusted the French government because of a previous scrape with it. CGCT, the company Paris awarded to Ericsson last week, was an ITT subsidiary until 1982, when the French nationalized it for what ITT considered woefully inadequate compensation.    But Mr. Araskog remained intrigued by Mr. Pebereau's grand plan. He feared that if Northern bought the European properties it would quickly encounter the same problem that ITT had: being seen as an outsider. &quot;The only way we could have done this deal with Northern is if they had walked in the door, laid a check on the desk, and we cashed it before they got out the door,&quot; he says now.    The CGE talks began to focus on a two-step transaction in which the French company would buy all the more than 200 ITT telecommunications manufacturing businesses and merge them with its own, after which ITT would take back a minority position. But things moved slowly.    One reason was language. Mr. Araskog doesn't speak French, and Mr. Pebereau, while expressive in English, isn't comfortable with it. &quot;You'd end up with two people who went to a meeting for an hour and wouldn't agree on what was said,&quot; says one participant, who also suspects that &quot;language problems&quot; were sometimes used tactically.    Price was another hitch, and on this issue the going got rough. ITT valued its businesses at more than $2.4 billion. Since CGE didn't have that kind of money, Mr. Pebereau visited Spanish, English, West German and Belgian firms to form a consortium of buyers -- which he would control.    Further complicating matters, ITT, to preserve the confidentiality of the talks (code-named Roxanne), wouldn't let CGE visit the facilities for which it was supposed to pay billions.    At this point, Mr. Araskog had another meeting with Northern Telecom's Mr. Fitzgerald, and the French got wind of it. At last the price issue began to yield. Morgan Stanley advised CGE to give up trying to place values on each of the properties and simply negotiate over how much total cash ITT had to have.    Then Mr. Araskog stalled the discussions. ITT was holding its annual meeting, and an interruption enabled the company to avoid disclosing the talks. In any case, says Mr. David-Weill, there were so many rumors of telecommunications deals going around that all of them tended to be discounted. One consultant kept a chart of all the supposed courtships; it looked like a huge spider web.    Finally, CGE and ITT settled on the outlines of an agreement (and ITT acceded to a CGE demand that it negotiate with no one else). CGE and its potential partners would assume $800 million of ITT debt and pay over $1 billion in cash. Though CGE would manage Alcatel, Mr. Araskog would head its supervisory board. ITT directors approved the arrangement at a meeting in Oslo, Norway, in mid-June.    That vote was a victory for the ITT chairman. &quot;If the board had favored Northern Telecom, Araskog would have lost face,&quot; one participant in the talks says.    Both sides celebrated with a champagne party. But it proved premature. While Mr. Araskog was vacationing in Italy, the agreement collapsed in a dispute over details.    The ITT chairman flew to Paris to help patch it together. One thing the parties agreed to was that the joint venture couldn't sell any major ITT properties for four years. There was another champagne party. And then, in late June, the press got word of the agreement.    But still there were problems. Mr. Araskog thought the French government had been kept informed all along, and he expected it to rubber-stamp the agreement. Instead, it said it needed a month to think it over. Furious, the ITT boss told the French to make up their minds by July 4 or the deal was off.    By now, however, word of the agreement had sent ITT's stock soaring -- by some $1.2 billion in total market valuation. Mr. Araskog grew concerned about shareholder suits should he lose the deal by hurrying the French. He reluctantly gave them their month to ponder it.    Amid this tension, the ITT chairman flew to New York for the July 4 rededication of the Statue of Liberty, also attended by French President Francois Mitterrand and his wife. Mrs. Mitterrand, coming upon Mr. Araskog while aboard publisher Malcolm Forbes's yacht, inquired, &quot;Is our marriage complete?&quot; A nervous Mr. Araskog merely replied, &quot;Almost.&quot;    But before the month was out a new peril struck: Mr. Pebereau, the architect of the CGE expansion plan, suddenly lost his job. He was a Socialist appointee, and a conservative French government had come in. It replaced him as CGE chairman with Pierre Suard, and Mr. Suard changed CGE's negotiating team. Though Mr. Suard had been involved in the negotiations, he didn't share Mr. Pebereau's grand vision of controlling the European market through a consortium.    After much nail-biting at ITT, both Mr. Suard and the French government gave the go-ahead. But Mr. Suard largely dismantled the investment consortium, taking only two partners, Societe Generale de Belgique and Credit Lyonnais.    The transaction left ITT with 20% of its equity still in telecommunications, but mainly as a passive investor. Besides its biggest business, insurance, it owns Sheraton hotels and is involved in automotive supplies and finance.    The company bears increasingly little resemblance to the conglomerate Mr. Geneen built, which sold everything from bread to semiconductors. Not counting the CGE deal, ITT has sold 104 companies, raising $4.03 billion, since Mr. Araskog became chief executive in 1979. Much of that money went into the now-scuttled telecommunications business.    Though Wall Street welcomed the CGE deal, some critics have seen the transfer of the costly System 12, a project Mr. Araskog championed, as a personal failure. He bristles at such suggestions. &quot;For crying out loud,&quot; he says, &quot;System 12 wasn't the end of my life. ITT is in the business of pursuing effective businesses.&quot;    Now, the $1.3 billion in cash gained gives him time to decide where to take the company next. Directors have authorized a stock buyback, and some acquisitions seem likely -- in the industrial, defense or financial field, according to Mr. David-Weill. But ITT still wants to sell at least one business, its Rayonier forest-products operation.    Mr. Geneen, now 77 years old, has apparently never said one public word about the dismantling of his empire. He didn't return several calls seeking an interview. Mr. Araskog says he called his erstwhile mentor in July to tell him of the CGE agreement and Mr. Geneen was &quot;very laudatory.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>