<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Suspicious Trading: New Evidence Links Arbitrager at Goldman To Insider Stock Deals --- Details of 3 Instances Show Ties of Robert Freeman To Kidder's Martin Siegel --- 'Your Bunny Has Good Nose' </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GE </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   When insider-trading charges against Robert M. Freeman, the prominent head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., were dismissed last year, government prosecutors vowed to seek a new indictment and described the earlier charges as &quot;merely the tip of an iceberg.&quot;    Today, precisely a year after Mr. Freeman's dramatic and highly publicized arrest, new charges still haven't been brought, but they are expected to be filed soon. Goldman has repeatedly and vigorously asserted Mr. Freeman's innocence, saying he was exonerated by the firm's own internal investigation. The firm, which yesterday reiterated that it doesn't believe Mr. Freeman has done anything illegal, continues to pay his legal fees and partnership income. He retains his title as head of arbitrage.    However, information gathered by this newspaper suggests an outline of at least part of the &quot;iceberg.&quot;    The information was obtained from a wide variety of sources, including interviews with principal participants in many of the takeover transactions under scrutiny, examination of numerous documents, including material from phone and stock-trading records, and interviews with some people familiar with testimony taken in the case.    In the period involved, between April 1984 and mid-1986, the information indicates:   --On certain occasions, Mr. Freeman traded profitably in his own private account before initiating trades through Goldman's arbitrage account.    --In at least two takeover situations involving Storer Communications Inc. and St. Regis Corp., Mr. Freeman bought stock in his personal account before the public announcements of takeovers or leveraged buy-out bids, and he traded in Beatrice Cos. before a significant news announcement.    --On at least two occasions, Mr. Freeman traded in his own account in stocks of companies that were potential targets of Goldman clients when trading by Goldman employees in those stocks was prohibited by the firm.    --Mr. Freeman and Kidder Peabody andamp; Co. investment banker Martin Siegel, who has admitted insider-trading, were in nearly daily phone contact throughout the period. At least 240 calls were made.    --Oakley, Sutton Investment Corp., an arbitrage and investment firm based in Princeton, N.J., is being investigated because of its close ties to Goldman Sachs and for possible insider trading.    --The government is also scrutinizing the roles of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts Inc., the country's most prominent and successful leveraged buy-out firm, and Coniston Partners, known for daring corporate raids and proxy fights, which had important roles in several transactions under investigation.    What constitutes criminal insider trading is subject to interpretation by the courts. However, courts have ruled that in certain circumstances trading in stocks based on misappropriated confidential information is securities fraud.    The government, of course, has access to far more data and testimony, and its case may turn out to be far different from anything uncovered by this newspaper. Evidence of possible wrongdoing notwithstanding, the government may decide that no criminal charges are warranted. Defense lawyers may eventually reveal facts that put these matters in an innocent light.    Both Goldman Sachs and lawyers for Mr. Freeman issued statements yesterday. Jed S. Rakoff, a lawyer for Mr. Siegel, declined comment. Bruce Baird, assistant U.S. attorney handling the case, also declined comment.    Since the highly publicized arrests last Feb. 12 of Mr. Freeman and two former Kidder arbitragers, Richard Wigton and Timothy Tabor, government prosecutors have faced criticism that they acted hastily without adequate evidence. Messrs. Freeman and Wigton were arrested publicly in their offices, and Mr. Wigton was taken out in handcuffs. Mr. Tabor spent a night in federal prison.    The next day, Mr. Siegel pleaded guilty to two felonies (although he hasn't yet been sentenced). He admitted that he exchanged inside information with Ivan F. Boesky, the former arbitrager who stunned Wall Street by pleading guilty last year to a felony and cooperating with the government. At Mr. Siegel's plea hearing, the government disclosed that Mr. Siegel had implicated Mr. Freeman, with whom he allegedly exchanged inside information, and Messrs. Tabor and Wigton, his colleagues in Kidder's arbitrage department.    Three months later, the government asked that all charges against the three be dropped because it needed more time to pursue its investigation.    &quot;The injustice and wrongfulness of the arrests was demonstrated by the inaccuracy of the original complaint and the government's need to dismiss the indictment,&quot; says Stanley S. Arkin, the lawyer for Mr. Wigton. &quot;The year of limbo and uncertainty for these men amplifies the unnecessary pain and hurt visited on them by the government.&quot;    Howard Wilson, a spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office, said, &quot;We can't comment on ongoing investigations. The most I can say is that this is a very complex and time-consuming investigation, and the government has needed more time.&quot;    The government named only three stocks last year in connection with the Freeman case: Unocal Corp. and Continental Group Inc., about which Mr. Freeman allegedly leaked inside information to Mr. Siegel, and Storer Communications, about which Mr. Siegel allegedly leaked information to Mr. Freeman. Last year, this newspaper reported that trading in eight other stocks was also under investigation, all of them involved in takeovers or leveraged buy-outs.    But a detailed look at just three of the situations under investigation, St. Regis, Storer, and Beatrice Cos., indicates the complexity of the case and provides an outline of the kind of charges Mr. Freeman might face if the government brings a new and expanded indictment against the three men.    St. Regis Corp.    St. Regis, once one of the country's foremost paper and forest-products companies, was acquired in 1984 by Champion International Corp. Champion first expressed interest in St. Regis in February; it went so far as to consult its investment bankers at Goldman about buying St. Regis to rescue it from a potential takeover threat from Sir James Goldsmith, the Anglo-French raider. Goldman placed St. Regis on its &quot;gray list,&quot; its confidential list of companies in which Goldman employees are prohibited from trading. But Champion decided it wasn't interested, and Goldman removed St. Regis from its gray list in May.    St. Regis bought back Sir James's stake and began a series of defensive maneuvers. But St. Regis was soon in play again, as the Bass Brothers, the Texas investors, disclosed a large stake and publisher Rupert Murdoch threatened a takeover bid. On July 13, Willard J. Overlock Jr., the head of mergers and acquisitions at Goldman, ordered that St. Regis again be graylisted as a result of renewed interest by Champion in acquiring the company as a white knight. At the time, Goldman's arbitrage department was among those informed of gray-listed stocks, according to people familiar with the firm's workings.    On July 16, Champion and St. Regis agreed to confidentiality and signed a &quot;standstill agreement&quot; barring further purchases in contemplation of a merger accord. Despite the earlier gray listing of St. Regis at Goldman, on July 17 Mr. Freeman, trading for his own account, bought 15,000 St. Regis shares.    Within the next few days, Kidder began buying St. Regis shares at an accelerating rate. On July 30, the day St. Regis and Champion secretly agreed to merge, Kidder bought more than 100,000 shares. Profits from that trading were disgorged by Kidder last year when it settled, without admitting or denying guilt, Securities and Exchange Commission allegations. The SEC charged that Mr. Siegel initiated the trading after receiving confidential information about the expected Champion bid. Mr. Siegel has said that Mr. Freeman gave him inside information about St. Regis.    Champion's agreement to acquire St. Regis for $55.50 a share was announced Aug. 1. Kidder earned enormous profits. It isn't known what Mr. Freeman did with his stake, but he would have gained about $150,000 on his 15,000-share purchase if he tendered the stock to Champion.    At the same time Kidder was accumulating St. Regis, Goldman was loading up on another stock, SCA Services Inc. SCA Services was acquired by Genstar Corp. and Waste Management Inc., a deal announced Aug. 13, 1984. Goldman began acquiring its stake in June; its purchases accelerated in July and August. For example, on July 17, the day Mr. Freeman bought St. Regis for his own account, Goldman bought more than 45,000 SCA shares. On Aug. 9, the same day Waste Management submitted a highly confidential bid of $25.50 a share for SCA, Goldman bought 52,000 SCA shares.    Mr. Siegel was SCA Services' investment banker, which may explain Goldman's uncanny timing. He has said that he leaked information about SCA to Mr. Freeman in return for confidential information about St. Regis. SCA was eventually acquired for $28.50 a share, earning Goldman huge profits on its stake.    Many of the Kidder and Goldman transactions closely track confidential developments in the course of negotiations. Bad news (such as published antitrust fears about the Waste Management-SCA deal that caused SCA's stock price to drop) appears to have had no effect on the trading by Kidder and Goldman.    Even so, there are major unanswered questions that underscore the complexity of the investigation. For example, Mr. Boesky, who is about to begin serving a three-year prison sentence for his role in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal, accumulated huge stakes in both St. Regis and SCA even sooner than Kidder or Goldman, earning millions of dollars in profits. People familiar with the investigation confirm that Mr. Boesky had inside information in both cases, but they insist that neither Mr. Siegel nor Mr. Freeman was his source, raising the questions of who the source was and how this person gained access to the information.    Storer Communications   Storer Communications, a Miami-based cable-television concern, was acquired in 1985 by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts in a $2.51 billion leveraged buy-out. The deal began when Coniston Partners acquired a stake in Storer and announced a proxy fight to take control of the company, which turned into a long, bitter and complicated takeover struggle. Mr. Siegel has said that he leaked to Mr. Freeman confidential information about the deal during the time when Mr. Siegel was an adviser to Kohlberg Kravis.    Both Goldman and Mr. Freeman traded heavily in Storer after Kohlberg entered the fray in April 1985. But Mr. Freeman's personal trading in Storer began well before Mr. Siegel had access to any inside information.    Coniston began quietly buying stock in Storer months before it disclosed in a March 19 SEC filing that Coniston controlled a 5.29% stake in Storer and planned a proxy fight to force the company to liquidate. According to people familiar with the Storer transaction, Coniston disguised its accumulation by having an unrelated investment firm, Oakley Sutton Investment, buy the stock. Mr. Freeman began buying Storer stock and options in his personal trading account more than two weeks before the March 19 Coniston filing. On Feb. 25, he bought 5,000 Storer shares. Oakley Sutton also traded options for the firm's own account before the filing. Mr. Freeman's purchases closely follow the purchases by Coniston through Oakley Sutton that led to the SEC filing in March (Such disclosures are required to be made no more than 10 days after an acquirer gains 5% or more of a company's stock.) A disclosure of this kind often triggers a rise in the stock price, and on the day Coniston filed, Storer shares jumped $5.75, to $70.125.    It isn't known how Mr. Freeman made such timely purchases. However, both Goldman and Mr. Freeman have close links to Oakley Sutton. Like many smaller firms, Oakley Sutton clears its stock trades through a larger securities firm with the necessary securities-processing ability. In this case, Oakley Sutton's firm was Goldman.    In addition, Mr. Freeman was a Dartmouth College classmate and close friend of James Sutton Regan. Mr. Regan and Edward Oakley Thorp founded Oakley Sutton and are the managing general partners of its main investment unit, Princeton/Newport Partners. Mr. Freeman and Mr. Regan talked on the phone many times before Coniston's filing and during the battle for control of Storer.    Although Mr. Freeman bought Storer stock and options for his personal account prior to the Coniston announcement, Goldman's arbitrage department, which he headed, didn't begin buying Storer shares until the March 19 disclosure. Goldman and its employees were free to buy the stock because the firm didn't represent Storer, Coniston or any other potential bidders. But on May 1, Goldman put Storer on its gray list because the firm thought it had a possible buyer for Storer: Neil Bluhm, the president of JMB Realty Corp., a major real-estate syndicator.    Mr. Bluhm confirms that he talked with Goldman about buying Storer. Goldman kept the stock on its gray list for nearly two weeks. Despite the gray listing, Mr. Freeman continued to trade in Storer options in his personal account during that period. Mr. Bluhm says he lost interest in Storer a few days after he first contacted Goldman. Goldman removed Storer from its gray list on May 13.    After Mr. Siegel became involved in the deal and Kohlberg made its first bid for Storer on April 19, Goldman, Mr. Freeman, and Oakley Sutton (for its own account) all traded heavily in Storer stock and options. There was also trading in personal accounts by three other employees of Goldman's arbitrage department. For example, on April 23, the day after Storer rejected Kohlberg's bid but was secretly planning to negotiate a higher bid, Goldman, Mr. Freeman and Oakley Sutton all bought Storer shares and options. On April 25, Storer announced that it had accepted a sweetened Kohlberg offer.    During this period, Mr. Siegel and Mr. Freeman spoke on the phone frequently, often several times a day. Mr. Siegel has said he gave Mr. Freeman inside information about Kohlberg's plans for Storer.    Among the unanswered questions about the Storer deal is whether anyone at Oakley Sutton gave Mr. Freeman information about Coniston's trading or received information that Mr. Freeman had allegedly gleaned from Mr. Siegel. Ted Wells, attorney for Mr. Regan, and Paul Grand, lawyer for Charles Zarzecki, a Princeton/Newport general partner, said, &quot;Oakley Sutton emphatically denies any wrongdoing with respect to transactions in Storer securities, all of which were open and aboveboard, with all appropriate consents. It remains proud of its longstanding relationship with Goldman Sachs and Bob Freeman.&quot; (As reported, in an apparently unrelated tax fraud investigation, Princeton/Newport's office was searched in December by federal agents.)    Coniston declined comment.    Beatrice Cos.    On Oct. 16, 1985, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. offered nearly $5 billion for Beatrice, the food and consumer-products giant, in the largest leveraged buy-out ever. Earlier that month, Beatrice stock was gray-listed at Goldman after Beatrice officials talked to Goldman about the possibility of their own leveraged buy-out. Nothing developed, and Beatrice was removed from the list soon after Kohlberg Kravis's bid was announced.    Mr. Siegel was retained by Kohlberg Kravis as one of its investment bankers. On Oct. 20, Beatrice's board met and rejected the Kohlberg Kravis offer as inadequate. On Oct. 29, Kohlberg raised its bid from $45 a share to $47.    Both Goldman and Mr. Freeman began heavy buying of Beatrice shares and options after announcement of the bid. But on Oct. 31 there were press reports that Kohlberg wouldn't increase its offer and rumors that the bid might be withdrawn. That day Mr. Freeman called Henry Kravis, a principal of Kohlberg Kravis. According to notes of the conversation, Mr. Kravis gave Mr. Freeman some highly sensitive information: &quot;Everything is fine. We're not pulling out.&quot; Within minutes of that call, Mr. Freeman bought 10,000 shares of Beatrice for his own account at $41.50 a share. A Kohlberg spokesman said that if the conversation between Mr. Kravis and Mr. Freeman took place, there would have been nothing improper about it. The spokesman declined further comment about the Beatrice transaction.    On Nov. 12, Kohlberg increased its bid to $50 in cash and securities, and three days later, on Nov. 15, Beatrice publicly accepted the latest offer.    On Dec. 20, Kohlberg announced it had lined up the financing for the Beatrice acquisition, and the market showed much confidence that the deal would be completed. But privately, Kohlberg was developing reservations about the price, and on Jan. 6, the firm became convinced that the deal couldn't be financed at the planned $50-$43 in cash and $7 in securities with a guaranteed value -- according to those familiar with the transaction.    The next day, apparently unaware of the latest developments, Mr. Freeman continued buying Beatrice shares for his own account. Then, between 1 p.m. and about 2:30 p.m., Mr. Freeman and Mr. Siegel spoke on the phone at least three times. Minutes after the last call, Mr. Freeman sold the 22,500 Beatrice shares he had bought earlier that day. He also called Mr. Kravis; it isn't known what, if anything, Mr. Kravis said. But when the market opened the next morning, Mr. Freeman closed out his entire Beatrice option position.    That same morning, Goldman sold large amounts of Beatrice stock at about $47 a share as well as options. In a call from Mr. Freeman to Mr. Siegel, Mr. Siegel told Mr. Freeman: &quot;Your bunny has a good nose.&quot;    At approximately 1:45 p.m. wire services announced that Kohlberg had cut its bid for Beatrice to $40 in cash and $10 in securities. Beatrice shares immediately plunged, closing at $43.25, down $4 for the day. This trading by Mr. Freeman and Goldman safeguarded their Beatrice profits. Mr. Siegel has said that he leaked news of the cut in Kohlberg's bid to Mr. Freeman. </TEXT></DOC>