<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861223-0129 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:'Engines of Change' at the Smithsonian---By Bob Davis</HL><DD> 12/23/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Washington  </DATELINE><TEXT>   So much fuss is made these days over young inventors who perfect computer widgets in their basements that progress has become synonymous with individual genius.    &quot;Engines of Change,&quot; a $1 million exhibition of early American technology at the National Museum of American History, challenges that view of technology. Laborers, businessmen and bureaucrats deserve as much credit for advances as inventors, the show contends. &quot;This show is intended to be ambiguous, to add complexity, to suggest that nothing is simple,&quot; says Roger Kennedy, the museum's director.    That may not sound like much of a reason to bundle up the kids and head to the museum. But the show, which opened last month, succeeds almost despite its high-seriousness because it's fun watching huge, chugging machines and because the show tells some great stories about some little-known Americans.    There is Samuel Slater, an English immigrant, who saves a bankrupt textile mill in Providence, R.I., by improving the mill's machinery. There is John Howe, a doctor in a New York poor house, who invents a pin-making machine after watching his patients make pins by hand. And there are the nameless slaves whose toil powers the Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond, Va.    &quot;Engines of Change&quot; is the second in a series of elaborate exhibitions that the American history museum, a part of the Smithsonian Institution, hopes will change the way Americans think about their country. It views society from a &quot;people's history&quot; vantage, weighing the contributions of ordinary citizens as heavily as those of the rich and famous.    The problem with people's history, of course, is deciding who the &quot;people&quot; are and what the people want to see. If numbers of visitors are the key, the people want more shows like the &quot;First Ladies' Gowns,&quot; a collection of dresses worn by Nancy, Betty, Jackie and their less-famous predecessors. But Mr. Kennedy clearly has other people in mind; many of the museum's recent shows dedicate themselves to telling the stories of once-despised minorities.    That is a laudable goal, but difficult to pull off. Museums depend on real-life objects, and most things worth preserving cost a lot of money and are owned by the rich. So the museum relies on symbols and placards dense with text to tell the story of ordinary citizens. For instance, a new exhibition on post-Revolutionary America shows off a plain-looking cradle, wedding dress and tombstone as symbols of changes in life. Most museum-goers, one suspects, scoot by such symbols to peek at Jackie Kennedy's gown.    Nevertheless, the museum presses on with people's history. In February, it plans &quot;Field to Factory,&quot; an exhibition on black migration north before World War II. Then in October, the museum will celebrate the constitution's bicentennial with &quot;With Liberty and Justice for All,&quot; a look at one of the most horrific examples of constitutional excess, the mass imprisonment of Japanese-Americans during World War II. That show won't open for another year, but it already has become so controversial that the museum has composed a form letter to answer complaints.    Until 1980, when the museum shucked its original name, the National Museum of History and Technology, the museum simply tried to show how machines worked. Even now, the older technology exhibits largely consist of row after row of giant machines, including some that the museum has hooked up so they hum and wheeze as they once did.    These collections of iron have some plusses: They give a feel for the massiveness of American industry -- something akin to driving the length of Kansas and realizing the bounty of the land. Machines also have a special call on a child's imagination. At a 20-year-old exhibit on power machines, my toddler son -- a 2 1/2-foot power machine himself -- stood transfixed before a steam engine the size of a cow. Previously only Bert and Ernie worked such magic.    &quot;Engines of Change&quot; tries to mix the wonder of machinery with the serious business of figuring out how technology changes society. The show opens with some of the American hits of the 1851 Crystal Palace exhibition in London -- the first world's fair. There is a Chickering piano, a sewing machine, a Colt revolver and a statue of a nude woman. The statue purportedly symbolizes mass-produced art, but both in London of a century ago and Washington of today, it also teases passers-by into the exhibition.    The rest of &quot;Engines of Change&quot; explains how Americans got so good so fast at technology. Government plays an important role. Dr. Howe, the pin magnate, for instance, didn't make any money until he successfully lobbied Congress to slash the import tariff on brass wire. With his cost of raw materials reduced, Dr. Howe became the richest man in Derby, Conn., in 1860, having increased his net worth nearly tenfold in a decade.    Business also drives technology. In 1790, one display explains, Moses Brown, a Rhode Island merchant, hired Mr. Slater, the English mill manager, to turn around his bankrupt spinning mill. Mr. Slater did so by rebuilding and improving the machines and by hiring children to run them.    Working people, the show makes clear, bear the brunt of technological change. A plaster statue of a sad-eyed mill girl stands between two spinning frames in one display. The text in front tells how the Lowell, Mass., mill girls published a literary journal and struck to cut their 14-hour work days. Another display shows that mill girls earned $2 a week, plus board -- about one-third the rate slave owners were paid for their male slaves who worked in the iron industry.    The show uses machines in eccentric ways. The John Bull, an 1831 New Jersey locomotive, polished, painted and seated on a section of an iron railroad bridge, is a symbol of American technology, but not the symbol you might imagine.    As the placards and a video-tape display at the show explain, the John Bull was made in England, disassembled for transport and then reassembled by American craftsmen who had never seen a train before. The point is that in the early 19th century the U.S., like Japan after World War II, rarely innovated in technology, but rather became expert at adapting a foreign power's inventiveness.    Even the iron bridge has an offbeat story to tell. American managers didn't turn to iron because of its technical superiority, but because rival canal workers were burning down wooden railroad bridges. They rightly feared the railroad would soon steal their jobs.    A few exhibits show machines in action, although they aren't as faithful to the reality of factory life as Steven Lubar, the show's earnest curator, might like. &quot;We should fill the air with cotton dust, but we can't do that,&quot; he sighs. &quot;We should make the noise here so loud that you can't hear anything else, but we can't do that either.&quot;    Nevertheless, the machines are crowd pleasers -- and balance the grimness of some of the other exhibits. A 20-foot-tall Harlan andamp; Hollingsworth steam engine chugs hypnotically. Lathes, planers, milling machines and grinders from a New England tool shop spin and hum in a symphony of industry.    The museum currently plans to run the machine shop only on the weekends, but it compensates with a touch-screen video display system in front of the machines. A passerby can point to a picture of the machine on the screen and the system answers with a video recording of the machine at work. That's an example of the museum using technology to tell technology's tale -- one of the many fine touches that make the show so appealing.    ---   Mr. Davis is a reporter in the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>