<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880609-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A U.S. JUDGE ORDERED separate trials for the four Iran-Contra defendants.    In making the ruling, Judge Gerhard Gesell said North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim should be allowed to use one another's immunized congressional testimony to defend against the charges. The four have been accused of conspiring to defraud the government by diverting proceeds from U.S. arms sales to Iran to Nicaragua's rebels. The ruling could jeopardize the criminal-conspiracy theory underpinning the charges, and means that any trials would extend well into 1989.    The federal judge in Washington gave independent counsel Walsh until tomorrow to decide whether to proceed first with a trial of North or Poindexter.    ---   THE SOVIET UNION PROPOSED a permanent moratorium on nuclear testing.    Speaking before a special U.N. General Assembly session on disarmament, Foreign Minister Shevardnadze said Moscow would observe the test ban if the U.S. also agreed. He also invited international representatives to witness the destruction of Soviet intermediate-range missiles. In Europe, U.S. authorities displayed some of the weapons to be destroyed under the superpower INF treaty, including one of America's most secret, high-technology weapons systems, called Snakebite.    Secretary of State Shultz held talks with officials in Madrid about a new bilateral defense agreement that provides for U.S. military facilities in Spain.    ---   Dukakis said neither Jackson nor anyone else &quot;is due an offer&quot; to join him on the Democratic ticket and said he would search &quot;far and wide&quot; for a running mate. Dukakis made his remarks following Tuesday's nomination-clinching four-state primary sweep, which set up a contest with Republican Bush in the November presidential election.    ---   The Senate approved legislation that would provide extra coverage for Medicare beneficiaries who suffer &quot;catastrophic&quot; illnesses. Reagan is expected to sign the bill. Separately, the House voted to kill a plan, proposed by Democratic Rep. Pepper of Florida, for long-term home health care for the nation's elderly.    ---   Jordan's King Hussein criticized Washington's peace initiative for the Mideast and unconditionally supported the PLO. The monarch, speaking at a summit of Arab officials in Algiers, asked the leaders of oil-rich Arab states to help pay for the Palestinians' continuing struggle against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.    An Arab died after being beaten by Israeli troops, a hospital official in Gaza City said. At least four other Palestinians were injured during sporadic clashes in the occupied territories. The army reportedly also escalated protection for Israeli-appointed Arab officials after Tuesday's stabbing of a 74-year-old West Bank mayor.    ---   Blacks in South Africa ended a three-day general strike, and anti-apartheid activists called the nationwide protest a victory over emergency restrictions imposed by the Pretoria government. At least 10 people were killed, 38 injured and 36 arrested during the strike. Employers estimated that the protest cost the economy about $250 million.    Pretoria said it was calling up army reserves because Cuban troops in Angola had moved within 12 miles of the border with South African-ruled Namibia. Foreign Minister Pik Botha said Havana's military advances were undermining prospects of ending Angola's 13-year-old civil war.    ---   The Veterans Administration said there is a &quot;growing scientific consensus&quot; that cancer and other illnesses among Vietnam veterans can't be blamed conclusively on exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange. The VA findings were disclosed at a House panel's hearings on compensation based on veterans' exposure to the chemical.    ---   Beijing University students abandoned plans to stage a large political demonstration at Tiananmen Square. Government warnings and a show of police strength prompted the move. The planned protest would have been the first overt political protest since 1986, when students nationwide rallied for democracy.    ---   Philippine President Aquino is expected to sign tomorrow a compromise land-redistribution package approved by Manila's Congress. About 6.9 million acres of agricultural land is to be transferred to more than two million farmers over 10 years. The cost is estimated at about $2.4 billion during the first five years.    ---   South Korea began deploying 60,000 police officers in an attempt to stop students from marching Friday to the border with North Korea to demand reunification. Rallies were held at many schools nationwide in support of the planned march, and riot police clashed with thousands of rock-throwing students at more than 10 campuses. </TEXT></DOC>