<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0118 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   On the morning of Dec. 30 last year, Samuel D. Rosen reached his boiling point. &quot;You are an obnoxious little twit!&quot; the New York lawyer snapped at an adversary during a deposition. &quot;Keep your mouth shut!&quot;    Irritated at the questions his client was being asked, Mr. Rosen went on to accuse the other lawyer of making &quot;idiotic statements.&quot; At one point, he even sarcastically offered to pay for a remedial course in trial preparation for his adversary.    Mr. Rosen's tantrum cost him dearly. William J. Thomashower, his adversary, complained about the outburst to Milton Pollack, the federal judge assigned to the case. In a rare public scolding, Judge Pollack rebuked Mr. Rosen for &quot;contentious, abusive, obstructive, scurrilous and insulting conduct.&quot; He also ordered him to pay $693 in deposition costs and a fine of $250. (Mr. Rosen says he plans to appeal.)    The rules of the game are fast changing for lawyers. These days, they run a greater risk of being slapped with heavy fines by judges who deem their cases frivolous or their tactics offensive. They are being sued by clients for losing cases -- or even for failing to win big enough victories. And they are being reprimanded and disbarred in record numbers as states move to crack down on the crooked and inept among them.    &quot;There's been a stunning increase in actions against lawyers in the last 10 years,&quot; says Stephen Gillers, a law professor at New York University. &quot;Lawyers, once untouchable, are now among the most vulnerable of all professionals.&quot;    The turnaround is having a profound impact on lawyers. Some say they are shying away from innovative trial tactics and new legal theories out of fear of incurring the wrath of judges, clients or the lawyers for the other side. Others say they are more reluctant to take cases in which there is a high probability of being sued or sanctioned, such as personal-injury claims or cutting-edge civil-rights matters.    In more innocent times, the legal profession was an exclusive club that looked after its own. Squabbles were settled behind the courthouse. Lawyerly misdeeds were hushed up or hurriedly resolved. Clients would have thought it scandalous to sue the family -- or company -- lawyer.    But in the wake of the past decade's litigation explosion, law has become a big, fiercely competitive business. Cases are more complex and often riskier. Judges are harried by crushing caseloads. Clients are more sophisticated and demandingand more vocal. From 1984 to 1985, the last years for which figures are available, complaints against lawyers rose 35%, according to the American Bar Association.    Procedural changes are a major factor behind the courts' stepped-up pressure on errant lawyers. Four years ago the federal judiciary, alarmed at the increase in frivolous suits and the use of heavy-handed trial tactics, especially in high-stakes litigation, gave its judges broader power to reprimand or fine offending lawyers.    Before the changes, lawyers accused of filing frivolous lawsuits could claim they had relied on a client's word and didn't know the case had no merit. Now, under the amended Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, a lawyer can be sanctioned for bringing cases to court without first investigating whether the charges have merit. Lawyers can also be sanctioned for filing motions or cases designed to harass an opponent, increase the cost of litigation or delay justice. (Judges in state courts don't have the same broad authority to punish misconduct, but they are pressing for more sanctioning power in several states, including New York and Texas.)    Federal judges haven't hesitated to use their new weapons. Since the revisions were adopted, sanctions against lawyers have been ordered in more than 500 cases, according to a recent study by Fordham University Law School. In the 50 years previous, they'd been ordered in only 11.    Moreover, ethics specialists think these cases represent just a fraction of the actual number. To spare a lawyer complete humiliation, judges typically don't file formal sanction orders with the court.    &quot;You wouldn't believe the rudeness, the contentiousness, the coercive pleadings, the ugly claims thrown at people just to force them into settlements,&quot; says Judge Pollack, who nevertheless concedes that professional sympathies sometimes make it hard for judges to take action against lawyers. However, he has no doubt that reprimands are effective: &quot;The ignominy of sanctions makes lawyers think twice before they try that stuff again.&quot;    Nor is public scolding the only option. The high cost of displeasing a judge has been made abundantly clear lately in a series of spectacular fines.    In a ruling last year that stunned the legal community, Joseph L. Alioto, a former mayor of San Francisco and a highly regarded lawyer, was fined $294,141. He had filed a class action in 1984 on behalf of Glendale, Calif.-based Unioil Corp. and its shareholders after the company's stock suffered a steep decline. The suit charged that several big brokerage firms had conspired to drive down the stock's price.    Things began to unravel soon after the case was filed, when one of the individual shareholders named in the suit directly contradicted the complaint's allegations. Mr. Alioto immediately moved to dismiss the suit, but the brokerage firms wanted more. They asked the court for sanctions against Unioil, Mr. Alioto and his co-counsel, Donald A. Barton of Los Angeles. The court, besides fining Mr. Alioto, ordered the group to pay the defendants' legal fees of $165,774. Mr. Alioto hopes to appeal.    Even more worrisome to the bar than courtroom sanctions, however, is the wave of legal-malpractice cases that has swept the country. &quot;The irony of it is that lawyers brought it on themselves,&quot; says Mr. Gillers, the law professor. Million-dollar verdicts in medical-malpractice cases, he argues, convinced the public that there was money to be made in suing other professionals, lawyers included.    Nowadays, lawyers are being sued by plaintiffs who feel that their cases were bungled or that they were given lousy advice. They also are being sued for technical foul-ups and clerical errors, such as missing a court deadline or misstating the value of an item in a divorce settlement. Wall Street law firms, because of their wealth, have become especially attractive targets.    Such actions were practically unheard of 15 years ago. But this year, one in 17 lawyers will be charged with malpractice, according to studies by William L. Tabac, a law professor at Cleveland State University. In litigious Southern California, by his estimate, the rate is one in six.    One development in legal-malpractice law has the profession particularly alarmed: Courts are beginning to hold lawyers liable for injuries to individuals or companies they never represented.    In an early precedent for such cases, the parents of a baby born with brain damage filed suit against the hospital in which the child had been delivered, alleging professional negligence. In mid-trial, the parents accepted $185,000 to settle the case after the hospital's lawyer told their lawyer that the hospital had an insurance policy that would pay up to $200,000.    What the hospital's lawyer didn't tell the parents at the time was that the hospital had an additional policy for $1 million. When the parents learned of the other policy, they filed suit in New York federal court against the hospital's lawyer and others for fraud. The parents won an award of $680,000 at trial in 1978. The case was later settled for an undisclosed amount.    Legal-malpractice cases are apt to be settled quickly, as lawyers fear damage to their reputations and practices if word of a dispute leaks out. But even these encounters are getting more costly. Lawyers Mutual Insurance Co. in San Francisco estimates that the average cost of defending and, if necessary, settling claims rose to $12,000 last year from $7,700 in 1977.    Some of the loftiest names in the profession have been dragged into court to face malpractice charges. Venable, Baetjer andamp; Howard, a 187-lawyer old-line firm in Baltimore, agreed in May to pay $27 million to settle a malpractice case stemming from the collapse of Maryland's savings-and-loan industry in 1985. The state had sued the firm for allegedly having several thrifts as clients while it was representing a state agency that regulated thrifts, without disclosing the conflict of interest to the state. A Venable spokesman says that, while the firm doesn't believe it caused any harm, it agreed to settle because fighting the litigation &quot;would drain the firm's energy, resources and time.&quot;    Lawyers who err risk losing not only their malpractice insurance but also their licenses. Prompted by public outcry, many states are cracking down on the profession. The most common offenses are stealing from clients and neglect of cases.    New Jersey has taken the toughest stance. Two years ago, it began randomly auditing the financial records of its 30,000 lawyers to check for misuse of clients' funds. Five full-time investigators pore over the books of about 350 firms a year. Last year, the state disbarred or temporarily suspended six lawyers for violations.    In California, disbarments and forced resignations from the bar are at an alltime high. Last year, 22 of that state's lawyers were stripped of their licenses, up from 18 in 1985, and 69 were forced out of practice under threat of disbarment, compared with 34 the year before. Says a spokeswoman for the state bar, &quot;Discipline is the bar's top priority.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>