<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881102-0131 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Sad Stories About the Shah's Last Days </HL><AUTHOR> Zalmay Khalilzad </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   William Shawcross sets out to tell one sad story, but -- almost inadvertently -- ends up telling two. Overtly, &quot;The Shah's Last Ride: The Fate of an Ally&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 463 pages, $19.95) is about Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, who fled Iran in January 1979 -- not knowing what had gone wrong, dying of cancer, rejected by all of his former friends except Egypt's Anwar Sadat and facing an agonizing death.    But there is another sad story here that Mr. Shawcross does not directly focus on, the Carter administration's dealings with Iran and the shah. Initially baffled by developments in Iran and divided on what to do, the Carter administration put pragmatic considerations above loyalty to an old ally, and even then it could not achieve its objectives.    As history, the &quot;Shah's Last Ride&quot; does not make a significant contribution, since both stories have been well known for some time. However, Mr. Shawcross does provide graphic and, at times, gripping details of the shah's journeys in exile, his illness and the bizarre interplay of the eight separate groups of doctors who looked after him -- and more than that, after their own egos and reputations.    Mr. Shawcross restates what we have known, that the massive uprising in 1978-79 in Iran came as a surprise to the shah and to President Carter. Neither man knew what was happening and neither took it seriously at first. As the opposition grew in strength in Iran, the shah was reluctant to use massive force to put it down. He was unnerved by the popular revolt, and looked to the U.S. for guidance.    The Carter administration was late in paying attention to Iran; when it did it believed the shah was strong enough to overcome his opponents. Then it sent incoherent signals. Ultimately it accommodated the opposition. And it convinced itself that the opposition to the shah was dominated by Westernized moderates whom the U.S. could work with. Mr. Carter's biggest problem throughout this period was one of analysis and judgement. He did not understand that Iran was going through a phase of increased radicalization and anti-Americanism. His expectation that he could work with the shah's opponents at that time was an illusion.    Mr. Shawcross correctly states that the shah himself was ambivalent about leaving Iran. Ultimately, because of U.S. encouragement, he did. However, instead of coming to the U.S. directly -- which he could have done at that time -- he lingered on in Egypt and Morocco. Mr. Carter was delighted by the delay. He believed that the shah's stay in Morocco, an Islamic country, and King Hassan's supposed influence as a Moslem leader would &quot;keep Khomeini under control.&quot; Of course it did not.    After Ayatollah Khomeini's takeover of Iran, Mr. Carter became unwilling to give refuge to the shah, though King Hassan wanted the shah out of his country. Mr. Carter hoped to establish friendly ties with the new Iranian leaders. He knew that Ayatollah Khomeini and his followers hated the shah. Giving the shah refuge would put U.S. relations with Iran and the Americans living in Iran at risk.    Finally, under increased pressure and because of the shah's deteriorating medical condition, Mr. Carter granted him permission to enter the U.S. -- on Oct. 23, 1979. Twelve days later the American Embassy in Tehran was overrun by radical students and American diplomats were taken hostage.    Mr. Shawcross accepts the widespread consensus that these two events were causally connected. And indeed, Mr. Carter's decision to admit the shah triggered the attack. But the real causes can be found in the internal power struggle in Iran. Attacking the U.S. Embassy had become part of revolutionary Iran's domestic convulsion even before the shah was admitted to the U.S. Radicals had entered the U.S. Embassy in February 1979. They left only after the more pragmatic members of the Bazargan government intervened and saved the American diplomats. However, by the beginning of November the pragmatists had been weakened and radical fundamentalists had gained the upper hand. The Bazargan government had resigned.    After the hostages were taken, Mr. Carter wanted the shah to leave the U.S. as soon as possible. He expected the hostages would be freed after the shah's departure. The shah was hustled out of the U.S., but the hostages were not freed.    To get the shah out of the U.S., the Carter administration persuaded Panama's Gen. Omar Torrijos to give him refuge. Iran was seeking the extradition of the shah and radical clerics, and some Palestinian organizations were declaring that death squads had been dispatched to kill or kidnap him.    Mr. Torrijos was suffering from delusions of grandeur. He began talking to the Iranians about possible extradition of the shah. He told them that the shah would be taken into custody, if the hostages were turned over to the Iranian government by the radical students. He believed that such a step would help President Carter in his re-election campaign.    Not surprisingly, the shah became suspicious. The fear of possibly being turned over to the Iranian regime, combined with conflicts between his foreign and Panamanian doctors about who should operate on him, led the shah to decide that he must leave Panama. Only Egypt's Sadat was willing to receive him. Mr. Carter did not want him back in the U.S. He feared that the release of the hostages might be delayed. The shah arrived in Egypt in March and died there in July. Still the American hostages were not released. Their release came only after the radicals had consolidated their position in Iran and Mr. Carter had been defeated in the U.S. elections.    Mr. Shawcross has written a well-researched and compelling story about the last days of the shah. He has been successful in using his personal contacts with members of the shah's family and immediate staff that go back to the 1960s to dig out details and to produce a unique account. On the Carter administration's handling of the shah and Iran, Mr. Shawcross suspends judgment and merely identifies the contradictory forces at work within and on it. This weakens the book's value and makes it less interesting.    ---   Mr. Khalilzad, formerly a member of the Policy Planning Staff at the State Department, is a senior political scientist at the Rand Corp. </TEXT></DOC>