<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SEOUL IS EXPECTED to unveil concessions aimed at quelling protests.    The package, to be announced as early as today by Roh Tae Woo, the nominee to succeed South Korea's President Chun next February, is aimed at placating the growing, and increasingly violent, anti-government opposition, with which it held talks. But many officials and diplomats believe a limited offer is unlikely to defuse the crisis. Meanwhile, riot police showed new aggression in breaking up demonstrations. A policeman was killed Friday, the first death in recent unrest.    The State Department is dispatching its top Asia policy maker to South Korea to assess the situation there and press for direct presidential elections.    ---   The Navy said it will relieve three senior officers of command of the USS Stark and courts-martial may follow. The action followed an inquiry into last month's Iraqi missile attack on the frigate. Meanwhile, Iraq Saturday struck a Maltese oil tanker, its first Persian Gulf shipping attack since the Stark incident.    ---   Soviets voted for local councils and district judges in an election officially described as an experiment in democracy. In selected districts, voters were offered a choice of candidates. In others, candidates were selected through pre-poll discussion. More than two million candidates were running for seats on about 50,000 councils.    ---   The Supreme Court struck down a Louisiana law that requires the teaching of creationism along with evolution, and some lawyers say the justices, in their 7-2 vote, sent a message that will slow efforts of the religious right to change public school curricula.    ---   Testimony written in November for then-CIA director Casey and reviewed by the White House was so misleading about the U.S. role in Iran arms sales that Abraham Sofaer, the State Department's legal adviser, said he would resign if it were given to Congress, sources familiar with the Iran-Contra inquiry said.    Lt. Col. North told an unnamed U.S. military official that he considered assassinating Iranian leaders, according to an article published in U.S. News andamp; World Report. Meanwhile, congressional panels continued to negotiate with North for an accord that would guarantee his testimony.    ---   Vatican bank officials had &quot;full knowledge&quot; they were helping Banco Ambrosiano Chairman Calvi perform transactions that could harm the Milan bank, according to an arrest warrant for three top Vatican bank officials. The private Milan bank, once Italy's largest, collapsed in 1982, leaving $1.3 billion in debts.    ---   AIDS testing should be mandatory only for prison inmates, prospective immigrants, the military and blood and organ donors, a draft report by the American Medical Association's trustees said. The testing called for in the report, which is likely to form the core of the group's AIDS policy, is more limited than that urged by Reagan.    ---   Syria rejected an offer by kidnappers to release the son of Lebanon's defense minister in return for keeping Charles Glass, a U.S. journalist. Pro-Syrian militiamen searched Beirut for the hostages, and Ali Osseiran, the defense minister, said he expected them to be released. He also blamed a pro-Iranian group for the kidnappings.    ---   The U.S. is expected to appeal to allies this week for a tighter ban on the exporting of strategic goods to the Soviet bloc. Congress has threatened to impose sanctions on Japanese and Norwegian companies that violated the ban by shipping tools for making ultraquiet submarine propellers to the Soviets.    ---   A Palau court canceled a referendum set for tomorrow in which residents of the Pacific island group were to decide a new political status for the U.S. territory. The court said some voting sites were illegal.    ---   Pindling won an unprecedented sixth five-year term as prime minister of the Bahamas, despite pre-election charges of drug corruption in his government. Final election results, held up by ballot shortages in some areas, confirmed the victory of Pindling's Progressive Liberal Party, which won 31 of 49 seats in the House of Assembly.    ---   Panama's National Assembly approved an indefinite extension of a presidential decree declaring a state of emergency. The decree was issued to quell protests calling for the ouster of Gen. Noriega, the country's military chief and de facto leader, after a former military official accused him of involvement in corruption and murder.    ---   A Barcelona march drew tens of thousands of people protesting violence by a Basque group seeking independence from Spain. A bomb that Madrid officials said was placed by the separatists exploded at a supermarket Friday, killing 17 people.    ---   Gen. Rogers said he expects growing transatlantic friction, a cut in U.S. troops in Europe, and Soviet aggression against one of the allies to &quot;test&quot; the West's resolve in the years to come. After eight years as NATO commander, he was rejected by the White House for another two-year term and departs Friday.    ---   Manila said men riding in a car tossed grenades and opened fire on the Philippine Commission on Elections, the fourth bombing in the capital in a week. Police also hunted suspects in the bombing of a police station in Cebu, a city southeast of Manila, in which one person was killed Saturday.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir charged that Pope John Paul II has legitimized Nazi war crimes by agreeing to meet with Austrian President Waldheim, accused of helping deport Jews to death camps in World War II. The Vatican defended the meeting, set for Thursday, saying it was arranged only after requests by Waldheim.    ---   Warsaw apologized to Bonn for the shelling last week of a West German ship observing Warsaw Pact naval exercises in the Baltic Sea. Poland's government assured West Germany the incident was an accident.    ---   Scott Simpson won the U.S. Open golf tournament at the Olympic Club in San Francisco by one stroke.    ---   Died: Raymond C. Harwood, 81, former president of Harper andamp; Row Publishers Inc., Saturday, in Asheville, N.C., of a stroke. </TEXT></DOC>