<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880217-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH DEFEATED Dole and won New Hampshire's GOP primary election.    With nearly all the vote counted in the nation's first primary contest, the vice president was leading his main rival, Kansas Sen. Dole, 38% to 29%. On the Democratic side, Massachusetts Gov. Dukakis easily won with 36%, scoring the biggest margin of victory since John Kennedy in 1960. Missouri Rep. Gephardt beat Illinois Sen. Simon for second place, 20% to 17%. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey of voters showed that Reagan's popularity and conservative anti-tax sentiments were important factors in Bush's triumph.    Bush's comeback is expected to aid him in future primary contests and deprive Dole of the momentum he gained with last week's Iowa victory.    ---   The Soviet Union has begun dismantling and crating intermediate-range nuclear missiles stationed in East Germany, according to a report by East Berlin's official news agency. Reagan and Gorbachev signed a treaty last December to eliminate all medium-range superpower weapons, but the U.S. Senate has yet to ratify the pact.    ---   The Defense Department is poised to unveil a scaled-down budget plan for the coming fiscal year, but it has yet to meet Carlucci's demand for $256 billion in savings over the next four years. The military's proposed $299.5 billion budget for fiscal 1989 is $33 billion lower than what was planned a year ago.    ---   The Pentagon plans to continue cutting the size of its naval force in the Persian Gulf, but officials said that shouldn't be seen as a sign that the U.S. commitment to the region is waning. Separately, the U.S. will send a delegation to Baghdad to discuss several close encounters between Navy ships and Iraqi jets.    ---   The U.S. will allow expanded distribution and use of an AIDS-related drug under a new procedure designed to get experimental medicines to patients before testing is complete. HHS Secretary Bowen said that trimetrexate, developed by Warner-Lambert, can be given by doctors to patients with life-threatening conditions.    ---   A former Conrail engineer pleaded guilty to one count of manslaughter related to a January 1987 crash near Baltimore in which 16 people were killed and 170 others injured. The state agreed to drop 15 other manslaughter counts against Rick L. Gates, who was accused of driving three locomotives into an Amtrak passenger train.    ---   Israeli soldiers wounded three Arabs in the West Bank and Gaza Strip as Palestinian youths stoned cars and torched buses to enforce a general strike. In Washington, the White House reaffirmed its support for exchanging territory for peace as part of a Mideast agreement. Israeli Premier Shamir has expressed opposition to the plan.    The PLO said it would attack Israeli targets to avenge Sunday's killing of three guerrillas and Monday's bombing of a ship intended to carry Palestinian deportees to Israel. Both incidents occurred in Cyprus.    ---   Austrian Chancellor Vranitzky said Vienna's coalition government would remain in power despite differences over President Waldheim's insistence on staying in office. Meanwhile, Waldheim said he would sue a West German magazine that printed a document linking him to Nazi atrocities. The publication later retracted the story.    ---   Officials in Bangladesh launched an apparent new crackdown on anti-government forces before next month's parliamentary elections, arresting three top opposition politicians. The move followed opposition criticism of President Ershad's announcement Monday that the army would be used to provide security at polling places.    ---   A disgruntled ex-employee killed at least three people at a Silicon Valley company's offices, authorities said. As many as five others were wounded. The gunman, armed with at least two high-powered weapons, later surrendered to police at the ESL Corp. building in Sunnyvale, Calif.    ---   Supreme Court Justice Scalia expressed regrets over what he described as an absence of give and take at the high court's weekly conferences held to review appeals and vote on pending cases. Scalia made his remarks in an address at the George Washington University Law School.    ---   Britain's secretary to Ulster denied reports that London was about to make a controversial anti-terrorism act into a permanent law nationwide. The act, placed in effect in Northern Ireland in 1974, allows British police to hold guerrilla suspects without charge for as long as seven days.    ---   Nicaragua's government said the country's recent currency change had caught the Contra rebels unaware, leaving them outside the country with billions of old bank notes. Border posts were closed in an attempt to prevent the insurgents from smuggling into the country any old cordobas.    ---   Two bombs exploded in a Hindu temple in the Sri Lankan capital of Colombo, killing at least seven people and injuring 13 others, police said. In a separate incident, a popular actor involved in an attempt to resolve the nation's Tamil-Sinhalese ethnic feud was killed by two gunmen.    ---   A court in London sentenced an American member of the outlawed Irish Republican Army to life imprisonment for killing a British police officer 13 years ago. William Quinn, 40, who returned to the U.S. from Europe in 1981, was extradited to Britain on terrorism-related charges in 1986.    ---   Orlando Bosch was arrested by U.S. marshals in Miami on charges of violating parole in 1974 after his conviction stemming from an attack on a Polish ship. Bosch, an anti-Castro militant, was acquitted in Venezuela last year in the 1976 bombing of a Cuban jet, in which 73 people died.    ---   Philippine Defense chief Ramos said stricter laws are needed to combat the country's 19-year-old communist insurgency, but noted that a state of emergency wasn't needed. President Aquino was quoted as saying that recent suggestions to impose martial law were &quot;ridiculous.&quot;    ---   American figure skaters won a bronze medal in the Olympic pairs competition. The Soviets captured the gold and silver medals. The third-place finish by Jill Watson and Peter Oppegard gave the U.S. its first medal of the Winter Games in Calgary, Alberta.    ---   Died: Richard Feynman, 69, Nobel Prizewinning physicist, in Los Angeles, of complications resulting from abdominal cancer. </TEXT></DOC>