<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0127 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Marking to Market?</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CCIBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Citicorp's decision to reserve an additional $3 billion to cover potential losses on Third World debt was more or less taken in stride by the markets. Stocks fell on the news, then stabilized yesterday. But markets have in any event been in a bearish mood for several weeks.    The lack of impact is understandable enough, since despite the big numbers, the Citicorp decision is mostly symbolic. It isn't giving up its claim against Third World lenders, and those claims aren't particularly more or less likely to be repaid than they were last week. The bank's cash flow won't change much, but more of it will be called loan reserves instead of earnings. Maybe it will save on its corporate income tax, if it otherwise would owe any to begin with. The chief result is to drop some fictions the markets regularly see through anyway. Citicorp's own stock actually rose.    At least the Citicorp move reflects the real problem of the international economy. The U.S. trade deficit is not the mirror image of the Japanese trade surplus but the mirror image of Third World bankruptcy, which has wiped out a major market for U.S. exports. If Citicorp now is in a better position to write down and sell off its Third World debt, that doesn't necessarily mean Brazil, Mexico and Argentina will become more bankable, but it at least is the beginning of realism. And it's hard to believe that without some greater sense of realism it will ever be possible to make Latin debtor nations and their private industries truly bankable once more.    Now some of our friends think that isn't going to happen anyway, at least not in this generation, so the only useful policy is to keep rolling over the bad debt and, in effect, capitalizing some of the interest with the aid of multilateral-agency lending and other forms of public-sector support. Gradually, as the world economy grows, the bad debt will become smaller relative to the productive capacity of debtor nations. Indeed, something like that has been happening. Any subscriber to that thesis is likely to call Citicorp a maverick, risking the whole program because of the damage its unilateral moves inflict on creditor solidarity, such as it is.    That second thesis may well be right for all we know, although we have always felt that anyone answerable to depositors and shareholders might be likely to perform at least some hard analysis before suggesting that large write-downs were in the offing. Maybe what Citicorp has decided is that it can't do much worse dealing with the problem unilaterally.    If this is not exactly a vote of confidence in current economic management, neither is the bearish tone of the markets. The markets know that we are not currently on anything resembling a steady march toward a sounder international economy. That's probably why gold hit a four-year high of $480 in London yesterday. Clearly, what most concerns all of the markets is the threat of a renewed outbreak of dollar inflation, coupled with and related to the current tendency in Washington to seek protectionist solutions to problems real and imagined.    The stock market began heading south about the time the administration, not having noticed that Japanese capital is good for us, decided Fujitsu could not buy Fairchild Semiconductor from a French company. Then the House passed a trade bill containing the protectionist Gephardt amendment. A companion piece with mind-boggling import-damage subsidies is working its way through the Senate. And finally, the wholesale price index checked in last month with an annual rate of increase approaching 9%.    Meanwhile, there are strong political, business and, most incredibly, intellectual pressures to try to solve the trade deficit by thrashing the dollar. At the time of the Plaza agreement, the dollar was overvalued in terms of purchasing power parity, but by now it is clearly undervalued. A lower exchange rate will be reflected in higher inflation, not more exports. The economists who were talking about balancing trade with a 120-yen dollar are now talking 100 yen. If we ever reach 100, they will be talking 60. Yet it is not clear that even the U.S. Treasury has abandoned these notions.    In the midst of this confusion, Citicorp has decided to chart its own course. In a world where public policies were better ordered, it might have felt more comfortable staying on the team. That fact, it seems to us, calls for some serious contemplation by the people who make U.S. economic policy. </TEXT></DOC>