<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880307-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Line-Item Veto: Older Than Constitution </HL><AUTHOR> Forrest McDonald (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> ECO </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   Last December Stephen Glazier argued on this page that the Constitution authorizes the president to exercise a line-item veto. His ground was the language of Clause 3 of Article I, Section 7, which says that not only bills but &quot;every Order, Resolution or Vote&quot; must be presented for the president's signature or veto.    His case can be made stronger by reference to the Framers' understanding of the nature of the veto, as indicated by the examples that constituted their experience in the matter.    The veto power, as they knew it, was an outgrowth of what in English constitutional custom was known as the &quot;negative voice&quot; of the Crown. For several centuries the Crown as well as the House of Lords and the House of Commons had a vote on all proposed legislation. If that vote was nay, the legislation failed. After the Glorious Revolution of 1688 the negative voice fell into disuse in regard to acts of Parliament, but variants of it were employed in regard to colonial legislation. It was these variants, together with provisions of early state constitutions, that formed the experience of the Framers with what came to be called the veto. The crucial fact is that in each of the forms in which Americans had encountered it, the veto was of a &quot;line-item&quot; nature.    The American colonists' most extensive experience with a veto had been through the British government's power to review acts passed by the colonial legislatures. Between 1696 and 1776 the Board of Trade, in behalf of the Crown, reviewed 8,563 acts submitted by the mainland American colonies, and it disallowed 469 of them -- in whole or in part. In 1702 it declared its basic policy: Bills &quot;might be altered in any part thereof.&quot;    The Board of Trade exercised such a line-item veto many times, as for instance in regard to a Massachusetts revenue act of 1764, which it found objectionable &quot;in no other respect . . . than that it directs a double impost&quot; on certain goods. The board ordered the governor to require the legislature to amend &quot;this particular clause.&quot; In the meantime, the rest of the statute was allowed to stand.    The second-most-common experience of Americans with a veto arose from the negative voice vested in colonial governors. This was likewise exercised selectively. The best-known examples are those of the proprietary governors of Pennsylvania and Maryland, who repeatedly vetoed specific provisions of military appropriation bills during the French and Indian War of 1756-63. Governors in other colonies also exercised a selective veto, at least in regard to some kinds of legislation. In certain colonies, for example, the governors' councils were selected by legislative enactment; governors had and wielded the power to reject individual selections even though all the choices were presented together in the same bill.    The third area of experience the Framers had with the veto -- that at the state level after independence -- was more limited. The constitutions of only two states, Massachusetts and New York, provided for a veto.    The veto in Massachusetts, vested in the governor, was described as the power of &quot;revisal.&quot; The phraseology of the provision suggests that it could be exercised selectively, but we cannot be sure because no governor exercised it before 1787.    New York's constitution of 1777 vested the veto power in a Council of Revision, consisting of the governor, the chancellor and the judges of the State Supreme Court. The language is similar to that in the U.S. Constitution, which is to say that it is not explicit as to whether a line-item veto is contemplated. In its very first exercise of the veto, however, the Council of Revision established the precedent that it could reject particular clauses as well as whole bills. This took place on Feb. 3, 1778, when the council disapproved several clauses of a legislative enactment without rejecting the whole; subsequently the Legislature amended the offending clauses.    There is another, related consideration that argues for the constitutionality of the line-item veto. As every student of the Constitutional Convention is aware, several delegates, including James Madison, proposed that the veto power be lodged jointly in the president and the Supreme Court. Instead, of course, the president and the court were separately empowered to pass on congressional enactments, the one on grounds of policy as well as constitutionality, the other only on the ground of constitutionality. The Supreme Court, in Marbury v. Madison (1803), established the precedent that its power was of a line-item nature: It declared that Article 25 of the Judiciary Act of 1789, not the entire act, was unconstitutional.    But if the Constitution contemplates what we now call a line-item executive veto, one may ask, why has no president exercised the power? There are several reasons, the most important being that until quite recently, presidents have had at their disposal better means of rejecting individual items, especially with regard to appropriations -- better, that is, from the presidential point of view, because they were not subject to being overridden by a two-thirds vote in Congress.    The original understanding was that Congress would simply declare lump-sum ceilings on expenditures, based upon its estimates of revenues, and that the president and heads of the executive departments would decide how the funds would be spent. Such appropriations began in 1789 and continued to be the norm throughout the administrations of George Washington and John Adams.    Thomas Jefferson and his secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin, attempted to effect a shift toward itemized appropriations, but they were only partly successful. It proved impossible to itemize for the War and Navy departments, which accounted for more than half of all expenditures. Moreover, throughout the 19th century and into the 20th, administrators devised various methods (which the courts did not overrule) of spending in ways and for purposes other than those specified by Congress.    Most important, until 1974 presidents repeatedly &quot;impounded&quot; appropriations and refused to spend them; Congress had no recourse. Thus from the inauguration of Washington until Richard Nixon's last year in office, presidents employed several means to exercise what amounted to an absolute line-item veto. Then in 1974 Congress passed the Impoundment Control Act, curtailing what was by then the most effective of those means. It scarcely seems coincidental that runaway deficits began immediately afterward.    It is time for the president to bring the budget back under control, and a judicious exercise of the line-item veto might be a way to start. Both the original understanding of the Framers and 185 years of precedent suggest that he has the constitutional authority to do so.    ---   Mr. McDonald is a professor of history at the University of Alabama and author of &quot;Novus Ordo Seclorum: The Intellectual Origins of the Constitution&quot; (1985). A related editorial appears today {see: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Line-Item Veto: Older Than Constitution&quot; -- WSJ March 7}. </TEXT></DOC>