<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880421-0041 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE VOTED payments to thousands of Japanese-American ex-internees.    The legislation, approved 69-27, would give $1.2 billion and an apology to those Japanese-Americans who were put into detention camps during World War II. The measure provides payments of about $20,000 to each of the 62,000 survivors of the internment as victims of &quot;war hysteria.&quot; The House, which has passed a similar bill, is expected to accept the Senate version. The White House opposes the legislation.    The internment camps arose from a 1942 order that was issued by Franklin Roosevelt after U.S. officials questioned the loyalty of the Japanese-Americans.    ---   ARAB GUNMEN LEFT Algiers after ending their hijacking, sources said.    The Shiite Moslem hijackers, who had held 31 hostages aboard a Kuwaiti jetliner for more than two weeks, freed the captives after Algerian assurances of safe passage to either Beirut or Tehran, the sources said. The gunmen, who had demanded the release of 17 pro-Iranian terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait, had cited &quot;Islamic&quot; reasons for ending the hijacking. Algerian officials wouldn't discuss the settlement.    The aircraft, which traveled to Iran, Cyprus and Algeria, was commandeered April 5 on a flight to Kuwait from Bangkok. Two passengers were killed.    ---   Dukakis celebrated his victory in Tuesday's New York Democratic primary, but remained cautious, saying the nomination is &quot;visible, but not inevitable.&quot; He won 164 of the state's 255 delegates. Jackson captured 89 and Gore gained two. On the GOP side, Bush won 91 of the 96 delegates at stake.    ---   Shepherd withdrew his name from consideration as Meese's choice for deputy attorney general. The St. Louis lawyer and former head of the American Bar Association cited &quot;personal and financial sacrifices.&quot; His decision had been expected. Meese said he doesn't think he will have &quot;any trouble&quot; filling the post.    ---   Israeli soliders battled Palestinians protesting Saturday's killing of PLO military chief Khalil al-Wazir. One Arab was killed and 10 were wounded in clashes in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Other troops blocked Palestinians in the areas from entering Israel. The violence came as Israel marked the 40th anniversary of its independence.    Thousands of Palestinians mourned the death of al-Wazir, who was buried in a cemetery in Syria's largest refugee camp. In New York, the U.N. Security Council agreed to meet today to discuss a Tunisian allegation that Israel was responsible for the assassination of the PLO official.    ---   The House agreed to a seven-month extension of the program that allows some illegal aliens to apply for legal residence. The measure goes to the Senate. Under the bill, the amnesty program for aliens who have been in the U.S. since at least 1982 would run through Nov. 30. The program currently is to end May 4.    ---   The White House prodded the Senate to ratify a superpower treaty eliminating intermediate-range missiles, saying it would be &quot;unfortunate&quot; if the accord isn't approved for the Reagan-Gorbachev summit in the Soviet Union next month. In Moscow, a parliamentary commission approved the pact, paving the way for Soviet ratification.    ---   The Air Force released a picture of its Stealth bomber, lifting a nearly decade-old veil of secrecy. It said the V-shaped aircraft -- which Northrop adapted from a 40-year-old design -- would make its first flight this fall.    ---   The Senate Finance panel cleared a major overhaul of the welfare system. The committee approved the five-year, $2.8 billion proposal that would replace the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program and would require many recipients to work, go to school, or receive job training to keep their benefits.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that federal labor law doesn't bar a union from distributing leaflets urging a boycott of stores at a shopping mall as part of a protest of the wages paid by a contractor working there.    ---   Iraq offered Iran a halt to attacks against civilian targets in the Persian Gulf war. There wasn't any immediate response from Iran, which fired a missile at a U.S.-operated oil field in Kuwait. Meanwhile, the Navy ended the search in the gulf for a U.S. helicopter and its two crew members missing since Monday's warfare with Iran.    ---   Shultz left for Moscow for three days of talks aimed at eliminating differences in U.S. and Soviet drafts of a new arms-control agreement to reduce long-range nuclear weapons as much as 50%. The secretary of state is to meet with Soviet leader Gorbachev and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze.    ---   A court in Duesseldorf convicted Abbas Hamadi of abducting two West Germans as ransom for his brother, Mohammed, who is accused of hijacking a TWA jetliner in June 1985. A U.S. Navy diver was killed in the incident in Beirut. Abbas Hamadi was sentenced to 13 years for kidnapping, coercion and possession of explosives.    ---   Police in South Korea said opposition supporters held 30 governing party members captive in a provincial area about 125 miles south of Seoul after the rival political groups clashed during campaigning for next week's National Assembly elections. The incident occurred hours after Premier Lee ordered a crackdown on election violence. </TEXT></DOC>