<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870805-0154 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Franco-German Army Brigade Would Form a Weak Link---By Frederick Bonnart</HL><DD> 08/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;Kecker Spatz&quot; (Cheeky Sparrow) is the name of a massive Franco-German military exercise to be held in Bavaria in September. It would be a more appropriate description of the proposal by West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl for the creation of a combined Franco-German army brigade, which is due to be discussed between him and French President Francois Mitterrand at these maneuvers.    The proposal was made by the chancellor shortly after the June meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Reykjavik, Iceland, at which the allies, including West Germany, approved the zero solution for medium-range missiles. Nevertheless, the Europeans, and especially the Germans, had been highly alarmed by the deal originally discussed by President Ronald Reagan and General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev the previous year.    Chancellor Kohl was soured further by the difficulties of arriving at a united stand on the matter within his own government and appeared to be looking at military alternatives to reinforce Germany's position. In this effort he was supported fully by the French, who, having failed to participate in the 1979 decision to deploy such missiles in Europe, now felt that they had little say in their withdrawal, although they were strongly opposed to it.    The proposal for the brigade should be seen in this light. It follows the decision by the two countries to reactivate the defense clause of the 1963 Franco-German treaty. On the face of it, it could mean a strengthening of European forces and a furthering of European integration. Nevertheless, it makes little sense.    An army brigade is the smallest military formation in which basic battalion-sized units are grouped. It contains three such 600-man units, either infantry or tanks or both, and, together with its supporting arms and services, such as reconnaissance, artillery, engineers, signals, transport, logistical and medical support, numbers about 5,000 men. It is normally part of a division, the basic all-arms formation commanded by a major general, which contains three such brigades and usually controls directly all the supporting elements. To put it in perspective, there are, according to data published by the International Institute for Strategic Studies, 90 Warsaw Pact and 38 North Atlantic Treaty Organization combat-ready divisions -- that is about 384 brigades -- deployed in Europe.    If well drilled the proposed Franco-German brigade could look good on parade and might be an impressive showpiece of allied unity. It is difficult to see how it could fight in a major war. In battle, soldiers in such a small, tightly knit formation have to rely on known support by an intricate combination of men, weapons and equipment. There must be excellent communications and instant reactions.    Yet, despite a good deal of talk and even some progress in NATO toward rationalization, harmonization and standardization, most weapons and equipment and fighting procedures remain national and different. This is even more so in the case of the French army, which has remained aloof from such attempts at integrating forces and equipment, and has its own individualistic organization, procedures, weapons and equipment.    If this is so, one may well ask how NATO expects to fight and win its war. The difference is the level at which international integration starts. In Allied Command Europe this is normally at a high one, that of the army group. The army group commander has an international staff and commands single-nation army corps, provided by the different allies. These corps, consisting of several divisions, usually three, are entirely national in character, composition and structure, though many procedures are aligned and much of the equipment is at least interoperable.    It is true that NATO also has a mixed-nation force at a much lower level, indeed about brigade size. But this Allied Mobile Force (Land) has a different purpose: It is intended to confront an aggressor in a critical situation with as many different allied units as possible, so as to demonstrate allied unity and discourage the aggressor from going any farther. It is headquartered in Heidelberg, West Germany, and exercises throughout the year from northern Norway to eastern Turkey with units supplied by the allied armies.    A two-nation brigade would not have the same effect. This seems to be understood by its authors and that is why they talk of it as a &quot;nucleus&quot; and look to other European nations, notably Britain, to join it. The response has been cool. British armed forces are well extended already and other nations, such as Belgium, have enough difficulties with defense commitments. &quot;We already have the West European Union,&quot; a Belgian diplomat said. True but, according to its treaty, all its military forces are assigned to the Supreme Allied Commander Europe, which would leave out France.    It is France's equivocal position of being a member of NATO but remaining outside its military structure that is the real nub of the matter. The brigade could therefore not come under NATO command. This creates an additional problem for Germany, as, when the West German &quot;Bundeswehr&quot; was created in 1954, all its combat forces, unlike those of the other allies, were assigned to NATO. All German troops for such a brigade would therefore have to be provided by its home defense forces. It is difficult to see how this could be compatible with raising a combat-ready formation.    Even more unpopular would be the diversion of resources, however small, from NATO tasks, for which they already are considered to be stretched. Finally, and most important, none of the allies, including Germany, are anxious to take any action that could undermine the American commitment to the defense of Europe, which finds its expression in NATO.    France's leaders, and particularly its senior military commanders, know as well as all other allies that NATO's integrated military structure is one of the main sources of the strength of the Alliance and in their hearts believe that they should be part of it. All the arguments about diversity of deterrence and multipolar defense are so much sophistry. Time and again, in the missile decisions, in allied weapon developments, in allied strategic concepts, France has failed to participate.    The proposal for the brigade is a way of trying to come in by the back door. It will fail because such a project should be the result of European unity -- it cannot be its chemistry. Europe must be built economically and politically before it can become militarily integrated. That is why this proposal is no more than a cheeky sparrow that will likely fall out of its nest.    ---   Mr. Bonnart is editor of NATO's Sixteen Nations, a Brussels-based publication. </TEXT></DOC>