<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880308-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Birth of an Issue: Older People's Lobby Gets a Message Across To All the Candidates --- Need for Long-Term Care Mobilizes the Retired, And Politicians Take Note --- Millions of Votes and Free TV </HL><AUTHOR> Joe Davidson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> FIN PHA </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> DEERFIELD BEACH, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Few of life's horrors instill more dread -- particularly in the elderly -- than to be very sick for a long time without the money to pay for doctors, hospitals and nursing homes. And few groups have more clout with politicians than the 28 million members of the American Association of Retired Persons. Put the two together -- deep concern and voting power -- and, boom, a political issue is born.    At a fancy retirement village here two weeks ago, Democratic presidential aspirants Richard Gephardt and Michael Dukakis videotaped a one-hour discussion on the sole subject of providing affordable long-term care for the sick, the frail, the injured and the handicapped. Their only real disagreement was over which man, once in the White House, would do more about it.    The talk, which has been broadcast in states with Super Tuesday primary elections and caucuses today, is a case study in issue creation in a presidential race. The candidates got free TV time, thanks to local stations and a $46,000 grant by the Villers Foundation, which, with the AARP, is an organizer of an ad hoc coalition called Long Term Care 88.    Paying for television is but part of a million-dollar effort begun nearly 18 months ago to gain commitments from Republican as well as Democratic presidential hopefuls. Few lobbies have been so successful at generating support.    Joshua Wiener, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, says he is flabbergasted at how long-term health care has moved from the &quot;political backwater,&quot; as he puts it, to the forefront of this year's election. Floyd Fithian, a former Indiana congressman who now is the chief of staff for Democrat Paul Simon, thinks it may well be a &quot;decisive issue in the campaign.&quot;    The coalition isn't pushing a specific program; it just wants to be sure that long-term care is a priority of whoever is elected. Ronald Pollack, the executive director of the Villers Foundation, says he wants &quot;this issue to come up over and over again in the campaign.&quot; He wants the candidates to be on record making promises.    The backers use many different tools. One is a powerful videotape produced by the coalition, which has been shown to most of the men running for president. Among the cases depicted is that of Mary Hill of Des Moines, Iowa, who describes with great anguish how she had to divorce her paralyzed husband of 33 years. Without her income, he could then be declared indigent and thus qualify for government assistance in paying huge nursing-home bills that the couple couldn't afford.    Four days after seeing the tape, Robert Dole used some of his time during an NBC-TV debate to bring up the problem. &quot;It seems to me that must be a priority in the next Republican administration,&quot; the Kansas senator said. The videotape helped crystallize Mr. Dole's views, says Mari Maseng, his press secretary. &quot;He does cite the tape in many of his speeches.&quot;    So does Gov. Dukakis. He said in one speech: &quot;We need a president who understands what the failure to provide for adequate and affordable long-term care . . . is doing to our families -- the pain it causes, the impossible choices it forces many of our citizens to make. Ask the Hills of Des Moines. . . .&quot;    The free TV time Long Term Care 88 has been providing, in cooperation with local broadcasters, is irresistible to politicians. In New Hampshire, the candidates each had a one-hour forum to discuss the subject with a studio audience after viewing the coalition's tape. In Iowa, the candidates did five-minute, televised interviews.    The first two questions asked each candidate were clearly designed to elicit commitments: Would you mention long-term care in your inaugural address, and would you introduce a comprehensive policy during the first year of your administration? Most of the current candidates said yes to both; nobody said no. Vice President George Bush declined to say what he would deal with in his inaugural, but he still promised: &quot;I will give long-term care the priority that it deserves.&quot;    The subject was raised again on Feb. 27 in Atlanta in a televised debate among the Democrats, a debate the coalition didn't sponsor. The Democrats generally favor an approach to providing care that emphasizes federal financing. Legislation of that sort has been proposed by Rep. Claude Pepper, the 87-year-old Florida Democrat. His bill would provide for a self-financing home-care program, financed by an extension of the Medicare payroll tax. Republicans, as usual, put more stress on governmental incentives for the purchase of private insurance and tax-deferred savings plans similar to Individual Retirement Accounts.    The AARP conducted workshops in several Super Tuesday states -- Florida, Alabama, Missouri and Washington. Voters were briefed, told how to draw specific answers from candidates. The group also ran spots on cable TV in 16 Southern Super Tuesday states. The AARP has given out nearly 800,000 copies of its &quot;Presidential Voters Guide.&quot;    Planning for the national drive began in the fall of 1986 when John Rother, the AARP's legislative director, and Villers' Mr. Pollack got together over lunch to discuss how to use the presidential campaign to promote action.    As Mr. Rother describes it, they devised a plan similar to what a company might use to launch a new car or breakfast cereal. The effort called for market research, product development and a sales force. Starting last fall, the groups used survey results to try to influence campaign issue and research directors, and provided their staffs a steady flow of slick propaganda. Because research showed that long-term care is an issue that grabs many voters, not just old people, they strategically broadened the issue: It's not just that many adults are burdened with aged parents needing nursing-home care at an average cost of $22,000 a year; anybody of any age could be struck down in an accident and need medical help, perhaps for the rest of his life.    The AARP/Villers-sponsored poll indicates that 86% of the public believes some government action should be taken to provide for long-term care of Americans; 68% of respondents would be willing to pay higher taxes to get it.    After examining the &quot;very, very powerful evidence&quot; of the poll results, Sen. Simon's campaign manager, Mr. Fithian, says he urged the senator to stress long-term care, an issue the senator had already embraced. The coalition, he says, &quot;made it easy for candidates to get involved.&quot;    Other groups espousing causes have had considerably less luck in getting to the top of the candidates' agendas. And it isn't because they don't try. The Vietnam Veterans of America wants candidates to back legislation to compensate victims of Agent Orange. The National Coalition Against Pornography wants government action against smut. Others push their views on acid rain, space and water policy.    But &quot;it's a real uphill battle,&quot; says Jerry Herman, the national coordinator of the American Friends Service Committee's Southern Africa program. He led a delegation through Iowa and New Hampshire seeking support for tougher sanctions against South Africa. Because the self-interest of the average American doesn't seem to be directly involved, the issue can't turn out voters the way health care can, says Mr. Herman.    An obvious reason long-term care attracts politicians' attention is that the elderly are a particularly powerful voting bloc. The AARP estimates that twice as many older voters participated in the Iowa caucuses this year as in 1984. And more than 50% of the Iowa participants were older than 50.    Another reason for the attention is that Long Term Care 88 has used a $500,000 budget and 115 coalition groups to spread the word. Most of the groups sent packets of information to the candidates, says Steve McConnell, the campaign's national coordinator. In addition, members of those groups were encouraged to write letters to the candidates. (The AARP and the Villers Foundation, on their own, are expected to spend at least another $500,000.)    &quot;We've really been bombarded&quot; with data, says Gregory Mermelstein, the issues director for Rep. Gephardt. He says long-term-care advocates have been particularly effective, &quot;simply because of the volume of the material,&quot; he says.    The issue caught on in part because several of the men who would be president, including Messrs. Dole, Simon and Gephardt, have supported the cause all along. &quot;You can't manufacture an issue,&quot; says Mr. McConnell. When the Reagan administration introduced legislation last year to cover catastrophic illnesses, many Americans became aware of just how poorly they are covered now. The bills passed by both houses and now awaiting action in conference committee don't cover long-term care, but they do provide increased acute-care coverage for elderly and disabled people covered by Medicare. Private insurers are just beginning to get into long-term care, and most Americans are still not covered. Medicare currently provides poor coverage.    Medicaid covers costs only if the recipient is poor, which is why some couples -- the Hills of Des Moines for example -- get expedient divorces after decades of marriage.    &quot;Here's the person who said she would&quot; take care of her husband, &quot;and now she's getting a divorce,&quot; says Mrs. Hill on the videotape. &quot;It's pretty upsetting.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>