<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870429-0124 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   From the glassed-in visitors' gallery of the Tokyo Stock Exchange you can see the brokers down on the floor applaud when the Nikkei stock average sets another record high. They've been riding an astounding national bull market that in dollar terms recently outstripped the American stock market to become the biggest in the world, with a total market value of listed shares at close to $2.7 trillion. That sounds worth clapping for.    But ask Asia's market experts how they see this boom and their response is less than enthusiastic. The Japanese stock market is &quot;berserk,&quot; says one Tokyo-based investment manager. &quot;Unreal,&quot; says another, who watches from Hong Kong. &quot;We are very much worried,&quot; says a senior official at the Bank of Japan.    There's a lot to worry about -- as Monday's record drop served notice. The skyrocketing stocks, together with Japan's famous land boom, could be heading for a crash that would rock the Japanese banking system and shake up markets around the world.    In a sluggish economy, prices are now wildly above the rest of the world's, something that Prime Minister Nakasone will surely have in mind when he meets with President Reagan in Washington this week. Japanese stock shares currently sell for an average of about 56 times earnings, nearly three times the average price-earnings ratio in Japan 10 years ago, and more than three times the American average and 2.5 times the world average today, according to Morgan Stanley's Capital International Perspective.    In real estate, the picture is much the same. A recent report from Drexel Burnham Lambert says that a square foot of commercial space in Tokyo now rents for more than twice the rate in New York.    What's feeding the fever in Japanese assets, as the nearby chart suggests, is the country's huge trade surplus -- $89.8 billion for the fiscal year that ended March 31. In a world of uncoordinated monetary policy, this surplus has driven up the yen so dramatically that Japanese institutions have suffered big foreign-exchange losses from stashing their profits abroad in, say, U.S. Treasury bonds. They would have earned higher returns simply by cashing in their dollars for yen and stacking the yen notes in a Tokyo broom closet.    Realizing this, corporations have been exchanging their dollar holdings for yen. In doing so, they have swamped Japan in a tidal wave of ready money -- or liquidity. The problem for highly liquid yen-holders is that thanks to protectionist regulations and high taxes, there's not much back home that they can buy -- so the same assets keep changing hands, and the prices keep going up.    Were Japan open to imports, there would be plenty to buy, and prices would stay at least closer to earth. The strong yen would draw in a wealth of relatively cheap imports -- especially farm produce -- and boost the development of Japan's stunted consumer markets. That would help reduce the trade surplus, raise the Japanese standard of living and restore a little balance to foreign-exchange markets.    But if it's consumption you're after in Japan, even the mighty yen won't help you much. For decades Japan's economy has been rigidly arranged to discourage people from enjoying the full fruits of their labors. What direct trade barriers don't keep out, the heavily regulated distribution network often does. For example, during the first 10 days of this month, the yen was up 22% against the dollar from a year earlier, but this was only weakly reflected in the 5.8% drop in wholesale prices, or in the 11% drop in wholesale prices of imports. Clearly it's not easy to import for consumption. Corporations and their Japanese bankers must find other uses for their yen.    In a less rigid economy, this would be an ideal moment for corporate raids. Takeovers could speed along the overdue restructuring of Japanese business -- away from monomaniacal export -- manufacturing, which is flagging, and toward businesses geared more to the domestic market. While the money is there, there just aren't enough shares for sale. Equity ownership in Japan resembles a mat of seaweed, with cross-company holdings so tightly intertwined that they never break loose and float away to new buyers.    It's all part of the Japanese tradition, explains the same senior official at the Bank of Japan who is worried about the stock market. The aim, he says, is to have a &quot;stable, friendly, long-term relationship&quot; among the cross-held companies, descendants of the pre-war zaibatsu, or big business and banking conglomerates.    Like many corporate traditions, the Japanese cross-company holdings also have a tax angle. Most of the cross-held shares have been carried for years on the corporate accounts at book value. If they are sold, the companies must pay capital gains of roughly 55%. With most share prices today much higher than book value, that would add up to a whopping tax bill. And share swaps -- which are tax exempt in the U.S. -- enjoy no such status in Japan.    Pressured both by high taxes and tradition, companies don't sell their cross-holdings. One Tokyo-based investment manager estimates that about two-thirds of all shares outstanding never change hands. New equity issues are also scant; despite the booming market and high ratios of prices to earnings, the number of publicly listed shares has increased by only about half over the past 10 years.    Much the same rigidity applies in real estate, which accounts for a big chunk of Japanese corporate worth. Measured in dollar terms, the total value of all Japanese land is now greater than the total value of all American land, notes Tomumatsu Iida, a real estate analyst with James Capel in Tokyo. But he goes on to say that zoning laws and price supports doom some land to rice farming, and high taxes on land sales mean that most Japanese land -- an estimated 94% -- never comes up for sale.    So, fenced in by their own system, what are Japanese corporations doing with their yen?    Enter the speculative bubble. The Japanese domestic financial markets are nowhere near as sophisticated as their dollar value might suggest. A Morgan Stanley economist based in Tokyo, David Gerstenhaber, describes them as &quot;Neanderthal,&quot; though he adds that they are liberalizing. Among the limited investment vehicles, there is a way for companies to trade stocks without paying the usual taxes and without revaluing or selling their crossheld shares. They can buy into special trust funds, known as Tokkin funds, that trade stocks for them and pay out income in the form of dividends taxed at a relatively low rate.    These Tokkin funds have grown rapidly, especially in recent months, and are now valued at more than $200 billion. They are the leading edge of the stock market. Due in part to rapid portfolio turnover by Tokkin funds, share-trading volume on the Tokyo Stock Exchange has soared recently to more than 1.2 billion shares a day in March from 670 million shares a day in December 1986, according to the Bank of Japan. With not much else to buy, companies just keep putting their profits back into the narrow portion of the equity market that can be traded. This demand is responsible at least in part for those enormous price-earnings ratios.    Individual investors are now also adding to the boom, drawn by rates of return that vastly outperform the annual rates of interest paid on regulated passbook savings. Some market analysts say that private individuals are also taking out loans against their property to speculate in the market -- a risky move for Japan's smaller banks and credit unions. But the banks are willing to play. They want some place to put their yen.    The same kind of frenzy has hit the tiny fraction of the real estate market that's up for grabs. Mr. Iida of James Capel calculates that once a piece of real estate actually gets sold, it then gets resold once every two months on average. Prices -- in yen -- have risen almost 50% on average over the past year for commercial land in the Greater Tokyo area. Prices for some properties have almost doubled. More than $200 billion of this speculative buying is currently financed by bank loans, Mr. Iida says.    What's wrong with this picture, as credit analyst Akio Mikuni, president of his own Tokyo credit-rating company, notes, is that the speculation could now be feeding on itself -- creating the same kind of paper profits for which the American stock market became famous in 1929. Speculators buy assets, take their profits, and then -- with nothing else to buy -- get right back into the market, bidding up prices even more. Banks take in the profits as deposits, then lend them out to the same speculators, and the narrow group of assets changes hands yet again.    The moment of truth will most likely come when the trade surplus starts to drop -- bringing a lower demand for yen, and a decline against the dollar as the liquidity runs back out of Japan's choked markets. There are signs that such a moment is approaching. Although the trade surplus has continued to rise in dollar terms, export volume has been falling as the high yen makes Japanese products more expensive abroad.    It's hard to say how large a jolt might finally hit Japan. According to Mr. Mikuni, &quot;financial institutions could face serious problems.&quot; Traditionally the Bank of Japan has backed troubled financial institutions. But the Japanese economy has reached a size that makes it much harder for the old consensus management to operate. A large, sudden withdrawal of Japanese overseas holdings to bail out the home market could create world financial havoc. That could be tragically compounded by the Smoot-Hawley II trade bill now moving through the U.S. Congress. For the Japanese bubble, tradition does not bode well. &quot;Liquidity has fueled one of the most powerful deflationary asset booms that has been seen in generations,&quot; says Morgan Stanley's Mr. Gerstenhaber. &quot;And, as we know, these things don't usually end nicely.&quot;    ---   Ms. Rosett is editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>