<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871230-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NASA POSTPONED its first post-Challenger launch of the space shuttle.    The space agency cited the failure of a motor part during last week's test of the shuttle's redesigned booster rocket, and said the flight of the shuttle Discovery, scheduled for June 2, would be delayed indefinitely. According to NASA, a portion of the rocket's nozzle broke off during the test-firing at Morton Thiokol facilities in Utah. NASA said that it didn't know what caused the nozzle problem, but that it was unrelated to the O-ring joints that caused the Challenger explosion.    Soviet cosmonaut ended a record 326-day mission in space. Yuri Romanenko's stay aboard the space station Mir was viewed as a test of man's fitness for future interplanetary travel.    ---   GULF LEADERS DENOUNCED Iran and backed a U.N. naval force.    Ending a four-day summit in Saudi Arabia, the six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council condemned Iran's &quot;aggressive acts&quot; against Persian Gulf Arab states, accepted a U.N. Security Council resolution calling for a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war, and agreed on military cooperation measures. Saudi Arabia's foreign minister said the leaders also welcomed an international naval force to protect shipping in the region.    The U.S.-flagged Kuwaiti tanker Bridgeton rejoined a Navy-escorted convoy in the Persian Gulf, five months after it struck an Iranian mine.    ---   Poland's Supreme Court has reduced the prison sentences of four secret-police officers convicted of the 1984 kidnap-murder of pro-Solidarity priest Jerzy Popieluszko. A Warsaw spokesman said the court's decision was made Dec. 17 for &quot;humanitarian reasons,&quot; and came under the terms of a political amnesty offered last year.    ---   Police in Arkansas found nine bodies in a shallow grave and in abandoned cars outside a Russellville home, bringing to 16 the number of slayings allegedly linked to a suspect arrested after a shooting spree Monday. R. Gene Simmons was ordered held without bond. The incident is considered one of the worst mass killings in the U.S.    ---   Reagan's national security adviser told Congress that the U.S. and Soviet Union are divided over the president's space-based antimissile program and a broader interpretation of the 1972 ABM treaty. In a letter, Lt. Gen. Colin Powell said Moscow had indicated that the issue could lead to suspension of talks on a long-range missile treaty.    ---   Five workers were killed when a fire fueled by 100,000 pounds of rocket propellant engulfed a Morton Thiokol plant in Brigham City, Utah. The facility, which is used to make part of the MX missile, was destroyed by the fire.    ---   Israel has ordered thousands of troops into the occupied territories and arrested more Palestinians in anticipation of a renewed rioting, Israeli radio reported. Officials in Jerusalem said the government would expel those threatening security, and Israel's envoy to the U.N. blamed the PLO for inciting recent unrest.    ---   President Ortega said that he wants to arm nearly all Nicaraguans and that Managua is negotiating &quot;with everyone&quot; to obtain rifles to fight the U.S.-backed rebels. He also said he wanted renewed peace negotiations next month with the Contras. Ortega made his remarks after meeting with Cardinal Obando, a mediator in truce talks.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett proposed a &quot;broad, deep and effective&quot; core curriculum for American high schools that might require five or even six years of study for some students. The proposal includes four years of study in English and three years in science, math and social studies as well as two years of a single foreign language.    ---   Xerox Corp. won a court order seizing $10,480 in federal funds earmarked for Gary Hart's renewed presidential bid to satisfy a debt from the Democrat's 1984 campaign. Meanwhile, paperwork problems stalled Jesse Jackson's bid for matching funds, but South Dakota Democratic leaders decided he could enter the Feb. 23 primary.    ---   A federal judge in Chicago sentenced the leader of the El Rukns street gang to 80 years in prison for masterminding a plot to blow up planes and U.S. government buildings in return for $2.5 million from Libya. Jeff Fort, 40, convicted Nov. 24 of 49 counts of conspiracy and illegal weapons possession, also was fined $255,000.    ---   A winter storm struck the Northeast, dumping as much as eight inches of snow, snarling traffic and delaying air travel in New York and Boston. The storm, which caused floods in the South and snow in the Plains and Midwest over the past week, has been blamed for at least 22 deaths.    ---   Police in Bangladesh clashed with protesters during a nationwide strike called by the opposition to demand the ouster of President Ershad. At least 30 people were injured in the violence, witnesses said.    ---   Chile's military rulers accused the U.S. of interfering in the country's political affairs and said it could slow a return to democracy. The Santiago government has been angered by a recent Reagan administration decision to suspend duty-free status on about $60 million of Chilean exports. </TEXT></DOC>