<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0165 </DOCNO><HL> Laser Weapon Lost in Budget Battle </HL><AUTHOR> Bruce D. Berkowitz </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> DEF CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   Unless an angel appears at the last moment, this fall the Defense Department will pull the plug on Skylite, the country's only operating high-energy laser-weapon system, by ending its funding. This may seem odd, given the priority the administration has assigned to defensive weapons and high technology, but it demonstrates just how thoroughly confused U.S. military research is today.    Skylite was originally developed by the Navy in the late 1970s as a defense against cruise missiles. As the attack on the USS Stark in the Persian Gulf demonstrated a year ago, low-flying anti-ship missiles are difficult to stop and deadly when they strike their targets.    Currently, the Navy uses Phalanx, a radar-directed Gatling gun, as a &quot;terminal defense&quot; against anti-ship missiles. Phalanx can be overwhelmed when a ship is attacked by several missiles at once (the Stark was struck by two Exocets). Also, Phalanx stores only enough ammunition for 30 seconds of operation, which is also about the operational life of the system's gun barrels. To date, Phalanx has never destroyed a cruise anti-ship missile in battle. The shortcomings of Phalanx and weapons like it are well-known and understood by Navy commanders, but up until now there has been no alternative.    A laser would seem like an ideal solution: It strikes its target instantaneously. Thus, unlike a gun, a laser weapon does not need to &quot;lead&quot; its target. Aiming the weapon is quicker and more reliable. Also, although a laser may need to recharge between shots, it does not run out of ammunition; it either has a fuel-tank supply that can be easily replenished, or it is powered by a ship's main generators.    Skylite's record was remarkable. It met all project milestones on schedule and within budget. It actually demonstrated its ability to destroy target drones in flight. So why was the project canceled?    Part of the blame goes to the Navy. Skylite was always a poor cousin at the Navy (where it was originally known as &quot;Sealite&quot;). The Navy bureaucracy is cautious and usually does not favor revolutionary weapons. Also, Skylite had no obvious patrons to protect it in budget battles. It is not a gun system nor missile system, so no existing Navy office has an interest in funding or supporting it. Part of the blame goes to Congress, where key staffers on the House Armed Services Committee were skeptical that any laser system could be a useful weapon. But blame for putting the final nail in Skylite's coffin will go to the Strategic Defense Initiative, and, more generally, the Defense Department's lack of direction in military research and development.    Contrary to public perception, SDI was not created out of thin air when President Reagan announced his intention to develop an anti-missile defense system. Rather, SDI was created by putting all Defense Department research and development programs that had potential for ballistic missile defense under a common umbrella. The problem is, so much of the Randamp;D budget has been devoted to SDI that the distribution of U.S. military research has been distorted.    SDI has had a special status in administration budget battles. In 1985, for example, it was the only defense program the administration fought to spare from the axe of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings. This favored treatment continues today. But since SDI funds only research and development for space defense, SDI's favored status has the effect of crowding out Randamp;D for other missions, such as tank warfare, anti-submarine warfare, and intelligence.    Skylite could be developed into an anti-satellite weapon or used for anti-ballistic-missile research, so it was moved to SDI. This saved Skylite until this year, when the rules of the game were changed.    SDI supporters were determined to transform their vision of a strategic defense system into a reality. They pressed for early deployment of SDI. As a result, the SDI Office had to focus its efforts on delivering a real weapon capable of destroying ballistic missiles.    Of all of the technologies the SDI Office was pursuing, the only one that seemed capable of being used in a deployable weapon before the end of the century was the hypervelocity kinetic-kill concept, a system that would destroy ballistic missiles with high-speed missiles aimed from orbiting satellites or some other platform. This is not the most potent SDI technology on the horizon, but it might be possible to deploy a limited system of this kind in 10 years.    Alas, the federal deficit (and congressional reservations concerning the wisdom of space defense) are creating a budget crunch at the SDI Office. The program office is concentrating on kinetic-kill technology in order to produce an operational weapon, and other research is being squeezed out. In the SDI Office's priorities, terminal defense and anti-satellite systems take a back seat to space-based systems that will destroy missiles before they approach the U.S., which is why Skylite is about to go under.    Last year Congress was worried about exactly this kind of problem. In response, for fiscal 1988 the House authorized a $50 million Balanced Technology Initiative, while the Senate authorized a $200 million Conventional Defense Initiative. In conference, the two were combined to provide $250 million to support high technology that did not fit underneath SDI's umbrella.    The Defense Department failed to respond to the opportunity. One might hope that the department would systematically search for high-leverage technologies that could be developed rapidly and delivered to the field. Unfortunately, the department lacks any effective mechanism for weighing defense-research priorities or for developing a long-range strategy for research and development. Instead, the law of the bureaucracy prevailed: Everyone got a piece of the pie.    In this case, the Defense Department frittered away the money for the Balanced Technology and Conventional Defense initiatives as a $250 million slush fund for Randamp;D programs that had just failed to &quot;make the cut&quot; in the defense budget review. It seems that just about everyone in the Pentagon got a share; one of the more interesting programs that was funded out of the windfall was the Army's project to develop a forward-deployed, armored, multi-color Xerox machine. (To be fair, Skylite also received some Balanced Technology money. It was used to carry out the system's last tests; Skylite again successfully intercepted and destroyed a target drone.)    It is easy to pass platitudes about an &quot;unresponsive bureaucracy&quot; or a &quot;lack of direction&quot; in the Defense Department. But to appreciate the damage that is done by the department's failure to plan research effectively, consider the real, concrete costs of losing just this one program.    First, once Skylite goes out, the U.S. will not have an operating high-energy laser-weapon system for research until the mid-1990s. The Defense Department will, of course, continue to experiment with lasers, but none of these will resemble a working weapon. This means the U.S. will have to wait until perhaps the turn of the century before it has a laser with which it can develop the tactics and operational experience that underlie success on the battlefield.    Second, the Navy will lose the only laser program that has been developed for naval application. If the Navy decides three or four years from now that using lasers to defend ships against cruise missiles makes sense after all, it will have to try to restart a canceled program and form a new team to run it. Or, the Navy could try to adapt whatever technology the Air Force and Army will have developed. This would not be easy; an analogy would be for the Navy to abandon gunnery Randamp;D, disband its gunnery research teams, and then later try to adapt Army howitzers for use on destroyers.    Third, the U.S. will lose expertise and technical support for intelligence on the Soviets' laser weapons. Just as U.S. nuclear-weapons labs carry out intelligence assessments of Soviet nuclear weapons, the Skylite program is among the most logical, effective methods for anticipating the progress the Soviets may be making in military lasers. According to the Defense Department publication &quot;Soviet Military Power,&quot; the Soviets are indeed developing laser weapons, including one that resembles Skylite.    Yet the real tragedy will not just be the loss of a promising weapon that might have saved the lives of American sailors. Skylite is just one example. The real tragedy will be knowing that the U.S. system for military research and development could just as easily fail again, and probably will.    ---   Mr. Berkowitz is author of &quot;Calculated Risks: A Century of Arms Control, Why It Has Failed, and How It Can Be Made to Work. (Simon andamp; Schuster, 1988). </TEXT></DOC>