<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Taking Charge---Where Patients Are Partners:Civility, Sympathy, Even LaughterMake the Rounds at This Hospital---By Hal Lancaster</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   IN THE VAST, ANTISEPTIC kingdom known as the UCLA Medical Center, computerized directions and colored lines on the floor guide the visitor through a labyrinth of corridors teeming with nearly 5,000 doctors, nurses and staff members. This is the quintessential modern teaching hospital, with all the gleaming, high-tech medical machinery money can buy.    A human being can get lost in here, and not just geographically. By most accounts, few things are as dehumanizing as a prolonged stay in a big-city medical complex. In such an overworked and competitive setting, who has time for compassion? Run the tests, hook up the machines, write the prescriptions and move 'em out.    But something is happening here. Sympathy, civility and laughter are creeping into the wards and the medical-school curriculum. Therapies sometimes considered flaky are gaining a foothold. Patients are asserting their rights, becoming partners with their doctors instead of mere subjects.    Signs of this quiet revolution are everywhere. In the Cancer Pain Clinic, relaxation techniques lessen dependence on chemical painkillers. A child's advocate guides parents and children through the shoals of eye surgery at the Jules Stein Eye Institute. The Supportive Services Consultation Team offers help and a sympathetic shoulder to dying patients and their families. Art therapists and strolling musicians help patients work out the dark emotions stirred by serious illness. Physicians refer patients to the Wellness Community, a support group that preaches patients' control over treatment.    Physicians here are drafting a &quot;Daily Code for Physician Behavior,&quot; in which new doctors would promise to maintain eye contact with patients, communicate respect and equality through body posture, use gestures that provide &quot;positive encouragement,&quot; and refer to each patient as a person, not as a disease or a case.    Individual mavericks flourish as well. Consider Jacob Zigholboim, an oncologist whose own bout with cancer led him to prescribe meditation, high-intensity music, voice dialogue (talking to various alter egos) and &quot;visualization&quot; to marshal patients' resources by helping them enter altered states of consciousness. He calls such efforts &quot;an exploration of the life force.&quot;    Ronald Katz, chairman of the anesthesiology department and a self-proclaimed medical radical, has introduced an acupuncture clinic and an ethics committee and has dabbled in hypnosis and herbal medicine.    Resistance, as well as some indifference, does persist in some quarters. Some physicians question whether patients who chart their own course know which way the wind is blowing. Other doctors consider these programs &quot;soft&quot; and thus somewhat frivolous in times of tight budgets.    This may explain why Devra Miller Breslow, director of UCLA's much-lauded Art That Heals program, has trouble getting permanent funding; or why major medical journals have spurned internist Sheldon Greenfield's experiment in &quot;coached care,&quot; in which patients with ulcers, diabetes or hypertension were taught how to ask their doctors better-informed questions. The result: Most did better.    But resistance is gradually eroding, particularly since it turns out that compassion may have implications for the bottom line. Studies are finding that today's health-care consumer is more put out with insensitive physicians and less willing to put up with them. With a surplus of physicians on the horizon, the medical profession is taking note.    Compassion may have concrete medical implications as well. If panic and depression can constrict blood vessels and suppress the immune system, the theory goes, why couldn't laughter and other positive emotions foster healing? In one intriguing if still inconclusive study here, melanoma patients who got emotional support along with their regular therapy generated 60% more immune cells in seven weeks than a group receiving only therapy.    UCLA isn't the only place experimenting with these approaches. In a 10-year study at Paoli Memorial Hospital in Paoli, Pa., patients with a view of a pleasant courtyard recovered faster, with fewer complications and less pain, than those who stared at a brick wall. The idea that laughter can heal is being tested with a 24-hour closed-circuit television humor channel at St. John's Hospital in Santa Monica, CA., and something called The Emergency Clown Unit at New York's The Babies Hospital. In &quot;The Living Room&quot; at St. Joseph's Hospital in Houston, cancer patients and families gather in a homey atmosphere to play games or view upbeat movies.    ---   But UCLA is at least representative of the patient revolution and maybe more so. &quot;UCLA, maybe because it's in crazy California, is receptive to new thoughts,&quot; Dr. Katz says. Here are some snapshots of the revolution in action:    If there is a prototype of the new breed of patient, it must be George McKean. Tall, silver-haired and relentlessly hopeful, the 62-year-old former telephone-company manager limps slowly into the UCLA Cancer Pain Clinic, leaning heavily on his cane. The nerve damage that triggers his chronic foot pain may have resulted from five years of surgery, radiation and radiation implants for prostate cancer.    Mr. McKean peppers doctors with questions. He gives each a scrupulously detailed medical record and insists, in return, on a written summary of the doctor's treatment. His wife, Dotti, lugs these records around in a leather briefcase. &quot;Have records, will travel,&quot; she says brightly.    The staff at this six-year-old clinic doesn't mind any of this. &quot;We're trying to shift responsibility for the patient's health back on the patient,&quot; says Robert DeMayo, a staff psychologist. As part of his &quot;behavioral contract&quot; with the clinic, Mr. McKean must stick to the program, keep a diary of his pain and which activities affect it, and be as active as possible.    The clinic employs nerve blocks and painkillers as needed, but it also tries to teach patients how to reduce stress or make the pain less bothersome. In guided imagery, for example, &quot;They can distract themselves from pain by imagining themselves in another place -- say, on a sandy tropical beach with a gentle breeze blowing,&quot; says Mr. DeMayo. Or they can &quot;relabel&quot; sensations, for instance imagining a burning sensation to be the tingle of a whirlpool bath.    The McKeans are impressed most, however, by the staff's attentiveness. &quot;How often do you go to the doctor and get four hours?&quot; he marvels, after seven clinic staff members descend on him. &quot;It's usually in and out the door.&quot;    ---   The man's sister had just died and there he was, alone, packing her things, psychiatrist Kathleen McCarty recalls sadly. &quot;The thought of him going down the elevator with his sister's clothes in a plastic bag. . . .&quot; Her voice trails off. &quot;We need to institutionalize taking people down to decedent care. There's something really cold about after people die here: See the body, take the things. There's something really wrong there.&quot;    Dr. McCarty's poignant case is one of several reviewed at an emotional, 3 1/2-hour meeting of the two-month-old Supportive Services Consultation Team, formed to help dying patients and their families. As the meeting proceeds, frustrated team members inveigh against an unjust God, vent anger at the insensitivity of the medical system and seek ways to inject compassion into it.    Nurse Katherine Brown-Saltzman tells of a physician who &quot;rather coarsely&quot; informed a dying woman's daughter that &quot;nothing could be done,&quot; casually dismissed the patient's pain and, when told a son couldn't face his mother's decline, simply said: &quot;Then don't tell him.&quot;    Another patient, Dr. McCarty explains, suffered &quot;excruciating pain&quot; all weekend because the doctor's prescription was too weak. The on-duty nurse, having worked 96 hours in the eight previous days, &quot;just blocked out&quot; the man's complaints, says Ms. Brown-Saltzman.    &quot;I kept thinking the system will work,&quot; she says angrily. &quot;I now know I can't trust the system.&quot;    ---   Armed only with a serene smile and a Snoopy tote bag full of dolls and coloring books, Sandra Burick unravels the mysteries of eye surgery for three frightened young patients at UCLA's Jules Stein Eye Institute.    They tour &quot;Planet O.R., where everyone wears weird green costumes,&quot; and the recovery room, with its wondrous mechanical beds. She describes the injection of intravenous fluids without ever using the word needle, and anesthesia without saying &quot;put to sleep.&quot; Knowing that surgery also affects siblings, she asks one patient's sister to color a picture for her brother's hospital room. She quietly advises parents to send their children away during the reading of the informed-consent form, in which recitation of possible side effects includes the bone-chilling &quot;including death.&quot; When the former teacher started here four years ago, she recalls, many children got to the operating room door, then asked: &quot;Is this where I'm going to die?&quot;    Ms. Burick's ministrations certainly help Denise Dietz, a shy and nervous seven-year-old, who perks up after the tour. That night, says Sally Dietz, her daughter was up until midnight -- not stewing about the operation, as one might expect, but coloring a picture for her new friend Sandy. The next day, she refused to go into the operating room without Ms. Burick. &quot;That's when they really need me,&quot; she says. &quot;When they're in the gurney and have separated from their parents and I'm all they have left.&quot;    &quot;She takes the impersonal effect of the hospital away and forms a link with the child,&quot; says John Dietz, hovering above his sleeping daughter's bed after her surgery. &quot;They need three or four more of her. As much as she does, she can't spend enough time with the children as is needed.&quot;    ---   Peter shuffles slowly down the hall, dragging along his I.V. on wheels like some reluctant pet. Two days out of isolation, the young musician is old before his time -- gaunt and hollow-eyed, with barren patches in his wispy blond hair. Leukemia exacts a toll.    But the toll is emotional as well as physical. Enter Marge Lewi, a short, energetic art therapist with a luggage cart full of art supplies. She persuades a hesitant Peter to try his hand at a collage for one of her patient theme albums -- &quot;Coping,&quot; &quot;What It's Like,&quot; &quot;Reflections&quot; or &quot;Great Escapes.&quot;    As Peter leafs through the pictures, Ms. Lewi gently prods him with questions, and he begins to talk about his &quot;realistic&quot; approach and his mother's inability to cope with his illness.    As he talks about the tedium of his hospital stay, he selects pictures of clocks, which he eventually pieces together and places in the &quot;What It's Like&quot; album. Two hours have passed.    To some, that's all there is to it: a pleasant distraction. But Ms. Breslow, the program's director, believes her artists and musicians do much more. &quot;You can go into someone's room who only speaks Polish and play music that brings up memories and raises hope,&quot; she says.    And earlier that day, guest speakers from a San Diego art-therapy program show Ms. Breslow's unit two paintings featuring similar vertical bars and fiery red colors painted by patients who hadn't seen each other's work. Both represented sharp departures from earlier work and both preceded major brain seizures by only days. Did the paintings reflect the trauma that was affecting their brain-wave patterns? &quot;We think we're picking up things that may be predictive of central nervous system changes,&quot; says Phyllis L. Spechko, a nurse attached to the program.    ---   Shelley, who asks that her last name be withheld, has a dancer's build, a combative nature and leukemia. Sitting in the living room of the aging Santa Monica house occupied by the Wellness Community, she complains about her current doctor. &quot;His philosophy is old-fashioned -- this is what we do -- and he doesn't explain things well,&quot; she says. &quot;I annoy him with my questions.&quot; So she has come here because &quot;I can't accept sitting there waiting for something to happen; I felt I had to get involved, and I don't know what all my options are.&quot;    They like that attitude here. &quot;Here's the key thing we say,&quot; explains Harold Benjamin, director of this support group for cancer patients: &quot;If you participate in your fight for recovery rather than acting as a helpless, hopeless, passive victim, you will improve the quality of your life and you may enhance the chances of your recovery.&quot;    The Wellness Community isn't connected to UCLA, but it has strong links, including three board members, its honorary chairman and some lecturers.    Several UCLA oncologists refer patients here for emotional support and the center's various services. Patients receive instruction in relaxation techniques to reduce stress and guided imagery, a controversial technique in which the patient imagines, for example, some killer attacking the cancer cells in his body (Pac Man is a popular assailant). The center also provides periodic lectures on pain control and nutrition, although it steadfastly has refused to recommend or debunk particular techniques or programs.    The community has been a revelation for many. &quot;I learned you don't have to let them poke you with needles, you don't have to let the doctor keep you waiting for two hours,&quot; says Kenneth Norton, an accountant who contracted colon cancer last summer. &quot;I'm not at their mercy.&quot; Indeed, over the mild objections of his oncologist, who fears that Mr. Norton still carries some microscopic cancer cells, he has swapped his chemotherapy for a regimen of strict diet and stress-reduction techniques.    &quot;In the American Indian community,&quot; says Sue Villega, who came to the Wellness Community two years ago with cervical cancer, &quot;when a person got sick, the whole village mobilized against the illness. They brought food, sang, touched the sick person. The Wellness Community is an attempt to recreate that.&quot;    ---   Mr. Lancaster is a Wall Street Journal staff reporter based in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>