<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871203-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:U.S. Intervention in Haiti Isn't-- And Wasn't -- The Answer---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 12/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM FORGNEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The smog of self-regarding rhetoric on the topic of Haiti now belching from our television sets is more than usually toxic. Secretary of State George Shultz and his assistant Elliott Abrams lament the rough treatment given democratic aspirations in the past few days but insist that the provisional government and the army must remain the guarantors of any march to freedom. It would be interesting, though alas impossible, to get a reaction to such sentiments from Haitian would-be voters murdered by thugs from that army Sunday.    From every quarter there are grave expressions of concern. On &quot;Nightline&quot; Tuesday, Robert White lamented the &quot;violence of right and left,&quot; a rhetorical trick he no doubt picked up during his term as ambassador in El Salvador in the early 1980s, when right-wing death squads were murdering the left, just as similar squads have been doing in Haiti over the past few months.    The habitually ineffable A.M. Rosenthal called in the New York Times for U.S. military intervention, apparently undismayed by the thought that the U.S. has trained and armed the above-mentioned army thugs and equipped them plentifully with U.S. military advisers over the past few months, and that therefore armed U.S. intervention is in no way -- at least in the minds of Haitians -- synonymous with anything other than imposition and preservation of tyranny.    Those who think this too brusque a resume of U.S. relations with Haiti should study the U.S. intervention back in 1915, at the onset of a couple of decades of occupation by U.S. Marines.    During this intervention, the Haitian constitution was rewritten -- by Franklin Delano Roosevelt, so he later boasted -- to permit national soil to be bought by foreigners, something previously forbidden and hence denounced by the U.S. State Department as an &quot;unprogressive feature.&quot; Haitian slave labor was expended in roads constructed under the aegis of the U.S. Marine commander in Haiti, Smedley Butler, who later had the frankness to proclaim with regret that &quot;I have been a gangster for capitalism.&quot; U.S. corporate interests were indeed well served by the Haitian serfs working the plantations and sugar mills in the neighboring Dominican Republic.    By the time the U.S. Marines withdrew in 1935, thousands of Haitians had died either from direct military repression or economic scarcity. There is no need to trace Haiti's parlous destiny to voodoo theocracy, as did an editorial in this paper Tuesday, a theory apparently of comfort to some Americans. The robust paradigms of intervention and exploitation will suffice.    By 1985 a World Bank study stated that 87% of Haitian children suffered from malnutrition, 80% of all Haitians were illiterate and 60% of the population had an annual per-capita income of less than $60. In that same year the young Jean-Claude Duvalier's government promulgated a law recognizing Baby Doc as the supreme arbiter of the national destiny and permitting him to suspend, without reason, the rights of any political party. This was hailed by the U.S. ambassador to Haiti, on July 4, 1985, as &quot;an encouraging step forward&quot; toward &quot;dialogue.&quot;    Having left the Duvaliers, father and son, unmolested for many years, while training the forces that maintained them in power, the U.S. saw the writing on the wall early last year and began to array itself verbally on the side of emerging democracy. But just as Hamlet's Uncle Claudius said sadly of his prayers that &quot;my words fly up, my thoughts remain below/ Words without thoughts never to heaven go,&quot; so did the practical calculations of the Reagan administration stay earthbound.    Baby Doc fled. And with prompt declarations that human rights were on the mend, the U.S. released millions in direct military aid, immediately rushing about half a million dollars in anti-riot equipment to the army -- notably to the Leopard battalion, which, according to reports, has been responsible for much of the violence in recent months and days. This battalion was no stranger to U.S. succor, having been trained and equipped in the early 1970s by U.S. advisers at a time when such aid was supposedly banned.    The provisional regime headed by Lieut. Gen. Henri Namphy was the repository of the hot affections of the U.S. government, even though it was clear from the start that Gen. Namphy and his associates in the army were scarcely zealots for the democratic way and viewed the independent Election Council -- which on Tuesday bravely rejected Gen. Namphy's order that it disband -- with profound distaste. At the end of June 1986, the week Gen. Namphy first tried to seize control of the Election Council, Assistant Secretary of State Abrams said brazenly that the Haitian government was guiding the country toward free elections and &quot;we congratulate . . . Gen. Namphy for leading these efforts.&quot;    While U.S. officials beefed up the army's repressive capacity with arms and advisers, the realities of political life in Haiti asserted themselves. One central reality is land hunger. In July 1986 groups of former Ton Ton Macoute fell upon peasants from the town of Jean Rabel and murdered 300 of them, thus inhibiting any recovery by these peasants of lands stolen by Duvalier associates. One such landlord, Nicole Poitevin, boasted of killing 1,042 such land-hungry &quot;communists.&quot;    Death squads, in the Salvadoran manner either directly from the army or sponsored by the army, commenced their rampages, terrorizing the democratic opposition and on one occasion assassinating a political candidate right in front of a police station. This deed should have provoked an immediate suspension of all U.S. military assistance to the Namphy government, along with some hard-bitten expressions of support for the Election Council and a genuinely free vote. Instead, the U.S. persisted in expressions of support for the Haitian army as the guarantor of liberty.    This doubletalk has continued right through the army savagery of the past few days, with State Department spokesman Charles Redman declaring that the Namphy government &quot;kept the process on the road till virtually the last day&quot; and that this same process &quot;broke down . . . in large part because there was not the necessary security to allow the elections to go forward.&quot; Properly interpreted, this means the U.S. buttressed the security that enabled the process to break down.    So what is the bottom line? After decades of the horrors presided over by the Duvaliers, the Haitian people were in a turbulent state, cherishing revolutionary expectations. Revolutionary expectations are not qualities esteemed by Mr. Shultz, Mr. Abrams or their predecessors in the State Department. The trick has been to render lip service to democracy while making absolutely sure that things do not get out of hand. Such has been the pattern in El Salvador and in the Philippines. Poor Haiti is the most tragic example, rent and bleeding as U.S. officials now suspend the aid they previously rushed to sustain the thugs who gratefully accepted it in the spirit in which it was tendered. Those now howling righteously for U.S. intervention should know that so far as Haitians are concerned, this intervention has been going on for most of the 20th century.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>