<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0129 </DOCNO><HL> Don't Let Elected Officials Take the Fifth---By James R. Ferguson</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   When Vice Adm. John Poindexter and Lt. Col. Oliver North invoked the Fifth Amendment before the Senate Intelligence Committee last month, the resulting controversy prompted an intriguing proposal: What if all candidates for public office were required to waive the privilege against self-incrimination as a condition to taking office?    Such a waiver would require the official to relinquish any claim of privilege he might otherwise have in future testimony concerning the performance of his official duties. The waiver would thus be limited in two critical respects. It would apply only when the official is called upon to give testimony in a proper legal forum, and it would apply only when he is questioned about his conduct in office.    The merits of this proposal must be examined from both a constitutional and a public-policy perspective. From the standpoint of public policy, the proposal has much to recommend it. Like all other testimonial privileges, the Fifth Amendment operates as a barrier to the discovery of truth. Most other privileges, however, are designed to promote relationships of unquestioned social value -- for example, marital or doctor-patient privileges. In contrast, the Fifth Amendment applies, as one scholar has put it, &quot;only to persons who have been breakers of the criminal law or believe they may be charged as such.&quot;    Allowing such a privilege to public officials seems more than a little odd. An official, after all, is a public trustee -- an individual whom the public vests with special powers on condition he wield those powers for the common good. The official vows to adhere to the highest standards of honesty and integrity in the conduct of his office, to be loyal to the public interest and to be accountable for his actions.    These duties and obligations are all undermined by the privilege against self-incrimination. To begin with, the privilege plainly undercuts the obligation of accountability. An official can resist any formal inquiry into the conduct of his office by refusing to answer questions on ground of self-incrimination. In many cases, moreover, the refusal to testify will occur not in public but before a grand jury, whose proceedings are secret.    The privilege is similarly at odds with the official's promise to perform his duties with honesty and integrity. After all, if the official remains faithful to his vow of integrity, he cannot incriminate himself by testifying about his conduct in office. The very act of claiming the privilege is a signal that the official has breached his oath or believes he may be charged as such.    The public trust would be well served if officials were required to waive the privilege as a condition to the receipt of power. To be sure, one could argue that such a waiver would lead to abuse by unscrupulous prosecutors. But this argument ignores the legal constraints that prevent prosecutors from abusing their investigative powers.    We come, then, to the constitutional question. The issue here is whether the proposed waiver would be sufficiently &quot;voluntary&quot; to satisfy the Constitution. The Supreme Court has repeatedly held that a state cannot require a public employee to waive the privilege by threatening to fire him if he fails to do so. The court has reasoned that the threat of losing a job is coercive in nature.    This element of coercion, however, isn't present if the waiver occurs before the candidate has taken office. At that point, the candidate has no &quot;job&quot; to forfeit, nor does he have any right or entitlement to the powers of the position. His decision, accordingly, is wholly voluntary. He can either take office and assume the duties of public service, or he can decline office and preserve his right to remain silent.    But even if the waiver is voluntary, another issue remains: Can the public properly condition the acquisition of power on the candidate's willingness to surrender a constitutional right? Though the issue is not free from doubt, the answer appears to be yes. The Supreme Court has upheld the validity of agreements in which individuals have accepted restraints on a constitutional right in exchange for a public benefit. In 1980, for example, the court upheld an agreement requiring individuals to give up certain First Amendment rights as a condition of employment with the CIA.    Arguably, therefore, the proposed waiver is constitutional. It may well be an idea whose time has come.    ---   Mr. Ferguson is a federal prosecutor in Chicago.    (See: &quot;Clarification&quot;: WSJ Jan. 27, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>