<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871007-0139 </DOCNO><HL> School District Fails Blacks, Foils Reforms---By George A. Mitchell</HL><DD> 10/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A group of black community leaders in Milwaukee is challenging the public-school monopoly's failure to teach children from poor families. These leaders want greater authority to try what national and local research shows will work: high standards and expectations, more parental responsibility, and greater accountability to parents for results.    This effort challenges the way urban schools are governed and would mean a transfer of power from bureaucrats and union leaders to parents, principals and classroom teachers. If successful it could cause a reappraisal of how American cities address the minority education crisis.    The Milwaukee school establishment has reacted as any strong monopoly would: It has tried to crush any discussion that might legitimate the proposals, which include either a new, independent school district or more autonomy within the current system. These reactions highlight the dual crisis in American public education -- the failure of most poor minority children to learn and the stubborn refusal of urban school leaders to discuss reforms that research shows could make a difference.    The main source of irritation to the education monopoly is the proposed option of creating a new school district composed of several black inner-city schools with a total population of about 7,000 that are now in the Milwaukee Public Schools system, which teaches 95,000 children and is the nation's 21st largest. The system's enrollment is 65% minority. Under the option, Milwaukee's top-heavy central bureaucracy would face certain reductions, because the plan would shift millions in state aid to the new district. The goal is increased academic achievement, resulting from more parental involvement, more accountability to parents, and greater autonomy for educators at the school level.    Research shows these factors are conducive to learning and usually exist in small systems not dominated by an authority-conscious central bureaucracy.    Another essential ingredient for learning is high expectations. Inner-city parents deserve educational leaders with confidence in the ability of their children to learn, yet many of those running the Milwaukee public schools lack optimism. The district's last official plan projects that blacks won't score as well as whites on achievement tests for 10 years. Joyce Mallory, a black member and former president of the school board, scoffs at the suggestion black students could do as well as whites from the suburbs. These educators explain their low expectations by focusing on problems beyond their control -- broken homes, teen-age pregnancy -- thus attempting to insulate themselves from blame.    One impetus for the proposed district is research by a blue-ribbon state commission I chaired that studied public schools in Milwaukee and its suburbs. The commission's report identified which schools were working, which were not, and why.    The study disclosed a dramatic disparity in learning between minority children from poor families and white students from middle- and upper-income homes. The gap is widest in the high schools, most of which are integrated. In Milwaukee, the odds are that a black or Hispanic child will drop out of school or be graduated with a D average.    More significant was the finding that educational failure among poor minority children is not universal in the Milwaukee area. The Milwaukee research mirrors studies elsewhere, summarized by U.S. Education Secretary William Bennett in publications called &quot;What Works&quot; and &quot;Schools That Work.&quot; The evidence is that learning occurs across the economic and racial spectrum when certain conditions are present. Major findings reported by the Milwaukee study:    Where teachers and parents report effective parent involvement, &quot;test scores are higher, failures and dropouts fewer, and attendance rates higher. Teacher perceptions of {parent involvement} are the most consistent indicator of performance we analyzed.&quot;    &quot;There is a consistent pattern of expectations that develops on the part of students and teachers. . . . The positive schools in terms of performance have the highest reported levels of expectations.&quot;    &quot;An effective school, which in the eyes of teachers has stronger leadership, standards, expectations, and teamwork, performs better with students from low and higher income homes and in the city and suburbs.&quot;    A smaller, more accountable school system could help parents take more responsibility for their children and create a school climate responsive to parental input.    The blacks in Milwaukee who are pushing this idea know that &quot;decentralization&quot; efforts such as New York City's have had problems. They believe the key is a true transfer of authority and responsibility. This is demonstrated by four nonsectarian private schools in Milwaukee with an 80% minority enrollment that achieve better results with low-income minority students than the public schools do (at a fraction of the public-school budget). Parochial schools in Milwaukee, with a 25% minority enrollment, also consistently report better achievement for minority students.    The Milwaukee proposal also emphasizes giving poor parents more choice in school selection, the kind already held by many middle- and upper-income parents. Parents in the new district could enroll their children outside it if they felt a better education would result. Proponents state in their literature that &quot;no child would attend a school in this district if his or her parent did not make that choice.&quot;    Race has been a source of controversy in discussion of the proposed new district. For years, school officials quietly condoned the segregated status of the schools in question. The same officials now shout &quot;Racism!&quot; at the blacks who propose the separate district and accuse them of wanting to undo civil-rights progress. The school board's attorney has labeled the plan unconstitutional, although it has not even been drafted in bill form yet. And after Republican Gov. Tommy Thompson expressed interest in the proposals, city school officials threatened to sue the state. Proponents of the new district say their bill will encourage and enable white parents outside the district to transfer students to the schools. The proponents believe this will happen when the schools become effective.    Opponents of the new proposal say they have better ways to improve schools. They cite the need for higher taxes to finance lower elementary class sizes, which they claim give suburban schools a big edge.    However, the Milwaukee study commission found &quot;no discernible relationship between student-teacher ratios and any performance measure,&quot; a conclusion reinforced by most national research. A recent independent study of metropolitan Milwaukee schools found little city-suburban difference in class size anyway, with 26 students per class in Milwaukee and 24 in its suburbs. The call for smaller class size is largely a way to preserve and create more teacher jobs and justify seeking big increases in state and federal aid.    One area where the district doesn't cut corners is in administrative staff. Despite economies of scale that might be expected in one large district, 17 smaller suburban districts have much lower overhead costs. Milwaukee has two-thirds of the metro public-school students but almost 80% of the administrative staff.    Some important Milwaukee educators reject the effort to stonewall discussion of the black leaders' proposals. Sam Yarger, dean of education at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, says the plan has problems but &quot;puts the right questions on the center stage and deserves serious discussion.&quot; He says the controversy it has sparked is predictable, because it &quot;has irritated almost every identifiable interest group in town.&quot;    A few years ago, these issues would have had no chance of serious consideration, because they contradict the once-conventional wisdom that more learning requires large infusions of new money and that minority students can't achieve unless mixed with middle-class whites.    Now, the political reaction shows more willingness to discuss the plan. State legislators plan hearings. Gov. Thompson and Democratic Assembly Speaker Tom Loftus say the educational issues merit study. Mr. Loftus asked authors of the plan to discuss it at a national conference on minority education later this month. Three of five major Milwaukee mayoral candidates say the proposal warrants a close look. The school establishment's resistance to change, except on its own terms, remains one of the biggest obstacles to poor children's advancement.    ---   Mr. Mitchell, a Milwaukee real-estate and education consultant, chaired the 1984-85 study of the area's schools. </TEXT></DOC>