<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0175 </DOCNO><HL> Enduring Service:A 'Settlement House'Has New ConstituencyBut Same Old Mission---New York's Henry Street IsSocial Force in the Ghetto,Giving Shelter, Counsel---Fighting Bureaucracy as Well---By Janice C. SimpsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At the turn of the century, &quot;everyone in the neighborhood knew about the Henry Street Settlement House,&quot; recalls Benjamin Schoenfein, a former chairman of Bank Leumi Trust Co., who grew up on the city's Lower East Side.    Back then, newly arrived immigrants, mostly Jews from Eastern Europe, came to Henry Street to learn English and vocational skills to make their way in their adopted land. Their children flocked there for after-school basketball games or lessons in democracy from volunteers such as Henry Morgenthau Jr., later the secretary of the Treasury, and Herbert Lehman, later the governor of New York. The settlement house was &quot;the bridge over the tracks to another world for the whole community,&quot; says Mr. Schoenfein, now 87.    Nearly a century later, Henry Street remains a bridge. But passage out of the underclass is a bigger problem today.    Henry Street's main constituents now are blacks, Hispanics and Asians, who aren't as easily assimilated into the white culture. Government funds -- and bureaucratic constraints -- have largely supplanted the time, money and vision invested by reform-minded benefactors. Contemporary social ills -- chronic drug abuse, mental illness and shattered families -- are far more resistant to cure than the sweatshop conditions, poor sanitation and illiteracy that early reformers fought.    Despite the obstacles, some 600 settlement or neighborhood houses, as many now call themselves, still exist in ghetto neighborhoods around the nation. Weathering swings in public concern, they survive both as monuments to an unfinished dream and as windows onto the changing faces of poverty and social welfare.    Jim Robinson, Henry Street's gruff-spoken director of youth services, recites a litany of changes he has seen in 20 years of social service: &quot;I have many more competitors,&quot; he says. &quot;Before, I just fought heroin, but crack is twice as dangerous. Institutional racism is worse now. Cops are younger and more frightened. The kids coming in are worse off. There's more neglect at home and child abuse. The schools are worse. Illiteracy is up. Kids are dropping out in junior high. The church has less effect. And Reaganomics is making less money available despite Mrs. Reagan's public campaign.&quot;    Settlement workers like Mr. Robinson are the infantry in the battle against social decay, and it is their intimate, day-to-day involvement with the needy that sets settlement houses apart from much of the welfare establishment. Henry Street offers a supermarket of social services under one roof -- and in the neighborhood where its clients live. (The name settlement derives from the practice of early reformers to &quot;settle&quot; among the poor they served.)    The center's approach contrasts sharply with the government's, where a maze of agencies offer ever more specialized &quot;boutique&quot; services to the poor, who often flounder under the complexity and indifference of the system.    By tradition, settlement houses addressed the root causes of social problems, rather than merely provided Band-Aid relief. Today, that philosophy is being challenged -- some say compromised -- by their increasing reliance on public financing. The government money that washed over settlement houses during the Great Society years freed them from the caprice of private donors. &quot;It was easier to be dependent on the government than on Daddy Warbucks,&quot; explains Bertram Beck, who headed Henry Street in those days. But government grants come with strings attached, and also are harder to come by now, in the Reagan years.    As a result, critics say, creeping grantsmanship has damped the reformist ardor that, in an earlier era, had settlement houses aggressively lobbying for the nation's first kindergartens and convalescent homes, child-labor laws and consumer leagues. &quot;How can we fight against the hand that's feeding us?&quot; laments Joseph Jenkins, who heads a federation of New York's 35 settlements.    Settlements have adapted to survive. When government funds for job-training and youth programs were cut, San Diego's Neighborhood House dropped them and concentrated on the Head Start and mental-health programs still in favor. Anthony Wagner, the head of the Pillsbury United settlement in Minneapolis, complains that good grant-seekers aren't necessarily the best street workers. &quot;What the funders want are people who are articulate, who can write well. What I need are people who can go into a group of black teen-agers and say, 'Get yourselves together, you --,' and be respected for saying it.&quot;    Such problems dominate life at Henry Street as well. Director Daniel Kronenfeld says his biggest problem is the financial uncertainty. &quot;Head workers like myself are torn between the time we give to the institution and the hustling all the time.&quot; In 1965, Henry Street subsisted on $800,000 a year, all of it from private sources. Its budget for the fiscal year ended June 30 was $7.4 million, of which almost 80% came from government sources.    When reformer Lillian Wald founded the Henry Street Settlement in 1893, financier Jacob Schiff cheerfully wrote the checks that enabled her to aid the needy and buy the red-brick town house that still serves as settlement headquarters. The teeming tenements that then lined the Lower East Side streets have been replaced by towering public-housing projects and middle-income apartments. But poverty is still the common denominator: More than half the households in the community have annual incomes under $10,000. Most of Henry Street's resources go to the very young or very old -- the fastest-growing segments of the nation's poor.    About 3,000 youngsters between the ages of six and 18 take part in the settlement's youth programs, which include athletics, tutoring, extensive arts facilities and an innovative alternative to street gangs known as the Pioneers, a sort of amalgam of the Boy Scouts and Marine boot camp. Recruits, chosen for leadership potential, must observe a curfew to allow time for homework. Afternoons, they perform community service, such as directing sports programs for younger children.    More than half the students at nearby Seward Park High School drop out before graduation, says Mr. Robinson, the youth director. But, he estimates, 80% of those who make it through the Pioneer program go on to college. One Pioneer alumnus returned to Henry Street as a counselor after earning his sociology degree. Two others -- a stockbroker and a lawyer -- each have pledged $1,000 scholarships to Pioneers graduating this year. Last year, the settlement helped obtain $1 million in scholarship offers for some 50 neighborhood youngsters.    It rankles Mr. Robinson that youth programs like the Pioneers are out of favor with bureaucrats. &quot;There's very little money for prevention,&quot; he complains. &quot;The money is available after kids get in trouble, but there's no money to keep them out of trouble.&quot;    The elderly are also a concern. Loneliness is endemic among the neighborhood's elderly, most of whom live alone on small fixed incomes. Every day, around 175 of them seek companionship at Henry Street's senior-citizen center, in the basement of a nearby housing project. At midday, the center serves a 60-cent hot lunch. The meals are kosher, in deference to the large number of elderly Jews in the community. Recently, however, Hispanics have demanded their cuisine as well.    For elderly shut-ins, the settlement operates a visiting service, fostering the sort of neighborly concern that urban crime and alienation can kill. Its homemaking service for the elderly and handicapped employs unskilled women who might otherwise be collecting welfare.    Two mornings a week, homemaker Carmen Camacho cleans for Nathan Letterer, a 75-year-old retired foreman who is nearly blind in one eye. A bachelor whose eight brothers and sisters are all dead, Mr. Letterer says, &quot;I'm a loner. I don't need no friends.&quot;    Miss Camacho, who lives across the street, knows better. She can see Mr. Letterer's apartment from her kitchen window, and if she doesn't see him moving around, she calls. Often, she says, it is hard to get people like Mr. Letterer off the phone. &quot;They are so alone, and when someone calls, they talk and talk,&quot; she says. Some Saturdays, Miss Camacho treats him to Chinese food that she pays for herself. &quot;She's my friend,&quot; Mr. Letterer says. &quot;She comes to visit me. She's a very nice lady.&quot;    At another New York settlement, the plight of the elderly has rekindled the sort of activism on which the movement was founded. Goddard-Riverside Community Center on the Upper West Side waged a successful two-year court battle to build housing for the elderly and handicapped over the objection of local residents. Now it is fighting to block the conversion of single-room-occupancy hotels into luxury rentals and condominiums.    Settlement workers often struggle to effect change while satisfying rules of bureaucrats far removed from the fray. Larraine Ahto, the director of Henry Street's mental-health clinic, complains that fund providers are faddish and demand quick results, although success is hard to measure in areas like mental health.    She cites the case of a 30-year-old clinic outpatient who has never held a job and still lives with his parents. The Jewish High Holy Days, when his brother visits, are particularly stressful for him, and in 1985 he attempted suicide. Last year around that time, he asked to be recommitted to the hospital. The settlement staff considers this progress, because he sought help rather than resort to another suicide attempt. They worry, however, that those financing the center will consider his treatment a failure because of his return to the hospital.    Staffers say their daily contact with the neighborhood's needy helps them identify problems -- and revise programs as necessary. Thus, when patients began dropping out of treatment at the mental-health center, the staff members abandoned the traditional psychoanalytic approach to counseling. They now stress short-term intervention to resolve specific problems, and include the patient's family in counseling.    One seven-year-old Hispanic boy was referred to the center after he had attempted to set his school on fire. Social workers, interviewing his grandmother, with whom he lived, unearthed a web of family problems, including drugs, violence and prison. The grandmother had taken custody of the boy and his 11-year-old cousin, and she refused to even talk about their mothers.    The family was assembled for a videotaped counseling session. At first, the two mothers spoke only to the social worker, who suggested that they tell their problems directly to their mother, who had custody of the two boys. Tearfully, the younger women began to talk of their desire to raise their sons and of their shame about their past. Tears rolled down the grandmother's cheeks, too, as she listened. After a long silence, the 11-year-old spoke up, asking why his mother didn't want him to live with her. The sobbing woman insisted she did, and they embraced.    After one more such session, Ms. Ahto says, both boys were reunited with their mothers.    Henry Street began grappling with the problem of the homeless long before the issue captured national attention. Its Urban Family Center, founded in 1972, provides some 90 homeless families and battered women with temporary apartments in a renovated city-owned building where resident social workers offer vocational, educational and personal counseling.    Shirley Hall spent two weeks in a public shelter where she and her eight children slept on cots and shared meals with scores of other homeless families. Then she heard about Henry Street.    There, at the center's 96-unit shelter, the Hall family was given a furnished three-bedroom apartment, complete with crib for the 18-month-old baby, Shannel. The older children joined the shelter's after-school program. And Mrs. Hall, who said she had &quot;cried every night&quot; in the first shelter, could talk with a social worker about her frustration, shame and despair.    Within four months, center staffers found Mrs. Hall a four-bedroom house and enrolled her in a city program that subsidizes her rent, which is nearly twice the $383 that welfare provides. &quot;Being homeless is the bottom of the pit, and I couldn't climb out alone,&quot; Mrs. Hall says.    Still, happy endings -- and fundamental solutions -- are rare. Mrs. Hall's new apartment is up for sale, and she worries that she will again be cast onto the street. Observes Henry Street's Mr. Kronenfeld: &quot;We're seeing a second generation of homeless people who were there when they were eight or nine years old who are now there with their kids.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>