<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880428-0072 </DOCNO><HL> Defusing a Bomb: Doctors and Patients Hope AZT Will Help To Stave Off AIDS --- Drug Is Toxic and Unproven, But Its Use Is Studied In People Still Healthy --- Prospect of a Million Dead </HL><AUTHOR> Marilyn Chase (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><DATELINE> SAN FRANCISCO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Since blood testing for AIDS became available in 1985, many infected people have been immobilized by their terror. &quot;It was regarded as a death sentence,&quot; says Mark Ryan, a 30-year-old former disk jockey. &quot;People assumed you could only sit and wait.&quot; Wait to become sick, wait to die.    For many months now, the federal Centers for Disease Control has estimated that as many as 1.5 million Americans are infected. Many of them -- perhaps nearly all -- will eventually have AIDS. AIDS is invariably fatal.    So medical science is in a race against time. Without a preventive, without a cure, the toll of suffering and death is likely to be very great.    But, even with no cure in sight, people who felt they were living on death row are beginning to be more optimistic about their prospects. Those who are infected but still healthy have some reason now to hope that disease can be staved off -- for months, maybe even years -- by taking AZT or some other antiviral agent.    AZT (azidothymidine) has been used since 1985 to prolong the lives of people with AIDS, at first just with those who had suffered pneumonia, then with other AIDS patients, all of them people who were dying. Using the drug with healthy, infected individuals is new, controversial and unproven. Experiments are under way. Hope is tempered with fear because this potent drug can have serious side effects and may well damage the health of people who aren't even sick.    Till recently, a good many gay men who suspect they are infected didn't bother getting blood tests. What was the point? AIDS is incurable, and a positive test result merely put them in a state of dreadful uncertainty, while inviting trouble with employers, insurance companies and the neighbors. But the possibility that AZT might keep disease at bay changes everything. More and more gay men are getting blood tests, enrolling in experiments, trying to stay healthy. The infected-well are taking action.    &quot;I can't impress upon you how important it is to know your status, to aggressively pursue life,&quot; says Mr. Ryan, who had blood drawn in 1984 while participating in a study of gay men in San Francisco, but waited until this year to ask what the result was. Although, as it turned out, he did test positive, he isn't sick. He is taking AZT prescribed by his doctor, and an inhalant called pentamidine, which he says &quot;is like sucking hairspray for breakfast.&quot;    The National Institutes of Health is sponsoring one AZT experiment involving 1,600 infected people who have no symptoms except, in some instances, swollen lymph nodes. &quot;This is the most important drug trial in terms of public-health impact,&quot; says Paul Volberding of San Francisco General Hospital. &quot;If it doesn't work -- unless another drug comes along very fast -- we'll have great concern. If it works, it will change the course of this epidemic.&quot;    Doctors are at a turning point in the seven-year history of acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Until now, most drug research has focused on those already sick with AIDS -- 60,583 in the U.S. so far (33,926 people in this country have died). But researchers are trying to head off an even greater tragedy involving the many, many more who, like Mr. Ryan, are presumed to have the AIDS virus coursing through their bloodstreams.    Scientists' sense of urgency is all the greater because of how doctors now view the prognosis of infected people. Once it was hoped that only a minority of those with AIDS antibodies would fall ill. The incubation period of the disease was poorly understood and its duration underestimated. But in the years since 1981 when the first AIDS cases were recognized, a consensus has been forming that most if not all infected individuals will eventually develop AIDS or its frequent precursor -- AIDS related complex.    Andrew Moss, an epidemiologist at the University of California at San Francisco, says a just-completed study suggests that about half of infected individuals will contract AIDS within six years of their infection with the HIV virus, and an additional 25% will contract ARC within the same period. If that scenario is borne out generally, a million or more cases of disease are brewing that will soon cause symptoms of illness.    &quot;We need to move quickly,&quot; Dr. Volberding says. Doctors believe that most infected homosexuals were exposed to the virus in 1981 and 1982. For them, the infection's average six-to-eight-year latency, during which people may feel fine, is ending; those who aren't sick now soon may be. &quot;The clock is ticking,&quot; Dr. Volberding says.    Although there are dozens of promising drugs under investigation, AZT was chosen because of its track record. It is the only one to have received Food and Drug Administration approval as a treatment for certain AIDS cases. It hasn't been approved for use in symptomless people, but a doctor can legally prescribe it for anyone. Doctors who use it with sick patients say that it seems to lengthen life by 12 to 18 months in those who can tolerate it.    But it is no panacea, even at its best. &quot;After 12 to 18 months, its beneficial effects seem to abate,&quot; says David Chernoff, a physician at the University of California at San Francisco. &quot;Patients get new infections, or toxicities develop.&quot; Toxic side effects range from unpleasant-nausea and headaches -- to dangerous-bone-marrow suppression leading to anemia.    Still, &quot;people (with AIDS) are definitely living longer,&quot; reports Marcus Conant, a San Francisco doctor. &quot;Two to three years ago, I hadn't seen people live more than 18 months following a bout of pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.&quot; Now he says he has many AIDS patients who have survived two years and are still holding on. Dr. Samuel Broder of NIH has witnessed the same phenomenon: &quot;The outpatient clinics are jammed with patients who would have been dead two years ago. The shift is startling.&quot; Helping AZT extend survival, doctors say, are other drugs, such as the pentamidine inhalant, that help prevent the pneumonia that is the most frequent cause of AIDS deaths.    The hope of the NIH study is that AZT may work even better in newly infected people who have yet to be debilitated by disease. &quot;The task will be easier while patients are still healthy,&quot; Dr. Volberding says. &quot;Their ability to tolerate the drug is better, and their immune system is intact.&quot; Dr. Conant concurs: So far only 10% of his patients suffer AZT's severe anemia if they start AZT while still relatively healthy, compared with 40% to 50% who started it after being diagnosed with AIDS. Still, he cautions, these are impressions, not scientific findings. The NIH study of 1,600 healthy virus carriers may produce proof.    Hopes and expectations vary widely. Anthony Fauci, the physician who presides over the trial as head of NIH's AIDS effort, says the ultimate goal is to stop the disease. &quot;But even if we achieve something less,&quot; such as reducing the incidence of AIDS in infected people to 10%, &quot;it would still be a major achievement.&quot;    Encouraging doctors' hopes, a Dutch study recently reported in the British medical journal the Lancet that AZT lowered virus levels and shrank swollen lymph nodes in 18 infected men who did not yet have AIDS. They were given the drug for up to 24 weeks. Still, skeptical scientists fear it won't prevent AIDS, merely postpone it. &quot;I said to my doctor, 'Am I kidding myself? Will I be alive in three years?'&quot; says one test participant. &quot;The doctor said, 'Yes. But you may not be as well.'&quot;    One doctor counsels patients that the drug might buy them &quot;one good year, and then maybe there'll be a better drug. . . . It's a roadblock for the virus.&quot;    Others are irrepressibly optimistic. Tom Porter, a 34-year-old export agent in San Francisco who is already sick and not in the NIH study, takes AZT by prescription. (He has mild ARC, including swollen glands; suppressed T-cells in his blood, suggesting immune deficiency; and oral thrush, a fungus disease in his mouth.) Still, he declares: &quot;I have no side effects, I feel fine, I've got a positive mental outlook, and I think I can beat it.&quot;    Wooing test subjects for the NIH study wasn't easy, though. For one thing, a healthy person incurs risks when he agrees to take dangerous drugs for the sake of science. For another, one doesn't know in a study of this sort whether he is being given AZT or a placebo. If what you want is a prescription for AZT, you can get that from a willing doctor. (Of course, then, it will cost you big money -- about $8,000 a year at current retail prices. The AZT that NIH dispenses in its study is free to patients.)    Finally, some people are too angry to be interested in AZT, angry at the Food and Drug Administration for the pace of its approval of new drugs, angry at Burroughs-Wellcome, the maker of AZT, for charging so much. &quot;AZT has gotten bad press,&quot; says Dr. David Chernoff, a University of California researcher. Even though test subjects get the drug for free, it has become politically tainted. Thus, he says, &quot;It's been difficult to recruit people.&quot;    However, no responsible person in the NIH experiment promotes wholesale purchase of AZT by infected people who are still healthy. For one thing, there aren't data to prove it can prevent AIDS. Moreover, this potent antiviral drug can starve the bone marrow, leading to such serious conditions as anemia and leukopenia. Thus many doctors -- and patients, too -- consider the trade-off unacceptable. However, when patients' health begins to deteriorate, when immune systems are clearly failing, many doctors feel free to begin experimental therapy.    Gay men with sad memories of other drug tests also shun AZT experiments. &quot;My lover died while taking suramin,&quot; says a San Francisco artist. The artist, too, took the now-abandoned AIDS therapy, and that was enough for him: &quot;I've been a guinea pig once,&quot; he says. Explains Dr. Walter Krampf, a San Francisco general practitioner: &quot;Gays at this point feel like canaries in a coal mine.&quot;    Which is not to say that people who know they are infected are doing nothing. For the disaffected or the desperate, the street offers a smorgasbord of self-treatments. &quot;People are peddling everything from penicillin to energy soup,&quot; says an infected East Coast man. A national conference on health fraud recently warned that purveyors of phony AIDS treatments will take in $1 billion this year. Health-food stores promote herbs and vitamins. Buyers' clubs flourish in Manhattan and San Francisco to help the infected and the sick obtain experimental drugs like dextran sulfate, imported from Japan, where it is available over the counter as a way to reduce blood cholesterol. Look-alike versions of the experimental drug AL-721, an egg-lecithin concoction, are readily available and the real thing may soon be marketed as a food supplement.    One night recently, a standing-room-only crowd jammed a church just off Castro Street in San Francisco for a meeting of the Healing Alternatives Buyers' Club. Frail men leaning on canes mingled with robust-looking men in running shoes, to trade news on the latest popular remedies. Dr. Chernoff says such groups promote pseudoscience. But the club's leader, John Fox, fires back, &quot;People are out there dying in the street.&quot;    Resistance to AIDS antibody testing dies hard, especially among certain civil liberties groups. But the tide is turning as AIDS organizations such as San Francisco's Project Inform urge men to seek testing and treatment &quot;in the best interests of their health,&quot; says founder Martin Delaney. With early testing and therapy, he believes AIDS infection could become &quot;a manageable chronic illness,&quot; and its complications, such as pneumocystis pneumonia, needn't catch people off guard.    Participants in AZT experiments often say they took years to summon the courage to face their test results. While the bad news of a positive result is devastating, many people make the point that knowing their status replaced &quot;fear with facts.&quot; Says Mark Ryan: &quot;The uncertainty almost killed me. Knowing gave me release.&quot; Seeking treatment, he says, was &quot;a way of taking control.&quot;    &quot;AZT isn't a wonder drug. But somebody's got to do this,&quot; says a 44-year-old, HIV-infected clinical psychologist who is a subject of the NIH study in Boston. He gets regular monitoring and doesn't know whether he's getting the drug or a placebo. But he and his doctors agree that if his blood counts suddenly plunge, he'll go off the study and take AZT for certain. Meanwhile, he pursues his psychology practice with new appreciation of life.    Getting involved in a preventive treatment program has caused some people to change the way they live. Mr. Ryan, for example, says that by age 26 &quot;I'd had enough sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll for four lives.&quot; He blames alcohol and cocaine for reducing his inhibitions and leaving him open to risky behavior and AIDS infection. Today, he works with the National Council on Alcoholism and seeks to wean other gay men away from chemical dependency. &quot;I want to do something for the larger community,&quot; he says.    &quot;AZT emboldened me&quot; to seek both testing and treatment, says a 32-year-old East Coast marketing executive, who is now in the NIH test. &quot;It's part of doing what is humanly possible (for his health), along with not drinking, not smoking, and having safer sex.&quot; He says participating in the study was a catalyst; it inspired him to make other changes: losing 15 pounds, joining AA, renewing his religious faith.    Self-interest is the prime mover. A 35-year-old Wall Street professional says he made his move to get tested and to join the experiment after a close friend died of AIDS. &quot;I wasn't sure,&quot; he says. &quot;The jury is still out on AZT. If I were sure, I'd just buy it. But one of the benefits of the study is that I'm under close medical supervision. I didn't have any altruistic feelings. My primary motivation is that it could do good for me.&quot; He wasn't sick, and he isn't now. He feels fit enough to exercise at the gym three times a week.    But where self-interest lies isn't entirely clear when one may be taking a toxic drug that can upset an otherwise normal blood count, even as it attacks a lethal virus. One patient wrote this about his journey into experimental medicine: &quot;As I lifted the three little maroon and white capsules to my lips, it seemed that I was poisoning myself and saving my life, all in a single gesture.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>