<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870108-0122 </DOCNO><HL> When the NSC Worked---By Paul B. Henze</HL><DD> 01/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   A look back at how well Jimmy Carter's National Security Council functioned under Zbigniew Brzezinski can help in the understanding of how the operation broke down under President Reagan.    Mr. Brzezinski's memoirs often understate or fail to describe how he kept an inexperienced and sometimes naive president from falling into difficulty, how patiently and persistently he coordinated competing bureaucratic jurisdictions and contentious personalities vying to influence or pre-empt Mr. Carter's decisions, and how he culled and forged a disparate, politically diverse staff into a disciplined team supporting and protecting the president.    Mr. Brzezinski kept tight rein on his staff. At the end of every working day each staff member wrote an evening report summing up all important activities in which he had been involved. Mr. Brzezinski finished his day by reading through a thick sheaf of them. Staff officers would find their reports returned to their desks the next morning with Mr. Brzezinski's notes, questions and advice. Only exceptionally and with clear presidential approval did the national security adviser or his staff become involved in operations themselves. All travel by staff members, domestic or foreign, required Mr. Brzezinski's approval.    Despite fundamental differences in their outlook on the world, Mr. Brzezinski's day-to-day relationship with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance was usually better than the press realized. But the State Department as an institution was a constant source of frustration not only to Mr. Brzezinski but eventually to Mr. Carter. Its policy papers were often so long, so hedged and filled with meaningless &quot;options,&quot; that it was difficult to discover what was being recommended. The Defense Department, for all its size, was easier to deal with.    The Carter administration never achieved a full consensus on the ultimate purposes of foreign policy. Emotional commitment to arms control as an absolute priority for some individuals in the administration skewed formulation and execution of policy toward a broad range of important national-security questions. The shock that the president experienced when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan reflected his persistent naivete nourished by the wishful thinking of Mr. Vance.    Yet, during the entire year preceding the invasion, an NSC working group had met weekly to assess Afghan developments and provided Mr. Brzezinski with reports of the mounting seriousness of the situation. These were regularly laid before a president who chose to ignore their import. No national security adviser can overcome the willful refusal of a president to accept his advice, but the course of events will destroy illusions, as happened in this instance, and Mr. Brzezinski's position was further strengthened. It was he who remained at Mr. Carter's right hand through the administration's last dismal days.    Somehow, in the euphoria of electoral triumph, Ronald Reagan failed to take this experience into account. He entered office with clearer views about foreign policy than Mr. Carter did, but he was disinclined to become involved in the details of national-security issues. His first choice as secretary of state, Alexander Haig, was a dynamic activist, but the first national security adviser was a tertiary figure with a meager record as either theorist or operator in the field of international affairs. President Reagan downgraded the NSC staff both in function and status. Only a few outstanding individuals were appointed to it and most of these, for example Russian historian Richard Pipes and Middle East specialist Geoffrey Kemp, left after relatively short tenures. Meanwhile, Richard Allen fell from grace and was replaced by a man of integrity with close ties to the president but no international-affairs experience at all.    The activist Haig departed and George Shultz, a man much more inclined to manage than to conceptualize or lead, took over the State Department. The principle Mr. Reagan adopted at the beginning of his administration of State Department supremacy in coordinating national-security matters, taking charge of interagency committees and working groups, remained unchanged. Thus a president who advocated a strong and assertive foreign policy was left with a weak and poorly coordinated structure to manage it. The weakness was, however, not immediately apparent -- least of all, it seems, to the president himself.    During the second and third years of the Reagan presidency, an experienced individual with stature in the position of national security adviser might have restored the NSC to its proper role of coordinating and monitoring national-security operations as defined in the National Security Act of 1947. William Clark had little zest for the job, however. He regarded it as a temporary burden and looked forward to leaving it. His successor, a conscientious former Marine, would never, had he not been next in line as deputy, have merited consideration for the position at all. Not surprisingly, he also tired of a position where pressure was heavy but authority unclear. Frequent changes in subordinate NSC staff officers did not represent a gain in expertise or distinction, as had often proved true in previous administrations.    Under Mr. Shultz, the State Department performed as it always does when it tries to lead and coordinate the foreign-policy process in the absence of an exceptionally dynamic secretary: parochially and spottily. Its preoccupations center on routine diplomacy and short-term issues. The department always has difficulty giving appropriate weight to military and economic considerations. More often than not in this administration, State has been ineffective in convincing Congress of the efficacy of the president's foreign policy and the rationale of his national-security concepts.    Whatever the multiple investigations now under way conclude, mere lust to be active is unlikely to have been the prime factor propelling Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North to resort to unusual channels to further the president's aims in Iran and Central America. Amateurish and muddled as these initiatives turned out to be, they came about because the routine processes of policy formation and operational planning centered in the State Department did not produce initiatives that offered promise of attaining the results the president desired. All the policy objectives by themselves make sense: (1) get hostages released; (2) keep openings to Iran that can be used in the post-Khomeini era; (3) oppose communism and advance the cause of peace and democracy in Central America. It was linking them all together in the framework of complex arms deals that was inane.    A national security adviser who aspired to be invisible and a progressively debilitated NSC staff were incapable of leading from strength or authority and so sought to accomplish clandestinely what was otherwise not being done, all the time assuming they were doing what the president desired.    Mr. Reagan himself must bear responsibility for this state of affairs. From the beginning he failed to appreciate the critical role a strong national security adviser with clearly defined authority can play. He was content with less than the best quality men he could have attracted to this position. A confident and experienced national security adviser would have assembled a high quality staff and enforced discipline within it.    There can be no absolute guarantee against human arbitrariness and excess. But an NSC staff led and motivated to serve the president and at the same time clear about its position as a central element in the White House structure -- preeminent in terms of coordination and oversight authority but without responsibility for operations -- is unlikely to fall victim to the illusion that it can both arbitrarily define the national interest and carry out its own schemes for furthering it.    The Reagan administration, coherent on concepts and blessed by lack of deep emotional cleavages among key personalities, failed during its first six years to implement an effective national-security coordination process. Long before the current crisis broke, the Reagan NSC operation was a disaster waiting to happen. It is to be hoped that the problem is now on its way to solution. Frank Carlucci, the fifth Reagan national security adviser, is the first who has qualifications the job demands. He is hardly to be envied in the challenge he faces, not the least part of which will be to change the habits of a president who is bored by the details of policy formulation and finds no fascination in guiding operations.    It is not merely the last two years of the Reagan presidency at risk, but the substantial accomplishments of the first six years and the capacity of the country to protect its interests in a tumultuous world. Mr. Carlucci seems to have his priorities straight: In very short order he has begun to assemble a staff with experience, knowledge and ability. If the president had understood the importance of this endeavor as he began his administration six years ago, he would have averted the crisis that has caused much embarrassment and done damage still difficult to calculate.    ---   Mr. Henze served on the NSC staff from 1977 to 1980. </TEXT></DOC>