<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. PROPOSED new procedures for superpower nuclear-arms verification.    The proposal, submitted to the Soviets at arms talks in Geneva, would scale back White House demands for on-site inspections that would verify a U.S.-Soviet medium and short-range missile pact. The State Department said the plan reflected Moscow's acceptance last month of a proposal to scrap arms in Europe and Asia. In addition, some Reagan officials have objected to Soviet access to U.S. military facilities. Meanwhile, Gorbachev urged a U.N. Security Council meeting to discuss how money saved by disarmament could be spent on economic development.    The U.S. rejected the Soviet leader's call for a U.N. summit, saying disarmament and Third World development aren't &quot;functionally interrelated.&quot;    ---   A high-ranking CIA official acknowledged that he turned a blind eye to what he suspected were White House efforts to circumvent congressional restrictions on U.S. military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels. He also said he purposely misled Congress last year about his knowledge of secret U.S. assistance to the Contras.    ---   Saudi Arabia denounced Iran's government as a &quot;group of terrorists,&quot; and said its forces would &quot;strike firmly and decisively&quot; at Iranian attempts to undermine Jidda's security. In Tunisia, Arab League foreign ministers threatened to sever ties with Tehran unless Iran accepted a U.N. call for a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war by Sept. 20.    Storm-driven sand reduced visibility in the Perisan Gulf region and added to uncertainty over the movements of the next convoy of Kuwaiti tankers. Officials in Kuwait denied reports by shipping sources that at least some of the ships in the new convoy were traveling north in the gulf.    ---   Striking black miners will vote today on an offer from South African mineowners that includes improved death benefits and vacation allowances. The bid, which doesn't include wage boosts, came during the first round of talks since the strike began. The walkout is expected to continue unless the offer is accepted.    ---   Reagan gave a speech on the Nicaraguan rebels' clandestine radio station, assuring the Contras that their fight against Managua &quot;has and always will have our support.&quot; He also questioned Nicaragua's commitment to a regional peace plan. The message was heard in parts of the country despite Sandinista jamming attempts.    Nicaragua named a four-member panel to oversee implementation of the five-nation Central American peace proposal signed Aug. 7. The commission includes the archbishop of Managua, a critic of the Sandinista government, which also said it would permit the return of exiled priests.    ---   South Korean labor tensions intensified as political activists flocked to the city of Okpo, where a striking Daewoo shipyard worker was killed in a weekend clash with police. In Seoul, students battled riot police after a memorial service for the worker, and a dissident group called for a nationwide general strike.    ---   Sudanese rebels released three American aid workers and a British nurse, seven weeks after they were abducted in southern Sudan. The four, all missionaries, appeared well when they crossed the border into Kenya, the U.S. State Department said.    ---   The French government is expected to announce today a shuffle of top posts at the Finance Ministry, the Treasury and the state-owned Banque Nationale de Paris, the country's largest bank. The shuffle still must be approved by President Mitterrand at a cabinet meeting.    ---   President Aquino partially canceled a fuel price increase, but leftist union leaders in the Philippines said a general strike called for today would proceed as planned. The military remained on full alert in Manila and other cities, where some striking transport workers have staged protests.    ---   The Commerce Department imposed a civil penalty of $381,000 on NCR Corp. for alleged violations by its foreign units of a law barring cooperation with an Arab boycott of Israel. The fine is the largest ever imposed on a U.S. firm in the 10-year history of the anti-boycott provision.    ---   Federal investigators have found additional evidence of a wrong flap setting on a Northwest Airlines jetliner that crashed Aug. 16 near Detroit. The safety board officials, however, remain uncertain whether pilot interference or mechanical problems kept a warning alarm from sounding.    ---   Panama's Noriega is being investigated by the U.S. Customs Service for possible involvement in illegal shipments of high-technology material from the U.S. to Cuba, a government source said. The investigation is the third U.S. inquiry into possible illegal activities by the military chief.    ---   The Soviet Union is prepared to accept outside safety inspections of its nuclear plants, according to a senior International Atomic Energy Agency official. The official said Moscow is to provide an observer during a nuclear plant inspection in Spain and has indicated a willingness to reciprocate.    ---   Syria fired missiles at Israeli warplanes flying reconnaissance over Lebanon's Bekaa Valley. It was the first such reported incident since Israel clashed with Syrian forces during its 1982 invasion of Lebanon. In Tel Aviv, an army spokesman said Israel was unaware of the missile attack.    ---   Israel intends to meet the threat of Soviet nuclear missiles held by its Arab opponents, Foreign Minister Peres said. He declined, however, to confirm or deny recent reports that Israel had developed nuclear arms. </TEXT></DOC>