<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870211-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Report to Bishops: Sanctions Counterproductive</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRICMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   On Jan. 27, the Southern African Catholic Bishops' Conference released the report of a special commission on economic sanctions. Following are excerpts from that report. A related editorial appears nearby {See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Sanctions Backfire&quot; -- WSJ Feb. 11, 1987}:    As anticipated, the whole issue of economic pressures has clearly had a totally counterproductive effect on government thinking. The whole sanctions issue has consolidated government in its retreat from meaningful and, indeed, any, reform. The following {points} are relevant:    --...The establishment of the new super Economic Ministry . . . seems to be designed to put into place an economy and structure to withstand siege. Government sources have recently been reported as stating that they were not concerned about world reaction anymore as nothing the government did could stem the tide of sanctions.    --The sanctions-busting effort is gaining momentum with the government cooperating in every facet. Passports of convenience appear to be fairly easily obtainable as is Reserve Bank cooperation in forming offshore operations to circumvent all kinds of trade pressures. . . .    --The State President's third economic &quot;summit&quot; (boycotted by several important business leaders), whilst giving business the chance to hammer the remaining vestiges of institutional apartheid, produced nothing, and certainly no positive government response -- only warnings to business &quot;not to meddle in politics,&quot; and strong rebukes that government must be given full support by the business sector.    --Government attitudes have become noticeably more and more defiant . . . more so than when sanctions were threatened. It is drawing more and more people into its service, making more and more people beholden to it. In just three years, its wage bill has doubled. Whilst the economy will be severely hurt by sanctions, it can survive, although for how long it is difficult to say, but those responsible for policy in the government and in government supporting roles, have effectively shielded themselves against the impact of deprivation. They will be the last to feel its effects.    --At the recent National Party Congress, political change and the fate of political detainees and future reform was not addressed.    --The incomprehensible attitude of the State President at the recent conference with certain of our Bishops, seems to supply final proof positive that the State President is totally closed to any overtures of reason or moral persuasion.    --The clampdown on the media coupled with total suppression against all sectors of opposition to the Government is further clear support for the gloomy prognosis that Government does not intend to change realistically, and certainly has no intention of admitting to any process whereby political power will be relinquished peacefully at this stage regardless of the consequences.    ---   What was anticipated by the pro-sanctions lobby early in 1986, namely an early change in Government policy with expectations of imminent meaningful black participation in a regime overcome by the pressures of economic boycotts, is not likely to materialize, and will probably only emerge but in {an} unpredictable manner, a long time ahead. The struggle is going to be arduous and lengthy, and very substantial suffering and confrontation is likely to continue to be experienced.    ---   The agricultural sector employs about 1.3 million of the economically active population of South Africa of which 1.1 million are blacks, with a further 200,000 people being employed by industries which have important forward and backward linkages with the agricultural sectors. A total embargo against exports of agricultural products could lead to the retrenchment of approximately 100,000 workers in the Western Cape and Northern and Eastern Transvaal. Workers in Natal are also threatened.    Most importantly, the agricultural sector also provides accommodation to farm workers and their families, for example housing facilities and farm schools. During 1984 nearly 460,000 pupils were enrolled in 5,477 primary farm schools. This represented about 30% of total black school enrollment in South Africa.    Again the observation of the Commission is that notwithstanding the optimistic and often brave statements made by the government and big business that the country will be able to weather sanctions, there is no doubt that sanctions are, and as their impact increases, will become, very hurtful to the economic and therefore the social fabric of the country.    ---   In summary it seems logical that black people desperately want an end to the oppression of apartheid, and are willing to endure some hardship to see this happen. It seems, however, that if the policy is likely to produce a loss of their vitally needed jobs, most blacks prove to be tentative about pressing the issue. The Commission concludes from this report that it cannot be said that blacks favor sanctions and are prepared to endure the hardship, a view apparently held by a minority only, for when the stark reality of loss of jobs is presented, then quite humanly this specter forces the preference for sanctions into the background.    ---   There is a growing awareness of social responsibility in the private sector and in the business sector. Notwithstanding that the whole issue of so-called &quot;constructive engagement&quot; has been damned by certain forces and is criticized for example by {the largely black Confederation of South African Trade Unions} as being cosmetic only, we believe that a statement which says that because black South Africans are denied political rights, efforts to improve their economic, educational and social status are cosmetic or trivial, is a fallacy.    ---   The Commission urges that the goals ahead must at all times be kept in mind. We see this primarily as twofold, namely the transformation of South Africa by the abolition of apartheid into a just society from which racial discrimination is eliminated, and in which equal opportunity with equal political rights will prevail, and at the same time the building of a base upon which a humane and just post-apartheid era with a Christian emphasis and orientation can be ushered into this country. In this the Church has a vital and far-reaching role to play. </TEXT></DOC>