<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870401-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Britons ConsiderNovel PressuresAgainst Japan---Politicians Want to RestrictEntry to London MarketAs Retaliatory Measure---This article was prepared by John Marcom Jr.,Matthew Winkler and Peter Norman</HL><DD> 04/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   British politicians think they may have found a weapon to pry the Japanese into fairer trading and more-open markets: access to London's lucrative financial markets.    The British are irate over Japanese plans to limit Cable andamp; Wireless PLC to a minor role in a communications venture, and the cabinet tomorrow will consider possible reprisals. Some politicians think the best retaliatory measure would be a novel one -- using the government's power to grant licenses to do business in London's markets. Previously, Britain and most other nations have used such powers to press for reciprocal privileges, rather than utilizing them as lever in other trade disputes.    Any such move would be fraught with risks, threatening to undercut London's role as a world financial center. But the willingness of some British politicians to consider the notion reflects the depth of frustration with existing trading rules. In a world increasingly moving toward trade in finance and services, the rules for trade in goods like cars and semiconductors seem inadequate.    The U.S. decision Friday to impose sanctions in retaliation for Japan's dumping of computer chips on the world market has increased the clamor here for some decisive reprisal against Japan.    &quot;Feelings are running high; there has been an underlying worry about Japan but it needed the catalyst of Cable andamp; Wireless to get things going,&quot; says Andrew Mackay, a Conservative member of parliament. An official at the Department of Trade and Industry puts it this way: &quot;There's a mood to get tough.&quot;    Restricting Japanese access to London's burgeoning financial markets appears to many politicians to be Britain's most effective means of fighting back. Japanese bankers and brokers already have surpassed U.S. institutions to become Britain's biggest foreign lenders, and the Japanese need London to build their international strength.    But London needs the Japanese, too. On closer examination, economists, bankers and some government officials warn that tampering with financial services is fraught with risk. Money doesn't heed customs barriers. Bankers and some government officials worry that throwing Japanese firms out could jeopardize the world role Britain has made for itself.    &quot;The City (London's financial district) could only be damaged if Japanese financial institutions are restricted here,&quot; says David Osman, international economist at James Capel andamp; Co.    Cable andamp; Wireless yesterday dashed Japanese hopes of an easy solution to the dispute, rejecting Japan's latest offer to increase its stake in the proposed venture to 5% from 3%. Cable andamp; Wireless is staying with its original aim of a much larger stake and a management role.    As trade in services grows in importance, dilemmas like Britain's will confront other countries. Rules for trade in goods are well established, with explicit room for retaliation and compensation. But rules for trade in services like communications or finance still are evolving.    Consider Britain, which has staked much of its future on developing international strength in services. It has welcomed bankers and brokers to London from all over the world, subject to reciprocal privileges for British firms in other countries. With the October deregulation of financial services, known as Big Bang, Britain took important steps to open even wider the previously protected domestic securities markets.    The Japanese, their assets swelled by an increasing trade surplus, have arrived in force. They have used the London-based Euromarkets to hone their expertise and build an international client base. London makes a good base for a broader assault on other capital markets -- especially Wall Street. Tapping huge capital pools at home, Japanese firms have been able to win business with aggressive pricing, provoking complaints from foreign rivals lacking similar access to the Japanese market.    Various estimates put the number of Japanese financial services concerns doing business in London at more than 50. They employ 5,000 Britons, up from fewer than 1,000 eight years ago.    Nomura International Ltd., the London unit of Nomura Securities Co., Japan's largest broker, is the top underwriter in the London-based Eurobond market so far this year. Last year, it helped the U.K. government sell British Gas PLC to private investors, as an underwriter of an equity offering that was equivalent to $9 billion-the world's largest. Japanese investors today own 11% of the gas utility.    Bank of England officials worry any reprisals in finance could undermine progress in winning access to Japanese markets for British institutions. &quot;Any retaliatory measures would have to be well focused and their implications thought through,&quot; says an official.    Echoing that view, Sir Nicholas Goodison, chairman of the International Stock Exchange in London, said in New York yesterday that sanctions would be a setback for London's ambition to become a major center for corporate financing and securities trading.    Any government action isn't likely until Michael Howard, a trade minister, completes a visit to Tokyo next week.    Politicians say they realize the risks of making financial issues a pawn in relations with Japan but see few alternatives. &quot;I would myself rather regret it,&quot; says Michael Grylls, a Conservative member of Parliament, &quot;but if the Japanese continue to stubbornly refuse arguments in favor of Cable andamp; Wireless, we may well have to take that action.&quot;    To politicians, the Japanese attitude toward Cable andamp; Wireless is an &quot;open and shut&quot; case of discrimination, says Mr. Mackay, the MP. Cable andamp; Wireless is widely respected here as a competitive service company; it is the first domestic competitor of giant British Telecommunications PLC and operates phone services abroad in dozens of countries. Japan would be another stop on a high-technology optical fiber &quot;highway&quot; the company wants to build linking the world's major nations.    Politicians and officials say Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's own impatience has fanned anti-Japanese sentiment lingering in parliament. Before leaving Saturday for a trip to Moscow, Mrs. Thatcher reportedly was displeased that Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone hadn't answered her letter of March 4 about Cable andamp; Wireless.    Opposition politicians contrast Britain's predicament with the U.S.'s decisive action last week on the semiconductor accord with Japan. Robin Cook, a Labor Party spokesman, termed the U.S. threat to respond with tariffs on certain electronics goods &quot;impressive&quot; because of its clearly set deadline.    &quot;As the Americans have shown, the only measures which will force the Japanese to drop unfair trade practices are those measures which hurt their industrial exports,&quot; he says. &quot;There is no reason to believe that pressure on the Japanese financial sector will result in action by their industry.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>