<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880831-0036 </DOCNO><HL> Embattled Leader: New Mexican President Is in Political Jeopardy Before Taking Office --- Winner in a Disputed Tally, Carlos Salinas Must Search For a National Following --- Harvard and a Farmer's Hut </HL><AUTHOR> Matt Moffett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A decade ago, as a Harvard doctoral candidate, Carlos Salinas de Gortari wrote a controversial thesis about the role of government spending in building political support.    Last month, as a presidential candidate, he proved it correct. Staggering to a disputed victory, Mr. Salinas lost three out of every four votes cast here in the capital, where the government underwrites everything from free public phone calls to cut-rate subway rides.    It was the worst showing in the history of Mexico's ruling party. &quot;As I have always said, subsidies do not necessarily mean votes,&quot; Mr. Salinas wryly observed afterward.    The remark is vintage Carlos Salinas. After an intellectual odyssey that took him from Harvard seminars to Mexican peasant huts to the labyrinths of state bureaucracy, the 40-year-old economist summarizes his world-view in a single sentence: &quot;A smaller state is a stronger state.&quot;    But now, the champion of lean and mean government faces the prospect of entering Mexico's highest office Dec. 1 as a political cripple. For the past six decades, Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, was a hodgepodge of groups united by the pragmatic view that working together under a strong president is better than working separately outside the system.    Then along came the technocratic Mr. Salinas, who insisted that the only cure for Mexico's ailing economy was to cut subsidies, sell state-owned enterprises and open Mexico to economic competition. In effect, he campaigned to reduce the powers of the very office he was seeking.    The result was Mexico's historic July 6 election that cracked open the one-party system like a pinata, sending its old constituents tumbling out in all directions. Fearful of the economic reforms Mr. Salinas began as budget minister and pledged to advance as president, many PRI stalwarts defected to the populist Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, who gained nearly one-third of the vote.    &quot;The job description for the Mexican president changed while Carlos Salinas was seeking the office,&quot; says Mayor Henry Cisneros of San Antonio, Texas, a Harvard classmate and friend of Mr. Salinas. &quot;He'll have to reject the imperious trappings of previous Mexican leaders and rule on persuasion and consensus, not authority and directive. He's going to have to be less a technocrat and more of a leader. He'll have to become a real politician.&quot;    Mr. Salinas's political work will begin in earnest tomorrow, when the Mexican Congress convenes and begins the two-month period in which it must ratify his fragile victory.    Mr. Salinas must find a way to appease his opposition, which continues a campaign of street demonstrations denouncing his victory as illegitimate. He must also reform the autocratic old guard within his party, whose customary powers are threatened by the rising opposition and Mr. Salinas's efforts to make government efficient.    Finally, Mr. Salinas must do something to galvanize the public, which is even cooler to the young iconoclast than it was on election day. Analysts have suggested that Mr. Salinas might try rallying the populace with everything from an all-out war on drug traffickers, to an attack on some corrupt PRI union bosses, to a much tougher line against the foreign creditors who hold Mexico's $105 billion foreign debt.    For now, all Mr. Salinas will say is that an &quot;enormous&quot; amount of political work remains to be done.    Whether he is up to the job remains questionable. Mr. Salinas and his team of foreign-educated technocrats are widely considered political novices, who on election day didn't even have the sense to place poll watchers in some 2,000 voting booths in the capital, where Mr. Cardenas racked up a suspiciously high vote. &quot;I love all of his people, but as politicians they are a fine group of economists,&quot; says Carlos Abedrop, a politically prominent banker and longtime friend of Mr. Salinas.    Mr. Salinas's capacity to inspire his followers is also limited. His voice is squeaky. He is physically unimposing, only about 5-feet-5 and 135 pounds. His baldness and wispy mustache have made him a favorite target for Mexican political cartoonists. (Mr. Salinas keeps a collection of 200 of his favorite cartoons.)    Mr. Salinas's image problem goes beyond his appearance. His political enemies have spread reports about a tragic incident from his childhood, in which the three-year-old future president and two older playmates got their hands on a loaded rifle and shot their maid dead. The incident was reported in newspapers at the time, but Mr. Salinas has never publicly commented on it.    That episode has helped draw attention to Mr. Salinas's volatile nature, which has prompted some in Mexico City to nickname him &quot;Hormiga Atomica&quot; -- &quot;Atomic Ant,&quot; after a hyperkinetic cartoon character. A cabinet minister says Mr. Salinas once lost three sets of tennis to an undersecretary, and then insisted that his opponent join him for a jog. Half an hour later, once Mr. Salinas had gained the lead, he stopped.    Even those closest to Mr. Salinas acknowledge he can be difficult. &quot;He never forgets anything. He will say 'Dad, you said this and that on this date,'&quot; says the politician's mother, Margarita de Gortari Carvajal, as her husband rolls his eyes in recognition. &quot;And Carlos always gets it right.&quot;    Clearly, Carlos thinks so too, and isn't reluctant to convey his contempt for those who he thinks get it wrong. A classic example came a few years ago when Mr. Salinas was invited to a breakfast meeting with a group of economists and journalists with whom he had sometimes disagreed. Mr. Salinas arrived punctually, bluntly told the other guests they didn't know a thing about economics, and walked out 10 minutes later without even eating. &quot;It was one of the most incredible things I've ever seen,&quot; recalls Carlos Ramirez, an editor at El Financiero, Mexico's leading business newspaper.    Mr. Salinas's partisans cast this hard edge in a kinder light. Says Mr. Cisneros: &quot;What's often interpreted as his aggressiveness is really his commitment -- the same quality that always made him the last one to leave the {Harvard} library. He really feels he has a historic mission to modernize Mexico.&quot;    A son of Mexico's traditionally sheltered political elite, Mr. Salinas has taken pains to see the rest of the world too. He spent a year hiking around the globe as a teen-ager. He chose a doctoral thesis topic that required spending several months working with peasants. Today, he sends his three children to Mexico City's Japanese school and on yearly visits to Japan.    Mr. Salinas has also displayed an unusual willingness to look outside conventional political circles for assistants. He headed a budget ministry in which one-quarter of the department heads were women and the average age of staffers was 35, highly unusual in a society noted for machismo and a deference to age.    After the election, some analysts were encouraged that Jesus Silva Herzog, the charismatic former finance minister who was once Mr. Salinas's arch-rival, had been included in a key PRI committee. It could be a sign that Mr. Silva Herzog might play a role in the Salinas administration, which badly needs his sparkle.    &quot;In this newly competitive environment, Carlos Salinas will need the most competent people he can find, whether or not they're his friends,&quot; says political analyst Luis Rubio.    Mr. Salinas's father, Sen. Raul Salinas, also a Harvard-educated economist, is a former commerce minister who at one time had presidential ambitions himself. His mother is also an economist. Business leaders and politicians, ranging from Henry Ford II to Gen. Lazaro Cardenas, the father of their son's current adversary, were house guests. &quot;The air was always full of very serious discussions about the world,&quot; says Sen. Salinas.    Mr. Salinas studied economics at Mexico's national university. Later, in two different stints at Harvard, he earned master's degrees in public administration and political economics and a doctorate in political economics.    While at Harvard, the young man who would later open Mexico to foreign businessmen struck up an unusually close friendship with a self-made U.S. businessman some 30 years his senior. John Mugar, who built the Boston-area chain of Star supermarkets, first met the young Mr. Salinas on a business trip to Mexico.    In Cambridge, Mr. Mugar and his wife found Mr. Salinas an apartment, accompanied him on trips to the beach and museum, and helped look after Mr. Salinas's pregnant wife, Cecilia. At Mr. Salinas's graduation party, Mr. Mugar, the only American invited, was caught off guard when he was asked to follow the Mexican custom of proposing a toast to the graduate. Mr. Mugar recalls beginning his remarks: &quot;To the future president of Mexico. . . .&quot;    Mr. Salinas received an education of a different sort in the months he spent researching his doctoral thesis in the stone house of Benito Garcia, a farmer from the central Mexican village of Tetla. &quot;He was much richer than us, but he was truly interested in the way we lived our lives,&quot; recalls Crispina Hernandez, the farmer's wife. The child of the upper class gradually developed a taste for the red-hot chilis eaten by the poor. The young man who once rode a charger for the Mexican equestrian team in the Pan American games plodded through the village on a burro.    &quot;My time in the country taught me the vitality of the Mexican people,&quot; Mr. Salinas recalls. &quot;My time in government would teach me the way an excessively big state can smother that vitality.&quot;    Mr. Salinas's first government job was as an economic analyst under the finance minister, an old friend of Mr. Salinas's father. The minister was so worried about the appearance of cronyism that he put Mr. Salinas's desk in the hallway. But Mr. Salinas didn't remain a bureaucratic outsider for long. He won eight promotions in eight years, becoming the budget ministry's general director of economic and social policy in 1979.    Along the way, Mr. Salinas caught the eye of another Harvard alumnus, President Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado, who became his political mentor. &quot;It's the relationship between the teacher and prize student,&quot; says Gonzalo Martinez Corbala, a PRI congressman who hired the teen-age Mr. Salinas as a page.    It turned into a political alliance in 1981, when Mr. de la Madrid began to be mentioned as a possible successor to then President Jose Lopez Portillo. Since the cardinal rule in the contest for the PRI presidential nomination is that one mustn't appear to be seeking it, Mr. Salinas did the campaigning for his mentor, with characteristic gusto.    Mr. Salinas published a scathing newspaper article accusing one of Mr. de la Madrid's conservative critics of fomenting &quot;fascism.&quot; And he defended his candidate's policies so hotly before the leading association of economists that a fist-fight almost broke out. After Mr. de la Madrid gained the nomination and breezed to the election victory, Mr. Salinas was rewarded with the post of budget minister, and he began the economic liberalization program that he hopes to complete as president.    Partly to soften the discontent caused by his economic policies, Mr. Salinas's presidential campaign centered on the theme of greater democracy. But Mr. Cardenas's surprising strength caught Mr. Salinas squarely between reformist ideals and political ambition. Paradoxically, Mr. Salinas, the self-proclaimed candidate of modernity, came to rely on old-guard PRI bosses who could still deliver the vote.    During the campaign, Rafael Abascal, an economist who has been Mr. Salinas's friend since they were Harvard classmates, was astonished to see a newspaper photograph of a smiling Mr. Salinas posed between two old labor bosses with dubious reputations. &quot;How can you pose for that picture?&quot; Mr. Abascal asked Mr. Salinas. Mr. Abascal recalls Mr. Salinas responded with resignation: &quot;Everyone has his job to do.&quot;    Says Mr. Abascal: &quot;He is very loyal to the old system, but he is intelligent enough to recognize that it must change. I'm confident that he can lead the PRI into the new era.&quot;    But that won't be easy. How, for instance, will Mr. Salinas teach the merits of political pluralism to one tough-as-nails PRI political boss who packs a pistol in his jacket and a knife in his sock even as he sits in the best table in one of the capital's most chic restaurants? &quot;Today, the leaders of the party are a bunch of little boys,&quot; asserts the boss. He recalls the way he once silenced a pesky opposition candidate after a disputed local election: He trumped up charges against the candidate and had him thrown in jail. &quot;That's what they have coming if they don't stay within the party,&quot; the boss says.    Mr. Salinas will also soon face a critical confrontation with the opposition in the coming Congressional vote to ratify his victory. The election gave the PRI a slim majority of 260 to 240. But Mr. Salinas's aides are lobbying furiously to prevent defections by PRI deputies, while trying to win over enough opposition deputies to spare Mr. Salinas the indignity of having his victory recognized only by his party.    Mr. Salinas is also meeting privately with important groups outside the PRI, trying to broaden his base of support. &quot;He was confident, telling us that he would sleep better knowing that the opposition was in Congress instead of on the streets,&quot; recounts a leading industrialist who met with Mr. Salinas.    But Carlos Salinas could wake up one morning to find the opposition in both places, unless he quickly develops the political savvy to control his followers and placate his enemies. </TEXT></DOC>