<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Trucker Frank WalshIs Accused of Payoffs,Anti-Competitive Acts---Despite a Stellar Client List,He Faces Federal Counts;A $4 Million Seaside Home---Winning One Case on Appeal---By Stanley PennStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NORTH BERGEN, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Frank J. Walsh started out in New York City's rough-and-tumble garment district loading goods for his truck-driver father. In 1970, at the age of 23, he became the head of his father's tiny firm. By last year, his trucks had become a coast-to-coast fleet of 2,000, part of a mini-empire of 23 operating entities with revenue exceeding $110 million.    Walsh Trucking, the oldest of Mr. Walsh's companies, credits deregulation for some of this success. The company says that when the Motor Carrier Act of 1980 abolished barriers to competition, it was able to expand into markets from which it had been excluded.    A knack for bringing in customers and a relatively strife-free labor record have also helped. The Walsh group's blueribbon customers include such giant retail chains as K mart, Limited Inc. and Federated Department Stores. Burdines, a Federated unit in Miami, is almost rhapsodic in its praise. &quot;The Walsh organization services Burdines's needs as well as anyone in the country has ever done,&quot; says James L. Harvey, Burdines's senior vice president.    But allegations in various courts paint a different picture of the Walsh operation. They describe Mr. Walsh as a ruthless executive who engaged in payoffs, received a questionable &quot;commission&quot; and engaged in anti-competitive practices. (Mr. Walsh has no connection with Walsh Trucking of Massena, N.Y., and its owner, Francis Walsh.)    A federal indictment issued in San Francisco charges that Mr. Walsh and Walsh Trucking of New Jersey made secret payments to a former transportation director of Emporium-Capwell, a San Francisco retailer, in an effort to obtain &quot;commercially favorable agreements.&quot;    According to the charges, Mr. Walsh also received $275,000 from a truck-equipment supplier after he &quot;advised&quot; the Emporium official to &quot;do business&quot; with the supplier. The official, Henry Hobelmann, who isn't a defendant, left Emporium in November 1980 -- about the time that Walsh ceased working for the retailer, which is a unit of Carter Hawley Hale Stores. Mr. Walsh denies any wrongdoing.    A federal indictment issued in Manhattan links Mr. Walsh to Anthony Provenzano, the former boss of New Jersey Teamster Local 560, a union that at one time represented some Walsh cargo handlers. The 1986 indictment accuses mobster Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno of helping Mr. Provenzano obtain &quot;illegal labor payments&quot; from Mr. Walsh of $3,000 a month between 1978 and 1984.    Mr. Provenzano, a reputed member of a Mafia family headed by Mr. Salerno, is serving a 20-year prison term for taking illegal payoffs from employers. Mr. Salerno, recently convicted as a member of the Mafia's ruling commission in a New York case, has pleaded not guilty. His trial began on Tuesday.    Mr. Walsh, who isn't named as a defendant in the indictment, denies making payments. &quot;Ridiculous,&quot; he says, adding that he has never met Messrs. Provenzano or Salerno. No Walsh employees have been represented by Local 560 since March 1986, according to Marc Zoldessy, a Walsh attorney. Another attorney for Mr. Walsh even questions whether the Walsh mentioned in the Salerno indictment is his client, and he criticizes mentioning anyone in that way in an indictment. But Joseph P. Russoniello, the U.S. attorney in San Francisco, says, &quot;I have no reason to doubt that it is one and the same person.&quot;    Mr. Walsh has also been embroiled in a bitter civil antitrust suit that was filed in federal court in New York. In 1982, International Distribution Centers Inc. accused him and four Walsh companies of trying to monopolize garment transport in the &quot;Pennsylvania corridor&quot; -- a truck route linking Pennsylvania garment factories with warehouses in metropolitan New York.    IDC was awarded $38 million in 1985, after a jury found in its favor. Immediately afterward, Mr. Walsh and the defendant companies sought protection against creditors by filing Chapter 11 petitions in the Trenton, N.J., bankruptcy court. In February, the judgment for IDC was overturned and the suit was dismissed by the U.S. Court of Appeals. IDC is seeking a review by the U.S. Supreme Court.    Meanwhile, a federal grand jury in Newark has been investigating Mr. Walsh's business dealings. In a brief filed last November in federal court in Trenton, a Walsh attorney, Timothy P. Neumann, stated that the subject of that investigation is &quot;possible bankruptcy fraud.&quot; Mr. Walsh hasn't done anything wrong, Mr. Neumann says.    By all accounts, Mr. Walsh is a formidable competitor and, with 240 pounds packed into his 6-foot-2-inch frame, a dominating presence. Friends say he is a kidder. But this wasn't evident during a recent interview, when he was flanked by five attorneys, including a former federal prosecutor.    Frank Walsh's drive -- his work-week sometimes stretches to 80 hours -- has helped him reap all the trappings of success. Married with three grown children, Mr. Walsh had an income in 1984 of $1.3 million, according to court documents. He has a $1.2 million home in Saddle River, N.J., a second home on the Jersey shore valued at $4 million, a $30,000 speedboat and a $9,000 sailboat.    There is also a $500,000 condominium at the swank Ocean Reef Club in Key Largo, Fla., where he uses a 61-foot motor yacht to entertain clients, many of whom, he says, congregate there. According to Mr. Walsh, a major customer, Robert Morosky, the vice chairman of Limited, has a condo at the resort. &quot;If you're not willing to socialize with them,&quot; Mr. Walsh has said of his customers, &quot;there are other people who are willing to take your place.&quot;    Stories of his work habits abound. &quot;It wasn't unusual to get a phone call from Frank at 4 a.m.,&quot; says a former Walsh executive. &quot;Frank had a brainstorm and wanted to talk to you about it. He's a driven person. His mother once told me that on the first vacation he ever took, when he was nine, he got bored the first day and began delivering pizzas on a rented bike!&quot;    &quot;Frank's a helluva salesman,&quot; says a New Jersey trucker. &quot;He could charm your pants right off your body.&quot;    Mr. Walsh's closest business associate is his 37-year-old brother, Norbert. Together they operate the Walsh trucking organization, which they own with other family members. In a deposition stemming from the IDC suit, Norbert Walsh described how the brothers divide the work: &quot;Frank makes the decisions. Frank tells us what to do and then we go out and do it. And if we need any help we go back and give him the different possibilities and then he makes the final decision.&quot;    &quot;I study retail trends,&quot; Frank Walsh says. &quot;I try to get {as customers} the up-and-coming stores before everybody realizes they're up and coming.&quot; Apart from trucking, he says, Walsh offers as many as 23 different services.    It will, for example, handle inventory and ticketing for retailer customers at central &quot;consolidation&quot; centers. A Walsh center receives merchandise direct from the manufacturer and then ships the goods on hangers to a retailer's stores for immediate display.    Walsh also operates some customer-owned truck fleets. &quot;The incentive for the customer is labor peace,&quot; says a former competitor. &quot;Walsh deals with labor, so there's no hassle for the customer -- no having to deal with troublemakers and slowdown artists.&quot;    But those who tangle with Walsh -- as International Distribution Centers did -- sometimes regret it.    IDC enjoyed a dominant share of the market in the Pennsylvania corridor when Walsh moved in. Alarmed at the challenge, IDC's president, Gerald W. Eskow, arranged a meeting. In a memorandum introduced as an exhibit in federal court in Manhattan, Mr. Eskow recalled that Mr. Walsh had boasted that &quot;I would make his best trophy, and he couldn't wait to mount my head on his wall.&quot;    Not so, Mr. Walsh says, contending that Mr. Eskow regarded Pennsylvania as his private preserve and tried &quot;to cut a deal to keep me out.&quot;    In any case, IDC collapsed. Last year it ceased operations after filing for Chapter 11 in bankruptcy court in Manhattan. In its antitrust suit, it charged Walsh with grabbing customers through &quot;predatory pricing&quot; and by pirating away key IDC executives with the promise of fat salaries.    Walsh may also have gotten help from a powerful friend. Testimony at the trial showed that Dorby Frocks Ltd., a New York dressmaker, switched its business to a Walsh company from IDC after a visit from Michael Pappadio, an old friend of Mr. Walsh's father.    A 1982 report to the New York legislature by state Sen. Franz Leichter identifies Mr. Pappadio as a moneylender to garment makers and the brother of the late Andimo Pappadio, a reputed lieutenant in the Lucchese crime family, which has been active in garment-center trucking. Michael Pappadio drew a one-year prison sentence in 1979 after pleading guilty to tax evasion. His brother Andimo, who was shot to death in 1976, was a major garment-district loan shark.    During his January 1984 visit to Dorby Frocks, Mr. Pappadio discussed Mr. Walsh's National Retail Transportation, a Dorby official testified. The Dorby official said that Dorby later dropped IDC, its trucker for more than 20 years, in favor of National Retail. Dorby blamed poor service by IDC for the switch. Mr. Pappadio, in a deposition filed in federal court in New York, denied soliciting work for the Walsh company.    Walsh, denying IDC's charges, says that its entry into the Pennsylvania corridor was &quot;precisely the type of pro-competitive conduct Congress sought to encourage&quot; through deregulation. In overturning the judgment against Walsh, the appeals court said that Walsh's 17% market share wasn't big enough to make it likely that the company would gain a monopoly.    The court said there was evidence that Mr. Walsh's National Retail Transportation had &quot;specific intent&quot; to monopolize the Pennsylvania corridor. But even if the company drove IDC out of business and grabbed all its accounts, the court said, it would gain a market share of 50% at most, making it unlikely that it could raise prices without losing business to competitors.    As for any help he might have received from Mr. Pappadio, Mr. Walsh says he views it simply as an act of &quot;kindness.&quot;    A Walsh truck company became involved with a Pappadio family company in 1981, when an independent trucking union struck Ideal Trucking. According to the Leichter report, Michael Pappadio's brother Fred had become a partner of New York-based Ideal in 1975. Matthew Eason, who headed the union that struck Ideal, charges that &quot;Walsh broke the strike.&quot; Mr. Eason, now the president of a warehouse and industrial trades local, recalls: &quot;One night Walsh trucks came in and passed the picket line and took out Ideal's merchandise. Our pickets tried to follow the trucks to see where they were taking the merchandise. But security guards smashed the window of the pickets' cars to prevent them from following.&quot;    In denying any wrongdoing, Mr. Walsh says: &quot;We got a phone call from Ideal that they were going out of the operations business. We went and took the work.&quot; Ideal's assets were later sold and the purchaser subcontracted out its customers to Walsh, says Mr. Zoldessy, the Walsh attorney.    In 1984, Frank Walsh stepped in when Lucille Zeccardi, whom he has known for many years, needed help. He lent her $20,000 when she asked for bail money, which she used for her cousin Anthony Indelicato, then under arrest for illegal gun possession. Mr. Walsh says that the loan was repaid. In January, Mr. Indelicato drew a 40-year prison term for racketeering in federal court in Manhattan in a celebrated organized-crime case. Lucille Zeccardi's father-in-law is Eli Zeccardi, a reputed member of the Genovese crime family who has been missing since 1978.    Meanwhile, Mr. Walsh's Chapter 11 filing in response to the IDC antitrust judgment has engulfed him in controversy. The filing was an attempt to put the four Walsh debtor companies' assets beyond IDC's reach by transferring the assets to other Walsh entities not in Chapter 11 proceedings, charged William Tucker, the bankruptcy examiner, in a report filed last year.    As a result, Mr. Tucker stated in the report, which is filed in the Trenton bankruptcy court, &quot;a good portion of the cream of the business is carried on outside of the four debtors.&quot; The debtors -- Walsh Trucking, Coastal Freight Lines, Hempstead Delivery and National Retail Transportation, with combined annual revenue of more than $70 million -- are left as &quot;little more than shells,&quot; Mr. Tucker stated.    The examiner said that Frank and Norbert Walsh &quot;diverted tens of millions of dollars of operating revenues&quot; from debtor companies to non-debtor concerns for &quot;their personal gain&quot; and that the two brothers &quot;helped themselves to extraordinary compensation packages from the debtors.&quot;    Norbert Walsh, the president and sole owner of the new companies, purchased the debtor concerns' assets for more than $10 million. Hugh M. Leonard, the U.S. bankruptcy trustee, protested that Norbert Walsh failed to get an independent appraisal of the debtor companies before seeking the court's approval to buy their assets. A witness testifying for IDC in hearings on the sale estimated the worth of the debtor companies at more than $18 million.    Walsh spokesmen say that the debtor companies were unprofitable when Norbert bought their assets and that they were worth nowhere near $18 million. They flatly deny Mr. Tucker's charges and note that Norbert's purchase received the bankruptcy judge's approval. The judge, William Gindin, rejected the IDC witness's estimate of the debtor companies' worth, but he said that he reserves the right to increase the purchase price if warranted.    The overturning of the $38 million judgment lifts a large burden from Frank Walsh. He has asked the bankruptcy court to dismiss his personal Chapter 11 petition. The debtor companies, meanwhile, have filed a plan of reorganization and are moving to obtain a discharge from bankruptcy proceedings.    But Mr. Walsh may have another hurdle to overcome: the Newark grand-jury investigation into possible bankruptcy fraud.    According to a copy of a subpoena filed in bankruptcy court, the U.S. attorney in New Jersey has subpoenaed Mr. Walsh's tax, bank and investment records for the 1980 to 1985 period, along with bank statements and canceled checks of Frank Walsh Financial Resources, a truck-leasing company he owns. </TEXT></DOC>