<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871209-0020 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN AND GORBACHEV SIGNED a treaty banning a class of nuclear arms.    The president and the Soviet leader hailed the pact, which eliminates superpower arsenals of medium and shorter-range nuclear missiles. They also pledged to press for deep cuts in long-range missiles, but Gorbachev reiterated his demand that such reductions be linked to restraints on missile defenses such as Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. The leaders, on the first day of their Washington summit, formed working groups to deal with arms control and other issues.    A Soviet legal specialist, citing Kremlin figures, said only 200 applicants were awaiting exit visas. U.S. Jewish groups have said as many as 400,000 would emigrate if allowed.    ---   A CRASH INQUIRY IS FOCUSING on possible revenge by a plane passenger.    Federal investigators studying the fatal Pacific Southwest Airlines crash reportedly were concentrating on the possibility that gunshots were fired on board by a recently terminated employee of USAir Group, which acquired PSA in May. USAir confirmed that among the passengers were David Burke, the fired employee, and the supervisor who fired him. USAir revised the death toll to 43, down from 44.    James Sylla, president of Chevron U.S.A., also was killed in the crash. He was returning to San Francisco from a company luncheon in Los Angeles.    ---   Managua said its troops shot down and captured an American flying a small plane inside Nicaragua's border with Costa Rica. Defense Minister Ortega said James Denby, who Managua said was linked to a group suspected of aiding the Contras, was taken to the capital for questioning. A member of the group said Denby is an orchid farmer.    ---   Judge Kennedy received the highest rating from an American Bar Association panel on judicial candidates. The Senate Judiciary panel is scheduled to begin hearings on Reagan's Supreme Court nominee next week, but a vote isn't expected until late January. The California U.S. Appeals Court judge would succeed Justice Powell.    ---   The U.N. disclosed that more than 400 files on Nazi war crimes are missing from its archives and ordered an urgent investigation. Israel's U.N. ambassador said vital information on World War II atrocities against Jews may have been lost or destroyed. A spokesman for the world body rejected the possibility of a cover-up.    ---   France expelled 17 opponents of Iran's Khomeini regime to the African nation of Gabon. Paris said the group included 14 Iranians and three Turkish citizens, and that nine other people had been placed under house arrest. The government of Premier Chirac denies the expulsions were part of a deal with the Tehran government.    Iraq said its warplanes struck an Iranian oil tanker in the Persian Gulf, while Iran said it downed two Iraqi jets. There was no independent confirmation of either claim.    ---   South Korean demonstrators began a sit-in at the Seoul headquarters of the two main opposition candidates for president, demanding that only one run in next week's election. Separately, the nation's main dissident group said it would defy a pre-election police alert and organize national anti-government demonstrations Saturday.    ---   CIA chief Webster named Richard Stolz, a retired intelligence officer, to head the agency's secret operations. He will succeed Clair George, who is retiring at the end of the month, in the first of an expected series of personnel shifts in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal.    ---   A Haitian general strike continued through a second day. Organizers of the action, called to protest election-related violence that killed 34 and forced cancellation of voting, pronounced it a success. A government spokesman said the strike wasn't as successful as earlier actions.    ---   Yugoslavia's Communist Party expelled two members from the ruling Central Committee for their part in a financial scandal. They were accused of involvement in the issuance of $1 billion in unbacked promissory notes by an agro-industrial firm.    ---   Argentine workers began a 34-hour general strike to protest austerity measures by President Alfonsin's government. A wage and price freeze, utility rate increases and a currency devaluation have been imposed.    ---   Seven South Africans were stabbed to death in a black township near Pietermaritzburg. Police blamed a feud between the Zulu Inkatha movement and the more radical United Democratic Front.    ---   Protesting Chinese students said they had won a promise that the government would investigate their charges of lax security and poor medical treatment in the stabbing death of a Beijing university student. Separately, a 25-foot statue of the late Chairman Mao Tse-tung in Beijing was demolished to make way for a library. </TEXT></DOC>