<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871116-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   POLAND ANNOUNCED price increases and acknowledged a risk of social unrest.    The Warsaw government Saturday announced price increases next year averaging 40%, including rises of 110% for basic foodstuffs and at least 200% for rents, energy and fuel. Poles already are stocking up on basic goods, and the government expressed nervousness about the impact of the move ahead of a national referendum Nov. 29 on economic changes. Social unrest prompted by price increases has swept Poland four times before, in 1956, 1970, 1976 and 1980.    Plainclothes police in Warsaw detained six dissidents involved in a meeting to reestablish Poland's Socialist Party, which existed until 1948.    ---   WRIGHT WAS FAULTED for his involvement in Nicaraguan peace talks.    House GOP leader Michel echoed Reagan administration officials and criticized the House speaker's role in negotiations between Managua and the U.S.-backed Contra rebels as &quot;absolutely wrong.&quot; Meanwhile, Ortega made an unscheduled stop in Mexico to discuss his 11-point peace proposal -- announced Friday in Washington -- with President de la Madrid. The plan calls for a cease-fire to begin Dec. 5, and amnesty for rebels who lay down their arms by Jan. 5.    Cardinal Obando, a mediator in a regional Central American peace plan, met with Contra leaders Saturday in Miami and presented Ortega's proposal.    ---   A PLANE OVERTURNED on a Denver runway, killing at least 21 people.    Authorities also said as many as 56 others were injured after the Continental Airlines jet, carrying 76 passengers and five crew members, flipped over while taking off from Stapleton International Airport and skidded along a runway. The plane was bound for Boise, Idaho. Police said that snow had been falling steadily in Denver for much of the day and that rescue work was hampered by snow, ice and heavy winds.    The DC-9 aircraft broke into pieces during the accident, and officials said it was &quot;resting on its top.&quot; The airport was closed shortly after the incident.    ---   U.S. and Soviet arms negotiators began talks in Geneva aimed at working out details of a draft treaty eliminating superpower intermediate-range missiles in time for next month's Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Washington. Verification procedures remain an issue that still must be settled.    ---   A congressional panel in Brazil voted to reject President Sarney's bid for a five-year term, in favor of four years in office. In Washington, Reagan's order Friday to impose trade sanctions heightened the likelihood of a trade war between the U.S. and Brazil.    ---   Philippine troops captured an ailing communist rebel leader, the second highest-ranking guerrilla figure in the country, authorities said. Juanito Rivera, who was charged with subversion, was apprehended near a U.S. communications station about 70 miles north of Manila, officials said.    ---   Iran said its forces shelled Iraqi cities in a round-the-clock bombardment to retaliate for recent Iraqi bombing of southern Iran. The report came as Baghdad placed its military on full alert. In Tehran, the Iranian cabinet held a meeting to discuss strategy for what President Khamenei called &quot;new movement&quot; in the Persian Gulf war.    ---   Italy's President Cossiga opened consultations with senior statesmen and parliamentary leaders in an effort to resolve a political crisis following the resignation of Prime Minister Goria and his five-party coalition. The resignations came Saturday after the Liberal Party withdrew from the government in an economic dispute.    ---   Syrian troops tightened security in mainly Moslem western Beirut and joined police in the search for those involved in Saturday's bombing at American University Hospital. At least seven people were killed and 31 others wounded in the blast, the second such attack in less than a week.    ---   Tornadoes swept through east-central Texas, killing at least seven people, injuring more than 50 others and damaging mobile homes, barns and power lines, authorities said. An undetermined number of people were reported missing, police said.    ---   North Yemen restored diplomatic ties with Egypt in the wake of last week's Arab League summit in Jordan. The Sanaa government joined Kuwait, Morocco, Iraq and the United Arab Emirates in re-establishing ties with Cairo, which were severed in 1979 over Egypt's peace accords with Israel.    ---   Investigators ventured onto the grounds of a Celanese Corp. plant in Pampa, Texas, in an attempt to determine the cause of two explosions Saturday. Three workers were killed and 40 others injured in the blasts.    ---   Ballet star Rudolf Nureyev said he believed Gorbachev was responsible for allowing the dancer to return to the Soviet Union to visit his ailing mother. Nureyev, branded a traitor following his defection 26 years ago, arrived Saturday in Moscow.    ---   Dissident leader Kim Dae Jung urged an end to clashes between his supporters and those of his chief political rival in South Korea's presidential campaign. The appeal came as violence continued at a campaign rally in Taegu. In Seoul, Kim Young Sam demanded the cabinet resign because of the disruption of a campaign stop in Kwangju.    ---   Opposition leaders in Dhaka extended a general strike through tomorrow in an attempt to oust Bangladesh's president. About 20 small bombs exploded throughout the capital, but there weren't any injuries reported. At least four people have been killed since the strike began Tuesday.    ---   Police in Kenya beat and briefly detained four Western journalists during riots in Nairobi in which paramilitary troops clashed with demonstrators protesting the arrests of five student leaders as suspected radicals. Hundreds of students reportedly participated in the demonstrations.    ---   Died: Roger Lewis, 75, former chairman of General Dynamics Corp., Thursday, in Washington, of cardiac arrest. </TEXT></DOC>