<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870717-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Poindexter Says He Quit Without TellingReagan of His Role in Contra Diversion---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Rear Adm. John Poindexter testified that he resigned as national security adviser without telling President Reagan or top advisers that he was responsible for approving the diversion of profits from U.S.-Iran arms sales to assist Nicaraguan insurgents.    Describing his final meeting with Mr. Reagan last fall, after the president had learned of the diversion, the admiral said he told Mr. Reagan he was &quot;generally aware&quot; of the plan that he now has testified that he unilaterally approved in February 1986.    Adm. Poindexter, whose stated goal was to give Mr. Reagan &quot;deniability&quot; if the controversy became public, said he prepared no written records of his intentions at the time of his February decision, or confided in top officials, even when his resignation was certain.    &quot;You created a situation where it would be only your word to corroborate that of our commander-in-chief?&quot; asked Senate committee counsel Arthur Liman.    &quot;That is correct,&quot; answered the admiral.    The testimony of the Naval officer, appearing before House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, demonstrates the extent to which his credibility has become crucial to lawmakers trying to make a judgment about the controversy. For a second day, the admiral repeatedly testified that he couldn't recall details from his tenure at the National Security Council, and he freely admitted to a history of withholding sensitive information from Congress.    Substantial conflicts have developed between his account of the Iran-Contra operation and that given by Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North. The colonel, a former NSC staff member, has said he prepared five memorandums to Adm. Poindexter seeking presidential authorization for different steps in the diversion scheme.    Adm. Poindexter said again that he has no recollection of the memos. But two investigative sources confirmed yesterday that James Radzimski, a retired Naval petty officer who served as the custodian of intelligence documents at the NSC, has told investigators that he recalls multiple memorandums by Col. North regarding the diversion.    Though the issue of what President Reagan knew about the diversion has been of major political importance to the White House, Adm. Poindexter testified that he had no recollection that either Attorney General Edwin Meese or former Chief of Staff Donald Regan raised the question privately with him, even when his resignation was assured last November. Nor was the issue mentioned in his final meeting with the president last Nov. 25. The former NSC adviser said Vice President George Bush, Mr. Regan and the attorney general also attended the meeting.    &quot;I was generally aware of that plan and I would like to submit my resignation to give you the necessary latitude to do whatever you need to do,&quot; Adm. Poindexter said he told Mr. Reagan. &quot;And the president responded . . . that he had great regret and that this was in the tradition of a naval officer of accepting responsibility.&quot;    &quot;It's mind-boggling,&quot; Senate committee Vice Chairman Warren Rudman (R., N.H.) said of Adm. Poindexter's account. More broadly, the testimony reflects the limits on the entire investigation. Top officials including Mr. Regan, Attorney General Meese and Secretary of State George Shultz remain to be heard, but none had the same combination of access to the president and knowledge of the Iran-Contra operation as the former adviser.    White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Mr. Reagan is preparing to speak on the affair when the hearings conclude. For now, the administration is facing continued discomfort because so many of the president's former aides have given conflicting accounts. While public attention to the hearings is expected to wane following the emotion of the past two weeks, the conflicts could preserve the skepticism seen in opinion polls since the scandal broke last fall.    After initially being relieved by Adm. Poindexter's testimony, the White House yesterday implicitly criticized him for failing to tell President Reagan about the diversion. &quot;Any time the president isn't allowed to make decisions that are presidential, he is done a disservice,&quot; said Mr. Fitzwater, who refused to criticize the admiral specifically. The comments seemed to be a White House attempt to signal its unhappiness and embarrassment over the impression that President Reagan hasn't been told of important decisions by aides.    As the testimony unfolds, Robert McFarlane, Adm. Poindexter's predecessor and a lead witness when the hearings began in May, increasingly appears to have been isolated within the administration, and was less aware of Col. North's activities than his successor.    Before becoming adviser, Adm. Poindexter was chairman of the administration's covert action coordinating council, the Planning Coordination Group, as part of his NSC staff duties. He worked then with Col. North and former Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey, forming a threesome that apparently distrusted Congress to a much greater degree than did Mr. McFarlane.    &quot;Poindexter was close to Casey, he managed the covert action programs, and he knew everything Ollie (North) was doing, even before he became national security adviser,&quot; said an administration official.    In testimony yesterday, the admiral acknowledged he had deliberately withheld information from Congress in 1986 regarding Col. North's activities. Though he insisted he acted within the law, he testified he also had &quot;withheld&quot; his opinion that legal restrictions at the time on U.S. military aid to the insurgents didn't apply to the NSC.    &quot;It withholds information but it is accurate,&quot; the admiral said of a letter he sent to Congress in a successful effort to kill a proposed House inquiry into Col. North's activities last summer. While not a lawyer himself, he said he &quot;seldom&quot; referred issues to the White House counsel and never asked for an opinion on whether the restrictions on military aid applied to the NSC. He said he never discussed this legal question &quot;in a formal way&quot; with Mr. Meese, but testified they &quot;conceivably&quot; discussed the matter at &quot;various&quot; points.    Like Col. North, Adm. Poindexter may have looked on Mr. Casey, who had a law degree, as an attorney. Indeed, the Naval officer said he called the CIA director last November when he was seeking legal representation. However, the former NSC adviser drew a distinction between Mr. Meese's legal position as attorney general and his less formal political role as a special adviser to the president.    Adm. Poindexter said it was in this second capacity that he understood Mr. Meese had begun an inquiry of the Iran-Contra operation last Nov. 21 -- the same day the Naval officer destroyed the signed copy of a presidential finding that authorized the CIA's role in an early arms sale to Iran in 1985.    &quot;I am not going to answer a question in a positive way unless I can remember a specific conversation,&quot; the admiral said when questioned about his briefings of the president. He also answered in only general terms when asked about what specific authority Mr. Reagan had given the NSC to assist the Contras.    &quot;If you take the totality of the president's actions, that was clearly his intent,&quot; testified the admiral, who said there was no &quot;specific designation&quot; in written or oral form that the NSC begin helping the Contras while the CIA was prohibited from providing military aid.    The memos written by Col. North about his Iran and Contra projects and entered in the NSC's filing system were kept in a compartment, which used to be code-named &quot;Veil.&quot; The compartment was reserved for covert action memos in the &quot;System IV&quot; registry of intelligence documents. Administration sources said they believe Col. North's memos were segregated from those relating to routine covert activities and were kept in Mr. Radzimski's safe.    Mr. Radzimski, who retired from the NSC's intelligence directorate last summer, assigned a number to every System IV document and was responsible for carrying them from the Old Executive Office Building where Col. North worked, across the street to Adm. Poindexter's office in the White House, and back again.    Some of his colleagues at the NSC described the former Naval petty officer as &quot;a pretty straight guy&quot; who would have resisted any attempts to tamper with the documents and the index he controlled. However, testimony and exhibits in the congressional investigation have demonstrated that Col. North didn't register some sensitive memos about the Iran-Contra affair with Mr. Radzimski -- a tactic that allowed the colonel to destroy them without a trace. </TEXT></DOC>