<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Ford and UAW Agree on 3-Year Pact That GrantsBroad Job Guarantees Except During Industry Slump---Spotlight Now Shifts to GM,Where Union Will TryTo Win Similar Terms---By Jacob M. Schlesinger and Joseph B. WhiteStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> F LABOR GMAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DEARBORN, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ford Motor Co. and the United Auto Workers announced a tentative agreement that will bring sweeping job guarantees for the union. The contract requires Ford to stabilize its employment base in ways that are unprecedented for such a large industrial company.    Now the union will put the same idea before General Motors Corp., the auto industry's struggling giant. Negotiations there will illustrate whether the Ford pact is just a fluke at a company that is doing extraordinarily well, or whether strong job guarantees are a realistic labor goal at industrial companies faced with increasing world competition.    While details of the pact were sketchy, a consensus was emerging among analysts late yesterday that the total cost to Ford, including economic and job-security provisions, could be considerable. The agreement could add between 15% and 25% to Ford's labor costs over the contract's three-year life, analysts estimated. One industry analyst projected the contract will add about $400 to the cost of a Ford car. A similar pact would be more costly to GM -- $900 a car -- because GM makes more parts in-house, the analyst said. Ford wouldn't discuss the contract's cost.    Ford pledged that -- with the important exception of an industrywide sales slump -- it won't lay off any of its 104,000 U.S. hourly workers during the contract's three-year life, and will replace at least one of every two workers who depart. While establishing an important principle, the guarantee wasn't terribly difficult for Ford to make. For one thing, Ford already has slashed its hourly work force from 190,000 people a decade ago, and its plants are now working overtime.    That certainly isn't true, however, of GM. The struggling No. 1 auto maker is saddled with idled workers and excess plant capacity. If the union insists that GM sign something close to the Ford pact -- as would be consistent with the UAW's tradition of pattern bargaining -- GM could be hit with a damaging strike this fall.    &quot;Do you think this formula can get by General Motors?&quot; a reporter asked Stephen P. Yokich, the UAW vice president who negotiated with Ford, when the contract was announced yesterday. &quot;Sure,&quot; Mr. Yokich replied. &quot;Absolutely.&quot;    But GM, for its part, issued a statement yesterday alluding to its oft-stated contention that the union can't expect it to match Ford. &quot;Our goal is to reach a contract settlement which recognizes GM's specific needs and enhances the job security of our employees,&quot; said Alfred S. Warren Jr., the company's chief negotiator. GM has already announced plans to close, over the next three years, more than a dozen plants affecting more than 30,000 workers.    The U.S. contract for Chrysler Corp., the No. 3 auto maker, doesn't expire until next year.    The Ford agreement was negotiated during a three-day contract extension during which Ford workers stayed on the job. The tossing aside of the &quot;no contract, no work&quot; labor stricture may have reflected a new, less-hostile relationship between the union and auto makers, although the true test of that will come at GM.    Such competition was the driving force behind the UAW's decision to make job security its top priority with Ford.    Not that the union wasn't interested in money. The issue of wage increases dragged out Wednesday's final negotiating session, which officials had originally hoped to be routine, to nearly 30 hours. The UAW eventually relented, winning a 3% raise in the first year of the contract, but accepting a base-wage freeze with lump-sum payments equal to 3% of wages in the second and third years. The union did, however, win improved profit sharing and &quot;upgraded&quot; health-care and insurance benefits.    The failure to win back the full raises doesn't seem likely to upset the rank and file, which is expected to ratify the tentative agreement. &quot;Time and time again when our membership has spoken, they indicated that money isn't as important as job security,&quot; said Bob King, administrative assistant to the president of UAW Local 600, which represents Ford's sprawling River Rouge complex in Detroit.    Although workers won't be protected against every cyclical downturn that causes an industrywide sales slump, the UAW certainly got the strongest job security plan it has ever won at a major auto maker. In 1984, it negotiated a &quot;Protected Employment Program&quot; at Ford, which shielded workers whose jobs disappeared because of technology, productivity improvements, and &quot;outsourcing,&quot; the transfer of work to other companies.    But UAW officials have criticized that plan because it didn't protect against job losses through attrition or layoffs from sales decreases. The new pact addresses those issues. It guarantees an employment number at each of the company's 89 U.S. facilities and even if Ford sales drop because of bad marketing or poor design and quality, the company can't lay off workers. It can temporarily furlough workers during an industrywide slump, but there are restrictions there, too.    Ford also promised not to close any plants during the life of the contract, and extended the required notification period before outsourcing work. The pact, however, didn't end outsourcing, something the UAW officials had been seeking.    Ford also offered improvements in pension benefits, which indirectly could be considered enhanced job security by encouraging older workers to retire. It also agreed to increase the overtime &quot;penalty&quot; it pays into a special fund to $1.25 an hour from 50 cents an hour.    In return for the job-guarantee clauses, the UAW agreed to encourage work-rule changes to increase productivity in the plants. But the union didn't make any ironclad promises, as Ford had originally asked. Indeed, many local unions have expressed reluctance to forgo practices they consider important factory floor protections. &quot;Work rules will be given the most scrutiny,&quot; said Walt Whittemore, president of UAW Local 737 at Ford's glass plant in Nashville, Tenn. &quot;That is a real ticklish question.&quot;    Analysts said that while Ford can afford the contract's cost, it won't be cheap. &quot;I think it's a liveable contract on job security, but the increases in wages and pensions are pretty stiff,&quot; said David Healy of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.    Others argued that because Ford already has a lean operation the company may find it relatively painless to provide the job security and monetary gains provided in the agreement.    &quot;You could find that the productivity improvement permitted under the contract will completely offset what the workers receive in wages and benefits,&quot; said Ronald Glantz, an analyst with Montgomery Securities Inc.    Peter J. Pestillo, the Ford vice president overseeing the negotiations, said, &quot;We have only the ambition to operate efficiently . . . this agreement does nothing to inhibit that.&quot;    (UAW President Owen Bieber was hospitalized during the final day of the negotiating marathon, although UAW officials said he kept in touch with the discussions via telephone. After being treated for an abdominal ailment, Mr. Bieber was released yesterday shortly after the new contract was announced.)    Many labor analysts hailed the pact as a landmark. The United Steelworkers and the Communications Workers of America have secured strong job guarantee programs in recent years, but Ford is apparently the largest U.S. manufacturing company so far to accept one. &quot;It's going to be used as a standard by which to measure job security,&quot; said Harley Shaiken, a labor professor at the University of California at San Diego. &quot;It essentially puts on the bargaining table the total number of jobs as a central issue.&quot;    Others, however, expressed skepticism. &quot;This can't be a permanent guarantee,&quot; said Audrey Freedman, an executive director of the U.S. Conference Board, an industry-supported nonprofit economic research concern. &quot;For three years things will be stabilized and then adjustments will have to be made.&quot;    Even some Ford officials privately say this won't significantly alter what they would have done otherwise.    But such a job-guarantee plan would have a big effect on GM. In the view of some analysts, General Motors would be better off taking a two or three week strike than accepting a Ford-style contract that contained wage increases or job-preservation programs. &quot;No way in the world can GM buy this (the Ford) contract,&quot; said Michael Luckey of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.    But a lengthy strike could hurt GM by delaying production of the new midsized GM-10 models, starting with the Buick Regal to be launched Oct. 1. Those cars carry much of GM's hopes for retaking market share lost to competitors, notably Ford's boldly designed Taurus and Sable models.    Negotiations at GM have been on hold pending the Ford contract, but are expected to heat up again Monday. A deadline will be set after the Ford contract is ratified, and will likely fall in mid-to-late October.    Yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Ford closed at $104.75, up 75 cents, while GM shares slipped 25 cents to $87.25.    ---   Ford-UAW Settlement   Key provisions of the tentative three-year contract negotiated between Ford Motor Co. and the United Auto Workers union:    Job security   --&quot;Lock in&quot; current employment levels at each of 89 facilities. Workers would be protected against layoff except during industrywide sales slumps.    --Replace one worker for every two lost through attrition.    --Not close any plants.    Wages and benefits   --Pat a 3% base wage raise in the first year of the contract, and 3% lump-sum bonuses in the next two years.    --Enhance profit-sharing.    --Increase pension payments.    Flexibility   --The UAW will encourage local unions to alter work rules to enhance productivity. </TEXT></DOC>