<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Jim's Saga:Homeless Man HauntsA Gentrified Enclave,Baffling Its Residents---Taciturn and Unthreatening,He Tests the CompassionOf His Chicago Neighbors---How a Fire Makes Him Move---By Jeffrey ZaslowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   One day last winter, a new neighbor appeared at a busy street corner in the affluent neighborhood of Lincoln Park. The man sat down on a bus-stop bench, folded his hands and hunched his head, and there he remained -- in the worst rains and the bitterest cold.    Whatever brought the homeless old man to that particular bench at Clark Street and Deming Place, he wouldn't say. He talked to almost no one, and he refused spare change or offers of help. He just sat, filthy and disheveled, day after day, stirring community unease and resentment.    He told a priest his name was Jim, but in his tattered poncho and gray beard, he looked more like an unwashed Moses. He warily guarded his piles of junk, stacked beside him in rusted shopping carts. To residents of this fashionable neighborhood, he was an eyesore who tested compassion -- and prompted frequent complaints to the police.    Even on subzero days, Jim was seldom invited into nearby stores; shopkeepers said his odor drove customers away. He shocked passers-by by urinating into plastic antifreeze jugs that he pulled under his poncho. And he infuriated many bridal parties by showing up uninvited for weddings at a nearby church.    One night last summer, Jim and his belongings were mysteriously set on fire. He survived and retreated to an alley in another neighborhood a few miles away. But his bench still bears an angry charcoal-black burn -- a reminder to Lincoln Park of its limitations, its frustrations, and its helplessness regarding the homeless.    Few communities are any better at dealing with their resident street people. Across America this winter, overcrowded shelters expect to turn away transients in record numbers. Housing shortages, welfare cuts, programs to deinstitutionalize the mentally ill and other factors have washed as many as two million people onto the streets. In some instances, the street people are there by choice, disdaining the shelters for one reason or another.    In Chicago, Skid Row residents have scattered in the path of ritzy new downtown residential developments, with many making their way a few miles north to the tree-lined streets and overflowing dumpsters of Lincoln Park. On any given night, more than 100 homeless people range among this gentrified neighborhood's 70,000 residents, local officials say.    People everywhere fear the crime, panhandling and unsightliness associated with the homeless. As the ranks of the homeless swell and lap against the doorsteps of the affluent, a backlash has developed.    In Santa Barbara, Calif., where residents seek to overturn a recent ruling that allows overnight sleeping in vacant public lots, a shopkeeper douses discarded food with bleach to prevent &quot;dumpster-diving.&quot; In Mount Holly, N.J., where the homeless pitched tents to dramatize their plight, officials liken building a shelter to posting a &quot;neon light&quot; inviting vagrants from nearby Philadelphia and Camden, N.J.    In New York, with its 9,000 homeless, some tony neighborhoods use barbed wire to keep sleepers off heating grates. Mayor Edward Koch proposes four new shelters in each of the city's five boroughs, which infuriates the smallest borough, Staten Island.    &quot;Street people have become like nuclear waste. Everyone screams, 'Not in my neighborhood!'&quot; says Philip Walters, a Lincoln Park resident who witnessed his neighbors' indignant opposition to plans for an emergency shelter.    The shelter wasn't built, but Jim's plight became Lincoln Park's problem anyway. The community's struggle with his presence says much about society's failures in dealing with the homeless.    &quot;He's a modern parable,&quot; says the Rev. Robert Oldershaw of St. Clement's Church, just down the street from Jim's bench. &quot;His story disturbs us, shocks us, and keeps us searching for some kind of further meaning.&quot;    Until last winter, Jim had lived in a nearby park, but complaints by joggers and picnickers led the Chicago Park District to demand that he move. Without saying a word, the homeless man agreed to go, perhaps because he was tired of fighting off the hoodlums who once tried to set his beard on fire. Park workers tossed out the junk that Jim didn't take with him, including bags infested with rats.    At the busy corner of Deming and Clark, Jim settled in on a bench emblazoned with an advertisement trumpeting &quot;SELF STORAGE&quot; in large orange letters. He wasn't welcomed. &quot;No one wants a vagrant camping by your door,&quot; says Hristos Dallas, the manager of the Greek restaurant across the street from Jim's bench. &quot;It's like someone pitching a tent on your front lawn.&quot;    On subzero mornings, young professionals would awkwardly keep their distance from Jim as they waited to board warm downtown buses. Although few even acknowledged his presence, Jim was unavoidable. &quot;I felt so guilty,&quot; says Jerry Zucker, a resident. &quot;I would walk behind him instead of in front of him. I didn't like making eye contact.&quot;    The shops within view of Jim's bench -- a sushi bar, a &quot;hair design&quot; salon, a record store and a specialty hat store -- provided a shrieking contrast to the old man. &quot;This is a neighborhood of rich yuppies eating 'designer' ice cream,&quot; says Rod Stasick, the manager of Dr. Wax Records. The store's record-buyers rarely mentioned Jim, except to joke about him. &quot;Customers asked if he was Dr. Wax, keeping an eye on the place,&quot; says Pete Nathan, a clerk at the store.    Jim hasn't been known to drink or panhandle, and he seems intelligent, even compassionate. At his bench, he would read newspapers left behind by commuters and write in a little notebook. And each day, he would rise from his bench to walk a young blind man across the street.    &quot;He had a sort of Christmasy face,&quot; says Fred Strauss, the executive director of the Lincoln Park Chamber of Commerce. &quot;If I were casting a Santa Claus, he'd be a good choice.&quot; Mr. Nathan adds: &quot;He looked like an old philosopher, as if the bench was his alternative life style.&quot;    Jim often attended Mass at St. Clement's but never took Communion or went to confession. The first time he arrived, Father Oldershaw told him to leave his bags of junk outside. When Jim refused, the priest says he first locked him out, but then &quot;had a conversion&quot; and invited Jim in. Jim would genuflect before entering a pew behind the other parishioners, then sit quietly through the Mass.    He became a regular, if unwanted, guest at the church's weddings, hunched near his bags at the side of the ornate, Byzantine sanctuary as bridesmaids in their finery glided down the aisle. &quot;Fathers of brides would demand that I 'get rid of the bum!'&quot; the priest says. &quot;I'd say, 'He's not a bum, he's a parishioner.' Once I asked Jim if he was coming to this wedding. He said, 'I'm not getting married, Father, I just came to watch.'&quot;    Jim rarely spoke, though he once admonished a man for smoking in church. And he yelled at a group of boisterous children for &quot;disrespecting the house of God,&quot; Father Oldershaw says. The children dismissed him and told the priest derisively, &quot;He's just a bum.&quot;    Jim would tell Father Oldershaw only that he was of German descent, came to Chicago 17 years ago from Kentucky, and carried an ice pick under his poncho for protection. Did he ever work? Does he have a family? Though many street people will tell their life stories for a cup of coffee, Jim usually refuses to answer questions. Some residents, including this reporter, have tried to speak to him, only to be rebuffed with an angry wave of the old man's hand.    &quot;I think Jim was hurt somehow, and he cut himself off from everyone,&quot; says the Rev. Bernard Guenther, another area priest.    Most residents speculate that, like an estimated one-third of the homeless, Jim has a mental disorder. &quot;I'd like to know what went on in his head,&quot; says Raymond Hudd, the hat store's owner. &quot;We all need something to hold on to. For him, maybe it was the trash in his shopping carts.&quot;    Whatever the case, Jim is among the hardest of the homeless to help. Enigmatic and antisocial, he offers no last name and no history. With no address, he gets no public assistance. Unwilling to accept money, he gets no aid from overburdened social agencies.    On the coldest nights two winters ago, Jim did stay at an overnight shelter at St. Clement's. He slept sitting up, off by himself, never conversing with others. He stopped going, however, because he wasn't allowed to bring his bags inside.    Residents grew desperate to rid their neighborhood of Jim, angrily calling the police, hospitals, their alderman -- &quot;everyone but the animal shelter,&quot; says Mr. Dallas -- all to no avail.    Jim couldn't be kept in a mental hospital unless he was deemed a threat to himself or others. And he couldn't be sent to jail for safekeeping. Unlike police in New York and Philadelphia, those in Chicago may not force people into shelters involuntarily, even on subzero nights.    &quot;People say, 'Look at this poor guy sitting there and the police won't do anything.' But we can't just hijack a guy off the street,&quot; says Richard Adamski, the policeman who handled Jim's &quot;benevolent arrest&quot; after he was burned.    Lincoln Park's rising street population, meanwhile, is sparking growing fights over garbage rights, as vagrants lay claim to dumpsters with the richest discards. Jim even got into shoving matches with street people rifling through his junk. &quot;The ruckus can be unbelievable,&quot; says James Stellas, a Lincoln Park grocer. &quot;Now we lock up the dumpsters.&quot;    Such scenes frighten residents. Chicago film maker Bob Mori, sensing their uneasiness, made a disturbing film called &quot;Wake Up You Bum.&quot; In it, a clown maliciously screams &quot;WAKE UP YOU BUM!&quot; and honks a horn at actual sleeping street people. The film, screened at a Lincoln Park nightclub to both cheers and jeers, is meant to shock, Mr. Mori says. &quot;Stereotypical yuppies would rather not look at a bum. They'd rather let someone else handle the problem.&quot;    When a permanent 25-bed shelter for the homeless was considered in Lincoln Park in 1984, &quot;the community went berserk,&quot; recalls Martin Oberman, the area's alderman. One resident said he didn't want some bum stealing his Porsche. Others feared that scores of vagrants would loiter outside the shelter, spreading diseases and lice or plotting crimes.    &quot;Parents have a right to fear that one of them would touch their children,&quot; says Connie Robison, the director of the Lincoln Park Conservation Association, a group composed mostly of homeowners.    Phil Walters, whose back yard would have faced the proposed shelter, says he went to meetings to learn both sides of the shelter debate. &quot;But just for wanting to hear the pros and cons, I became a pro-derelict revolutionary in the eyes of some people,&quot; he recalls. &quot;They didn't want an objective study. They just wanted to prevent the onslaught of the bums.&quot;    Since then, a community group has quietly set up temporary winter shelters for a handful of people in three churches, including St. Clement's. But rounding up the necessary 200 volunteers to commit one night a month to run the shelters is a tough job in a neighborhood of busy professionals, says Robert Burson, the president of the group, the Lincoln Park Community Shelter.    The group keeps a low profile to avoid stirring neighborhood opposition. Overnight guests are sent back into the streets by 6:45 a.m., so they aren't around when people arrive for Mass or to drop off their children at church schools.    The makeshift shelters are severely overtaxed. &quot;We turn people away on subzero nights -- give them subway tokens to get to another shelter. That's what's toughest,&quot; Mr. Burson says. And they lack the room, resources or staff to lure unwilling people like Jim in from the cold.    Shelters can't help Jim, especially when &quot;there are people crying for help who aren't getting it,&quot; says Mr. Burson. &quot;Maybe Jim is a commentary on our limitations.&quot;    Advocacy groups, including the Chicago Coalition for the Homeless, press for government financing for social workers to travel the streets, coaxing people like Jim into shelters and treatment.    Failing such solutions, Lincoln Park probably demonstrated as much charity toward Jim as most affluent neighborhoods would. &quot;Lincoln Park isn't heartless,&quot; says Mr. Strauss of the chamber of commerce. Older residents would take Jim leftovers from their senior-citizen lunch programs. Young people would toss him doughnuts or scraps of cookies as they walked by. Residents regularly donate to canned-goods drives at their health clubs. And two blocks from Jim's bench, they lined up by the hundreds last spring for Hands Across America, the nationwide benefit for the homeless.    But when Jim was set ablaze in the early-morning hours last June, no one called the police until noon -- even though scores of rush-hour commuters saw Jim and the charred remains of his junk strewn across the parking lot of the sushi restaurant.    Jim survived, police say, because the flames didn't eat through his many layers of clothing. They doubt that Jim set the blaze himself -- he said he was asleep when it began -- but have no leads on who might have been involved. Neighbors suspect young hoodlums or nearby businesses, which deny any involvement. &quot;It was a concerted effort to get him out,&quot; figures Mr. Nathan, who had received anonymous calls at his store demanding that Jim be removed.    A fingerprint check showed that Jim had no criminal record. Police released him the day of the fire, and he soon turned up in an alley by St. Alphonsus, a church in Chicago's Lake View section, just north of Lincoln Park. On Election Day, workers at a polling place in the church complained that Jim and his bags got in the way of voters. Police arrested him for disorderly conduct, couldn't get him to talk, and released him without charges to a mental hospital under the name &quot;John Doe.&quot;    A week later, doctors at Reed Hospital still hadn't determined what to do with Jim. &quot;We haven't even gotten a first name out of him,&quot; a spokesman said. In mid-November, Jim was released to the streets, and he returned to the neighborhood near St. Alphonsus.    In Lincoln Park, the mood about Jim since the fire is a mix of pity, sadness and relief. Father Oldershaw says he will always consider the intersection of Deming and Clark to be &quot;Jim's Corner.&quot; But the sentiment isn't widely shared.    Neighbors tell of a man who witnessed Jim burning from his third-floor apartment overlooking the bench.    The man didn't go to the police, and he refuses to come to the door to discuss the fire with a reporter. His wife speaks through a crack in the doorway, without unhooking her safety chain. &quot;We never,&quot; she says, &quot;saw any man on that bench.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>