<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID Moscow continues to withhold promised data on its missiles.    The secretary of state said he couldn't explain the holdup on the information, promised to him by Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze in Geneva last week, and said, &quot;We must have that data.&quot; Prior to the Geneva meeting, the State Department had termed the data &quot;essential&quot; to completing a treaty banning superpower arsenals of intermediate-range nuclear missiles. Separately, 12 presidential candidates from both parties discussed the INF accord at a debate in Washington, with the Democrats rallying behind the pact.    Reagan told Florida high school students he is determined that next week's summit not usher in an era of detente allowing for a Soviet missile buildup.    ---   India filed homicide charges against Union Carbide and nine former executives in connection with the 1984 disaster at the company's Bhopal plant. A company spokesman said the charges are unfounded and that India is unable &quot;to accept the fact of employee sabotage&quot; in the accident that killed more than 2,800.    ---   Suspected Japanese terrorists took cyanide pills in Bahrain prior to questioning about a possible bombing of a South Korean jetliner carrying 115. A South Korean official said the couple may have planted a bomb on the airliner, wreckage of which Thai police have located in Burma. The man died but the woman is expected to live.    ---   The U.S. and Britain criticized the French government for dealing with Tehran to exchange an alleged Iranian terrorist for two French hostages. The State Department said the transaction shows that Iran controls hostages held in Lebanon and that such activity shouldn't be rewarded.    ---   Federal authorities reported substantial progress in talks with Cuban detainees holding 89 hostages at a federal penitentiary in Atlanta. Officials said a dissident minority blocking a pact appears to be losing influence. Negotiators also have enlisted the aid of a Cuban-born Catholic bishop who helped settle a similar standoff in Louisiana.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled the U.S. clean-water law may be enforced through lawsuits by private individuals and groups, but not when they are trying to elicit fines for past violations. Separately, justices dismissed a suit seeking to overturn a court voiding of a New Jersey law requiring moments of silence in schools.    ---   The State Department condemned Haiti's military government for failing to protect voters during violence that killed 34 and forced cancellation of elections Sunday, and called for quick arrests of the gunmen. A team of election observers accused Haiti's army of collaborating with the killers and called for an OAS peace-keeping force.    ---   A Senate panel approved a provision in an appropriations bill that would allow foreign countries, primarily Egypt and Israel, to refinance at lower current rates loans made by the U.S. earlier this decade. The bill, which is supposed to be part of a deficit-reduction package, would result in a $1 billion U.S. loss.    ---   The EPA unveiled draft regulations to reduce ozone-destroying chemicals by assigning annual production and import quotas to suppliers. The rules, which will go into effect in August, implement reductions called for in an 11-nation treaty Reagan is to submit to the Senate this month.    ---   China ordered pork rationing in Beijing because of a nationwide shortage caused by bad weather and chaotic pricing policies. The move follows similar orders issued last week in Shanghai and Tianjin and means higher prices and another boost to China's mounting inflation.    ---   U.S. immigration authorities began requiring all immigrants to take and pass AIDS tests. Aliens applying for legal residency must pay for their own tests and no appeal is possible if results are positive.    ---   Bangladesh freed nine opposition leaders as part of a peace overture by President Ershad that includes a call for talks with government foes. One person was killed, several were injured and 181 arrested as clashes continued despite a government protest ban and curfew ordered last week.    ---   Philippine President Aquino rejected talks with Col. Honasan, saying the fugitive leader of a failed Aug. 28 coup must surrender first. Honasan ignored a Monday surrender deadline set by the government, saying he wanted to negotiate terms with Aquino.    ---   An anti-smoking group claimed a tobacco industry representative conceded for the first time, at a recent meeting with federal health officials, that smoking is &quot;related to&quot; cancer, heart disease and chronic lung disease. The group said that comments by a RJR Nabisco lawyer could help smokers to win liability suits.    ---   Died: James Baldwin, 63, author and civil rights activist, Monday, in St. Paul de Vence, France, of stomach cancer. </TEXT></DOC>