<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880701-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Scrappy Jurist: Justice Antonin Scalia, On the Court 2 Years, Points Way to Future --- Unpredictably Conservative, He Brings Wit and Passion To This Staid Tribunal --- The Influence of 'Ninograms' </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> SUP </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Antonin Scalia isn't the type to just sit quietly at the end of the bench, which is his assigned seat as a junior member of the Supreme Court.    During arguments before the court, he peppers lawyers with questions and makes pithy comments: &quot;To contradict Vince Lombardi, the First Amendment is not everything,&quot; the conservative justice told the lawyer representing Hustler Magazine against a lawsuit filed by the Rev. Jerry Falwell. Mr. Falwell claimed that a parody in the magazine had caused him &quot;emotional distress.&quot;    In his first two years on the court, Justice Scalia has urged overruling five major legal precedents. And he has taken on the court's own hallowed procedures. When asked early this year about the court's secret conferences, in which the justices vote on cases, he startled court traditionalists by responding: &quot;Not much conferencing goes on. I don't like that.&quot;    His outspoken zeal sometimes annoys colleagues, but his energetic personality and sharp wit have helped him win acceptance. He jogs with the newest justice, Anthony Kennedy; he plays tennis with Justice Sandra Day O'Connor and poker with Chief Justice William Rehnquist. An opera fan and piano player, he led a rendition of &quot;Some Enchanted Evening&quot; at a farewell party for court law clerks this week.    His after-dinner speeches often sound like comic monologues: &quot;I think it's generally agreed among most of the justices,&quot; he told a recent audience, &quot;that the most unadmirable quality&quot; for a lawyer arguing a case &quot;is mispronouncing the word Scalia.&quot; (It's Skuh-LEE-uh.)    Mostly, though, the 52-year-old justice has already established himself as a formidable conservative who could well be a force on the high court into the next century. &quot;I expect him to be the doctrinemaker for the court's new majority,&quot; says Philip Kurland, an expert in constitutional law at the University of Chicago.    That prospect doesn't thrill Justice Scalia's liberal critics. He professes the view that the courts should play a limited role, but his critics say he actually is pushing a conservative political agenda.    Justice Scalia &quot;seems to think he has a commission to review everything that has gone on since John Marshall {chief justice from 1801 to 1835} and set it straight,&quot; says Herman Schwartz, a professor at American University's Washington College of Law.    Last year, he excoriated the court for ruling that a Louisiana law calling for the teaching of &quot;creation science&quot; as well as evolution violated the First Amendment separation of church and state. He said the Louisiana law had a clear non-religious purpose -- teaching scientific theories other than evolution -- and he urged the court to overrule its own 1971 test for determining when a state or federal law interferes with religious freedom.    His dissent drew criticism from Harvard University geologist Stephen Jay Gould, who said, &quot; . . . creationism cannot qualify as science.&quot; Even conservative columnist George Will was upset; his critique ran in the Washington Post under the headline: &quot;Good Grief, Scalia.&quot;    Recently, court observers say, Justice Scalia has been trying to maximize his influence by gaining allies, particularly by establishing rapport with Justices O'Connor and Kennedy, President Reagan's other appointees. He also works well with Chief Justice Rehnquist, whom Mr. Reagan promoted to head the court, and that could well help move the court in a conservative direction.    What sets Justice Scalia apart from the traditional back-seat role of court newcomers is his obvious fervor. An outgoing, energetic man, he is more likely than most justices to drop in on colleagues to talk over a case, instead of communicating only in writing. Justice Scalia -- his friends call him Nino -- is impatient with the monastic isolation of the high court and craves a good legal discussion, a feeling left over from his 10 years as a law professor.    He also sends colleagues &quot;Ninograms,&quot; as law clerks for other justices call his memos. While most justices keep to themselves in preparing for the 155 oral arguments each term, Justice Scalia sometimes sends his missives before a case is argued, or soon afterward, to warn colleagues of procedural concerns he has about whether a dispute truly belongs in the Supreme Court.    And once one justice has written and circulated a draft opinion to the others, former law clerks say Justice Scalia is more likely than the others to respond in minute detail, with a long note asking for changes and arguing points. Last spring, former clerks say, he angered the mild-mannered Justice Lewis Powell, who retired in June 1987, by correcting his grammar.    Justice Powell wasn't the only member of the court whom Justice Scalia has offended. At times, his zeal and persistence on matters sometimes quite small have frustrated his colleagues and made him difficult to work with. This unwillingness to give up, which friends say characterizes the way he plays poker, too, can blunt his effectiveness.    Justice Scalia's lack of seniority means that by the time he has a chance to state his views at conference, seven others have already announced their positions. So he uses oral arguments to make sure his colleagues know where he stands.    In a February argument on whether police may chase someone solely because he runs away from a police car, Justice Scalia left no doubt about his view. &quot;I know in my neighborhood if there is a police car patrolling and this police car sees someone observe the car, do a double take, and start running, I would like that police car to follow that person.&quot; But he doesn't always telegraph his views; in the Hustler case, he ultimately voted for the magazine.    Justice Scalia, who declined to be interviewed for this article, does seem to do more exchanging than most of his colleagues. From the time he arrived at the high court in September 1986, after four years as a federal appeals judge in Washington, he has been a dominant and forceful interrogator at the court's oral arguments. In a recent survey by the Legal Times, he ranked third in number of questions, behind Justices John Paul Stevens and Byron White, averaging 13 per hourlong argument.    He takes the arguments so seriously that friends say he skips his regular poker game when the court is in session the next day. Chief Justice Rehnquist plays even when the court will meet the next day.    Justice Scalia's colleagues sometimes chafe at his intense grillings. In a January argument on a contempt ruling against the Providence (R.I.) Journal for publishing materials despite a court order, he questioned one lawyer at length on a major procedural problem. &quot;Perhaps we violated the law when we granted your petition,&quot; Justice Scalia said. The interrogation persisted so long that Chief Justice Rehnquist finally lost his patience, interrupted, and told the lawyer: &quot;I hope when you're given an opportunity to do so, you'll address some of your remarks to the question on which this court voted to grant&quot; review.    Justice Scalia is also unusual in that he does much of his own writing. While law clerks do prepare draft opinions for him, he rewrites them, using a word processor at his desk. He rarely has printed texts of his speeches because he writes them in longhand on airplanes.    Admirers say Justice Scalia is hardly a soldier for the Reagan administration. &quot;I really don't think he has a political agenda,&quot; says Lee Liberman, a former Scalia law clerk and now a professor at George Mason University Law School in Arlington, Va. &quot;He has a view of the law and what courts can do.&quot;    He is persistent on a number of legal points. He lectures the court often that laws passed by Congress and state legislatures should be interpreted by judges based on the &quot;plain meaning&quot; of the words. And he believes there are many cases that the high court shouldn't decide because the individual challenging an action wasn't sufficiently affected by it or because there is no real legal dispute between the parties.    Critics say that much of his work is difficult to square with the notion of a restrained role for courts and that it resembles a conservative political agenda.    When the high court last spring upheld a voluntary affirmative-action plan for minority-group and women public employees in Santa Clara County, Calif., he wrote a blistering dissent saying the justices have turned anti-discrimination law &quot;into a powerful engine of racism and sexism.&quot; He urged the court to overrule its 1979 decision upholding employers' voluntary affirmative action.    Just this week, he wrote the court's 5-4 ruling shielding military contractors from lawsuits for damages if the equipment they designed is defective and causes injuries. The liberal dissenters accused the majority of acting like a legislature, not a court. But it was one of the few cases so far in which a new conservative majority, completed by Justice Kennedy's arrival in February, voted as a bloc, and it is a sign of trust that Chief Justice Rehnquist assigned it to Justice Scalia to write.    Justice Scalia this week also wrote a strong dissent in which he concluded the Constitution in no way bars the death penalty for juveniles.    Says Mr. Schwartz of American University, &quot;Clearly . . . he is one of the most vigorous activists on the court. He looks for opportunities to correct what he thinks are past mistakes.&quot;    Yet, at times, Justice Scalia can be unpredictable. He has said the court should rethink its 1973 test in which local community standards are used to decide when pornography is protected by the First Amendment; the line is too hard to draw. He urged overruling a 1950 precedent that bars lawsuits against the federal government by the families of military personnel killed on the job.    There are other hallmarks of Justice Scalia's legal view. He is the court's most ardent and persistent defender of the authority of the president and the executive branch. On Wednesday, he was the lone dissenter, arguing (in a 7-1 ruling) that court-appointed special prosecutors encroach directly on the president's power. Always the showman, he read excerpts of his dissent in the courtroom for nine minutes, an unusual step, all the more dramatic because of his deep, imposing voice.    He has also sharply criticized the court for upholding the free-speech rights of a Texas county worker who, when President Reagan was shot, told a colleague she hoped they get him next time. And he recently dissented from a ruling that the Central Intelligence Agency's decision to fire an employee for security reasons may be challenged in court for claims of bias.    He has also shown that he will work hard to breathe new life into the Fifth Amendment guarantee that private property won't be taken by the government &quot;without just compensation.&quot;    Friends say he lives his life with the same passion he has for the law, with an abiding curiosity and an eagerness to experiment. Last summer, while he was teaching at Tulane University Law School's summer program on the Greek island of Rhodes, he, his wife, Maureen, and a former law clerk went across the island to a seaside cafe owned by their driver's family. They sipped ouzo, ate stuffed grape leaves, and traded stories. And when the octopus was served, the former clerk, Michael Luttig, says Justice Scalia plunged right in, chiding the clerk for not trying it, too.    Says Tulane Dean John Kramer, &quot;He loves travel. He taught his classes in the morning. In the afternoon, he scoured the island for the most private beach.&quot; At night, Mr. Kramer says, &quot;we partied extensively.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>