<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870819-0123 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Theater:The Real Thing, Well Almost---By Sylviane Gold</HL><DD> 08/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Who says theater can't be real? In order to get to your seat at Romulus Linney's &quot;Holy Ghosts,&quot; you've got to walk through the packed earth that surrounds the Theatre 890 stage. If you happen to be wearing sandals, your toes get dirty -- really. And when Diana Castle, as a resentful Southern wife, grabs a broom and starts sweeping, the dust blows up -- really. Her tatty little shift, the bare plank floor, the spare furniture are all blatantly real.    Farther downtown, at Robert Harling's &quot;Steel Magnolias,&quot; a Louisiana beauty salon complete with swivel chairs, manicure table and hair dryers has been faithfully reproduced on the stage of the Lucille Lortel Theatre. As the play progresses, various characters have their hair washed, set and combed out -- really. The rollers and hair spray, the multicolored smocks, the flowery wallpaper are all dead-accurate. And there's even a program credit for &quot;Hair Design and Supervision&quot; (to Bobby H. Grayson, if you want to know).    In the first play, the final offering of this summer's New York Theater Exchange, realism serves to describe the misfits and rejects drawn to a sect of Pentecostal snake-handlers, and the second's to limn the lives of a genial, often comic group of female friends. But they have more in common than their insistently authentic Southern settings. Both writers give us access to a sanctuary to which we couldn't otherwise gain admission; both plays allow us to inspect at close range the refugees we wouldn't otherwise encounter.    In &quot;Holy Ghosts,&quot; the refuge is the Rev. Obediah Buckhorn's makeshift church, where Ms. Castle's character, Nancy, has found shelter from the boorish redneck she naively married. As we meet her fellow parishioners, we find that they, too, are in flight from the pain of a terminal illness, of a promiscuous past, a lost pet, a lost job, a lost life.    The problems in &quot;Steel Magnolias&quot; are no less serious, but the remedy is less drastic. The Chinquapin, La., beauty shop serves as a haven where the neighborhood ladies can trade gossip, recipes and oneliners without interference from the outside world -- made up, of course, primarily of men.    Messrs. Linney and Harling are both using theater as a sociological tool, which explains both the strengths and the weaknesses of their plays. Mr. Linney wants us to understand what draws people into a form of worship so ecstatic and irrational that its practitioners are willing to pass poisonous snakes from hand to hand. So he turns his congregants into case studies. He has tried to inject some tension by dragging Nancy's angry, deserted husband onto the scene, but this plot line seems thin and contrived. The meat of the play is in its case histories, and well-performed though they are in this San Diego Repertory Theatre production, they never become anything more than a census.    As for Mr. Harling, his purpose is implicit in his title. He wants us to see these traditional, small-town women, with their big-time hairdos, as heroic -- blushing flowers with innards of forged metal. So the oldest of them finds new youth in a business venture; the crankiest is softened by a rekindled romance; the most pathetic redeemed by friendship and an evangelical church and a new job. But Mr. Harling also wants us to know that he's smarter and more sophisticated than his characters, so he makes jokes at their expense. Since they are, on the whole, entertaining jokes, the play works well enough, in its genial, limited way -- until Mr. Harling falls off a dramatic cliff.    Interestingly, it's exactly the same one that Mr. Linney falls from in &quot;Holy Ghosts.&quot; Both playwrights break faith with their audience by abandoning the verisimilitude they have worked so hard to establish.    In &quot;Steel Magnolias,&quot; Mr. Harling quite unaccountably allows one of the characters to die. And even though he's led us to believe that we were in for an evening of sentimental comedy, we let him get away with it. But when he brings all the survivors onstage to weep disconsolately at their loss, and then, with a single mean line of dialogue sets them all laughing again we won't buy it. The playwright is trifling with us -- a theatrical sin unforgivable in everything but a murder mystery.    We are similarly let down when Mr. Linney gets to the climactic moment of his play. When Nancy's husband kicks the innocent-looking wooden crate he's been sitting on, it emits an evil rattle. But when Obediah's singing, dancing followers lift the lid, there's nothing in it. The actors mime the culmination of the worship, and instead of writhing, scary snakes, we get air.    This might pass if we hadn't been made to notice the dirt floor, the real broom, the deadly hiss. And most people, I suspect, could do without seeing live snakes in a theater -- I was once ready to bolt when a bunch of uncaged mice turned up in the cast of a show. But a play is a kind of tightrope act-one misstep and all the skill and daring that's preceded it goes for naught. In this play, snakes -- or some literal representation thereof -- are absolutely essential even if the audience feels jittery. Realism can work in the theater -- but not if you're going to be namby-pamby about it. </TEXT></DOC>