<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871228-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Sour Plum:Despite Big '71 Grant,The Natives of AlaskaRun Into Hard Times---Many Companies Are Losers,And Some Firms Collapse;Mismanagement Is Cited---But Optimism Isn't Dead Yet---By John KnowltonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESPULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)PETROLEUM (PET)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> HYDABURG, Alaska  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Esther Nix, now 78, moved to this southeast Alaska village as a child of two, her first home was a tent. For many years life was harsh for her people, the Haida Indians. Then, in 1971, the white man gave the Haidas and all other Alaska natives a deal that looked like a real plum. Today many of them think it's more like a lemon.    To settle old native claims that clouded state development and threatened the Alaska Pipeline, Congress passed the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, or Ancsa. It granted Alaska's Indians, Aleuts and Eskimos $1 billion in cash and 44 million acres, a tenth of the state. They would all become shareholders, owners of village and regional corporations set up to invest and manage these assets. They not only could survive; they might even get rich.    But the Haidas, along with many others, didn't get rich. Their business ventures failed, and to pay some of their debts they are reluctantly selling some ancestral lands where the Haidas have gathered berries and dug for clams for centuries. &quot;Our people are not getting ahead,&quot; says Mrs. Nix, sitting in her drafty wood home by the ocean. &quot;Our people are getting behind.&quot;    From here in Alaska's panhandle to the frozen barrens on the Bering Straits, many other natives are getting behind, too. Plagued by greed, naivete, and inept or downright fraudulent management, their corporations have been steadily piling up operating losses.    Champions of Ancsa, while conceding that the native groups are in deep trouble, still believe that corporate capitalism can take root and flourish among them. U.S. Sen. Ted Stevens of Alaska says the act, which he helped draft, &quot;has worked a hell of a lot better than most Indian-claims settlements.&quot;    Meanwhile, the deficits, exacerbated by falling commodity prices in recent years, have grown so great that some corporations have already collapsed.    Others are making a comeback only through what amounts to artificial respiration: Washington is letting them sell their past losses to profitable stateside companies for use as tax credits. There is evidence that some of the native groups are inflating their losses -- and their profits from the losses' sale -- with accounting maneuvers, a technique that may later be challenged by the Internal Revenue Service. To raise more cash, a few native corporations are also now leaning toward something that many have bitterly opposed for years -- more oil development.    Disillusionment is sweeping through the villages as dividends disappear and struggling corporations battle both their creditors and one another. &quot;You've got families fighting each other and unrest in the community,&quot; says Percy Frisby, a fisherman and Haida Corp. shareholder. &quot;The whole social structure has gone to hell.&quot;    Many Alaskans, native and white, largely blame the corporate framework set up by Ancsa. It was, they say, spectacularly ill-suited to native societies that operate communally, know little about corporate management and define wealth as cash for a new snowmobile rather than pieces of paper representing stock. George Irvin, vice president of the Alaska Federation of Natives, declares, &quot;The corporate model is a graft that's being rejected by the body.&quot;    It is difficult to determine exactly how much money the corporations have lost. Only the larger ones report regularly, and sometimes the figures are suspect. But sources who have examined the most troubled companies in connection with native pleas for aid put these companies' total losses since Ancsa was passed at about $575 million. That amount is likely to swell as the natives claim additional paper losses after new appraisals of their timberland holdings.    Though some corporations have been profitable, it is believed that most have been losers over the long run. At least four, including two of the 13 regionals, have entered bankruptcy proceedings in the past two years, and others are tottering on the brink. Haida Corp., a village corporation, was the first to fall, filing in 1985 after defaulting on a $3.8 million loan. Like others, it was the victim of an accumulation of errors over the years, supplemented by simple bad luck.    Beginning in 1979, Haida invested heavily in logging roads and a log-sorting yard and built a big fish cannery in Hydaburg. At the same time, officials of the corporation were also being besieged by shareholder demands for some of the federal money it had received, and they gave in too often for their own good.    For example, the corporation lent $1 million to a group of fishermen-shareholders for nets and engines, but got less than half of it back -- and that much only because it sued some of them. Woodrow Morrison Jr., a former director of the corporation, says his face and hands went numb after one stormy board meeting. He feared a heart attack, but his doctor blamed stress. Mr. Morrison quit, fed up with neighbors who harassed him for scholarship money, loans for their businesses and other special favors.    The cash poured out and the bad loans piled up. Then timber prices dropped. Mainly because of that, the value of Haida assets fell from $33 million in 1979 to about $7 million in 1985. One year the harvest didn't even cover the logging contractor's fee, and the contractor sued for it. Later a fire destroyed the $6.5 million cannery, which was insured for only $700,000.    Ancsa's corporate concept was trouble from the beginning. As soon as the law was implemented, the native corporations became magnets for scam artists. Some posed as consultants, producing phony or worthless reports for their unsophisticated customers. Frank Williams, the chairman of Hunah Totem Corp. in southeast Alaska, says some of these fakers &quot;just copied work that had already been done {by somebody else} and would get paid for it.&quot;    With few natives qualified to run corporations, the Eskimos and Indians turned to outside managers to run them. Many were hardly more skilled in management than the natives, and some were crooks. Kuukpik Corp. on the North Slope, for instance, used an employment agency to hire a finance director who, it developed later, had a civil judgment hanging over him for defrauding an auto-parts company in Oregon. He helped himself to $531,000 of Kuukpik Corp. money and jetted off on a round-the-world trip before being exposed. He is now in jail.    Like everyone else, the native corporations were caught up in the boom mentality that accompanied the building of the Alaska Pipeline, and they are paying for their overoptimism now. One penitent is Bering Straits Native Corp. in Nome. Led by a former Alaska prison official and a Nebraska lawyer, it plunged into an orgy of construction ventures. By 1977 four of its subsidiaries had rolled up $30 million in losses. Today Bering Straits is in bankruptcy proceedings, too.    Its current president, Daniel Fondell, says the corporation's heavy-construction unit regularly underbid contracts, leading to losses and eventual defaults. Several half-built Bering Straits projects, including an oil refinery in Fairbanks, still litter the landscape.    Tigara Village Corp., based on the North Slope, erected a $2 million office building in Anchorage. It couldn't rent it, and Tigara, too, is in bankruptcy court. Others may be a step away. Wells Fargo Bank is trying to foreclose on a defaulted $20 million loan to Anchorage-based Calista Corp., a regional that owns the Sheraton Anchorage Hotel.    While creditors attack the corporations, the corporations attack one another. In some cases, the differing priorities of village corporations and regional ones have them bickering over development plans. In others, the villages charge mismanagement of their funds by regionals entrusted with them.    Ancsa supporters point out that the decline in oil and timber prices that has depressed the whole state economy can hardly be blamed on the natives. Also, because of surveying problems and other snags, not all the land promised under the law has been turned over to the natives.    Recognizing these facts, Congress last year included in the tax bill -- which otherwise was hard on special interests -- permission for the native corporations to sell their losses. They have been doing so, peddling what amounts to tax credits to Pillsbury Co., Marriott Corp., Del E. Webb Corp. and others. This has had the desired effect, helping many native groups to cover losses from operations and show a profit besides -- if a somewhat illusory and temporary one.    Klukwan Village Corp. and Kake Tribal Corp., both in the southeast, got enough from their loss sales to pay off their debts, distribute a $10,000 dividend to each stockholder (all own the same number of shares) and establish &quot;permanent&quot; funds. Bering Straits sold $50 million of past losses for $8 million cash. Haida Corp.'s plan to emerge from bankruptcy proceedings hinges on getting $4 million for its losses. &quot;It's like blood to a guy on the operating table,&quot; says general manager John Morris.    But some fear that history will repeat itself, that the new money will only go the way of the old. Kake Corp. directors, for example, opposed the $10,000 dividends -- which added up to $5.6 million -- as an unwise use of funds that could have been used to help build a permanent local economy. Eager for cash, the shareholders overruled them.    This alarms retired Canadian Judge Thomas Berger, an expert in Alaskan and Canadian native affairs. If this is what will happen to much of the income flowing from the tax break, he says, &quot;the day of reckoning will just be postponed a year or two.&quot;    The tax break is also having two unforeseen effects -- environmental degradation and a big jump in artificial losses to take maximum advantage of Congress's largess. Under the tax law, native loggers get to declare as losses the difference between the peak value of timber in 1979 and its value at whatever time they take the loss. These paper losses, too, can be sold rather than taken. Congress felt this was fair because delays in conveying land caused some native groups to miss the peak prices, but now there is a frenzy of cutting -- not only to make money from the timber itself, which has risen enough in price to yield a profit on its own, but to generate wholly artificial and salable losses as well.    A U.S. Forest Service economist says timber cuts off nongovernment acreage in southeast Alaska are now almost double historical rates, or about 500 million board feet this year. That is almost double the expected haul on the federally owned Tongass National Forest, which is three times bigger than all the southeast native lands combined. Earth-slides off heavily logged land are ruining salmon spawning beds, and internal memorandums of the state fish and wildlife agency cite &quot;very serious problems with forest practices.&quot;    Some native groups, such as Kake, have reappraised the peak value of their timber, increasing their reported losses and profits on the sale of the losses by a huge amount. The Kake group has said it undervalued the quality of its timber. The IRS will audit these corporations next year, and they could be challenged. Any disallowed gains would be claimed by the U.S. Treasury.    Whatever else it may have done, the tax break has failed to stem the growing conviction among natives that they are moving backward and that the corporate experiment has been mostly a failure. Helen Sanderson, an 81-year-old retired teacher in Hydaburg, counted on corporate profits to improve education, care of the elderly and employment among the Haidas. But crime and unemployment have increased and, she says sadly, &quot;our future leaders are indulging in liquor and drugs.&quot;    Far to the north in Nome, Darryl Trigg, a 53-year-old Eskimo, feels worse off than before the white man came along to help him. Dividend money for snowmobiles and outboards has dried up. &quot;Now that the big splash is over,&quot; he says, &quot;I don't see where it's benefiting anyone in our region.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>