<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880803-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SOUTH AFRICA PROPOSED a cease-fire in the 13-year-old Angolan war.    Pretoria's foreign minister said the offer was made at the resumption of regional peace talks in Geneva. The talks involve South Africa, Angola, Cuba and U.S. mediators. The proposal calls for the withdrawal of foreign troops from Angola and independence for Namibia, with elections by next June. South Africa said that if an Aug. 10 truce were accepted, it would pull out its estimated 3,000 troops from Angola by Sept. 1 and begin leaving Namibia Nov. 1.    A meeting of Commonwealth foreign ministers opened in Toronto with a call for strict sanctions to counter repression and censorship in South Africa.    ---   REAGAN REFUSED to endorse a call for an AIDS anti-discrimination law.    While the president directed all federal employees to refrain from bias against those infected with the AIDS virus, he declined to embrace a White House panel's recommendation for federal anti-discrimination legislation. Reagan issued a 10-point program on AIDS and ordered the attorney general to review whether further action is needed. He also urged American businesses, unions and schools to consider adopting policies based on the federal rules.    Reagan disappointed some AIDS activists who believe the stronger actions recommended in June by the presidential commission are necessary.    ---   THE SENATE PASSED a bill to expand the nation's fair-housing law.    The measure, approved 94-3, would give HUD new powers to enforce 20-year-old housing discrimination laws by bringing lawsuits against landlords. The legislation also would give the handicapped in private housing the same protection against bias extended to those in publicly funded housing, and would prohibit discrimination against families with children, except in certain retirement communities. The bill is supported by Reagan.    The City Council of Yonkers, a community north of New York City, voted to reject a housing-integration plan ordered by a federal judge.    ---   A senior Iraqi official said Baghdad would never accept a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war if it is declared by the U.N. without Iraq's consent. The U.N.'s Perez de Cuellar appeared to be edging toward making such a declaration and relying on the Security Council to enforce it. Iraq is insisting on direct truce talks with Iran.    ---   The PLO will convene a special session of its parliament to discuss King Hussein's decision to sever Jordan's links with the Israeli-occupied West Bank, officials said. And Egypt called for Amman and the PLO to coordinate efforts to achieve Mideast peace. In the West Bank, Israeli troops killed an Arab as Palestinians staged a strike.    ---   A Pentagon report has found that human error was primarily responsible for the July 3 downing of an Iranian airliner by a U.S. warship, ABC News reported. The network said the Navy team that investigated the Persian Gulf incident concluded that the ship's Aegis radar system performed well.    ---   Carlucci boarded the Kremlin's top-secret Blackjack strategic bomber and watched war games during tours of two Soviet military bases that had been off limits to Westerners. The visits, considered unprecedented for a U.S. official, came on the second day of the defense secretary's four-day trip to the Soviet Union.    ---   The U.S. is examining the creation of an international peacekeeping force in Cambodia to prevent the Khmer Rouge from regaining power once Vietnam withdraws its troops, the State Department said. The proposal is one of several that were explored in talks last week in Indonesia between Cambodia and three main guerrilla factions.    ---   A bomb exploded in the town of Lisburn in Northern Ireland, killing a police officer, and a gunman killed a British soldier in Belfast. The Irish Republican Army, which issued a statement warning the public in Ulster to stay away from the military, claimed responsibility for both attacks.    ---   The Iran-Contra prosecutor suggested severing the main conspiracy counts from North's case and trying the former White House aide on obstruction, false statements and tax-fraud charges. The trial is scheduled to begin Sept. 20. Independent counsel Walsh conceded that the difficulty over public disclosure was &quot;formidable.&quot;    ---   Anglican leaders accepted a joint report with the Roman Catholic Church that is intended to pave the way for greater unity between Canterbury and Rome. The document resolves a disagreement between the Christian churches over the doctrine of salvation that dates to the 16th-century Reformation led by Martin Luther.    ---   U.S. and Philippine negotiators resumed talks on the status of American military bases, officials said. The two sides were working toward a compromise on the issue of U.S. compensation for the use of the installations in the Philippines. The current bases agreement expires in 1991.    ---   Authorities in Burma arrested two aging war heroes who allegedly plotted to overthrow the week-old government of leader Sein Lwin, Western diplomats said. The arrests came amid rumors that the former army general was the target of an assassination attempt last week. </TEXT></DOC>