<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870220-0044 </DOCNO><HL> Contra LeaderPlans to RemainWith the Group---Cruz Decision Isn't Solution,But It Will Buy TimeTo Unify the Movement---By Robert S. Greenberger and Clifford KraussStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Arturo Cruz, a Contra leader who has been threatening to resign, said he will continue to work for the movement.    The decision by Mr. Cruz, who enjoys widespread support in the U.S. and abroad, doesn't solve the Contras' problems. It will, however, buy some time for the rebel group to unify the movement under civilian control, to build domestic support in Nicaragua and, perhaps most important, to fight the steep uphill battle ahead to win more aid from the U.S. Congress.    Mr. Cruz had been threatening to resign. But he said yesterday that &quot;after very trying soul-searching, I have decided to stay.&quot;    Robert Leiken, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for Peace who supports the Contras and follows Central America issues closely, said:&quot;I think a lot of people will now adopt a wait-and-see attitude. Cruz has enough credibility so that people will give him the benefit of the doubt.&quot;    State Department officials, in meetings in Washington Wednesday, had urged Mr. Cruz to stay, promising that they would back his program for reforms and warning that his departure could pull the plug on the Contra movement.    Mr. Cruz's announcement was a victory for the State Department, which supports his strategy of combining military pressure on the Sandinistas with a political program designed to win support among Nicaraguans. Hard-liners at the Defense Department and Central Intelligence Agency had supported Adolfo Calero, the conservative leader of the dominant Contra military force, called the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, and known by the Spanish acronym FDN. Mr. Calero resigned from the rebel umbrella group earlier this week.    Ironically, the political fallout from the Iran-Contra Affair has put the State Department in a stronger position to make good on its promises to help Mr. Cruz in his efforts to assert civilian control over the anti-Sandinista movement.    Frank Carlucci, the new national security adviser, is a supporter of Mr. Cruz's moderate views. Mr. Carlucci's predecessor, Vice Adm. John Poindexter, and NSC staffer Lt. Col. Oliver North, who both left the agency in the wake of disclosures that funds from secret arms sales to Iran were funneled to the Contras, supported the hard-line view that stressed the military fight in Nicaragua.    Moreover, another key supporter of Mr. Calero's faction, William Casey, has resigned as director of the CIA following brain surgery for cancer.    The hard-liners had put their money on Mr. Calero because his FDN was the only proven fighting force. Now, &quot;Everybody understands this is ultimately a political struggle,&quot; said a State Department official. &quot;The resistance isn't going to knock out the Sandinistas in a pitch battle. The political reality is that all the opposition groups have to be united. This is a step in that direction.&quot;    Mr. Cruz's decision to remain in the Contra movement was greeted positively on Capitol Hill, where the rebels face strong opposition. Last year, after a powerful lobbying effort by President Reagan, Congress approved $100 million in aid for the rebels. But opposition has mounted steadily, fueled by the inability of the Contras to make inroads against the Sandinistas and congressional anger over allegations that the administration provided funds to the rebels during a period when Congress prohibited aid.    Earlier this week, the Democratic-controlled Senate Foreign Relations committee approved a measure to cut off funds for the rebels. The bill, if approved by Congress, isn't likely to survive a presidential veto. However, the administration's proposal to provide the Contras with $105 million in aid next year is expected to provoke a fierce battle.    An aide to Rep. Ike Skelton (D., Mo.), a leader of a group of Democrats who supported Contra aid last year, said that Mr. Cruz's decision to remain in the movement &quot;gives us the time to deal with this issue.&quot; But, he added that &quot;we're still a long way from winning the $105 million for next year.&quot;    The latest round in what by some counts is the sixth leadership crisis for the Contras in as many years began last May over another threat by Mr. Cruz to resign. At that time, he complained that the United Nicaraguan Opposition, or UNO, the rebels' civilian umbrella group, didn't have control over military affairs and the movement's finances.    Mr. Cruz won that round, when Mr. Calero and other conservative Contra leaders agreed to civilian control, but that promise was never kept. A top Contra leader close to Mr. Cruz says this became &quot;embarrassingly clear&quot; following the disclosures last November that the secret arms-sales funds were sent to the Contras without Mr. Cruz's knowledge. Late last month, Mr. Cruz again threatened to resign. In fact, as late as Wednesday night, Mr. Cruz still was undecided about what course he would follow, according to a State Department official.    Mr. Cruz said yesterday that he decided to stay after the various rebel military commanders agreed that UNO would combine Mr. Calero's 15,000-member FDN army with smaller fighting forces based on Nicaragua's Atlantic coast and southern border into &quot;one rebel national army.&quot; Mr. Cruz added that UNO would relocate its headquarters from Miami to Central America, perhaps Costa Rica.    He also said an expanded UNO directorate would maintain financial control over rebel operations. He was joined at a Washington news conference by Alfonso Robelo, another moderate Contra leader and member of UNO's directorate, who also plans to remain.    Mr. Cruz said he had set deadlines for the implementation of the reforms he was proposing. He said, for example, that he expected that the &quot;integration&quot; of the new rebel army would be completed by the end of June. He warned that he would &quot;denounce&quot; any effort to sidetrack the reforms, indicating that he would leave the rebel organization if his plans weren't carried out.    Despite his plans and threats, Mr. Cruz has tried and failed before to harness the powerful FDN under civilian control. And administration officials have promised before to support his efforts.    &quot;This is round seven of a 15-round bout,&quot; said Bruce Cameron, a longtime congressional lobbyist who sympathizes with the Contra moderates. </TEXT></DOC>