<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890913-0038 </DOCNO><DD> = 890913 </DD><AN> 890913-0038. </AN><HL> Commodities:@  Coffee Futures Plummet on Indications U.S.@  Won't Press for Restoring Global Export Quotas@  ----@  By John Valentine@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/13/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)COMMODITY MARKETS FOR METALS (MIN)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Coffee futures prices plunged more than six cents a pound on indications that the U.S. won't press for the restoration of global quotas on exports of green coffee.    The heavily traded December contract fell 6.62 cents a pound to 80.03 cents. The soonest-to-expire September delivery was off 6.68 cents to 81.40 cents. All other contracts were down their daily permissible limit of six cents a pound.    Since Sept. 4, when Colombian President Virgilio Barco wrote a letter to President Bush appealing for help in restoring the important quota and price provisions of the International Coffee Agreement, there has been hope that the U.S. might respond favorably. The current strong relations the two nations have right now in fighting the Colombian drug cartel helped buoy these hopes, analysts said.    As a result, the December contract, for example, rose about 10 cents a pound between mid-August and early September.    &quot;Now, the feeling is that there won't be a prompt restoration of the export quotas,&quot; said Arthur Stevenson, an analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities, New York.    President Barco's letter estimated the loss to Colombia at $400 million a year because of the decline of coffee prices since the suspension of coffee quotas in July.    The letter reportedly stated that the loss of coffee income was making the war on cocaine more difficult. &quot;If no action is taken, {coffee} prices will fall even further,&quot; according to the National Coffee Association, an industry organization.    News reports circulated that President Bush, in his expected reply to President Barco, will praise Colombia for its fight against drugs and express a willingness to continue talks on the International Coffee Agreement if there is a prospect that the problems the U.S. has with the pact can be corrected, analysts said.    These problems are a two-tier export market, in which there have been sales of coffee to countries that aren't members of the agreement at prices as much as 50% below what member consuming countries were paying, and a rigidity of quotas that has prevented increased shipments of higher-quality, milder coffees to meet rising demand.    However, the news reports said, President Bush is expected to indicate he won't push for a return to the agreement as it existed before July, according to analysts.    Analysts said there have been growing signs that President Bush wouldn't acquiesce to President Barco's request. They noted that U.S. Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter last week said that Colombia would probably be better off without an international coffee agreement over a 20-or-30-year period, although he didn't say how.    Sen. Richard Luger (R., Ind.), a senior member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, stated that he blamed Brazil and Colombia for the breakup of the coffee pact, analysts said. They also cited a news report that said U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills in Paris said Colombia should be helped to develop alternative crops so its farmers would be encouraged to stop growing cocaine.    Analysts interpreted these comments as meaning the U.S. wasn't likely to support restoration of the rescinded economic provisions of the coffee agreement, the analysts said.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Although spot prices of North Sea crudes rose 10 cents to 20 cents a barrel in European markets, futures prices of the U.S. benchmark crude fell in relatively light trading. On the New York Mercantile Exchange, West Texas Intermediate crude for October delivery declined six cents to settle at $19.70 a barrel. There was little news to account for the drop, although statistics on U.S. oil inventories reported by the American Petroleum Institute were considered moderately bearish. The figures, released after the close of trading, showed increases in U.S. oil inventories for the latest week. Petroleum products also were weaker in futures trading, with unleaded gasoline for October delivery down fractionally at 56.89 cents a gallon. Strength in the U.S. gasoline market had helped support crude prices in recent days. Oil prices improved moderately but briefly on the basis of an interview with Indonesia's oil minister by Dow Jones International Petroleum Report. The Indonesian official, Ginandjar Kartasasmita, held out the possibility that the Sept. 23 meeting of OPEC's ministerial monitoring committee still could result in a rise in the production ceiling to 20 million barrels a day from 19.5 million. But he predicted the meeting is unlikely to result in any formal changes in policy of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    SUGAR: Futures prices rose on news that the U.S. had increased its sugar import quota. Traders bought contracts because the move would draw supplies from the world market, in which supplies and demand are in close balance at the moment, an analyst said. The October contract advanced 0.52 cent a pound to 13.95 cents. Agriculture Secretary Yeutter announced that the import quota for sugar was increased by slightly more than 860,000 metric tons, or about 950,000 short tons, to 1,986,950 metric tons. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds. He also announced that the 1989 quota period is extended by nine months covering the period from Jan. 1, 1989, through Sept. 30, 1990. &quot;This change puts quota shipments for the new 21-month quota period at a somewhat higher level on a 12-month equivalent basis than the previously announced quota of 1,125,000 metric tons,&quot; he said. While the announcement created an immediate surge in futures prices, analysts through the day came up with varying estimates of how much sugar imports would actually change as a result. One calculated that imports on a monthly basis would actually be slightly lower, while another said they would be slightly higher. Analysts agreed that the discrepancies resulted from different methods of computation and an incomplete understanding of the government's action. One analyst said the futures market response was so sharp because &quot;with the somewhat tight supply situation, the world market is sensitive to any sign&quot; that unsold supplies would be reduced. Another analyst said the quota was increased because domestic prices had risen strongly and there was the possibility that industrial sugar users could face a shortage of the sweetener.    COPPER: Futures prices were slightly higher as labor problems continued in some producing areas. The December contract rose 0.10 cent a pound to $1.2570. Negotiations in the Highland Valley mine strike in British Columbia, which began July 8, aren't much closer to settlement, an analyst said. News reports said the president of the company commented that the negotiations weren't making much progress, and the chief negotiator for the company was quoted as saying both sides are still far apart on an agreement, the analyst said. The company negotiator was also reported to have said that if an agreement isn't reached this week, the talks might be recessed indefinitely, according to the analyst. In Chile, labor leaders were reportedly getting together to discuss a new strategy concerning the strike at the El Salvador mine, the analyst said, but he added that an agreement could follow soon. The recent vote among miners not to return to work was very close, he said. </TEXT></DOC>