<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0020 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   GULF ATTACKS MOUNTED and the U.S. said it will seek curbs on Iran.    The State Department said the U.N. should draft sanctions, including an arms embargo, unless Tehran agrees by the end of the week to comply with a truce call. In the Persian Gulf, as a convoy of U.S. Navy ships and two reflagged Kuwaiti tankers arrived safely in the emirate's waters, Baghdad said its jets attacked four ships and struck Iranian industrial targets. Tehran said its forces downed three of the raiding Iraqi aircraft, and an Iranian speedboat fired rockets at a Spanish supertanker.    The Pentagon said a Navy ship rescued an Iraqi air force pilot found adrift in the gulf. The pilot's plane was believed shot down Monday by Iran.    ---   POPE JOHN PAUL II HELD unprecendented talks with Jewish leaders.    During a 75-minute meeting at Castel Gandolfo, the Jewish delegation expressed anger over the pope's June 25 audience with Austrian President Waldheim, who has been accused of complicity in Nazi war crimes. While the pontiff didn't directly respond to criticism of the Waldheim meeting or to questions about the Vatican's lack of diplomatic ties with Israel, the Jewish representatives termed the talks a success. The Vatican said it would issue a major document on anti-Semitism and the Holocaust.    The controversy over the meeting with Waldheim had threatened to disrupt the pope's 10-day visit to the U.S., which begins next week in Miami.    ---   South Korean police clashed with thousands of students throughout the country as universities reopened for the fall term. As students demanded the ouster of President Chun, rival parties worked on a timetable for presidential elections. Labor unrest also continued, with hundreds of strikes for higher pay remaining unresolved.    ---   Philippine President Aquino said last week's failed coup attempt by disgruntled military officers could indicate that something is &quot;lacking&quot; in her government. She said it was time to re-examine Manila's policies. Meanwhile, Roman Catholic Cardinal Jaime Sin told Aquino that she was surrounded by corrupt officials.    ---   The White House declined to say whether Reagan would agree to be questioned as part of independent counsel Walsh's Iran-Contra inquiry. Responding to published reports that Walsh may need the president's testimony, a spokesman said Reagan would make a final decision once a request for such an interview has been made.    ---   The Labor Department ordered a drastic reduction in the allowable workplace exposure to the cancer-causing substance benzene, reviving a standard that was dropped seven years ago. The action followed a decade-long dispute over what risk benzene poses for workers.    ---   The U.S. rejected a Soviet demand for the destruction of American warheads on West German missiles, saying &quot;third-country systems aren't part&quot; of superpower arms talks. U.S. aides also said a response to Moscow's proposal to let the U.S. explode a nuclear device on Soviet soil may be withheld until the offer is made in Geneva.    ---   Veterans groups said government scientists should examine new methods for studying the effects of Agent Orange exposure on soldiers in the Vietnam War rather than abandon a congressionally mandated study. The federal Centers for Disease Control has said it can't find enough soldiers exposed to the herbicide to conduct a valid study.    ---   South African mining officials said 40 men trapped in a 4,600-foot elevator shaft at a gold mine near the city of Welkom must be presumed dead. At least 10 miners were confirmed dead in the incident, and five were rescued after an explosion Monday sent an elevator crashing at the site. The miners union faulted safety practices.    ---   President de la Madrid said that Mexico had overcome the worst of its economic crisis, and that the government will maintain its current policies. In an annual address to the nation, de la Madrid, whose term expires next year, also pledged a commitment to democratic changes and noted improved relations with the U.S.    ---   West German pilot Mathias Rust met with his Soviet lawyer in Moscow to prepare for the opening of his three-day trial today on charges related to his May 28 flight through Soviet air defenses. The 19-year-old Rust faces as long as 10 years in prison for landing a light plane in Red Square.    ---   The World Wildlife Fund urged Reagan to impose sanctions against Japan's fishing industry if it resumes whaling in Antarctic waters next month, as planned. A spokesman for the fund also said it would seek curbs against Iceland, which announced plans to resume its whaling Friday.    ---   Six convicts surrendered to authorities on the Italian island of Elba. The murderers freed 28 hostages unharmed to end a nearly eight-day prison siege, the longest such revolt in Italy in 15 years. Officials said concessions weren't made to the convicts.    ---   El Salvador's government said the country's leftist guerrillas had failed to comply with conditions for peace talks, but right-wing opposition politicians faulted President Duarte for setting preconditions to negotiations. Duarte has insisted that the rebels renounce violence as well as accept a five-nation peace accord signed last month. </TEXT></DOC>