<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880916-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE GULF COAST BRACED for the arrival of Hurricane Gilbert.    As the storm churned in the Gulf of Mexico, building strength after thrashing the Yucatan Peninsula with heavy winds and rains, thousands of coastal residents from Mexico to Louisiana fled to higher ground. Weather forecasters said the 450-mile-wide hurricane, the strongest on record, was expected to hit land today. Although its winds weakened to about 120 mph as it crossed the peninsula, experts expected the storm to intensify.    The death toll from the hurricane's onslaught through the Caribbean and the Yucatan was at least 36, and damage estimates reached about $8 billion.    ---   Lech Walesa met with Warsaw officials and demanded the legalization of the outlawed Solidarity trade union. Walesa, Poland's interior minister and others held four hours of talks to work toward an early start of full-scale negotiations on the country's future following recent labor unrest. Both sides agreed to resume discussions today.    ---   Nicaragua's Contras accepted an offer by Managua to begin preparations Monday in Guatemala City for the resumption of high-level peace talks. Negotiations aimed at a permanent armistice in Nicaragua's civil war broke down in June. Announcement of the Contra decision followed a meeting between rebel leaders and Shultz.    ---   Baghdad indicated that it mightn't allow the U.N. to conduct an investigation in Iraq of allegations that Iraqi troops used poison gas on Kurdish rebels. It also said it was &quot;impossible&quot; for its forces to use chemical weapons in the Kurds' mountainous region. And Turkey said it wouldn't allow a U.N. inquiry.    ---   The House voted to remove from an anti-drug bill a provision to require a seven-day waiting period for hand-gun purchases. The 228-182 vote was considered a gun-lobby victory. The amendment instead would direct development of a system under which gun dealers can discover if potential buyers are convicted felons.    ---   Republican Bush criticized Democratic presidential nominee Dukakis's economic record as governor, saying the &quot;Massachusetts miracle&quot; resulted from a national expansion fostered by the Reagan administration. Dukakis, meanwhile, toured Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming and said he was &quot;awestruck&quot; by recent fire damage.    ---   HHS Secretary Bowen said he wouldn't take a position on a proposed White House ban on using aborted fetal tissue until a National Institutes of Health panel completes a review of the issue. Reagan's top health official said &quot;there are some good pros and some good cons&quot; to use of such tissue for experimental treatment of some diseases.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir ended talks with officials in Budapest and said Hungary had agreed to renew full diplomatic ties with Israel after a 21-year break. The two-day visit by Shamir was the first to an East European nation by an Israeli premier. Israel pledged to assist Hungary in economic and industrial development, Tel Aviv radio said.    ---   Pope John Paul II issued an appeal for nonviolence as the death toll rose to six from Wednesday's attack on a hijacked bus in Lesotho. South African troops helped storm the bus to free about 70 pilgrims taken hostage. The pontiff's comments came at the end of a Mass in Maseru that he celebrated to beatify a French evangelist.    ---   Federal officials failed to find any evidence of engine failure on the Delta Air Lines flight that crashed in Dallas last month killing 14 people. But the National Transportation Safety Board didn't rule out the possibility that one or more of the Boeing 727's three engines experienced a compressor stall.    ---   Burmese opposition leaders said two provincial councils resigned en masse from the ruling socialist party and took sanctuary in Buddhist monasteries. In Rangoon, thousands of demonstrators demanded an end to the one-party regime. Sources said the U.S. Embassy refused student leaders' requests for weapons, but offered moral support.    ---   A U.N. study concluded that unhealthy air is blanketing many of the world's cities and subjecting many of the 1.8 billion urban dwellers to respiratory ailments and other health hazards. The 100-page survey is based on data from as long as 15 years of monitoring in more than 60 countries.    ---   Officials in Stepanakert said thousands of workers staged a strike in the capital of the disputed Azerbaijan territory of NagornoKarabakh. The strike reportedly began to protest the arrival of Azerbaijanis from the neighboring Soviet republic of Armenia calling themselves refugees.    ---   South Korea prepared for the opening this weekend of the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul. Despite a government ban on demonstrations, students in the city of Suwon, 25 miles south of the capital, battled riot police during an anti-government protest. At least 48 people were reported injured.    ---   Died: Henry C. Wallich, 74, a former governor of the Federal Reserve Board, in Washington. . . . Peter D. Kiernan, 65, chairman of Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, Wednesday, in Boston, of complications following surgery to remove an aneurysm. </TEXT></DOC>