<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Genentech, Wellcome Battling in CourtOver British Patent on Anti-Clot Drug---By Richard L. </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP GENEPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Genentech Inc. and Wellcome PLC, in a case that may influence the development of the international market for genetically engineered drugs, are suing each other for the right to market an anti-clotting drug that analysts predict could be an extremely lucrative product.    The patent-dispute trial, which began yesterday in Britain's High Court, concerns a new type of heart-attack medicine called tissue plasminogen activator, or TPA. Genentech, based in South San Francisco, and Wellcome, based here, separately devised genetic methods to produce the drug. Genentech beat Wellcome to the British patent office last year and was granted a patent that was unusual because it covered the drug itself, not just the process used to make it.    Now the two concerns are suing each other over whether Genentech's patent also covers Wellcome's own TPA. The trial is expected to last two to three weeks.    At stake for the companies is a share in what may be the first home-run product for the 15-year-old genetic engineering industry. Clinical tests have shown TPA to be twice as effective as existing remedies at dissolving blood clots in heart attacks. Industry analysts predict TPA sales could exceed $1 billion a year by the early 1990s. Such bright forecasts only dimmed slightly after a U.S. government advisory panel recommended last month to withhold marketing approval for the drug there until there's further evidence that TPA actually prolongs lives.    The Wellcome-Genentech dispute may have important repercussions for other products and companies in the fledgling market for genetically engineered drugs. &quot;It is a test case as to how far the courts in this country will allow patent protection&quot; for such medicines, said Richard Burnett-Hall, a patent specialist at McKenna andamp; Co., a big London-based law firm.    A Genentech victory, patent specialists say, would significantly extend the scope of biotechnology patents not only in Britain but possibly in other countries as well. Because of similarities between British and European Community patent law, such a ruling also might encourage Continental companies to try to broaden their patents.    In most countries, including the United Kingdom, companies generally can patent only the specific gene-splicing process used to manufacture a product. They can patent the product itself only in special circumstances, because most genetic-engineering products occur naturally and already are known to scientists. The gene-splicing is merely a newfangled technique for making the product.    By contrast, Genentech's TPA patent claim goes further than this, London patent specialists note. It covers any TPA made by genetic means, as well as Genentech's specific genetic process.    There likely would be fewer repercussions in the U.S., because of wide differences between British and American patent law. Nevertheless, Genentech says it isn't pressing its U.S. patent application, pending the outcome of the British case.    In February 1986, Genentech was the first company to receive a patent for TPA from the British Patent Office. Wellcome developed its own, as-yet unpatented process for TPA separately. The legal dispute began when Genentech told Wellcome that the British company's TPA infringed on its patent.    Wellcome filed a legal challenge to Genentech's patent, and Genentech countersued to enforce its patent. The High Court is trying both suits simultaneously.    Thomas Kiley, Genentech's vice president for corporate development, argues that Wellcome's TPA process isn't substantially different from Genentech's. Moreover, he said, Genentech's work on the drug was the first to be published and patented and so deserves patent protection. Mr. Kiley said he believes this should be the case no matter what genetic techniques other companies may use to produce TPA.    Wellcome officials disagree. William Castell, Wellcome's commercial director, contends that Wellcome's TPA was developed entirely independently of Genentech's research. And if the patent stands, he said, &quot;then nobody can have TPA&quot; without paying royalties to Genentech. </TEXT></DOC>