<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Issuers Worry Taxable Municipal BondsAre Being Linked to Risky Financings---By Alexandra PeersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FEXCBOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   The fledgling market in taxable municipal bonds is being endangered by financing techniques that violate the spirit if not the letter of the new tax law, some issuers and investors charge.    The nub of their complaints is that the new taxable municipal market will become characterized more by risky arbitrage deals than financings aimed for some productive purpose. They also are concerned that taxables have been indirectly linked with the junk bond market and the insider trading scandal on Wall Street.    Most of all, some issuers worry that these developments will attract increased regulation of the taxable market, possibly by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Municipalities have reason to fear regulators' wrath. They're still stinging from the curbs on their financing powers that Congress imposed in the new tax law.    Those curbs, which eliminate the use of completely tax-exempt bonds for any use that isn't deemed &quot;essential&quot; or &quot;public purpose,&quot; have made the taxable bond market the only alternative for state and local governments attempting to raise money for such projects as loans to local businesses or aid to farmers. So far this year, 79 taxable municipal offerings totaling $4 billion have been sold, compared with three offerings for $300 million last year, according to Securities Data Co.    But some bond market participants claim that taxable municipal financings underwritten by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which dominates the market in taxable municipals with 42.5% of the business, will give the bonds a bad name with institutional and individual investors who are testing the new market.    Most of the issues Drexel has brought so far have been given the top credit rating by Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. because they've been backed by guaranteed investment contracts, or GICs, from Executive Life Insurance Co., a subsidiary of First Executive Corp.    Executive Life is a major investor in low-rated, high-yielding bonds, the security that Drexel has built into a multibillion-dollar market and has used to enhance its role in financing hostile takeovers. The GICs that Executive Life writes are backed by the insurer's portfolio, which is approximately 30% invested in junk bonds, says Alan Chapman, the firm's actuary.    Executive Life also owns a &quot;substantial position&quot; of the $660 million debenture issue that Drexel underwrote earlier this year for Ivan F. Boesky andamp; Co., Mr. Chapman says. However, Executive Life maintains its triple-A rating based on its ability to pay claims. The company has no debt on its books.    Drexel itself, among others, is under investigation by the SEC because of its close business dealings with Mr. Boesky, a takeover speculator who has pled guilty to a criminal charge of insider trading, and because a former Drexel official supplied inside information to him.    Arbitrage financings in tax-exempts have been sharply curtailed by the new tax law, but not in taxables. By using the proceeds of a taxable issue to purchase a GIC from a financial institution, usually a life insurance company, the issuer earns a rate of return that is slightly higher than the interest rate on the bonds, thus producing arbitrage profits. In some of these financings, it's more profitable to keep the money in the GICs than to use the funds for their intended purposes, critics charge.    But such profits are appealing to many state and local government officials, who are hard pressed to make ends meet. And investment bankers are competing to service this need for revenue.    Joel Mesznik, head of municipal finance at Drexel, says the same competitors who have cast aspersions on Drexel's taxable municipal offerings have been approaching bond issuers with nearly identical deals, some of them also backed by GICs from Executive Life. Issuers confirm that.    &quot;Everybody and his brother is throwing GICs at us,&quot; says John Gunyou, Minneapolis's finance officer, &quot;and some investment bankers are arguing that the public purpose of the deals is pure arbitrage.&quot; While Mr. Gunyou says he's &quot;hesitant&quot; about such financings, he asks rhetorically: &quot;What do you do when an underwriter says, 'I can make you $500,000 and I'm going to tell your city council that'?&quot;    Taxable municipal financings, because of their hybrid nature, fall between the regulatory cracks. Christopher Taylor, executive director of the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, which regulates brokers and dealers, calls taxable municipals &quot;nothing more than a corporate bond in another guise.&quot; But, he adds, the board hasn't any authority over the purpose for which such securities may be issued.    The Treasury Department, which pushed for strict regulation of tax-exempt arbitrage in the new tax law, lacks jurisdiction over taxables, says assistant secretary for tax policy J. Roger Mentz.    At the SEC, the issue of whether municipal taxable securities should have to be registered with the agency &quot;is a problem, and it's up for grabs,&quot; says William Morley, chief counsel on corporate financing. Further discussions on the issue will be held with investment bankers, bond attorneys and possibly members of Congress, he says, but meanwhile, no taxable municipal issuer has yet filed with the SEC.    Because appearances are important in the investment business, some issuers worry that the controversy over taxable municipals will chill investors' appetite for their debt. Robert Dormer, president of the New York State Job Development Authority, says he is concerned that potential buyers of a $50 million taxable commercial paper issue the agency is pricing this week &quot;won't know the difference&quot; between issues backed by GICs and those that offer what he considers more solid backing.    The authority's issue is backed by the full faith and credit of New York state, but has earned a SP-1 rating from Sandamp;P, one notch below the triple-A that GIC-backed muni deals have earned.    Phoenix Economic Development Corp. spent nine weeks working on a $150 million taxable financing with Drexel investment bankers but backed out when Executive Life raised its fees, according to Ioanna Morfessis, executive director of the Phoenix authority. At first, she says, the agency figured on paying yields on the bonds about 1.4 to 1.5 percentage points above comparable U.S. Treasury bonds, which would mean they could have offered loans to small local businesses at 9.2%.    But, as the agency moved towards finalizing the deal, Executive Life &quot;started asking for higher terms and fees which would have made it impossible for us to make loans&quot; at below-market rates.    Within days after Phoenix pulled out, the Boesky scandal depressed prices of junk bonds and of taxable municipals because of their indirect link through GICs. That forced issuers to offer rates on their taxable municipal bonds that were 1.7 to 1.8 percentage points above comparable Treasuries.    This volatility upset the Phoenix authority, Ms. Morfessis says, but it has plans to bring a taxable municipal issue to market through another investment banker in March. By then, she says, &quot;the market may have calmed down.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>