<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   POLISH VOTERS REJECTED the Warsaw government's program of reforms.    Only 44% of those eligible to vote in a referendum Sunday, Poland's first since 1946, supported a &quot;radical cure&quot; for the country's faltering economy. Just 46% voted for political liberalization, a sweetener tacked on the referendum to make austerity more palatable. Polish law requires approval by a majority of eligible voters for a referendum to be binding. The communist government must now reassess the entire reform program.    Across-the-board 40% price increases that had been expected next year, including a doubling of food prices, seem certain to be scaled back.    ---   THE U.S. WON'T RESUME aid to Haiti until the electoral process is revived.    The State Department said the partial cutoff of aid, which amounted to $102 million in the last fiscal year, won't end until elections are again under way. Gen. Namphy, Haiti's military ruler, suspended elections and disbanded the electoral council as dozens were killed while trying to vote Sunday. One estimate put the death toll at 34. The U.S. blamed some killings on forces loyal to the former Duvalier dictatorship.    Two presidential candidates rejected elections organized by Namphy. Radio stations said electoral council members took refuge in Western embassies.    ---   Gorbachev said he is prepared to accept a 50% reduction in the superpowers' arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles if the U.S. agrees to adhere to a strict interpretation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. The Soviet leader made the remarks in an NBC-TV interview, his first with a U.S. television network.    Carlucci wouldn't rule out the possibility that U.S. budget cuts could force reductions in the more than 300,000 American troops stationed in Europe. The defense secretary made the remark on his way to a Brussels meeting of NATO defense ministers, who backed U.S. adoption of a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles.    ---   The Dominican Republic agreed to be the site of cease-fire talks between Nicaragua and the Contras under a five-nation Central American peace plan. Cardinal Obando, who was authorized by Nicaragua's bishops to mediate the talks, planned to travel to Santo Domingo Thursday to begin arrangements if rebel leaders agree to the proposal.    ---   Cuban detainees refused to release 90 hostages at a U.S. prison in Atlanta despite the peaceful weekend resolution of a similar standoff at a Louisiana detention center. A Justice Department aide said a &quot;small but aggressive minority&quot; of the Cuban detainees at Atlanta was blocking a pact.    ---   Afghanistan's Najibullah said Soviet troops could be withdrawn in a year or less if aid to rebels is ended. Meanwhile, a gun battle left as many as 20 dead when an Afghan general, formerly a rebel, and his bodyguards opened fire on security forces at a government assembly that was meeting to confirm Najibullah as president.    ---   France and Iran ended a 4 1/2-month-old standoff by trading diplomatic personnel -- the first secretary of the French Embassy in Tehran and an interpreter at the Iranian Embassy in Paris -- in Pakistan. The standoff began when the interpreter refused to be questioned about several Paris bombings and took refuge in the embassy.    ---   Prime Minister Ozal won re-election and a fresh five-year mandate to overhaul Turkey's economy and politics. With 99% of the votes counted, Ozal's Motherland Party won 36.3% of the vote and 292 seats in the 450-member National Assembly, while the Social Democratic Populist Party won 24.8% and 99 seats.    ---   An earthquake shook Alaska, but no one was hurt and a tidal-wave warning was canceled soon after it was issued. The quake, centered 300 miles southeast of Anchorage, was measured at 7.7 on the Richter scale by the University of California at Berkeley.    ---   At least 12 Pakistanis died during voting for local councillors in the first nationwide elections since President Zia ended eight years of martial law in 1985. Gunbattles between rival factions erupted in Karachi and several towns in the province of Punjab, while a bomb went off outside a polling station in the southwestern town of Quetta.    ---   The Senate approved, 74-0, the nomination of James Burnley to become transportation secretary. Burnley has been deputy secretary since 1983 and will succeed Elizabeth Dole, who resigned in October.    ---   Five Philippine mutineers surrendered and will face court-martial for their part in the Aug. 28 coup attempt that killed 53. Col. Honasan, the coup leader, failed to surrender under a government-imposed deadline.    Separately, six officers were convicted of mutiny and misconduct in a Jan. 27 coup attempt and sentenced to 20 years in prison.    ---   The State Department said Cuba must halt &quot;subversion of democratic governments in the hemisphere&quot; before the U.S. would support its re-admission to the Organization of American States. Eight Latin American presidents, who met in Mexico over the weekend, supported Cuba's re-admission at an &quot;appropriate opportunity.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>