<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Drug on Trial:Genentech's MisstepsAnd FDA Policy ShiftLed to TPA Setback---Agency Jurisdictional SwitchResulted in Tougher TestFor Blood-Clot Dissolver---Maker's Inexperience Showed---By Brenton R. Schlender and Michael WaldholzStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GENEPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) </IN><TEXT>   Heart-attack victims being rushed to University of Michigan Hospital in Ann Arbor are almost immediately injected with an experimental drug called TPA. If the attack is caught early enough, the drug, by dissolving a clot blocking a coronary artery, relieves the patient's excruciating pain and stops the potentially deadly destruction of heart muscle.    For the past two years, dissolving the clot has been &quot;the way we've treated every heart attack that has come into the emergency room,&quot; says Eric Topol, the cardiologist in charge of the drug's use. At his hospital, Dr. Topol says, TPA, a genetically engineered drug from Genentech Inc., replaces standard heart-attack therapy: injections of painkilling morphine and &quot;a lot of praying.&quot; He adds: &quot;Treating patients the old way seems very primitive to me now and may even be unethical, given the existence of TPA.&quot;    But most emergency rooms still do things the &quot;old way,&quot; and now it is doubtful they will have TPA soon. On May 29, an influential scientific panel that advises the U.S. Food and Drug Administration recommended against a quick approval of TPA, arguing that Genentech hadn't shown that its ability to break up clots provides a clear-cut health benefit. The FDA hasn't acted on the recommendation yet.    The panel's decision jolted industry analysts, FDA officials and, most of all, Genentech. Sales of TPA have been projected at as high as $1 billion a year someday, which would make it biotechnology's first blockbuster drug. But now the product is enmeshed in a regulatory and scientific controversy in the U.S. that may not be unraveled for a year.    FDA staffers and medical researchers say Genentech, which is counting on TPA to turn it into a big-time drug company, botched quick approval by taking scientific shortcuts to beat the expected rush of competition from other experimental clot-dissolvers. It also acted clumsily and, some contend, arrogantly, by such tactics as advertising TPA in medical journals before it had even won approval and giving short shrift to some FDA concerns.    But Genentech also was a victim of an FDA policy shift on biotechnology products and of intra-agency maneuvering for control of them. Staff members in one FDA division accuse another of wresting away the review of TPA in an effort to win authority over an expected slew of genetically engineered drugs. A result of the maneuvering was that the FDA changed the criteria Genentech had been trying to meet during more than two years of clinical testing, gave the company short notice of new demands, and coached a rival drug company whose competing clot dissolver was under review for wider use.    The wrangling within the FDA, ironically, comes at a time when the agency's top officials are trying to streamline and speed the evaluation of new drugs. Among other things, the TPA case shows how scientific debate at a regulatory agency and a company's inexperience in dealing with the FDA can delay even a drug that is almost sure to have great impact someday.    Part of the problem is that the field is new. &quot;Genetically engineered drugs present a lot of regulatory, legal and clinical questions that never existed before,&quot; says Robert Kupor, a drug-industry analyst for Cable Howse andamp; Ragen in Seattle, Wash. &quot;Companies trying to get these new drugs out quickly are finding that they and their drugs are the laboratory animals for determining how the courts and regulatory agencies deal with those questions.&quot;    Genentech first asked the FDA in 1983 for guidance in getting approval of TPA, its manufactured version of tissue plasminogen activator, the body's own clot-dissolver. From the first, there was doubt as to which of the FDA's two main divisions would handle the substance. TPA has properties both of conventional drugs, which the FDA's Office of Drugs evaluates, and of naturally occurring hormones, bacteria and viruses, whose derivatives are dealt with by the Office of Biologics. Initially, the FDA followed the procedure it used with two earlier blood-clot dissolvers -- streptokinase and urokinase -- and told the Office of Biologics to evaluate the TPA manufacturing process and help the company plan tests of safety and effectiveness.    The first issue to resolve was whether Genentech had to prove merely that TPA opened clogged heart arteries or also that its use reduced illness and death. Based on the case of streptokinase, an advisory committee to the Office of Biologics said in January 1984 that studies of whether TPA lowered mortality would be &quot;so experimentally demanding that they would not yield useful data in the near future.&quot;    That ruling greatly pleased Genentech, since it meant the company wouldn't have to do a study that might have cost $10 million and put off TPA approval for years. But the decision would haunt the company three years later when other FDA staffers overturned it.    With the help of cardiologists at some noted research hospitals, Genentech set up trials of how well TPA dissolved clots in heart-attack victims. One study, at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, also would test whether the drug revived heart-muscle function after an attack.    Over two years, a compelling body of data emerged. Some side effects, such as bleeding in the brain, cropped up with large doses. But there was no doubt TPA could dissolve clots in the heart faster and better than any previous drug; it had twice the efficiency of streptokinase, according to one study. And it was much easier to administer.    In one publicized trial, results were so striking that the sponsoring National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute ordered the test curtailed because it couldn't in good conscience let half the subjects get a placebo, or even streptokinase, when TPA worked so well. Genentech officials began to believe that the FDA couldn't turn TPA down.    In the meantime, though, staffers at the FDA's Office of Drugs were expressing growing interest in seeing the TPA research data. Within the FDA, the Office of Drugs is highly respected and has much experience dealing with controversial drugs; the Office of Biologics, a newer division run by less influential people, couldn't very well resist. So when Genentech last August submitted its formal application for the final round of FDA approvals, the head of the Biologics office invited Office of Drugs officials to participate as consultants, as well as to help review an application for wider use of streptokinase.    Office of Drugs officials scheduled hearings on both products before an advisory panel of cardiologists. FDA officials concede that Genentech wasn't immediately told that the Office of Drugs -- with somewhat different drug-approval criteria -- was getting involved.    Some Biologics staffers saw the drug office's involvement as nothing less than a power play. &quot;Because of the importance of these new, biologically derived drugs and the publicity surrounding them, everybody wanted in on the act,&quot; says a former official who worked closely with the TPA evaluation. &quot;Coming so late in the process, many of us in Biologics felt we were being sandbagged.&quot; Office of Drugs people deny any power play; it is their job to make sure drugs are safe and effective, they say.    Only in December did reluctant Biologics staffers finally send Abraham Karkowsky, an Office of Drugs researcher, the thick packet of scientific documents outlining Genentech's TPA application. Within a few weeks he had a list of 55 questions challenging Genentech's clinical methods and results.&quot;It was not a friendly set of questions,&quot; says John Norris, the deputy FDA commissioner.    Office of Drugs officials had qualms about Genentech's apparent haste in pulling together clinical trials and data. Moreover, while the Office of Biologics generally seeks proof only of a substance's biological activity, the Office of Drugs wants, in addition, evidence that taking it actually improves patients' health in some way. Reviewing TPA, Dr. Karkowsky found &quot;a paucity of conclusive data that either mortality or morbidity is significantly altered by the reestablishment of blood flow.&quot; He expressed doubt whether the FDA should clear it simply on the &quot;suspicion&quot; it prolongs life.    Coloring his review was a 1986 Italian study showing that streptokinase reduced mortality. The study involved thousands of patients and set a standard that Office of Drugs officials believed TPA ought to be required to match. They felt Genentech could have provided similar evidence if it hadn't been in such a rush.    When Genentech received Dr. Karkowsky's questions last February, officials saw them as a rehash of issues the Office of Biologics had already addressed. They felt that proof of clot dissolution should be enough, since it had been enough to get streptokinase approved 10 years ago. Besides, &quot;What could Genentech do?&quot; asks the former Office of Biologics official. &quot;It was three years too late to redesign the trials.&quot;    In late February, Genentech replied to the FDA. &quot;The company's response was clearly, 'We're not going to answer your questions,'&quot; says an Office of Drugs staffer. Genentech currently won't discuss the TPA controversy, but it earlier complained that the FDA had unfairly changed the rules late in the game.    &quot;I think they decided to tough it out,&quot; an Office of Drugs staffer says. &quot;Genentech had very powerful forces on its side -- some of the country's most respected heart researchers and growing Wall Street and public excitement.&quot; But he concedes that &quot;given the fact they couldn't answer Dr. Karkowsky's questions with data, I guess their strategy was understandable.&quot;    In any case, Genentech's blunt response sealed a decision by the Office of Drugs to have its Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee review TPA. That panel's recommendation would carry great weight with the FDA. In late March, a May 29 hearing was set both on TPA approval and on the plan for wider use of streptokinase.    Beyond Dr. Karkowsky's concerns, two things disturbed FDA officials. In the midst of one trial, Genentech had lowered the TPA dose by a third after finding that the initial dose led to bleeding in the brain. And it had changed the method of manufacturing TPA during the trials. The upshot, agency officials say, was that only about 100 patients got the material made the new way, at the new dose.    They also received data from an independent researcher suggesting that the bleeding problem was worse than Genentech had let on. In light of this information, the FDA wanted much stronger evidence of clinical benefit to outweigh the risk.    Meanwhile, the Office of Drugs staff was working closely with Hoechst-Roussel Pharmaceuticals Inc., a U.S. unit of the West Germany's Hoechst AG, over its application to broaden use of streptokinase. That drug had seen quite limited use because it required injection directly into a coronary artery, a procedure few doctors can do. But its maker had gathered data supporting common intravenous injection -- data that also showed two health benefits to heart-attack victims: thinning of blood and lowering of blood pressure.    Hoechst-Roussel officials say Office of Drugs staffers specifically asked to see this research on health benefits. &quot;We decided we'd better include it in our presentation to the committee,&quot; a company spokesman says.    Genentech got no such coaching. Indeed, FDA insiders and other sources say the agency never directly told the company how serious it was about finding evidence not simply of clot dissolving but of benefits to health. FDA Commissioner Frank Young concedes that &quot;the company may have received signals that were mixed. There was so much focus on lysis {clot dissolving} that they may not have heard clearly the concerns about mortality and ventricular {heart-muscle} function.&quot; He insists, however, that the agency expressed its concerns &quot;in ways they should have heard.&quot;    A top research official at another drug maker says his company avoids being blind-sided by &quot;constantly asking the FDA people if the studies we're doing are enough or correctly designed. They change their minds a lot, and every company with experience in dealing with the agency knows that.&quot; He adds that Genentech officials &quot;believed they could treat the FDA with the same tough attitude they've treated everybody else with. But the FDA doesn't like to be treated as if its concerns aren't important.&quot;    On the eve of the hearing, an FDA official distributed an agenda that made clear the committee wanted evidence of benefits to heart-attack patients' health. Genentech officials hastily huddled and reorganized their presentation, allotting time for the Johns Hopkins study on heart-muscle response, something they hadn't planned to discuss at length.    The next morning, Hoechst-Roussel went first, making its presentation for streptokinase. &quot;I had the sense we were watching the orchestration of events in the meeting,&quot; says Peter Drake, an analyst for Kidder Peabody. A former Office of Biologics official who had worked on the TPA application is more blunt: &quot;It looked like a setup to me. The streptokinase presentation was being used to set standards that TPA's data couldn't possibly meet.&quot;    By the time Genentech's turn came, after the panel had met for hours and finally backed broader intravenous use of streptokinase, it was 1:30 p.m. and some panel members were already fidgeting. Before the hearing ended five hours later, several had left to catch flights home.    Genentech's people appeared edgy, and the hastily reorganized presentation lurched from topic to topic, seeming at times to stray from the central issues. &quot;It was a Junior Achievement level of presentation,&quot; says Richard Stover, a Smith Barney analyst who has been to many such hearings. &quot;Genentech tried to steamroller the committee even when it was obvious it wouldn't work.&quot;    By 7 p.m., after 10 hours of hearings and only a half-hour lunch break, the meeting ran out of gas. Committee Chairman Jeffrey Borer, professor of medicine at Cornell Medical Center in New York, asked for a vote of the remaining members on whether to recommend approval of TPA but stopped counting after five of the first six votes were negative.    When markets opened the following Monday, biotechnology stocks sank. Genentech fell nearly 25%, to $36.75, dealing shareholders a one-day paper loss of $950 million. (The price has since recovered to $42.75.)    TPA researchers were aghast at the decision. &quot;As a doctor who treats patients with TPA, I find the committee's request for more studies to be absolutely incomprehensible,&quot; says Burton Sobel, a research cardiologist at Washington University in St. Louis. &quot;I've got to believe something else is going on here.&quot;    Industry officials, analysts -- even White House officials -- scrambled to figure out how such a surprise could happen. FDA Commissioner Young, a Reagan appointee who has been trying to speed drug-approval processes and who ultimately will decide on TPA, ordered a quick review of the affair for the White House. It states that there is &quot;room for honest disagreement with the committee's recommendation on TPA.&quot; It also says the committee's stern requirement for direct evidence of a benefit to health &quot;is a question that is debatable and that will need to be further evaluated by the agency.&quot;    Top FDA officials say that within three months they will decide whether Genentech does, in fact, need to show that its drug improves health and prolongs life. Even if it does, the company probably won't have to begin new studies; the results of current European research on TPA and mortality will be available in six to 18 months.    Meanwhile, last Friday France approved TPA, which already was on the market in the Philippines and New Zealand. However, Genentech also has lost some of the competitive edge that it thought a quick FDA approval would give. For one thing, several other biotech companies are testing their own versions of TPA. And other experimental clot dissolvers are in advanced stages of testing, such as pro-urokinase from Abbott Laboratories and eminase from Britain's Beecham PLC.    Several members of the panel that opposed TPA approval at this time say they don't see what the ruckus is all about, since most of them assume TPA will be approved eventually. &quot;The drug will have a phenomenal impact on the practice of medicine and the treatment of heart attacks,&quot; says Dr. Borer, the advisory panel's chairman. It is just that &quot;before you unleash this massive onslaught of new therapy, you'd like solid evidence that you're doing the right thing.&quot;    Since the hearing, FDA and Genentech officials have met several times to discuss where to go from here. Some of the panel members say the Johns Hopkins study involving heart-muscle function in TPA recipients and other current trials could hold the proof the panel needs to back TPA, possibly by the end of the year.    In the meantime, Genentech, whose recent brash ads in medical journals proudly stated that &quot;Activase {TPA's projected brand name} is coming soon,&quot; will have to wait a while longer. So will heart-attack victims and their doctors. </TEXT></DOC>