<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881024-0022 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHAMIR CRITICIZED Peres for seeking Arab support for a Mideast peace plan.    With just over a week until the Israeli presidential election, Peres won the endorsement of Jordan's King Hussein, who said a victory by Prime Minister Shamir would be a &quot;disaster.&quot; In a televised debate, Shamir accused Israel's foreign minister of election interference for seeking such backing. Hussein also met over the weekend with Egypt's President Mubarak and PLO leader Arafat to forge a united stand on peace in the region.    Mubarak said Hussein and the PLO had agreed on a form of confederation to aid the Palestinian cause. He offered few details on the proposed union.    ---   CONGRESS CLEARED compromise anti-drug legislation before adjourning.    Reflecting election-year pressures against illicit drugs, the bill imposes stiff penalties for using or selling drugs. The measure includes permitting the death penalty for those convicted in federal courts of drug-related killings and a civil fine of as much as $10,000 for those caught with even small amounts of marijuana and cocaine. The bill was approved after lawmakers removed several provisions that had raised constitutional questions.    The measure was the last bill to pass before the 100th Congress adjourned, and it attracted provisions against child pornography and expanded fraud laws.    ---   MARCOS VOWED to fight federal racketeering and other criminal charges.    A federal grand jury in New York indicted the deposed Philippine president and his wife, Imelda, on charges that they embezzled more than $100 million from the Philippines, fraudulently converted much of it to Manhattan real estate and then conspired to try to hide the assets. A number of Marcos associates also were indicted Friday. Marcos appears determined to contest the charges. His lawyer said Marcos would plead innocent.    Many U.S. and Philippine officials are convinced that the ailing Marcos, in exile in Hawaii, will give up much of his hidden fortune in order to avoid jail.    ---   Democrats contended that the Bush campaign was injecting racism into the presidential race. Democratic vice presidential nominee Lloyd Bentsen accused the GOP of distorting Dukakis's record, and civil-rights leader Jesse Jackson said Bush's camp was instilling fears of blacks in white voters. A Bush spokesman denied the allegations.    ---   Kidnappers in Lebanon issued a series of demands for the release of two U.S. hostages. It was the second threatening statement from the pro-Iranian Islamic Jihad in three days. The statement was delivered in Beirut, and called for the U.S. to end support for Israel, and demanded that Arab prisoners in Israel and elsewhere be freed.    Italian anti-terrorist police questioned a Lebanese woman whom they believe could be a courier for the kidnappers of U.S. hostages in Lebanon. The woman was arrested last week in Milan carrying photographs of three U.S. captives and coded documents addressed to an Italian businessman.    ---   Israeli troops clashed with Moslem guerrillas in southern Lebanon. Israel's soldiers were supported by allied Christian militiamen. Beirut radio stations reported that four guerrillas were killed. On Friday, Israeli jets bombed Palestinian and Shiite Moslem bases in apparent revenge for a car bombing at an Israeli checkpoint last week.    ---   Polish leader Jaruzelski said the banned Solidarity trade union could be legalized again only if the economy is improved and alternate political forms are created so that unions don't serve as vehicles for political demands. Jaruzelski also said Poland's authorities wouldn't hesitate to use force to protect the nation's Communist system.    ---   Andrei Sakharov said the Kremlin has tentatively agreed to allow him to leave the Soviet Union to attend a conference in the U.S. The 67-year-old physicist and human-rights activist, who said Friday he would leave for the U.S. next month, was released in 1986 from nearly six years of internal exile in the closed city of Gorky.    ---   Hurricane Joan killed at least 50 people and left 300,000 homeless in Nicaragua, officials in Managua said. In its six-day trip across the Caribbean -- also hitting Colombia, Costa Rica, Panama and Venezuela -- the storm left more than 100 people dead. About 150 people remain missing.    ---   Several hundred demonstrators defied a police ban and marked the 32nd anniversary of the Hungarian uprising with a rally in Budapest. While Hungary's government has allowed several marches in recent months, officials refused to authorize the action commemorating the start of the uprising that was put down by the Soviet Union.    ---   About 20,000 Lithuanians attended a Mass to celebrate a government pledge to turn over a cathedral to the Roman Catholic Church. It was the first Mass at the cathedral in about 30 years. Meanwhile, Lithuania's Communist Party chief warned a political movement to moderate its demands, including secession from the U.S.S.R.    ---   A congressional study concluded that the B-1 bomber has run into more maintenance problems than the planes it was designed to replace. The General Accounting Office said the aircraft &quot;hasn't been mission capable&quot; because of servicing that has required &quot;a significant percentage&quot; of time. </TEXT></DOC>