<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880913-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Public Spirit Lives, Even in Congress </HL><AUTHOR> Steven Kelman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG DEF </G><TEXT>   Let's hear it for the Hill. The House and Senate have now passed legislation to establish an extracongressional commission to make recommendations about closing unnecessary military bases. The recommendations will go into effect automatically unless overridden as a package by a two-thirds vote of Congress. It now looks as if something finally will be done about closing bases that even the Pentagon wants closed but that representatives from the districts concerned have managed to keep open.    This step by Congress is but the latest, most striking example to counter what every cynic knows about Congress. Every cynic knows that members of Congress care only about taking credit for bringing visible benefits -- or staving off visible harms -- to their constituents, the route to re-election. Since, the argument goes, re-election is all that members care about, it should be no surprise that such abstractions as concern for good public policy for the country as a whole get short shrift.    The occasional observer will argue that the sum of local and special interests is the public interest, so that the orientation of members toward visible benefits to constituents isn't necessarily bad. But for most of us, who are not really persuaded by that argument, the suggestion that members of Congress seek only to show their own constituents how they stand up for them, regardless of any broader considerations at stake, constitutes perhaps the major count in the case against Congress.    The decision to authorize an extracongressional institution to decide on military-base closings is an example of legislation by which Congress, in order to promote public policy that is good for the nation as a whole, voluntarily deprives itself of the ability to take credit for standing up for constituents. Legislation that transfers authority to establish any specific trade restrictions out of Congress and into the executive branch (where they have a harder time getting adopted), rather than having Congress itself vote restrictions on steel or shoes, is another. So are decisions indexing entitlement increases (such as Social Security benefits) to occur automatically, rather than being passed each year by Congress. Yet another example is legislation replacing categorical grants, which are applied for by localities for specific projects and are therefore easy to credit to the members from those localities, with formula-determined general grants. These are not project specific and therefore deprive members of the chance to make opening-day speeches or cut ribbons.    The cynic runs into some problems here. Surely, if all that members care about is providing visible benefits to the folks back home, this kind of legislation would never get passed. That it does, at least sometimes, shows that other forces can move members enough to counteract the strong pressures from their constituents. Slightly old-fashioned as I am, I call these other forces &quot;public spirit.&quot;    Legislation by which Congress ties its own hands gets passed because congressional majorities have become convinced that the measures in question represent good public policy -- that unnecessary military bases have no business staying open in a time of budget stringency, that protectionism hurts consumers and threatens the trade that raises living standards worldwide, and that retirees should be compensated for inflation but not more. At the same time, members recognize the intense pressures to act on behalf of constituentsin other words, the intense pressure to act as the cynical view predicts -- and fear getting turned out of office for ignoring their constituents' wishes.    So, like the dieter who padlocks the refrigerator, members of Congress vote to deprive themselves of things that the conventional wisdom suggests they seek above all -- not only the opportunity to provide visible constituency benefits, but power as well -- so that they may further what they believe to be good public policy while insulating themselves from criticism in the next election race. If making good public policy were not important to members, such instances of self-denial would never occur, since members would feel no counterpressures from inside themselves pushing against those to do visible things for their constituents.    Clearly, such behavior does not occur all the time, to say the least. There is no shortage of instances where members seek to promote the interests of their districts. But fortunately, for most issues that Congress faces, a majority of members do not have strong constituency pressures that drive them one way or another. This leaves them freer to think in terms of what makes good public policy.    For issues where this is not the case, it often takes long, patient work to overcome these pressures. The military-base issue itself has been around for a number of years, and it is only now that something is being done about it.    Perhaps members need to mark some more sessions with their consciences on their calendars; tobacco price supports and the construction and location of federal office buildings are subjects that come quickly to mind. But public spirit lives, even in Congress. It's nice to see it carry the day even on an issue the most sanguine might well have thought hopeless.    ---   Mr. Kelman is a professor of public policy at Harvard's Kennedy School. </TEXT></DOC>