<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:The Constitution According to Kohl---By Helmut Kohl</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The United States of America is celebrating the bicentenary of its Constitution. For us Germans this anniversary is more than an occasion shared by good friends. We pay tribute to the American Constitution as a symbol of freedom.    The common ideal of freedom is what makes the German-American alliance strong. Tensions may occur but it would be a cardinal error to believe that the U.S. and Europe are drifting apart.    For Germans -- for all Europeans -- the American revolution triggered the propagation of democratic ideals. It is no coincidence that in two years' time we shall also be able to celebrate the bicentenary of the French Revolution. The ideals underlying the American Constitution changed the face of Europe and, via Europe, the face of the world. The European community and the North Atlantic community are not primarily associations determined by common interests; they are associations that rest on shared values and convictions.    This common spiritual background also characterizes German-American relations. The 200-year-old American Constitution and the comparatively young Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany are imbued with the same political spirit; both refer in unequivocal terms to the link between freedom and responsibility. In their common commitment to freedom and democracy, Germans and Americans are citizens of the same spiritual homeland.    The destinies of Germany and the U.S. have always been linked. Gen. Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben fought for American independence at the side of George Washington. German immigrants played a major part in the development of the continent and in the building of the U.S. Jacob Shallus, the scribe who 200 years ago copied the text of the American Constitution onto parchment, was a son of German immigrants. Germans, including German Jews, found a home in America during the darkest chapter of German history, the era of Nazi tyranny.    Those who returned after the elimination of German dictatorship regarded the free order of the U.S. as a model for democracy in the free part of Germany.    The United States' commitment to the democratic development of Germany has a long tradition. For example, no nation applauded more strongly the work of the democratic assembly that met at St. Paul's Church in Frankfurt to attempt to write a constitution in the years of 1848 and 1849. Sadly, that attempt failed. Germany was unified decades later. But Germans still remember that the U.S. was the only country to send a representative to observe the progress of the deliberations there.    The German people are still strongly aware of what we owe the U.S. The elimination of need and misery, the recovery of our country that lay in ruins, the reestablishment of a free state -- all of this would not have been possible without the assistance, vision and heartfelt compassion of the American people. Today, just as during the Marshall Plan 40 years ago, the U.S. is the indispensable guarantor of our country's freedom and of the viability of Berlin.    America's commitment in Europe also rests on the consensus on basic values. The community of shared values and the security partnership (only in this context does the term &quot;security partnership&quot; make sense) cannot be separated. In Europe, the U.S. is also protecting the freedom enshrined in its own Constitution.    On the level of economic and political interests, too, fundamental agreement exists between the U.S. and the Federal Republic of Germany on all essential issues. Although differences of opinion occur from time to time, they are only natural between nations that differ so greatly alone in terms of their size, geographical location and international importance. As long as the consensus on common values exists, the cohesion of the North Atlantic alliance will be guaranteed and remain essentially insensitive to everyday trials. A serious threat to the alliance's cohesion is posed only by those who call into question the political culture associated with freedom.    If we want to preserve the North Atlantic alliance and German-American friendship, we must cultivate the spiritual core of this friendship -- the joint commitment to the ideals of free democracy, as enshrined in the U.S. Constitution and the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany. To do so, we must cope with three tasks:    First, we must ward off the challenges confronting democracy. For instance, we must resolutely stop the advance of ideological thinking, that is, the claim to truth on the part of small, self-appointed elites who oppose the majority principle and urge that democratically legitimated laws be violated.    Second, we must make sure that the close ties between our countries and peoples are handed on to the coming generation. This generation in particular must acquire a heightened awareness of the values underlying our constitutions. This is, for example, the aim of the U.S.-German Youth Exchange Council that President Reagan and I set up a year ago. It fits into the multifarious efforts designed to enable young Germans and Americans to meet and get to know each other. Numerous private organizations have already carried out work in this field.    Third, we should bring cultural aspects more to the fore of U.S.-German relations. When the eminent conductor Christoph von Dohnanyi performs in Cleveland and Leonard Bernstein participates in the Schleswig-Holstein Festival, they both draw on the same cultural sources.    The advancement of cultural relations is all the more necessary because in this field especially some misunderstandings and even prejudices have to be eliminated. For example, in the Federal Republic of Germany sometimes only phenomena at the surface of American cultural activity are perceived -- as though the U.S. had only produced comic-strip heroes and TV series and not such important political philosophers as Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton, writers of the stature of T.S. Eliot, Ernest Hemingway and Arthur Miller, and composers such as Charles Ives and George Gershwin.    Conversely, the picture of Germany portrayed by some American media is also in need of improvement. German history and culture are too multifaceted to be reduced to the &quot;Jawohl, Herr General&quot; of third-rate war films.    During his visit to Germany in 1963, President Kennedy spoke at St. Paul's Church in Frankfurt. His words are still valid today:    &quot;The ocean divides us less than the Mediterranean divided the ancient world of Greece and Rome. Our constitution is old and yours is young, and our culture is young and yours is old, but in our commitment to freedom we can and must speak and act with but one voice.&quot;    ---   Mr. Kohl is the West German chancellor. </TEXT></DOC>