<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880722-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Coercion Failed, So Vietnam Fills Highlands Voluntarily --- World's 12th Most Populous Country Is Fighting Unemployment, Hunger </HL><AUTHOR> Barry Wain (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> BAN ME THUOT, Vietnam  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Le Manh Hung had his doubts when he visited southern Vietnam's Central Highlands in late 1985 to see if it was suitable for farming.    It was far less crowded than his native Kim Thi district in northern Vietnam. So he decided to give it a go. Other Kim Thi residents followed him to a new homeland 600 miles to the south.    Today, Mr. Hung is chairman of newly created Xuan Phu village here in Dac Lac province. It consists of 530 families almost entirely from Kim Thi, complete with a transplanted Communist Party cell. They live in thatched huts while struggling to make the adjustment from farming lowland rice to highland crops such as coffee, pepper and cashew nuts.    &quot;The future is here,&quot; says Mr. Hung.    More than a million people sharing that view, some more than others, have moved to the sparsely populated Central Highlands in the past decade. Encouraged by government propaganda and material incentives, they migrate under what is left of the country's overambitious and controversial New Economic Zone policy.    Soon after Hanoi defeated the U.S.-backed Saigon administration in 1975, the government announced plans to relocate 10 million Vietnamese by the year 2000. Vietnamese were to move from congested locations to reclaim fields abandoned during the fighting or to open new land to cultivation. The idea was to create jobs and increase food production, though critics charged that the victorious communists also were trying to disperse and punish their opponents.    Movement was supposed to be voluntary, but when city dwellers didn't respond to appeals to go to the countryside, many were forced out. The evacuees didn't receive the help they were promised, and many New Economic Zones became little more than rural prisons filled with miserable and hungry inhabitants. Tens of thousands fled back to the cities, even more fled Vietnam altogether as refugees.    More recently, the government appears to have abandoned efforts to forcibly relocate people. But while this has scaled back the New Economic Zone plans, Vietnam remains a nation on the move.    Nguyen Van Thanh, a Labor Ministry official, says 3.5 million people have pulled up roots since 1976. And while projections for the 1986-90 Five-Year Plan have been halved, 1.2 million people still are expected to migrate during the period, he says.    The government persists with relocation because the mismatch between land and people has worsened. With about 63.5 million inhabitants, Vietnam is the world's 12th most populous country. Moreover, the population is unevenly distributed: 1,000 people a square kilometer in the Red River Delta against 20 in the highlands of central and southern Vietnam. Millions are jobless or underemployed, and the country still can't feed itself.    To make moving more attractive, the government prepares sites by building roads, dams, schools and hospitals. The state also provides doctors, nurses and teachers. Each family is entitled to one hectare to farm collectively and a 2,000-square-meter private garden. They also get free transport to the site, enough cash to build a bamboo-framed house, subsidized rice for a year and other benefits.    That's the theory. In practice, as the official press notes, serious deficiencies occur. Provinces divert funds and building materials, the reports say, while doctors and medicine are in short supply.    Dac Lac province in the Central Highlands -- the destination for many migrants -- consists of steep slopes, sharp crests, narrow valleys and wide plains covered with rich, red soil. The area is home to hill tribes known as Montagnards, traditionally opposed to central authority.    The impact, energy and atmosphere of large-scale settlement are on display here in Dac Lac, Vietnam's third-largest province. More than 400,000 outsiders, almost half Dac Lac's current population of 850,000, have arrived since 1975, coming from at least a dozen provinces. That has reduced the local hill tribes to a minority, which seems to have helped the government curb Montagnard opposition.    Dac Lac officials boast that the province leads Vietnam in coffee production and say they intend to rapidly expand the output of rubber and rice. &quot;This is a land of opportunity,&quot; says Nguyen An Vinh, deputy chairman of Dac Lac.    Indeed, what distinguishes many Dac Lac residents is their hope, a commodity in conspicuously short supply elsewhere.    In Ban Me Thuot, the provincial capital, Ho Hoang Hien, 53, is back where he started when the communists took over. Required to surrender his prosperous coffee lands and equipment in 1975, locally born Mr. Hien worked for years as a specialist on a plantation run by the province before receiving his own two-hectare farm. He was among the first to take advantage of a government program that gives coffee lands to anyone with the funds and knowledge to run them privately.    The farm produces 10 tons of coffee annually. After paying a fixed amount of coffee as tax, Mr. Hien trades the rest with a provincial import-export company for consumer goods and cash.    He has bought a two-story house, three motorbikes, a color television, a videocassette recorder as well as a tractor and electric pump for the farm. Now that the government allows private car ownership, he intends to get a new Japanese model.    &quot;I want to set a good example so that everyone will join in, growing coffee and getting rich,&quot; he says. &quot;Don't say that as a socialist I can't enjoy life.&quot;    At Xuan Phu village, 30 miles away, Mr. Hung and his Kim Thi district transplants have no such dreams. While they are undaunted, they think more in terms of survival.    The village was formally established in February 1986, and the last of its 2,800 occupants arrived just a few months ago. Their long-term aim is to grow industrial crops, but the villagers initially are cultivating beans, dry rice, corn and sweet potatoes to feed themselves. About 60% are self-sufficient. The rest are still subsidized by the authorities.    Mr. Hung, 48, squats on the earthen floor of the mud-walled hut that he shares with his wife, their four children aged one to 14 and his widowed mother. There is little furniture except for two beds that are in fact planks covered with rattan mats.    &quot;Given proper investment,&quot; he says, &quot;this land has a very good future.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>