<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880622-0026 </DOCNO><HL> LAB NOTES </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Waldholz </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LTEK ENZO </CO><IN> PHA TOB </IN><G> AGD </G><TEXT>      Switching On Proteins   That Aid Hair Growth   UNIVERSITY of Miami researchers say they have discovered biochemical &quot;switches&quot; that regulate scalp-hair growth, which could help in developing anti-baldness drugs.    Scientists have long suspected that hair loss occurs when excessive amounts of male hormones called androgens flood hair follicle cells. But they didn't know what caused this to happen.    In earlier research, the Miami scientists, led by Marty E. Sawaya, found that androgens stored in glands near the follicles are controlled by proteins, or receptors, on the surface of follicle cells. They learned that certain receptors carry hormones into the cell, while others keep them out, depending on the cells' needs.    Now, Dr. Sawaya and her colleagues have determined exactly how two receptors control hormone traffic into the cell.    Basically, the researchers found that hair grows when follicle cells are surrounded by a higher proportion of the larger of the two receptors. Because the large receptor is too big to enter the cell nucleus, hormones attached to it stay outside the cell. Hair stops growing when the smaller receptor is in greater supply because it can transport its hormone cargo into the cell.    Dr. Sawaya says that in lab experiments the researchers were able to convert small receptors into larger ones. The next trick is to produce chemicals duplicating that in humans.    How Not to Smoke   A Low-Tar Cigarette   ULTRALOW-TAR cigarettes aren't necessarily less risky than other cigarettes, because smokers often thwart the filters, according to University of Toronto researchers.    Cigarettes advertised as low in tar -- less than four milligrams, compared with 10 to 30 for regular cigarettes -- cut tar content by diluting smoke with large amounts of air drawn in through a band of tiny holes around the filter. Tar is thought to contribute to health problems from smoking.    But Lynn Kozlowski, a smoking-addiction expert at the University of Toronto, has shown that the amount of tar inhaled in a &quot;one-milligram-tar&quot; cigarette can be increased to 16 to 29 milligrams simply by blocking the filter holes with fingers or lips.    To determine how common such blocking is, Mr. Kozlowski and his colleagues collected cigarette butts discarded in public ashtrays. In this month's issue of the American Journal of Public Health, the researchers reported that of the 135 low-tar cigarettes collected, 51% had their vents blocked to some degree. Tar stains entirely covering the flat end of the filter indicate blocking; a bull's-eye pattern means the holes weren't blocked.    &quot;We think most people are unaware they are blocking and significantly increasing their tar and nicotine intake,&quot; Mr. Kozlowski said. &quot;Most people appear to do it unconsciously in order to increase their smoking satisfaction.&quot;    Genetic Check for Virus   May Improve Pap Test   SEVERAL COMPANIES are racing to develop more accurate Pap-smear tests to detect early signs of cervical cancer.    The Pap smear, in which a doctor takes a sample of cells from the tissue lining a woman's cervix, has been sharply criticized for its high rate of failure. Many of the problems result from lab errors. But many pre-cancerous cases also are missed because changes in cell structure indicating that a person is at risk for cancer are sometimes too slight to be seen under a microscope.    Efforts to improve the test may be aided by a recent finding that certain forms of an increasingly common, sexually transmitted virus that causes genital warts also can cause cervical cancer. Early stages of the infection -- known as human papilloma virus, or HPV -- have been difficult to detect. Recently, however, several biotechnology firms have developed experimental tests using so-called DNA probes to detect whether the genetic material in the virus has infected cervical tissue cells, even before the changes can be detected under a microscope. The tests, which produce an easily seen color stain if cells are infected, would tell doctors that certain patients are at risk of getting cervical cancer.    Life Technologies Inc., Gaithersburg, Md., and Enzo Biochem, New York, have designed HPV tests requiring that cervical tissue be removed surgically, a difficult and expensive procedure. But both companies and Digene Diagnostics Inc., College Park, Md., are developing tests to detect HPV in cells easily collected in a Pap smear.    Plant Extract Studied   As Tick Repellent -   SYRUPY OIL, similar to myrrh, from the bark of a common African plant may lead to a better tick repellent.    Interest in developing a nontoxic repellent for use on human skin has increased sharply in recent years with the rise in cases of Lyme disease, a potentially serious nerve ailment contracted by the bite of one type of tick. Most common insect repellents for humans aren't effective in fighting ticks, and the one product gaining favor, permethrine, is only approved in some states and even then only for use on clothing.    The Department of Agriculture's Beltsville, Md., research center is studying the oil from a plant called commiphora erythrae. The oil, which isn't toxic to skin, is used in Africa as a perfume and insect repellent. In lab studies, it has repelled the Lone Star tick, common in the Southwest, and the deer tick, which carries Lyme disease.    Since such research products are still years from reaching the market, permethrine is expected to attract wider attention, despite some safety concerns. Sold as Permanone by Coulston International Inc., Alamogordo, N.M., it is available in about 25 states. </TEXT></DOC>