<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870814-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Insuring All Employees Could Kill the Company---By Anthony Gajda</HL><DD> 08/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The minimum health insurance legislation that the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee is now considering would cover the estimated 25 million workers and dependents currently without health insurance, people greatly in need of some sort of help. But the price of this legislation would likely be business shutdowns and layoffs that would throw many people out of their jobs. In attempting to solve the problem of how to relieve the pain and suffering of millions of people not covered by health insurance, the legislation would cause unacceptable pain and suffering of its own.    The Minimum Health Benefits for All Workers Act of 1987, sponsored by Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.), would require employers to provide employees who work 17 1/2 or more hours a week and their dependents with insurance for hospital, medical, surgical, maternity and well-baby care on both an in-patient and outpatient basis. Employers would have to pay 80% to 100% of the costs. By the most optimistic estimate, the cost of this minimum level of health insurance would average $1,186 per employee per year, or a first-year total cost of more than $25 billion.    Some large employers, including American Airlines and Chrysler, support the legislation, arguing that companies and governments now providing health insurance are indirectly paying the health-care bills of employees who do not have health insurance. If hospitals and doctors cannot collect their fees from patients who are uninsured, they simply raise the fees that they charge to patients with insurance. While this argument seems reasonable, it takes an act of extraordinary faith to expect that hospitals and doctors are going to reduce their fees if uninsured patients suddenly become insured.    Other supporters argue that small business, by not providing its employees with health insurance, is failing to pay its fair share of health-care costs. The implication is that this problem can be solved by the minimum health insurance bill. Unfortunately, the dynamics are much more complicated than that.    Small businesses are frequently in the retail trade and services industries, typically paying minimum or low wages. At the minimum wage, an employee working 35 hours a week earns $6,097 a year. An employee working half-time, or 17 1/2 hours a week, earns $3,048.50. At the minimum wage, the annual cost of $1,186 for the minimum health insurance plan will be equal to 19% of payroll for full-timers and 39% of payroll for those who work half-time.    In light of these costs, it is difficult to accept that the proposed legislation creates a program that, according to Sen. Kennedy, &quot;small business cannot only live with -- it can prosper under.&quot; Some large employers also will find it difficult to absorb the cost of the legislation. An estimated 4.3 million uninsured workers are in companies with 1,000 or more employees.    Companies -- large and small -- that now do not provide health insurance for their employees are likely to react in a number of ways if the legislation is enacted:    --Some marginally profitable or even unprofitable concerns will view the cost of minimum health insurance as the last straw and will close. Others will provide the insurance, become unprofitable and close. In both instances, there will be a loss of jobs.    --Some companies will replace part-timers with full-timers. While this response may minimize the employer's insurance costs, his total cost of doing business could increase. Companies that now provide health insurance to their full-time employees but not to their part-time employees may simply change work schedules so that part-time employees work less than 17 1/2 hours a week. Again, in both cases the result will be that some part-timers will lose their jobs -- or at least some of their wages.    --Other employers will simply reduce their workforce to the point at which the additional cost of mandated health insurance is offset by reductions in payrolls. Again, the result will be job losses.    --The higher labor costs associated with the legislation will cause some companies to replace labor with technology. The result? Job losses.    It will not matter that some employees, such as teen-agers covered by their parents' health insurance or adults covered by their spouses', do not want the minimum health insurance. They will be covered.    It will not matter that some employees making over $4.19 an hour will not want to pay the typical $20 a month for their share of health-insurance costs. They will have to pay it.    Of course, all this presupposes that the employers and employees are totally committed to complying with the law as it is enacted. Some small employers may join the underground economy by paying workers cash to avoid offering the insurance. If so, tax revenue will be lost.    It is quite possible that large firms that have been providing health insurance to their employees and retirees will see smaller increases in the cost of their health insurance. But that is likely to be a short-term effect. In the longer term, the injection of $25 billion or more a year into the health-care system probably will increase the price we pay for health care.    The minimum health insurance mandate may set off an era of steep increases like the one we saw after the implementation of Medicare and Medicaid. And those increases may dwarf any savings that large firms may gain initially from no longer having to subsidize the cost of health care for the uninsured.    Some will say these fears are unfounded, that the oversupply of health-care providers is sufficient to absorb the additional demand. That probably would be true if unemployment among physicians were 10% or 15%. But when was the last time someone tried to make an appointment with a doctor and was told to &quot;come right over, we're kind of slow today&quot;?    While a case can be made that there are enough empty hospital beds to absorb the additional demand, there are three reasons that prices are likely to go up.    First, hospitals, unlike physicians, are not mobile and cannot follow population movements. In many areas of the country, populations have shifted away from neighborhoods and communities in which hospitals are situated. While the Kennedy proposal might fill beds in hospitals in older neighborhoods and communities, it would probably exacerbate demand and raise costs in newer areas already short of hospital beds.    Second, the hospital industry has been scaling down operations to accommodate the reduced demand resulting from costcontainment efforts in both the public and private sectors. The increased demand from those obtaining the minimum benefits will require the industry to begin to bid up wage rates in order to attract nurses and other health workers to hospitals.    Third, hospitals have reorganized in order to market outpatient services, such as outpatient surgery and home health care, the prices of which are not regulated by state or federal agencies. Revenue from these outpatient services is then used to subsidize losses from inpatient services, the prices of which are frequently regulated. It is likely that hospitals will optimize the mix of regulated and unregulated services to maximize revenue and that the increased general demand for unregulated services will boost prices.    Congress should carefully study the economic impact of the Kennedy legislation. Health care now accounts for 10.9% of gross national product: The proposed legislation would raise it to 11.4% of GNP. Congress should say what the actual cost of the Kennedy legislation, as well as catastrophic care, Medicare and other pending health-care legislation would be in terms of increased health-care prices, job losses and other dislocations in the economy. Businesses that are paying for this legislation and workers whose jobs may be affected by it deserve to know how much this approach to providing needed health insurance will really cost.    ---   Mr. Gajda is a principal of William M. Mercer-Meidinger-Hansen Inc., a leading employee benefit and compensation consulting firm. </TEXT></DOC>