<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Strong Start:Under the Democrats,Congress Is ReassertingA Legislative Initiative---Rep. Wright and Sen. ByrdForge Close RelationshipTo Outdo White House---Stances on Taxes---By Jeffrey H. BirnbaumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last November, Robert Byrd and James Wright, the top Democrats in Congress, sat in the back seat of Rep. Wright's burgundy Cadillac outside the White House after their first briefing on the Iran-Contra affair.    Rep. Wright, who was about to become speaker of the House, suggested that he and Sen. Byrd, the incoming Senate majority leader, respond together to the president's coming State of the Union speech.    &quot;I'll be happy to work with you,&quot; Mr. Byrd replied to the surprise invitation.    Their joint appearance on national television two months later signaled the close working relationship that has developed among the Democrats since they regained control of Congress last fall. By stage-managing legislation, they have moved the spotlight of power in Washington away from the White House and onto their own doorstep on Capitol Hill. Though difficult tests lie ahead, the Democrats, after four months in charge of both the House and the Senate, are off to a strong start.    &quot;You've got to be impressed,&quot; concedes Republican Sen. Phil Gramm of Texas. &quot;They've shown a fairly remarkable unity since they've been in control.&quot;    Under the Democrats' guidance, Congress is reasserting the role of government. It has overridden presidential vetoes of two major bills, including a transportation measure that was enacted despite a visit by the president to the Capitol. Each chamber also has passed similar budget plans that, in defiance of Mr. Reagan, call for increased taxes and a slowdown in military spending. Steaming toward approval are bills that would toughen U.S. trade policy, overhaul the welfare system, increase aid to the homeless and revise campaign-finance laws.    &quot;The Democratic Party now has the responsibility to perform. We have to show we have our act together, that we can produce,&quot; Mr. Wright says. &quot;We are running in constant competition against the clock, and so far we are winning.&quot;    But soon there will be ample opportunity to stumble. The Democrats' priorities conflict with Mr. Reagan's, and the president is waiting for Congress to send him bills so that he can bat them back with vetoes. Many Republicans contend that the Democrats have produced an atmosphere of confrontation and increasing partisanship that will lead to stalemate.    &quot;They want to maintain the political momentum, and they've been pretty skillful so far,&quot; says GOP Sen. William Armstrong of Colorado. &quot;But all they've done is say, 'Spend more money.' All they've done is confirm all the worst things Republicans have always said about them.&quot;    The Democrats have differences among themselves that are likely to come to light in the coming months. Already, Mr. Wright was forced to twist arms to eke out a narrow House victory for the tough trade sanctions contained in the Gephardt amendment, which Senate Democrats aren't likely to adopt. &quot;In the Democratic Party, you take it one day at a time,&quot; says Kirk O'Donnell, who heads the Center for National Policy, a Democratic think tank. &quot;At the moment, it's been one victory at a time.&quot;    When the Democrats took control of Congress last November by regaining a majority in the Senate after six years, West Virginia's Mr. Byrd resumed his old job of Senate majority leader. The House stayed in Democratic hands, and Mr. Wright of Texas became speaker after the retirement of Thomas &quot;Tip&quot; O'Neill of Massachusetts.    The changes have turned the ways of Washington upside down. Legislative initiatives, which came mostly from the White House during the first six years of the Reagan administration, now tend to come from Congress.    &quot;The town has no gyroscope, no central balancing force, and into that vacuum the Democrats are starting to move, and in almost every policy area,&quot; Stephen Bell, a former GOP congressional staffer who lobbies for Salomon Brothers Inc., recently told a meeting of his investment-banker colleagues.    The Democrats have been helped by President Reagan's troubles. The president was embarrassed by the GOP's loss of Senate control despite his extraordinary plea. Then, the Iran-Contra scandal sapped him of much of his remaining popular strength. The Democrats have been quick to take advantage.    In contrast to the strained relations that existed between Sen. Byrd and former Speaker O'Neill, Messrs. Byrd and Wright are coordinating the direction of their separate chambers to a degree not seen since the 1950s. The result has been a mostly united front on the issues, a breakneck schedule for the approval of bills and a new ritual known as the leadership breakfast to keep it all on track.    Every other Tuesday morning, Mr. Wright and Mr. Byrd preside at the breakfast with the other members of their respective leaderships. They plot strategy, discuss differences and devise ways to solve problems to a common end.    Coordination hasn't been perfect. Early this year, the Senate attached a motion to block a scheduled pay increase for members of Congress to a bill, dear to House members, to increase aid to the homeless. House leaders felt betrayed, but they managed to secure the pay raise anyway, after some fancy maneuvering. House Majority Leader Thomas Foley of Washington was so angry that he suggested publicly that Mr. Wright should have delivered the State of the Union response without Mr. Byrd.    But at a subsequent leadership breakfast, Mr. Wright ended a discussion of the incident by saying, &quot;Let's move on,&quot; and Mr. Byrd ultimately won enough votes on a parliamentary procedure that put the issue to rest. In fact, Mr. Wright had quietly disregarded the advice of media consultants that he respond to Mr. Reagan alone.    Cooperation reached its apex during the fight to override the president's veto on the transportation bill. The crucial battle was waged in the Senate, where Democrats hold a narrower majority than in the House. Mr. Wright pressured GOP senators by dispatching into their states Democratic House members who are contenders for their seats to talk about the good the bill would do. House leaders also took pains to ensure an overwhelming margin for the override vote, to send a signal to the Senate about the bill's popularity.    When the override in the Senate came down to a single vote -- that of freshman Democrat Terry Sanford of North Carolina -- House Democrats swung into action. Rep. Charlie Rose, a leader of the North Carolina delegation, went to Mr. Byrd's office to volunteer his services; other House members telephoned the wayward senator to warn about possible retribution against tobacco subsidies important to his state. Mr. Sanford changed his vote, and the veto was overidden the next day.    Messrs. Wright and Byrd have served in Congress since the 1950s, and they spent four years together in the House. Mr. Wright made speeches in West Virginia to help Mr. Byrd get elected to the Senate in 1958. But they aren't personal friends. In fact, they are headstrong loners who are enigmatic even to their colleagues. They have been lampooned as &quot;Byrdles and James,&quot; a play on the country-bumpkin television hucksters for Bartles and Jaymes wine cooler.    The two leaders also are different in many ways. Mr. Wright fancies himself a spellbinding orator and likes to speak with flourishes to the whole House. Mr. Byrd can rise to high rhetoric when angered, but is better known for reading a detailed Senate history to a usually empty chamber. In the end, they are professional politicians who see cooperation as the way to meet their mutual goals.    Mr. Wright, who is 64 years old and represents Fort Worth, Texas, is the more aggressive leader. He raised eyebrows with his early advocacy of a tax increase, and though some Democrats warn he will rue the day, most now admire his courage and believe their constituents won't revolt at the idea. Mr. Wright has taken a firm hand in shaping and pushing legislation ranging from the budget resolution to the trade bill.    &quot;If you aren't willing to take a risk, you don't get anywhere,&quot; says Mr. Wright, who in his youth was a boxer and who still has a reputation as a hothead on occasion. &quot;The risk-takers of this world, the upstream swimmers, the people who can make a litte bit of a break with the past, these are the people who influence the course of events. Otherwise all you're doing is being swept along with the tide.&quot;    Mr. Wright's enthusiasm has rubbed off on his colleagues, and Democrats in the House are feeling resurgent. &quot;He bubbles and that's infectious,&quot; says Democratic Rep. David Bonior of Michigan. Adds Democratic Rep. Charles Schumer of New York: &quot;There's an intensity that pervades the place, that's Jim's style. He has strong beliefs and he wants to win.&quot;    The speaker's leadership team is regarded as an able complement to him. Majority Leader Foley is the consensus builder, the insightful devil's advocate who finds the flaws in legislation and seeks to blunt resistence where it lies. Top Democratic floor manager Rep. Tony Coelho of California is the ambitious political animal, the partisan, the vote counter and the man who keeps his eye on the polls. But tensions between the two mount as they are seen as rivals to succeed Mr. Wright.    In the Senate, Mr. Byrd, 69, is more respected than liked; few of his colleagues call him &quot;Bob.&quot; He is regarded as a gatekeeper rather than an incubator for legislation, though he is responsible for making campaign-finance &quot;reform&quot; a congressional priority. He managed to hold onto his job because of his considerable parliamentary skills and his attention to the small courtesies that are fundamental to the Senate.    This year, for instance, he bent over backward to accommodate pressure from the freshman class to speed assigning of office space. He even offered his own conference room to them in the interim.    But more than chivalry accounts for the senator's ability to keep his troops in line. He has been aided by the esprit and political savvy of the 11 freshmen Democrats and the dread among the veterans of ever having to return to the minority again. &quot;There's nothing like being out of power to unite you when you get back in,&quot; says Democratic Sen. James Sasser of Tennessee. &quot;For years we just took for granted that we were in control around here. But now there's a sense we have to be cohesive in order to stay there.&quot;    Though Mr. Byrd declines to discuss his plans, he has given his colleagues the impression that he won't seek to retain his job as leader in 1988, senators say. The expectation that he will step down has instigated a rising behind-the-scenes influence for a slew of possible successors, including Sens. Daniel Inouye of Hawaii, who heads the Iran-Contra investigative committee, and George Mitchell of Maine, who helped raise money for the Democrats last year.    Democrats acknowledge that the heady days of late might soon end. Some members grumble, particularly in the House, that the leadership is moving too fast, with inadequate attention to the substance of legislation, and often applying excessive pressure on Democrats to vote for their bills on the floor. There also are splits between Democrats in the two chambers -- the House represents the more liberal wing of the party and the Senate the more moderate wing. The Senate-passed budget, for example, allows more military spending than the House's budget.    But for now, harmony prevails. &quot;Sometimes we won't agree,&quot; Sen. Byrd says, &quot;but that will be a minor problem, a grain of sand in the Potomac compared to our general view of things. We're going to make the difference now.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>