<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861208-0049 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Insight:Shultz Must Restore U.S. Credibility,Bolster His Image at NATO Meeting---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/08/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP MDEST FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Secretary of State George Shultz's task at the annual meeting of North Atlantic Treaty Organization foreign ministers this week will be nothing less than restoring the credibility of U.S. foreign policy and cementing his own position in Washington.    In the face of the domestic disarray and crisis in confidence generated by the administration's secret dealings with Iran, he must convince the allies that the U.S. still can mount a coherent foreign policy.    But Mr. Shultz also may use the NATO meeting to bolster his own position, an effort that will begin with his testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Committee today. Although the secretary of state hasn't been linked to any improper actions, White House aides say he knew more about the Iran arms sale than he has conceded. Administration officials also have confirmed that Mr. Shultz solicited money from the Sultan of Brunei to support the Nicaraguan rebels, though it's unclear whether the money was used for military or humanitarian assistance.    &quot;He'll be showing an audience back home that, while other senior officials are part of the problem, he's part of the solution,&quot; a State Department official says.    The European allies want to make Mr. Shultz look effective, too. &quot;We want to help Shultz,&quot; says a West German official and arms control expert. &quot;His staying power would be very welcome here. He knows the agenda and the arguments and has always been able to steer the pragmatic course.&quot; The allies particularly value Mr. Shultz's influence on arms control issues.    The allies fear that once the dust settles in Washington, Mr. Shultz will be replaced; he pointedly distanced himself from the White House at the beginning of the Iran affair and thus irked many of President Reagan's closest advisers.    The Europeans are angry that the U.S. was making secret arms sales to Iran while pressuring other nations to adhere to a weapons boycott of Iran and a tough policy of not dealing with terrorists. &quot;While the U.S. was reproaching the Europeans for being wimps and being soft over Libya, it was secretly pursuing what the Europeans were accused of doing -- namely doing business with a country that supported terrorism,&quot; says Karl Kaiser, director of the West German government-sponsored Foreign Policy Institute.    The Iran revelations were particularly disturbing to the Europeans because they came on the heels of the Reykjavik summit between President Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. The European allies believe Mr. Reagan endangered their interests by almost agreeing to remove medium-range missiles from Europe. This would have created an imbalance in the face of Moscow's superiority in short-range missiles and conventional arms.    During the Brussels meetings, European officials will demand that in the future they be more fully appraised of U.S. security and anti-terrorism policies, and they think they're in a position to win such assurances from Mr. Shultz.    &quot;The whole administration doesn't understand the political and psychological repercussions of the withdrawal of missiles from Europe,&quot; says Pierre Lellouche, director of the French Institute for International Relations. &quot;The big fear is that a nervous and weakened Reagan might be tempted to get a deal with the Russians that will ease his political pressure but lead to the decoupling of the United States and Europe.&quot;    For a long time there was nothing the Europeans wanted more than a U.S.-Soviet arms control agreement. For public purposes, they still say they want a deal. But Mr. Lellouche echoes the views of some West European officials when he says that it might be risky for the Reagan administration to pursue an arms control agreement in its current weakened state.    U.S. actions over the past weeks have bred among Europeans a rare unity born out of a common fear that they may be harmed by a U.S. foreign policy that is losing its bearing.    To counter this disquiet, Mr. Shultz will attempt to get the allies to forget the past and look to the future. Instead of discussing Reykjavik, he wants them to use the less-radical arms control prescription he outlined in a recent Chicago speech as a starting point for disarmament discussions. He'll portray the Iranian arms sales as an aberration and assure the allies that President Reagan has promised that Iran policy is back in Mr. Shultz's hands.    &quot;He'll try to fence off the problems from discussion and move ahead in other areas,&quot; an administration official says.    The Europeans want the administration to promise that no deal will be made on medium-range nuclear missile cuts unless the Soviets reduce the number of their short-range missiles or accept a ceiling that NATO can build up to.    One especially thorny issue at Brussels -- the question of a new forum for conventional arms discussions -- goes right to the heart of European uneasiness about U.S. decisions made on their behalf, a French official says. The French want all 35 countries involved in the recent Stockholm talks on confidence-building measures to take part in order to dilute Washington's influence and increase their own. Washington wants talks between NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact.    Mr. Lellouche says that whenever talks are strictly between the two alliances, U.S. and Soviet interests far overshadow those of other European countries. That's a bad idea especially now, he says, because after Reykjavik and Iran it's clear that &quot;the wisdom of the U.S. line isn't always obvious and shouldn't always be followed.&quot;    With the U.S. in its weakened state and Europe acting with more unity, America's allies hope the U.S. will be more attuned to European concerns and demands for coordination. </TEXT></DOC>