<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH TESTIFIED that he acted with the approval of the White House.    The Marine officer and former National Security Council aide told congressional Iran-Contra panels, however, that he never directly discussed with Reagan the diversion of arms-sale proceeds to Nicaraguan rebels. North disclosed that a secret finding authorizing the CIA's role in a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran had been signed by Reagan days after the shipment, but the document is believed to have been destroyed in an administration cover-up. North said he sent memos for Reagan's approval on each shipment to Iran.    Reagan was too busy to watch the testimony, a spokesman said. A senior official said the White House isn't aware of North's five arms-shipment memos.    ---   SIKH GUNMEN KILLED 34 more Hindu bus passengers in northern India raids.    The two attacks, both in the state of Haryana, came 24 hours after separatist gunmen killed 38 bus passengers in Punjab, police said. In the most recent raids, two buses traveling in different directions were stopped at a bridge, where Hindu passengers were singled out before being shot with automatic weapons. Police believe the same group is responsible for all three raids.    Opposition leaders denounced Prime Minister Gandhi's policies in Punjab, where 500 have died this year in Sikh agitation for a separate homeland.    ---   A gasoline tank truck crashed into a restaurant in Herborn, West Germany, killing at least 30 people and injuring 25, police said. The truck's brakes apparently failed, sending it skidding into the crowded restaurant, sparking explosions in nearby homes when burning gasoline poured into sewers in the town 50 miles north of Frankfurt.    ---   South Korea's Chun refused to accept resignations by his party's top officials. The shake-up had been expected to allow party chief Roh to restructure the party in line with reforms he proposed and the president accepted. Meanwhile, dissident Kim Dae Jung's rights are expected to be restored, allowing him to run for president.    ---   Moscow offered to pull its warships out of the Persian Gulf if the U.S. did the same, but the Pentagon said the U.S. was unlikely to withdraw even if the Soviets did. Meanwhile, Rep. Aspin (D., Wis.) said following a gulf visit that Kuwait unilaterally changed plans for U.S. ships to escort its tankers, which may require a larger U.S. presence.    An Iraqi warplane fired a missile at a Cypriot oil tanker near Iran's Kharg Island terminal, setting the ship afire, shipping sources in the region said.    ---   Charles Glass claimed he worked for the CIA. The videotaped statement by the kidnapped U.S. journalist, who appeared haggard, was released by a group Beirut militia sources say is Iranian-backed. The White House and ABC News, for which Glass worked, denied Glass was a spy and said the statement was made under duress.    ---   A U.S. safety agency blamed &quot;limitations in the air traffic control system&quot; for the collision of an Aeromexico airliner with a small private plane last year. The Cerritos, Calif., crash killed 82 people. The National Transportation Safety Board urged the speedy implementation of electronic collision-alert systems.    ---   A trial began for six top officials of the Chernobyl reactor, charged with negligence in the explosion that led to history's worst civilian nuclear accident and the deaths of 31 people last year. The trial is being held in the Ukrainian town of Chernobyl, inside the evacuated zone. A new U.S. study said the accident will cause 39,000 cancer deaths.    ---   Thousands of Haitians crowded near the National Palace to watch students who had vowed to burn themselves to death in an anti-government protest, but dispersed when the students didn't show up. The eight-day-old crisis appeared to be easing, and the White House said opposition goals have been met and warned against further violence.    ---   Walters left Syria and U.S. Ambassador Eagleton is expected to resume his post in Damascus in two weeks, Western and Arab diplomatic sources said. The U.S. envoy to the U.N. had been sent to Syria as Reagan's special envoy to hold talks with President Assad about healing an eight-month rift over alleged Syrian involvement in terrorism.    ---   Zambian officials say as many as 390 people are feared dead in the sinking of a barge carrying 470 passengers on the crocodile-infested Luapula River, which divides Zaire and Zambia. One official said the man at the tiller may have been asleep when the barge hit a sandbar. Eighty people survived, and 39 bodies have been recovered.    ---   Taiwan's legislature approved unanimously a proposal to end martial law, which was imposed 38 years ago when Nationalists fled to the island after Communists took over mainland China. President Chiang is expected to sign the measure soon.    ---   Lyndon LaRouche pleaded innocent in federal court in Boston to a charge that he conspired to obstruct a federal investigation of an alleged $1 million credit-card fraud by his 1984 presidential campaign. If convicted, the political extremist faces a maximum of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine. </TEXT></DOC>