<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871214-0047 </DOCNO><HL> States AgreeTo Crack DownOn Airline Ads---By Jonathan DahlStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AIRLINES (AIR)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN><TEXT>   More than 40 states have approved a plan that could force airlines to drastically change some of their advertising practices and frequent-flier programs.    In a meeting this past weekend, the National Association of Attorneys General agreed on national standards for what constitutes deceptive airline practices. Because states have vowed to sue airlines that don't comply with the standards, most carriers are expected to follow most of them.    The standards, which go into effect Jan. 15, are similar to ones that a smaller group of attorneys general proposed in August. But the revised rules contain some new details that address many of the industry's most frustrating tactics.    For example, the standards require airlines to give frequent fliers a year's notice or protect members some other way before making adverse changes in their programs. Last spring, several carriers sparked a public outcry by abruptly changing frequent-flier rules.    The states' action follows other attempts to crack down on airlines' consumer practices. The Department of Transportation has fined several carriers for various abuses, and Congress is drafting an airline consumer-protection bill. But the attorneys general's effort is highly unusual for several reasons.    For one thing, the attorneys general group says it has only twice before adopted national standards against an industry. And states have rarely sued airlines. That's partly because airlines argue they come mainly under the jurisdiction of the federal government -- and shouldn't be subject to varying state laws. The standards seek to remove some of this argument by giving states a unified front.    &quot;This tells the industry what we consider to be deceptive and what it needs to do to clean up its act,&quot; says John Van de Kamp, the attorney general in California, which originally proposed the standards, known as &quot;enforcement guidelines.&quot;    All but two of the roughly 45 attorneys general attending an annual meeting of attorneys general in San Diego approved the standards, says a spokesman for the group. The opposing states were New Mexico and Utah, the spokesman says.    Several airlines have also opposed the standards, and may fight some aspects in court. So far, they have declined to comment publicly on their plans. State officials, however, say the airlines have indicated they will comply with most of the standards, as long as competitors do.    The standards, outlined in a 70-page report, list up to 10 restrictions that must be included in newspaper ads. Airlines, for example, would have to point out when an advertised low fare applies only to one airport in a city. Restrictions can't be buried at the bottom of any ad and usually must be in type that's at least one-third the size of the largest type in the ad.    In television commercials, certain restrictions must be orally described, instead of listed in writing at the bottom of the screen. And they must be described in the same oral pace and volume as the rest of the commercial.    &quot;We don't want someone whispering the restrictions at auctioneer's speed,&quot; says Christopher Ames, a deputy state attorney general for California.    The standards also require airlines to include any surcharges in their advertised prices. And they make it harder to advertise prices for one-way fares that are only available on round-trip flights.    In addressing frequent-flier rules, the attorneys general created one set of standards for future program members, and another for current members. Airlines will be allowed to change rules for future members at will, as long as they disclose any possible changes. But the standards affecting the thousands of presently enrolled members are stricter.    Airlines, for example, can't increase mileage requirements that frequent fliers must reach to win free trips without providing a year's notice or protecting those members some other way, such as by crediting them with additional miles.    The standards also protect current members in another way. Many frequent fliers complain they must wait months to use their awards because some carriers restrict the number of seats available for free trips. To comply with the attorneys general's rules, airlines will now usually have to provide such awards either 15 days before the date requested by the traveler, or 15 days after. </TEXT></DOC>