<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870526-0068 </DOCNO><HL> The 'Situation' in FijiIsn't Back to Normal,But It Can Be Ignored---A Coup in the South Pacific,Noteworthy Nonetheless,Spells Trouble for Paradise---By James P. SterbaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SUVA, Fiji  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As the sounds of ukuleles wafted through proverbial swaying palms, 160 Australian sailors slipped off the H.M.A.S. Stalwart, a destroyer tender. Undeterred by what has come to be known as the local &quot;situation,&quot; they headed straight for bars dispensing legendary Fiji Bitter on draft.    And that display of supply-boat diplomacy drew scant attention from Fijians attending to 51 weekend soccer matches, 64 church services, a golf tournament and to countless wind surfers, yachts and fishing lines. Tension Sunday was pretty much confined to the radio broadcast from Hamilton, New Zealand, of Fiji's World Cup Rugby battle against Argentina.    Then, yesterday, everyone but a few ousted politicians returned to work. And the Fiji Times reverted to normal news coverage, devoting half of its page eight to a photograph of farmer Pauliasi Muavesi holding a four-foot-long yam from his garden.    The &quot;situation&quot; which people are trying to ignore developed at 10 a.m. on May 14, when Lt. Col. Sitiveni Rabuka burst into Parliament House with 10 balaclava-masked companions brandishing pistols and announced: &quot;This is a military takeover. Stay down and remain calm.&quot;    Since there seems not to have been a coup in the South Pacific before, unless you count the Australian rum rebellion, procedural guidelines were as scarce as explanations for how woolen balaclavas had made it this far into the Tropics. The soldiers knew enough to cart off to house arrest 28 members of the six-day-old government of Prime Minister Timoci Bavadra and to seize the government radio station, which then suspended normal programming for some stale rock 'n' roll. (Fiji doesn't have television.)    Tanks couldn't rumble through the streets because the 2,500-man Fiji army, half of which is in southern Lebanon and the Sinai on peacekeeping duties, doesn't have any tanks. The army's biggest weapons are 12 81-millimeter mortars and a couple of howitzers. But they weren't needed since, in nine subsequent days of army rule, soldiers were confined to guard duty, to crowd control and to seizing film from unruly photographers (mainly Australians), in a futile effort to head off damage to Fiji's image as a tourist paradise.    Intra-army squabbling was minimal, partly because the coup leader's commander, Brig. Epeli Nailatikau, was in Australia to accept four gift patrol boats with which to chase American tuna poachers.    A few clubs were briefly swung. Rocks were tossed. Soldiers fired two rifle shots into the air. A 12-gauge shotgun blast subdued a would-be looter. And a shot across the brow with a Teacher's Scotch whisky bottle put the hijacker of an Air New Zealand Boeing 747 jet out of action.    But the major battles were rhetorical, as politicians, variously aggrieved -- from Suva to Wellington to Canberra to London -- bickered over constitutional procedures. And that is a foggy, ongoing squabble owing in part to the fact that Fiji endured the 96 years prior to 1970 as a British colony. That circumstance, to a large extent, was America's fault.    It all started during a Fourth of July celebration in 1849, when an exploding cannon burned down the house and store of an American trader, John Brown Williams. Subsequent looting was officially blamed by the U.S. on Fiji's most powerful chief, King Cakobau. He was a cannibal warload and sea-slug monopolist who went on to be celebrated in the apocryphal stories of generations of local after-dinner speakers for once having demanded to see a passenger list when nothing on a cruise ship dinner menu appealed to him.    Pestered by gradually inflated U.S. damage claims, he eventually turned to the British, and on Sept. 29, 1874, signed a deed that began: &quot;We, King of Fiji, together with other high chiefs of Fiji, hereby give our country, Fiji, unreservedly to Her Britannic Majesty, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland.&quot;    There went 332 coral-fringed islands and the 508 islets that are above water at low tide. With pomp, young Prince Charles gave them back on Oct. 10, 1970. But not before the descendants of 60,537 indentured Indian sugar-cane laborers, imported from Calcutta and Madras between 1879 and 1916, had come to outnumber native Fijians, who are mainly ethnic Melanesians.    Fijian chiefs' worries over so many Indians were soothed by wording the constitution of the new parliamentary democracy to prevent Indians from owning land or attaining political power. That worked for 17 years under an Oxford-educated chief, or &quot;ratu,&quot; named Sir Kamisese Mara, and his Fijian-dominated Alliance Party. But Indians, who make up 48.6% of Fiji's 715,000 people and who dominate commerce and the nation's big moneymaker, sugar, didn't give up their quest for political power.    Ethnic Fijians, who constitute 46.2% of the population, held on by counting on an Indian swing vote to side with them and the Europeans and Chinese who make up the rest of the population. But then, last month, Fiji's first multiracial political coalition, made up of Indians and many young Fijians disaffected by the 67-year-old Ratu Mara's crusty regime, won 28 of the 52 seats in Parliament's lower house. Timoci Bavadra, a 52-year-old family-planning specialist with 11 children, became prime minister. An ethnic Fijian, he named a cabinet of six Fijians, including himself, and eight Indians.    That was enough to bring about the insurrection. Lt. Col. Rabuka said he seized power to prevent a violent Fijian backlash. But the 38-year-old officer undercut his own credibility by golfing with Ratu Mara before the coup and appointing him a top adviser immediately after it. Ratu Mara, who befriended the Reagan administration by reversing Fiji's ban on visits by U.S. nuclear ships (as a response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan), claimed the coup wasn't his idea. The Reagan administration, disturbed by Dr. Bavadra's plan to reimpose the ban, claimed it had no part in it, either.    Lt. Col. Rabuka, who wears traditional Fijian skirt and sandals and hardly looks the part of &quot;Rambo Rabuka&quot; (as he is known in the Australian press), suspended the constitution and the governor-general, who represents the queen of England because, at independence, Fiji elected to become a dominion. But the governor-general, a Fijian named Sir Penaia Ganilau, pronounced the coup and the suspensions illegal, and he announced that he was in charge. Lt. Col. Rabuka said OK, noting that the governor-general &quot;doesn't have any way to enforce his power,&quot; and that &quot;I need him for the international community,&quot; which so far hasn't endorsed the coup.    Members of the Great Council of Chiefs, a group of 100-odd traditional Fijian tribal leaders, meanwhile, say in meetings they are having that they want the constitution changed to get rid of its &quot;democratic&quot; elements, since traditional Fijian society wasn't and isn't democratic. One poignant plea was made to translate the constitution into Fijian from English so that some of the elder chiefs can read it.    The governor-general has appointed a 19-member advisory council to help him run the country until the constitution can be reviewed and new elections held, in about six months. But ousted Prime Minister Bavadra says he won't participate since his forces have only two council seats. Indian unions could cripple the economy by refusing to harvest the ripening sugar crop. Tourist cancellations have hurt resort hotels to the point that the Fiji visitors bureau is offering foreign journalists free lodging for two nights in the hope that they will write that all is well in Fiji.    Lt. Col. Rabuka, who retains control of Fiji's military and police muscle, is eloquent about his political future.    &quot;I want to get out, now that I've had an insight into it,&quot; he says. He says he wants to &quot;go back to my village, write a book, work on my doctorate.&quot;    So in a tiny nation that advertises itself as &quot;the way the world should be,&quot; the only certainty as a new week began came from Hamilton, New Zealand, where Fiji's Rugby squad, energized by the &quot;situation&quot; back home, trounced Argentina, 28 to nine. </TEXT></DOC>