<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Better Ways to Allocate Foreign Aid---By Harry J. Shaw</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Secretary of State Shultz is crying wolf in warning of a crisis if Congress cuts the administration's proposed $20 billion foreign-affairs budget for fiscal year 1988.    While it is too early to know how Congress will react, it is clear that given its need to meet the Gramm-Rudman deficit target, Congress is unlikely to approve more than this year's foreign-affairs budget of $17.3 billion and may cut even deeper. The current level is adequate to cover the most urgent needs, but only if Congress and the administration are willing to break loose from political constraints and allocate the limited funds to the most deserving programs.    Last year Congress lopped $4.2 billion off the administration's proposed foreign-affairs budget of $21.5 billion without anything very serious happening. While there were some substantial reductions within the foreign-aid programs that constitute more than three-fourths of the foreign-affairs budget, these cuts were more severe than necessary since neither Congress nor the administration was willing to take the political heat of cutting back the $5.3 billion going to Israel and Egypt.    Congress cut the largest slice -- $2.8 billion -- from security assistance. This includes foreign military sales (FMS) loans, military assistance, economic assistance for security-related purposes, and smaller programs for foreign military training and peace-keeping operations.    The greater part of the $2.8 billion saving, however, is more illusion than reality. While on the face of it Congress cut FMS financing $1.7 billion, this reduction was taken by eliminating $1.8 billion in Treasury-rate financing. Untouched were the $3.9 billion in concessional credits offered at subsidized rates, which are usually 2.5% to 3% below the cost of money to the Treasury.    This is a shell game at the expense of the taxpayer. While the cuts look good in the short run since total outlays are reduced and the budget balance is helped, over the long run deficits will be larger because of lower receipts.    The shift to concessional financing marks a further departure from the economic criteria that should be used to establish a country's need for military aid and the degree of concessionality it receives. This year and under the proposed 1988 budget, for example, Greece and Spain, countries whose economies have in the past been judged strong enough to pay the Treasury rate, will receive concessional loans.    Another worrisome trend is the increasing reliance on grant military aid. This is the most expensive form of military aid and was virtually eliminated during the Carter administration. Yet last year Congress approved $900 million in grant military aid, the highest level since the end of the Vietnam War. For fiscal 1988, the administration is requesting $1.3 billion.    This shift toward grants and concessional loans partly reflects an effort to compensate for reduced FMS financing by offering better terms. The shift also aims to avoid increasing the debt burdens some countries incurred when they took on large FMS loans financed by the Federal Financing Bank at high interest rates. As annual repayments on those loans become a serious burden for some countries, the clamor for debt relief has increased and defaults have dissipated the &quot;Guaranty Reserve Fund&quot; once maintained against such defaults.    Israel has the largest FMS debt burden ($1.1 billion in fiscal 1988) but it is essentially relieved of repayment since it receives economic-supporting assistance in the form of cash aid that is sufficient to cover its payments. Moreover, since payment of all of the $1.8 billion provided annually in new FMS financing is forgiven -- making it, in effect, a grant -- Israel is not building up any new FMS debts.    Egypt, like Israel, is not required to repay its $1.3 billion in new military aid. Only part of its $800 million in economic-supporting assistance, however, is in cash. This means that after meeting $500 million in payments on past military loans, Egypt has little U.S. economic aid left to support its economic development.    The Reagan administration has been searching for a debt-relief formula that would not trigger a general assault on the U.S. Treasury. Outright forgiveness has been rejected as too costly. The administration also rejected refinancing the $18 billion in outstanding FMS loans financed by the Federal Financing Bank because of the risk that it would open the door to refinancing the rest of the bank's $150 billion in outstanding, mostly domestic, loans.    As an alternative, the administration has proposed a &quot;restructuring&quot; of outstanding high-interest FMS loans that would bring interest rates down to the current 7% to 8% range. This proposal would bring near-term relief on interest payments, but the deferred interest would be added to the principal balance and would come due at the end of the payment period in 10 to 20 years. The borrowing countries would then face massive balloon payments that many might not be able to pay.    The administration is also offering countries that can afford to do so the option of pre-paying their high-interest FMS loans. This seems more likely to help the countries least needing relief (such as South Korea, Thailand, Greece and Spain) than those whose debt burdens are the most onerous.    The prospect that some countries will take advantage of the option to pay off their outstanding high-interest loans has near-term advantages for budget estimates. The 1988 budget, for example, assumes that the administration will be able to manage the &quot;restructuring&quot; so that the positive effects of prepayments will override the negative effects of reduced interest payments, giving a positive $26 million. This is in contrast to estimated shortfalls of $770 million in 1987 and $1.7 billion in 1989. Such are the government's ingenious schemes for manipulating deficit estimates.    Of the administration's proposed $20 billion foreign-affairs budget for 1988, $15 billion would go to foreign aid. Of that $15 billion, 38% is for development aid, up from the administration's request of 33% last year. This is due largely to a $435 million increase for multilateral development banks. (Bilateral development aid remains essentially unchanged at $3.3 billion.)    While this shift in favor of development aid appears to reflect a departure from the administration's past emphasis on security-related aid, it is probably more a response to Congress's tendency to cut security assistance more severely. Moreover, while the administration is requesting $1.4 billion less in security aid than last year, the saving is offset by greater concessionality. Outright grants increase from 75% to 85% and all FMS financing is at concessional interest rates.    Under Democratic leadership, Congress is not likely to favor an increase in security aid at the expense of bilateral development aid. The greatest cuts are likely to be made in security assistance and a proposed substantial increase for multilateral development banks -- a proposal that Rep. David Obey (D., Wis.), chairman of the Foreign Operations Subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, said earlier this month &quot;doesn't stand a chance of a snowball in hell.&quot;    Although it is unlikely to increase military grants by nearly 50%, as proposed by the administration, Congress might be tempted to go along with some increase in grants as well as greater concessionality in FMS loans, especially if the outlay effects can be masked by prepayments of past FMS loans.    But greater concessionality is a move in the direction of higher costs and prolonged dependency -- exactly the wrong direction for our security-assistance program. Instead, Congress should hold the line by rejecting any increase in security assistance, especially in grants, and by requiring that concessional FMS financing be offered only where economic criteria justify it.    Lacking any broad consensus on the purposes of foreign aid and unwilling to take on domestic supporters of key recipients such as Israel, Egypt and Greece, Congress is unlikely to give the administration much leeway in allocating the available funds. If, as seems all too likely, Congress cuts foreign aid again while maintaining current earmarks, it will further distort a program in which aid to Israel and Egypt equals U.S. bilateral and multilateral aid to the rest of the world.    But this is to be expected of a foreign-aid program that lacks a coherent rationale and is largely devoted to satisfying the efforts of special interests to protect the aid levels of a few favored countries. While congressional pressures on overall aid levels, coming largely from the budget and appropriations committees, have forced some overdue cuts, few knowledgeable persons in either the administration or Congress would argue that the resulting program represents a sound allocation of the limited resources available. Little is likely to be done about this in the dying years of the Reagan administration. But it is not too soon for Congress to initiate a comprehensive, critical reappraisal of foreign aid.    ---   Mr. Shaw, who teaches international law at George Washington University, was chief of the military-assistance branch of the Office of Management and Budget from 1967 to 1980. </TEXT></DOC>