<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Heart of Health Insurance Is at Risk---By Douglas L. Hallett</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   The property and casualty insurance industry came under unprecedented public scrutiny last year. This year may be the turn of the life and health industry, in part because of the negative attention AIDS has drawn to the risk classifications insurers use to evaluate applicants.    Revenue-hungry congressmen look longingly at the industry's tax-exempt &quot;inside buildup&quot; of investment income. In the wake of the Ivan Boesky scandal on Wall Street, state regulators want to clamp down on the investment by insurers in so-called junk bonds. Even the Reagan administration now thinks the industry cannot respond adequately to the nation's catastrophic health-care needs and wants to do away with the industry's traditional immunity from antitrust law.    But these are merely symptoms of a much deeper dissatisfaction. A recent poll by the American Council of Life Insurance shows that the heart of the private insurance system -- risk classification -- is really at stake. The percentage of the public that supports risk classification has dropped to 35% from 57% in 1979. Some 46% now believe any risk classification at all is unfair.    Richard Schweiker, the council's president, views the survey &quot;as a warning that we're in trouble. The public is defining acceptable risk-classification procedure right under our noses. In effect, {it is} taking this underwriting tool away from us.&quot;    The long-term cost of eliminating risk classification, industry executives say, would be society's ability to account accurately for the health risks it undertakes. Incentives to reduce risk would decline, and the cost of health care for everyone would rise.    The focal point of the current attack is the life and health insurance industry's use of testing in underwriting against acquired immune deficiency syndrome. California, Washington, D.C., and Wisconsin have already banned the use of some or all AIDS testing by insurers. New York, Florida, Massachusetts and other states appear likely to take similar action this year.    Even the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), the governing body of state insurance regulators, ducked the issue at its recent meeting in Orlando, Fla. In issuing new guidelines on AIDS, the regulatory panel said weakly that any state permitting AIDS testing should also permit insurers to question applicants on prior test results, but that those states that ban such testing should not allow inquiries into past results.    Industry critics score some good points about AIDS underwriting practices. One insurer, for example, issued a general bulletin to its agents a little more than a year ago warning them against insuring &quot;restaurant employees, antique dealers, interior decorators, consultants, florists and people in the jewelry or fashion business.&quot; The insurance industry, however, has squarely addressed that kind of discrimination. The new NAIC guidelines ban questions aimed at determining an applicant's sexual orientation or even using such information in the underwriting process.    Perhaps as significant, the new guidelines were developed by an industry-consumer advisory panel including representatives from the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force and National Gay Rights Advocates. In addition to dealing with underwriting issues, the panel forthrightly addressed other issues related to the AIDS epidemic, including confidentiality of medical records and availability of alternative health insurance for people with catastrophic diseases such as AIDS.    Nobody really questions the reliability of AIDS testing as an indicator of whether a person has been exposed to the disease. Insurers who employ AIDS testing in their underwriting generally use a series of tests that has been found to be nearly totally reliable in confirming whether a person has been exposed to the AIDS virus.    There is no similar agreement, however, regarding the likelihood of those carrying the virus actually developing the disease. Recent studies published by the Centers for Disease Control indicated that more people testing positive will come down with the disease than had been earlier thought. A report published last summer estimated 20% to 30%. Others predict even higher percentages. The National Academy of Sciences now projects 50%.    With those kinds of statistics, AIDS testing is clearly a valid underwriting tool. Many underwriting criteria used by insurers to rate risk -- and accepted by society until recently -- involve correlations far less serious than a 20% to 30% certainty of developing a disease that, with equal certainty, will result in death after what is conservatively estimated to be at least $50,000 to $75,000 in medical costs. The extra mortality for smokers is 200% of normal; for those exposed to AIDS, it is now calculated at 2,600%.    But the critics insist that AIDS is different. Other underwriting criteria employed by insurers lead to &quot;rating&quot; a risk, not certain denial of coverage at any cost. This is true enough in the case of initial applications for individual insurance -- so what?    By what logic should the cost of caring for AIDS victims be borne involuntarily by the policyholders and stockholders of companies effectively forced to provide them with insurance? Group health insurance -- which covers 90% of the insured American public -- generally employs health underwriting only in the case of &quot;late entrants,&quot; those who do not sign up when they are first employed or when a plan takes effect. Insurance critics rarely point out that the industry is therefore already assuming the risk of AIDS in 90% of the market without any underwriting.    Ten states already sponsor high-risk health-insurance plans -- with premiums ranging from 125% to 400% of standard rates (150% on average) -- that cover AIDS victims. Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Co., which has perhaps the most experience with AIDS of any insurer, has proposed the creation of an industrywide pool to pay AIDS claims after they hit an agreed-upon ceiling. The aim is to spread the cost of responding to the AIDS crisis throughout the health-insurance industry. Undoubtedly other methods will be developed as the AIDS epidemic spreads.    But such measures should never include elimination of the insurers' traditional ability to rate risk. The highly regulated property and casualty insurance industry was caught unprepared by the liability insurance crises of the past two years. One reason was that product competition that might have avoided the present spiral of price hikes and pricing controls was actively discouraged. Many good risks therefore went overseas for their insurance and many bad risks now go uninsured.    In sharp contrast, the relatively unregulated life and health insurance industry has developed an ever-expanding array of products -- group insurance, health maintenance organizations, preferred provider organizations, investment-oriented life insurance -- that have creatively met public needs, including the needs of most AIDS patients. The only difference up until now is that the life and health industry has been left alone to do what it does best -- rate and underwrite risk. If we don't want a repeat of what has happened on the liability side of the insurance industry, it should still be left alone.    ---   Mr. Hallett is a partner in the Los Angeles office of Coudert Brothers specializing in insurance regulation. </TEXT></DOC>