<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880713-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Jackson in '96: How He Can Prep For the Presidency </HL><AUTHOR> Brad J. Sherman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   For months, political pundits have bored us with the same question: &quot;What Does Jesse Jackson Want?&quot; The answer is obvious to anyone who has bothered to listen to Mr. Jackson: He wants to be president. And since the 46-year-old won't be elected president in the '80s, it is safe to assume he wants to be elected in the '90s. The question facing Mr. Jackson is how to get from here to there. The question facing Mr. Dukakis is what he can afford to give Mr. Jackson, and whether it is enough given Mr. Jackson's long-term objective.    During the past three decades, no one who has served as vice president has been denied his party's presidential nomination. While vice presidents often have difficulty establishing their own identities, this hardly would have been a problem for Mr. Jackson, the only figure on today's scene whose identity is too strong for his own political good. Mr. Dukakis was unable to give the nomination to Mr. Jackson without impairing his own chances in November, but he did select a running mate too old to compete with Mr. Jackson in the 1990s. Sen. Lloyd Bentsen will turn 75 in 1996.    But the absence of well-known competition will not be enough to secure the nomination for Mr. Jackson in the 1990s. He also must overcome these obstacles that plagued him in 1988: He has little managerial or government experience and has never held public office. He now stands further to the left than any serious candidate for the presidency, and his race, membership in the clergy, and oratorical skills only serve to make his views more frightening to Middle America.    Some have suggested that Mr. Jackson prepare for the presidency by seeking lower elective office. Gov. Jesse Jackson or Sen. Jesse Jackson would be a more formidable candidate for the White House than the Rev. Jesse Jackson. But it is tough to find a state where he could win the governorship or a Senate seat. Mr. Jackson could be elected to the House in 1990, but he would exercise too little power there to enhance his presidential chances. So how about Secretary Jesse Jackson?    Not just any cabinet post will do. Presidential candidate Jackson needs a post that offers high visibility and a chance to use his oratorical skills; an opportunity to develop and display managerial competence; a chance to develop recognized experience in international affairs -- not by acting as a private citizen, but as a government official. From Mr. Jackson's standpoint the perfect cabinet posts are secretary of state and Treasury. But Mr. Dukakis is unlikely to award these posts to someone of Mr. Jackson's currently meager qualifications. U.S. trade representative and U.N. ambassador are both possibilities, but neither of these &quot;cabinet-level&quot; posts enjoys a level of authority consistent with Mr. Jackson's goals.    The minimum Mr. Jackson needs, and the maximum Mr. Dukakis can offer, might take the form of a new cabinet post: Secretary of Drug Enforcement and Education. If Mr. Dukakis really needs Mr. Jackson's help this fall, the new department could include the Customs Service and Coast Guard, along with agencies that deal exclusively with drug problems. Imagine these news stories circa 1989-95:   --Secretary Jackson flew to Bogota today to arrange the extradition of three druglords.    --Secretary Jackson announced today the largest seizure of drugs in the history of the DEA.    --Yesterday Secretary Jackson gave an anti-drug speech to junior high school students in Cleveland that was carried via satellite to more than 400,000 students nationwide.    --Long-time Jackson confidants Ron Dellums and Ann Lewis today urged Secretary Jackson to speak out against recent Dukakis administration policies. He said he would instead fight inside the administration for &quot;progressive alternatives.&quot;    --Secretary Jackson announced new procurement regulations for the Coast Guard that he said could serve as a model for the other armed services.    --Secretary Jackson began an international negotiating tour today. He will discuss drug eradication programs with the leaders of Turkey, the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India and China.    --High-level sources indicated President Dukakis would soon reshuffle his cabinet in preparation for the 1992 election and, he hopes, his second term in office. Rumors circulated that Secretary Jackson, fresh from negotiations with Asian leaders, may take over as secretary of state.    --As expected, Secretary Jackson announced that he would resign his cabinet post in October 1995 to seek the Democratic presidential nomination.    This road to the White House is long and treacherous. For starters, Michael Dukakis may lose in November, thus making much of the scenario moot. Mr. Jackson would lose, too, if Democrats blamed their loss on his failure to campaign enthusiastically this fall for the Dukakis ticket.    Given a Democratic win in November, it would not be easy for Mr. Jackson to be a &quot;team-player&quot; in a Dukakis administration. Mr. Jackson might have to support policies opposed by his most fervent supporters. No matter what cabinet post Mr. Jackson might hold, he would be the focus of media attention, including that of a small army of investigative reporters seeking waste, fraud or abuse in his department. Even if Mr. Jackson won high praise for service in a Dukakis administration, he should expect tough fights for the nomination, and in the general election.    I don't know if Jesse Jackson ever dreamed of being president while growing up poor and black in South Carolina. I do know he never dreamed it would be easy or quick. I hope Mr. Jackson will forgive me if I assume that he is willing to &quot;wait another eight,&quot; while keeping his &quot;eyes on the prize.&quot;    ---   Mr. Sherman, an early Dukakis supporter, is a Los Angeles attorney and former member of the California State Democratic Central Committee. </TEXT></DOC>