<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870220-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Iran-Contra Scandal Makes It Difficult for BushTo Overcome in '88 the Curse of Vice Presidents---By Ellen Hume and Jane MayerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Vice President George Bush isn't so much seeking to capture the 1988 Republican presidential nomination as to corner it.    Already, he has lined up much of the GOP establishment. He raised $9.3 million and stumped for 308 candidates in 1986, and personally talked to 50 winners and losers within 24 hours of the election. He also has managed to hold on to support from such moderate Republicans as Florida Gov. Bob Martinez and Iowa Rep. Jim Leach, while remaining acceptable to conservatives like the Rev. Jerry Falwell and former Sen. Barry Goldwater.    Yet Mr. Bush still faces two serious problems, one of them 150 years old, the other quite new.    First, no incumbent vice president has won the presidency since Martin Van Buren was elected to succeed Andrew Jackson in 1836. &quot;The vice presidency is an office of political dependency, which makes it extremely difficult to establish one's own political identity,&quot; says Richard Moe, who was Walter Mondale's vice presidential chief of staff.    Second, the Iran-Contra scandal has damaged the Reagan presidency and raised questions in many minds about the vice president's involvement. The scandal puts Mr. Bush in a thoroughly uncomfortable position: Either he was kept ignorant of the dealings, which undercuts his claim to be an integral part of the administration, or he knew what was going on and didn't put a stop to it. Either way, Mr. Bush loses.    All of this has unsettled the vice president's principal argument: the inevitablity of his nomination. As he faces the first crisis of his 1988 quest, Mr. Bush's ability to walk a tightrope is being tested earlier than expected.    The vice president's precarious position was illustrated on a trip to the Midwest last week. Never known for his political daring, Mr. Bush nonetheless tried to put at least a little distance between himself and the Iran mess. Even some of his aides were surprised when, at a Lansing, Mich., news conference, he disclosed that he had &quot;expressed reservations&quot; about the Iran arms policy to &quot;key players&quot; in the administration as the policy unfolded. Previously, he had scrupulously supported the president's position and avoided saying what he personally thought.    Mr. Bush's performance generated mixed reviews, even among his own staff. Already, some Bush aides have concluded that his statements could undercut the image of loyalty to the president that he has worked so hard to build and maintain. He isn't likely now to make more comments overtly separating himself from the president, aides say.    Just as he must juggle positions on Iran, Mr. Bush also must juggle support from the disparate elements within the Republican Party. Despite his assiduous courting of conservatives, he stirred their ire by failing to address the Conservative Political Action Committee conference in Washington this week. The vice president's aides claim a scheduling conflict, but in any event they note that he has recently addressed a number of other conservative groups, including religious broadcasters.    At the same time, his aides are well aware that they can't afford to alienate the more moderate conservatives who made up the base of Mr. Bush's support during his 1980 presidential run. &quot;It's always a difficulty,&quot; says Peter Teeley, a longtime Bush adviser. &quot;It has to be overcome if anybody's going to be nominated. But it's a question not just for Bush but for Dole or Kemp or anybody else.&quot;    If Mr. Bush is to fend off those other candidates, though, many of his GOP supporters are telling him that he must sharply identify himself as a leader in his own right. &quot;He has to develop his own thought processes, his own programs,&quot; says Peter Secchia, a Bush campaign cochairman in Michigan.    This spring, Mr. Bush plans to lay out what are likely to be his campaign themes -- on such issues as education, agriculture, competitiveness and arms control -- in a series of commencement speeches in key areas such as Iowa, New Hampshire and the South. But aides expect those speeches will be more important in setting a tone than in outlining specific positions. Moreover, they insist that the vice president doesn't have any big game plan for taking on the other GOP contenders.    Instead, they say, he is concentrating on building up his campaign organization state by state, hiring much of the Republican campaign establishment. &quot;You will see that we have grabbed most of the former Reagan-Bush political network types,&quot; says James Pinkerton, a Bush campaign staff member.    The emphasis on organization over ideology is, Bush aides acknowledge, a very cautious one, based largely on their long-held notion that he is the favorite to win the nomination. But as every day passes without an end to the Iran scandal, the risks of that strategy grow more apparent. L. Brooks Patterson, another Bush cochairman in Michigan, says some of the vice president's backers there are wavering and &quot;taking a wait-and-see attitude&quot; about the Iran affair.    Bush campaign manager Lee Atwater says that there is &quot;no big magic strategy&quot; to handle the Iran crisis or develop a separate image from President Reagan. When asked specific questions, Mr. Bush plays down his part in the Iran policy; trying to relegate the Iran issue to the past, he blames the National Security Council staff for failing to follow procedures and stresses that the NSC has been reformed now.    Essentially, however, his forces are handling the Iran problem in the same way the president is -- by saying as little as possible, except to express confidence that the investigators' reports will clear both Mr. Bush and the president. Publicly and privately, Mr. Bush's strategists act as if they believe the Iran crisis will eventually fade away, supplanted by new foreign policy issues in the coming months. They concede that the controversy has hurt Mr. Bush, but they argue that the Senate Intelligence Committee report portrayed him as a marginal player, and expect the Tower Commission will as well.    But whether this will satisfy voters remains far from clear. Indeed, many Bush backers suggest that Mr. Bush won't be able to put the scandal behind him until the president does. &quot;If Reagan's in trouble on Iran then Bush is in trouble on Iran,&quot; says Mr. Secchia, the Michigan co-chairman. The vice president, adds his chief of staff, Craig Fuller, &quot;has always said that when things go well for the president, he benefits more than most. And when things go wrong, he suffers more than some.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>