<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870526-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Zealous Prosecutor:Robert Merkle CourtsTrouble but Holds OnTo U.S. Attorney Post---Florida's Governor Is AmongHis Enemies: His AttacksAntagonize Officeholders---Reprieved by Carlos Lehder---By Michael AllenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> TAMPA, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When a caller to a local radio talk show asked Robert M. &quot;Mad Dog&quot; Merkle if he was planning to run for office, the beleaguered U.S. attorney didn't miss a beat. &quot;Ma'am,&quot; he replied dolefully, &quot;the only thing I'm running for these days is cover.&quot;    Indeed, the burly, 42-year-old Mr. Merkle is one of the most controversial figures in Florida. He may well be the most controversial U.S. attorney in the nation.    Mr. Merkle is in the limelight again, as the prosecutor of one of the biggest drug cases ever: the trial of Carlos Lehder, the Colombian believed to be a kingpin of the world cocaine trade. He is charged with several counts of smuggling cocaine into the U.S. That trial, due to begin in September in Jacksonville, ironically is bringing Mr. Merkle a welcome respite from the storm that usually rages around him.    In Mr. Merkle's five years in office, three campaigns have been waged to have him removed -- the latest headed by Florida's recently inaugurated governor, Bob Martinez, who, like Mr. Merkle, is a Republican. Florida's two U.S. senators, both Democrats, have openly criticized the prosecutor. Two-thirds of Florida's sheriffs recently approved a resolution calling for his ouster. Ed Austin, a veteran state prosecutor in Jacksonville, has called Mr. Merkle a &quot;reincarnation of Joe McCarthy.&quot; The mainstream Tampa Tribune and the liberal St. Petersburg Times both repeatedly have bashed him in editorials for his performance as the top federal prosecutor in the Middle District of Florida.    &quot;We urge the Justice Department, respectfully but urgently, to get Merkle out of here,&quot; the Tribune said in an editorial accusing him of recklessly smearing innocent people in his zeal to stamp out public corruption.    But it became apparent that Mr. Merkle also has a lot of friends when Gov. Martinez last January kicked off the latest ouster effort by asking the White House to replace him. A Tampa citizens group flooded the Justice Department with pro-Merkle petitions bearing thousands of names. &quot;To my knowledge, we've never before had a public write-in campaign in support of, or against, a U.S. attorney,&quot; says John Russell, a Justice Department spokesman.    The support partly reflects Mr. Merkle's role as a tireless crusader against drug abuse and child pornography and as an outspoken opponent of abortion. Those stands, consistent with his background as a devout Roman Catholic and father of nine children, strike a sympathetic chord with many conservatives in his 32-county district. But the support also reflects the public popularity of the very issue that has made him the bane of politicians: his crusade against public corruption.    Since 1982, his office has obtained indictments of three sitting state representatives, two judges, six county commissioners, three prosecutors, a sheriff, two deputies, more than three dozen attorneys and bankers, two federal agents and 17 postal workers. Most were convicted, although a few highly publicized acquittals raised howls of protest against Mr. Merkle. And a three-year investigation of E.J. Salcines, a prominent Tampa Democrat and former Hillsborough County state attorney, became a rallying point for Mr. Merkle's critics. Mr. Salcines was never indicted, but the investigation did contribute to his only election defeat.    Mr. Merkle, says Barry Cohen, Mr. Salcines's attorney, &quot;is emotionally unstable, and he's totally obsessed with his power.&quot; The St. Petersburg Times charged in an editorial earlier this year: &quot;In Merkle's paranoid fantasy, he is Central Florida's sole repository of honesty and character.&quot;    Mr. Merkle counters that much of the criticism is politically motivated, or orchestrated by the defense bar to undermine his credibility in court. He particularly resents comparisons with the late Sen. McCarthy, whose hunt for Communists in the 1950s ruined dozens of reputations. &quot;Who's calling whom McCarthylike?&quot; Mr. Merkle says in his dingy Jacksonville office. &quot;I've been called arrogant, abusive,&quot; he says, lighting up one of the cigarettes he smokes one after another. &quot;I've been accused of things no self-respecting Communist would be caught dead doing.&quot;    Scattered on his desk, next to the battered imitation leather briefcase he totes everywhere and several used Styrofoam coffee cups, are loose papers on which he has scribbled statistics. He says the numbers constitute his own best defense: In five years, he has more than doubled the number of criminal cases filed in his 32-county district, to 863 from 388, while raising his office's overall conviction rate to 83%, from 67% before he took over. &quot;I could be a country-club U.S. attorney,&quot; he says. &quot;But that's just not my style.&quot;    At times, Mr. Merkle, an erudite man who laces his conversation with quotes from Voltaire, Shakespeare and Oscar Wilde, actually seems to revel in his reputation. In a speech here before an animated crowd of local journalists, the 6-foot-2-inch former Notre Dame running back jokingly invited the audience to his house for hamburgers &quot;and a game of kick the dog.&quot; In &quot;a parody of myself,&quot; he says, he began another speech by donning an executioner's hood and dangling a noose over the podium.    &quot;He has made more enemies than most prosecutors,&quot; says Steven L. Winter, a criminal-law professor at the University of Miami Law School. &quot;In most other places, people don't even know who their U.S. attorney is.&quot;    One reason is his penchant for tangling with elected officials, both in and out of the courtroom. &quot;Plain and ordinary criminality, I think, doesn't interest Bob,&quot; says Lee Atkinson, who headed Mr. Merkle's narcotics division until 1985. &quot;It's almost like a compulsion with him to bring down the high and mighty.&quot; (Mr. Merkle disputes those assertions.)    Last year, when a reporter asked Gov. Bob Graham, who had just been elected to the Senate, what he expected to do about Mr. Merkle, Mr. Graham said that as a senator he expected to be part of an inquiry into Mr. Merkle's office. Mr. Merkle shot back with a scathing letter to the governor that quickly found its way to the press. &quot;Not surprisingly, your concerns once again sound of politics,&quot; he wrote. Referring to an earlier skirmish with Gov. Graham over the investigation of Mr. Salcines, Mr. Merkle added: &quot;I was embarrassed for you and for your public confirmation of the ways of Florida politics.&quot;    Then, Mr. Merkle wrote that Florida's longtime senator, Lawton Chiles, in a private meeting in 1982, had advised him to ignore rumors of corruption in Hillsborough County. Sen. Chiles, through a spokesman, denies that.    Mr. Merkle's most talked about confrontation with a political figure was in January, when Floridians were treated to the extraordinary spectacle of their new governor, Mr. Martinez, on the witness stand, defending himself against another witness's unproved allegations of bribery. In many ways, the clash captured the essence of the Merkle controversy.    The defendant in the trial was Nelson Italiano, a politically influential Tampa businessman, who prosecutors said paid corrupt county commissioners $15,000 in bribes to win a county cable-television franchise for a client. But that allegation was quickly overshadowed by startling testimony from a former bus driver named Eddie Perdomo, who claimed to have funneled $5,000 in illegal contributions from Mr. Italiano to Mr. Martinez for his successful 1979 mayoral campaign, in a failed bid to gain the city franchise as well.    Although the governor was never charged with a crime, the Italiano trial quickly became, for many, the trial of Gov. Martinez. For five hours, over the course of two days, Mr. Merkle interrogated the governor about his dealings with Mr. Perdomo, a boyhood acquaintance. Gov. Martinez denied any misdeeds and lashed out at the prosecutor from the witness stand. &quot;I don't like abuse,&quot; the governor snapped. He charged the prosecutor hadn't &quot;dealt properly&quot; with him.    Mr. Merkle's critics wondered why the Perdomo testimony was introduced at all, since the charges against Mr. Italiano involved an alleged bribe to the county government, not to the city.    But to his admirers, the clash demonstrated Mr. Merkle's courage and unwillingness to bend before political pressure. Mr. Merkle is quick to point out that the district's chief federal judge admitted Mr. Perdomo's testimony, accepting the government's contention that it was an important part of the case. Mr. Merkle adds that it wasn't he, but, rather, Mr. Italiano's attorney, who called the governor to testify. &quot;I did it exactly by the book,&quot; he says.    Four days after the courtroom encounter, Gov. Martinez launched his effort to dislodge the U.S. attorney.    Even though the subsequent conviction of Mr. Italiano allowed Mr. Merkle to claim another victory, the attack on Mr. Merkle by an incumbent governor could be a serious threat. The prosecutor's four-year term ran out a year ago, so he is serving at the pleasure of President Reagan. Thus, when Gov. Martinez called the White House Jan. 13 to request Mr. Merkle's removal, many thought his days were numbered.    But then, on Feb. 4, came the dramatic capture of Mr. Lehder in his Colombian jungle hide-out. Colombian authorities had on file an extradition request that Mr. Merkle had made during a secret visit to the country in 1983, and within hours of Mr. Lehder's capture the fugitive was on a plane to Tampa. Mr. Merkle promptly assigned himself the Lehder case.    &quot;This is just not the time to be making political moves when as big a drug case as this is being handled by Bob Merkle,&quot; says Republican Congressman C.W. &quot;Bill&quot; Young. He says Gov. Martinez agreed to a truce until after the trial, which is scheduled to begin Sept. 8. Gov. Martinez, who in recent weeks has refrained from making public statements on Mr. Merkle, declined to comment for this article. But his chief political aide, J.M. &quot;Mac&quot; Stipanovich, suggests the governor is no longer actively pursuing the ouster attempt. &quot;We're comforted by the fact that {Mr. Merkle} cannot survive more than 20 months,&quot; that is, beyond Mr. Reagan's presidency. Mr. Stipanovich adds: &quot;He's a dangerous man . . . but we've got other things to concern ourselves with.&quot;    When Mr. Merkle first arrived in the Tampa Bay area in 1977, there was little hint of the controversy to come. After a career in the Justice Department's anti-terrorism unit in Washington -- where he worked on cases against such militant groups as the Weathermen and the Black Panthers -- he took a $10,000 pay cut to go to work for the state attorney's office in Pinellas County, across the bay from Tampa, so he could spend more time in the courtroom.    There, he impressed his colleagues with his tenacity and courtroom flair. &quot;He's two cuts better than anybody I've ever seen,&quot; says Clearwater, Fla., Circuit Court Judge Fred L. Bryson. After successfully prosecuting a manslaughter case nobody else wanted -- against the son of a lieutenant in the local sheriff's office -- Mr. Merkle was given the nickname &quot;Mad Dog&quot; by his fellow prosecutors. During his four years there, he never lost a case that he led.    In 1982, he was named U.S. attorney -- and praised by many as just the person needed to fight corruption in Tampa. In less than a year, he had his first big break, as Federal Bureau of Investigation agents, working with an informant, arrested three county commissioners and led them in handcuffs from their offices. Mr. Merkle convened a special grand jury, which eventually handed up 43 indictments.    Most of 170 defendants in these cases were convicted -- including a corrupt majority of the county commission. A handful, however, were acquitted. One case was dismissed by the judge before it went to trial. And Mr. Merkle's biggest case -- a six-month bribery trial led by his chief assistant in which the prosecution alleged that the county commission was little more than a racketeering enterprise -- became his biggest fiasco, when all but four of 15 defendants were acquitted last summer. Commissioners had been accused of soliciting and accepting bribes relating to zoning permits, liquor licenses and barrow permits. And Mr. Merkle argues that, despite the acquittals, the trial &quot;proved what a sordid pit that commission was.&quot;    By the time the verdict was rendered in the first of the cases, however, he had lost much of the good will that had greeted his arrival. Newspapers that had backed him were calling for his removal. A running feud had developed with district FBI agents, many of whom criticize him privately as too aggressive. And state law-enforcement officials were complaining openly that they couldn't do their jobs because Mr. Merkle was so busy investigating them. &quot;Merkle acted like he invented integrity,&quot; said Mr. Austin, the state attorney in Jacksonville, whose own top assistant was indicted on conspiracy and mail-fraud charges and subsequently cleared.    Mr. Merkle has been embarrassed by the defection of several prominent staffers -- assistant U.S. attorneys -- who found him hard to work for. &quot;It generally takes him 10 to 30 seconds to make up his mind in a discussion,&quot; says a former associate. &quot;And if you disagree, you're incompetent, or worse, corrupt.&quot;    Mr. Merkle says he isn't nearly as intense as his critics claim. As if to prove that, he hauled out his guitar at a charity benefit last year, delighting the crowd with his comic ballads. Recently, he recorded one of his favorites.    One overcast day in Jacksonville, he takes a drive in a rented car -- which he trades for a new one every few days in order to elude possible attack from Carlos Lehder's henchmen -- and turns on the cassette player to hear himself sing an old Country and Western tune to which he has added new lyrics:    &quot;My heroes have always been lawyers/ And they still are, it seems/ Sadly in search of, and one step in back of/ Themselves and their slow-moving schemes.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>