<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870330-0009 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THATCHER CALLED for religious freedom in the Soviet Union.    The British prime minister, following a Mass in a monastery in the Soviet city of Zagorsk, also expressed hope that &quot;those people imprisoned for their faith will be freed.&quot; Thatcher, on a five-day official visit to the Soviet Union, is to begin talks with Gorbachev and other officials today. An aide said she will press for verifiable arms-control accords, with the priority on eliminating midrange weapons from Europe. Thatcher also is expected to raise human-rights issues.    The Soviet Union announced that it will experiment with multiple-candidate ballots for local governments in selected districts during June 21 elections.    ---   GREEKS RALLIED in support of the government in a standoff with Turkey.    As Greece's showdown with Turkey over oil-drilling rights in the Aegean Sea eased, civil servants canceled strikes planned for today, and the Greek Orthodox Church, battling Athens for control of church-owned lands, said it would halt protests. Turkey withdrew an oil-prospecting ship from the disputed waters Saturday, and Greece gave assurances that it wouldn't start drilling in the area. The dispute over the waters is far from settled, however.    Papandreou, who is expected to step up anti-U.S. rhetoric following the weekend face-off, had threatened to close U.S. military bases in Greece.    ---   Israel said air force officer Aviem Sella, charged in the U.S. with hiring American spy Jonathan Pollard, resigned as commander of an important Israeli air base. Defense Minister Rabin approved the resignation. Sella said he was stepping down because of his &quot;concern for the future of relations&quot; between the U.S. and Israel.    ---   Chirac is expected to tell Americans this week that he will bolster free-market economic policies. The French premier, interviewed by The Wall Street Journal, also is expected to tell Reagan that he is concerned the U.S. might be moving too fast in arms accords with Moscow to the detriment of Western Europe.    ---   The U.S. surgeon general predicted that an effective AIDS vaccine probably wouldn't be available during this century. C. Everett Koop, in a CBS-TV interview, again urged that pregnant women who test positive for AIDS be given abortion counseling.    ---   Congress is preparing to vote this week on whether to override Reagan's veto of an $87.5 billion highway and mass transit bill, with a battle expected in the Senate. Reagan vetoed the measure Friday, saying it was a budget-buster.    ---   Lech Walesa said Poland is &quot;sitting on a powder keg&quot; because of newly imposed increases in food and gas prices. The founder of the outlawed Solidarity union, however, stopped short of calling for immediate protests. Under the increases, food prices rose an average 9.6% and gasoline 25%.    ---   Venezuela said special agents had arrested Italian neo-fascist Stefano Delle Chiaie, an explosives expert charged in a 1980 train bombing in Bologna that killed more than 85 people. Delle Chiaie, a fugitive for 17 years, will be deported to Italy today, Caracas's interior minister said.    ---   Italy's parliamentary speaker said the country's political parties &quot;have taken very rigid positions&quot; and appear unwilling to resolve a deadlock over forming a new coalition following Premier Craxi's March 3 resignation. The speaker, Nilde Iotti, is the first Communist and first woman to be asked to form a new Italian government.    ---   Bonn plans to expel a Lebanese hijack suspect, wanted by the U.S. in connection with a 1985 TWA hijacking, in an attempt to win the release of two West Germans held hostage in Beirut, the newspaper Bild said. The West German government reportedly also plans to expel the suspect's brother.    ---   Philippine President Aquino endorsed unarmed anti-communist citizens' groups and blamed extremists on both the left and right for national instability. Throughout the country, the armed forces remained on full combat alert to guard against possible attacks by the communist New People's Army on the 18th anniversary of its founding.    ---   Haitians voted for a new constitution in preparation for presidential elections scheduled for Nov. 7. While the referendum's results aren't expected for two weeks, interviews at polling stations indicated that the charter, which paves the way for a democratically elected government, received overwhelming approval.    ---   A Libyan military helicopter landed in Egypt's western desert and its three crew members requested political asylum. It was the second time this month that a Libyan aircraft crew sought refuge in Egypt.    A draft congressional report found that technical problems continue to plague two multibillion-dollar weapons systems that soon could be in production. The weapons, the Army's Aquila remotely piloted vehicle and the Air Force's advanced mediumrange air-to-air missile, are among 20 reviewed by the GAO.    ---   Iraqi warplanes crossed the border into Iran, bombing an oil field, pipelines and a &quot;large military ship&quot; in the Persian Gulf, state radio in Baghdad said. A military communique from Tehran said Iranian gunners downed one of the Iraqi jets.    ---   South African police said the country's environmental affairs minister was found shot to death in his home south of Cape Town, apparently a suicide. In Natal province, 19 Zulu tribesmen were killed in a clash between rival clans. The cause of the violence wasn't known, officials said.    ---   Lawyers for an accused Nazi guard told Israel's supreme court that the three-judge panel presiding over the trial of retired U.S. auto worker John Demjanjuk was biased and asked for its dismissal. Demjanjuk is accused of killing thousands of people at the Treblinka concentration camp. The high court said it would review the arguments. </TEXT></DOC>