<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0112 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Report From the Commissioners</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GENEPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;We now know that in more than 85% of heart attacks, the precipitating event is a blood clot. . . . There is now powerful evidence that jeopardized heart tissue can be saved by reopening blocked coronary arteries within the first two to three hours after the onset of heart attack. If specialized treatment begins early enough, a heart attack can sometimes be aborted entirely, with little or no lasting damage. . . .&quot;    &quot;On the horizon . . . is an even newer thrombolytic agent that not only appears to be more effective than streptokinase, but may also produce fewer side effects. Recombinant tissue-plasminogen activator is a genetically engineered version of a clotbusting chemical normally produced in minute quantities by the body. Because )TPAe is a cloned natural product, it's less likely than streptokinase to cause adverse reactions. And because its action is more precise than streptokinase's, there's less chance of bleeding throughout the body. Furthermore, in a recent national trial, )TPAe proved to be almost twice as effective as intravenous streptokinase in restoring blood flow through blocked arteries.    &quot;Right now )TPAe is still an experimental drug, available in a few dozen research centers. But approval from the Food and Drug Administration is expected soon, and within the next year or two it will probably become the standard front-line treatment for heart attack.&quot;    These words were written last January for the lay magazine Being Well by two authors, one a prominent cardiologist. They reflected the understanding most physicians have held for nearly two years, since publication in the peer review journals of experiments with TPA, a genetically engineered drug developed by Genentech. One of the authors, Dr. Craig Pratt of the Baylor College of Medicine, happened also to be a member of the panel of outside experts convened by the FDA on May 29 to recommend whether to approve TPA. Like most of the panel, Dr. Pratt voted no. Asked to explain the discrepancy between his article and his vote, Dr. Pratt through a spokeswoman directed all inquiries to the FDA.    We relate this anecdote because in the letters column this morning, eight former high officials of the Food and Drug Administration take issue with our position on the agency's handling of the drug. In particular, the former commissioners object to our &quot;ad hominem&quot; attack on Dr. Robert Temple, director of the Office of Drugs, which convened the May 29 panel. Our complaint was not against the man but against the bureaucratic system he presides over. Dr. Temple and his staff, though public employees, appear to have achieved a level of nonstatutory independence from review and public criticism that the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board might admire. By the way, some 1,300 Americans die daily of heart attacks.    Now, both the scientific and financial communities recognize that the May 29 decision was absurd and wrongheaded, but the prevailing wisdom is that it's all Genentech's fault. The company, the argument runs, should have anticipated and produced the kind of numbers that appeal to the Office of Drugs people. Worse, Genentech's presenters treated the advisory panel's questions condescendingly. In other words, the the drug-approval process less resembles science than it does a 15th-century system of court patronage and obeisances.    In fact, even without the FDA, the United States has a pretty good system of scientific confirmation. It is called the medical literature, a system on which Dr. Pratt no doubt based his positive January assessment. In April 1985 the New England Journal of Medicine presented the evidence of TPA's efficacy in helping victims of acute myocardial infarction in a report on the National Institute of Health's 13-center TIMI trials. Following the New England Journal article, elaboration and confirmation of the efficacy of thrombolytic therapy (dissolving clots) appeared regularly in Lancet, the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, Circulation, Hospital Practice, Thrombosis and Haemostasis, and in the Annals of Internal Medicine. The efficacy of thrombolysis has been fully aired and described at numerous medical meetings. Yet the FDA panel told Genentech that while it proved TPA dissolved clots, it hadn't proved this helped the patients.    The former commissioners, however, appear to insist on the primacy of the FDA bureauracy, arguing that it will arrive at an acceptable solution if &quot;the agency stays focused on the medical and scientific issues.&quot; However, in a June 16 Journal article by Brenton Schlender and Michael Waldholz, a former FDA Office of Biologics staffer said of the Office of Drugs' role in the TPA affair, &quot;Coming so late in the process, many of us in Biologics thought we were being sandbagged.&quot; Others agreed that the Office of Drugs was reasserting its dominance in a turf battle with Biologics, which had initial responsibility for TPA. That doesn't sound like a medical issue to us.    The former commissioners assert that Dr. Temple's shop won't make the final decision on TPA. We hope they're right. Because the key issue here is not that a controversy has occurred over one drug. The issue, as the controversy over this heart-attack drug amply shows, is the life-anddeath power that the Office of Drugs has developed over American medicine and the patients it treats. It is a system that brooks no public challenge. It is a system that is feared by researchers who complain bitterly in private but disallow public comment because &quot;I've got to live with these people.&quot; Once the sands wash over the TPA decision, the system will remain to impose itself on coming treatments for Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, cancer and other depredations.    The commissioners say that the TPA decision says nothing about the system they've helped create; nothing needs to be reformed; it can all be solved &quot;out of the glare of publicity.&quot; We say this miscarriage is the epitome of a system that is killing people by depriving them of life-saving drugs. Let the facts be aired, and the public can decide. </TEXT></DOC>