<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870701-0011 </DOCNO><HL> Fatal Flight --African Plane Disaster:Was It an AccidentOr an Assassination?---International Dispute RagesOver Crash That KilledPresident of Mozambique---Mistakes by the Russian Crew---By William M. CarleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC FRESTAIRLINES (AIR) </IN><TEXT>   A Russian Tupelov jet bored through dark African skies at 35,000 feet on the night of Oct. 19 last year. Carrying the president of Mozambique and several of his top aides, the jet was heading for Maputo, the capital of Mozambique.    But as the plane descended, it became hopelessly lost in the darkness. Unable to pick up a navigation signal from Maputo's airport, the captain exclaimed: &quot;There is no Maputo.&quot; As precious minutes ticked away, the crew, at first unconcerned, grew frantic. &quot;No, no,&quot; the baffled navigator said. &quot;There's nowhere to go, no. . . . There's nothing.&quot; Seconds later, the jet slammed into a hillside just over the border in South Africa. Thirty-five crewmen and passengers died, including the president.    Since then, the crash has become one of the most controversial in the annals of international aviation. Both the Soviet Union and Mozambique assert that it was no accident -- that treachery was involved. They say a decoy radio beacon may have lured the jet off course. The decoy beacon, they imply, was set up by the white government of South Africa, a foe of black-ruled Mozambique.    In short, it is suggested, the crash was really a political assassination of Mozambique's president. South Africa vigorously denies it.    The truth appears to lie in a mass of evidence since assembled by an international group of aviation specialists. The evidence tells a dramatic and frightening story but lends no support to the Soviet-Mozambican theory. Even if there had been a decoy beacon -- and there is no proof one way or another about that -- the airplane could have landed safely had the Soviet fliers followed proper flight procedures. They did not; and why they didn't remains the true mystery in the crash.    The crewmen made one error after another. For example, they failed to crosscheck navigation decisions with each other; and that failure might have allowed the captain or the co-pilot to tune to a radio-navigation beacon that could have led the plane astray. By descending below 3,000 feet, the crew violated the jet's air-traffic-control clearance.    There was a series of misunderstandings among the captain, his radio operator and Mozambique's air controller. At one point, for example, the pilot believed he was heading for one runway while the radio operator was getting air-traffic clearance for another. Finally, the captain and the co-pilot both ignored the jet's ground-proximity warning system; had they pulled up when the warning sounded, they could have saved the plane.    The crew's performance &quot;was one of the sloppiest I've ever seen,&quot; says Frank Borman, former test pilot and astronaut and former chairman of Eastern Airlines. Mr. Borman, one of a six-member independent commission authorized by South Africa to investigate the crash, believes it was caused only by the crew's own errors, whether or not there was a decoy radio beacon.    The commission also includes Cecil Margo, a prominent South African jurist who is the chairman; two South African aviation officials; a retired British judge; and one of Britain's top aviation-safety experts. They had access to the joint research of South African, Soviet and Mozambican specialists. The Margo commission report on the crash is expected to be issued soon.    Whatever the conclusion of the report, the issue has been inflamed by wild charges on all sides. Soon after the crash, South African Foreign Minister Frederick Botha said alcohol had been found in the blood of the Russian crew members, suggesting they were drunk. A Mozambique newspaper countered that the South Africans were slitting the necks of dead crew members to inject alcohol prior to autopsies. In fact, no significant amounts of alcohol were found in any crew member.    For Mozambique, the death of its president, Samora Machel, was just one more in a series of troubles. The nation on the southeast coast of Africa had been a Portuguese colony since the 1500s. In the 1960s and early '70s, Mr. Machel and others fought the Portuguese, who pulled out in 1975. Mr. Machel became president, but of an impoverished land racked by continuing guerrilla warfare. The guerrillas, some say, are being supported by South Africa. (South Africa denies that charge.)    A Marxist, Mr. Machel had an initial strategy as president of obtaining aid from the Soviet Union (including a Soviet crew and plane to serve as his presidential jet). More recently, to obtain more aid, Mr. Machel had been tilting a bit toward the West, including Britain and the U.S.    While the cause of the crash is bitterly contested, basic facts such as the jet's flight path and the nature of the crew conversations recorded on the craft are largely undisputed.    In the early morning of Oct. 19, Mr. Machel and his entourage flew north to Mbala, Zambia, for a one-day summit meeting of black African leaders. The presidents of Zambia, Angola and Zaire, as well as Mr. Machel, were there. At 6:38 p.m., when the conference was over, Mr. Machel's jet took off for the nearly three-hour flight back to Maputo. The Tupelov was a twin-engine jet similar to a McDonnell Douglas DC-9, and its last flight was designated C9CAA.    At 9 p.m., C9CAA was nearing Maputo and asked for clearance to descend from 35,000 feet.    Jet's radio operator: Charlie Nine Charlie Alpha Alpha {calling}. Now top of descent.    Maputo air controller: Charlie Nine Charlie Alpha Alpha, no reported traffic {in the way of your} descent. Report runway lights in sight . . . or reaching 3,000 feet.    That meant if the runway lights couldn't be sighted, the plane had to level off at 3,000 feet and couldn't descend below that without further permission.    As the plane started down, the crew -- captain, co-pilot, engineer, navigator and radio operator -- seemed relaxed. The co-pilot had tuned in a Soviet station on his radio and was listening to Russian news and music. The captain was chatting with the engineer about dividing up some beer and Coca-Cola.    Engineer: Three beers and one Coke, here.    Captain: Three beers yes, Vova {the engineer's name}?    Engineer: Yes, and one Coke each.    Captain: All right.    But the crew members were perhaps too relaxed. For example, although the navigator had chosen the Mozambique city of Beira as an alternative airport, the plane didn't have enough fuel to fly to Maputo and then divert to Beira.    A more serious problem involved radio-navigation beacons. A radio beacon -- just like an ordinary light beacon -- shows the way to a certain point, such as an airport. But instead of shining a light, a radio beacon broadcasts radio waves that are picked up by a plane's receiver and displayed on cockpit instruments. One type of radio beacon is called a VOR (for Very-high-frequency Omni-directional Range).    A basic rule in aviation is that members of a jet crew work as a closely coordinated and disciplined team. This includes routinely cross-checking with each other the radio beacons they are using to guide the plane. For example, the pilot or co-pilot should state he is tuning in the VOR radio beacon at Maputo airport and read out the frequency, which for Maputo is 112.7. Other crew members, and especially the navigator, should then double-check this on their instruments and challenge any discrepancy.    But in the 30 minutes covered by the Tupelov's cockpit voice recorder -- when there should have been several crosschecks -- the crew made none. (One pilot who flies in the area says that pilots are sometimes tempted to skip cross-checks in Africa because of the continent's relatively few radio beacons.)    In the cockpit, as reconstructed from the evidence, the navigator was guiding the plane toward Maputo. As the plane neared the city, his instruments should have picked up a flight-path broadcast by Maputo's VOR radio beacon. This would indicate the way toward the airport's runway.    A needle on the navigator's instrument panel began moving to the right, seeming to indicate the plane should make a right turn toward Maputo's runway. So the navigator directed the plane (which was on autopilot) to the right -- a fatal move, as it turned out. The right turn surprised the captain.    Captain: {You're} making some turns. . . . Couldn't it be straight?    Navigator: VOR {radio beacon} indicates that way.    The captain's suspicion was well-founded. The jet should have continued straight, making a right turn for Maputo's runway about eight minutes later. But the momentary suspicion passed, and the crew went on to talk about beers and Cokes.    What caused the premature right turn? It was at this point, Russia and Mozambique say, that the decoy beacon overrode Maputo's beacon and lured the plane off course, away from the lowlands around Maputo and toward the hills of South Africa. The decoy beacon, Mozambique suggests, could have been mounted on a Land Rover stacked with electronics and topped by an antenna. The antenna might have been concealed, Mozambique says, by a tent pitched on a hillside close to where the plane crashed.    Margo commission investigators suggest other explanations.    The captain, in trying to tune in the Maputo VOR radio beacon on 112.7, might have mistakenly dialed in the wrong frequency, getting 112.3. (On Tupelov dials, the &quot;7&quot; and &quot;3&quot; look similar.) But 112.3 is the frequency for Matsapa airport in Swaziland, a country sandwiched between Mozambique and South Africa, and its signal could have directed the flight to turn too soon.    Alternatively, the co-pilot might have deliberately tuned in to the VOR radio beacon at Matsapa -- without telling the navigator. Tuning in an alternative radio beacon for a short time in order to doublecheck a plane's position is a common practice.    In either case, as the plane banked to the right, the captain and the co-pilot failed to recheck the frequency of the signal they were getting; and the navigator assumed that his instruments were picking up the Maputo beacon. Because the Maputo airport had no radar, the Maputo air controller couldn't know that the Tupelov was veering off course.    After the right turn, the jet's captain began trying to tune in the next navigation aid he would need, Maputo's instrument-landing system, or ILS. The VOR radio beacon gives a plane only the direction to an airport; an ILS signal is needed to portray on a plane's instruments the proper glide slope to descend to the runway.    But because of the premature turn, the Tupelov was now too far away to pick up Maputo's ILS signal. It was also too far away for the crew to see the runway lights.    Captain: There is no Maputo.    Suddenly, the crew is shocked out of complacency.    Co-pilot: What?   Captain: There is no Maputo. Electric power is switched off, chaps.    The captain surmised -- incorrectly -- that there was a power failure at Maputo, forgetting that all navigation systems have backup power generators and not noticing that Maputo's air-traffic-control radio was still broadcasting.    The Tupelov jet, meanwhile, continued descending to 10,000 feet, to 5,000 -- and then below 3,000, even though no runway lights were in sight.    The radio operator, apparently thinking that by this time the plane had bypassed Maputo, got clearance from the air controller to partly circle Maputo airport and land on runway 05. (The plane was originally cleared for an approach straight in to runway 23.) But the radio operator hadn't cross-checked his runway change with the captain. As the plane continued down in the inky darkness, an argument broke out in the cockpit over which runway the jet was going to use.    Captain (overhearing the radio discussion about runway 05): I understood nothing. . . . And what runway? What are you talking about?    Navigator: We are going to do straight-in approach {to runway 23}?    Radio operator: No. Well, can you see the runway?    Co-pilot: No, there's nothing.    Still the plane kept descending through darkness and clouds. For a moment, the captain worried about that. &quot;Surely, it is indeed cloudy to descend,&quot; he said. But, perhaps concerned because he didn't have enough fuel to divert to Beira, he kept heading down, hoping to sight the runway.    By this time, the plane was crossing into South Africa. Flying over rolling hills rather than the lower flatlands around Maputo, the jet was only about 2,000 feet above the ground and still going down.    Then the loud &quot;Beep, beep, beep&quot; of the plane's ground-proximity warning system began screeching in the cockpit.    &quot;Damn it!&quot; the captain said.    But the alarm apparently had given a spurious warning in the past, so the captain and the co-pilot paid no more attention.    For 32 seconds, as the jet hurtled through the darkness toward the ground at 250 miles an hour, the alarm kept sounding. Still, the captain and the co-pilot ignored it.    &quot;It's cloudy, cloudy, cloudy,&quot; the captain fretted. The co-pilot was still listening to Russian music. &quot;No, no, there's nowhere to go,&quot; the navigator said. &quot;No {navigation beacon}, there's nothing.&quot;    A split second later, the jet's left wing clipped off a treetop near the crest of a hill. The plane hit the ground, ripping off both wing tips. It bounced into the air, then tore into the hill's downward slope, disintegrating into shards of metal.    Of the 44 on board, nine survived. Of the crew members, only the engineer lived.    In analyzing the accident, Mr. Borman says that rather than discipline in the cockpit, there was &quot;pandemonium.&quot; Daniel Gerard, a veteran French pilot and flight-safety expert, testified in recent Margo commission public hearings that the Soviet crew's performance was &quot;totally unprofessional. . . . Cross-checking of the navigation aids basically did not exist.&quot; He added that when the ground-proximity warning system sounded, the crew's reaction was &quot;totally unacceptable -- no reaction.&quot; (The ground-proximity warning system is so important that a plane isn't supposed to take off if it is suspected that the system doesn't work.)    At any point along the way, even as late as when the ground-proximity alarm sounded, the pilot could have pulled up and found his way to Maputo using any number of methods. For example, he could have tuned his automatic direction finder to Maputo's commercial radio station, and that instrument would have pointed directly to the city. He could have turned on the jet's radar and picked up the Mozambique coastline, including the distinctive indentation that marks Maputo. &quot;It would have been easy to find the way home,&quot; says Mr. Borman.    Instead of crew error, Russia and Mozambique are trying to pin the blame on a decoy radio beacon that they say must have existed. &quot;Clearly, a rogue radio beacon fed a false substitute beam to the Tupelov, dragging it off course,&quot; Ivan Vasin, Soviet deputy minister of civil aviation, said in an interview with a Soviet press agency. But neither Russia nor Mozambique has presented any evidence of such a beacon. Neither nation sent representatives to recent Margo commission hearings.    There is evidence that Maputo's VOR radio beacon, rather than being overridden by a decoy, was working just fine. At the same time that President Machel's plane was heading for Maputo, a Boeing 737, one of Mozambique's commercial airliners, was on a regular flight to the capital from Beira. Both the pilot and the co-pilot of the 737, when interviewed by Margo commission investigators, said that they were using the Maputo VOR radio beacon and that it was functioning normally. A reconstruction of the 737's flight path by a Canadian expert working for Mozambique shows that the 737 was indeed heading straight for Maputo.    But now Mozambique says that its pilot was mistaken and that he wasn't using the Maputo VOR after all.    The Soviets, in a written submission to the Margo commission, reject the idea that the crew was at fault. They argue that the Tupelov crew couldn't have tuned in the Matsapa radio beacon because its signal isn't strong enough. Besides, the Tupelov wasn't heading exactly toward Matsapa as it would have if the Matsapa beacon had been tuned in. So there must have been a decoy beacon, they reason.    Because it can't be proved now just what frequency the crew tuned in, the controversy probably will never end. Even if there was a beacon, the Soviets are unlikely to admit the crew should have been able to land safely anyway. Admitting that a Soviet crew's sloppiness led to the death of one of Africa's most prominent black leaders would be a blow to Soviet prestige.    Meanwhile, the new president of Mozambique, Joaquim Chissano, has evidently reached his own conclusions: He doesn't fly on Soviet planes; instead, a diplomat in Mozambique says, he flies on a Boeing jet piloted by Mozambican or Portuguese crews. </TEXT></DOC>