<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Press and Ethics:Who's LookingAt the Problem?---By Robert S. McCord</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WPOB KRIPUBLISHING (PUB) </IN><TEXT>   The Miami Herald's reporting about Gary Hart and his subsequent withdrawal as a candidate for president has created much controversy among journalists. But controversy, now already subsiding, apparently is all it is going to produce.    Was it ethical for newspapermen to stake out the candidate's house in Washington and report on the visits of a young woman from Miami? Perhaps an even more important question is this: Was the Washington Post's proper role to publish immediately a story concerning a relationship with yet another woman or to go first to Mr. Hart and tell him about it privately? (Which is what the Post did and which is what actually led to Mr. Hart's immediate withdrawal from the race.)    Readers don't seem to have many doubts about the stakeout: 70% said it was improper, according to a New York Times/CBS poll. So far there's been no poll on the Washington Post's behavior, but its editor maintains that in spite of how it looked, there was no negotiation or deal between his paper and Mr. Hart.    Because there has been no third-party inquiry, there are disputes about what the Miami Herald actually did, not to mention the merits. Trade magazines have been full of comments, and ABC's &quot;Nightline&quot; has held some stormy debates. The usually imperturbable &quot;Washington Week in Review&quot; on the Public Broadcasting System nearly broke up in argument, with Jack Nelson of the Los Angeles Times staunchly defending the Miami Herald against three other panelists.    Editors also sharply disagree. David Hall of the Denver Post, Mr. Hart's hometown newspaper, has praised the Herald's work, whereas Abe Rosenthal, retired executive editor of the New York Times, wrote in his column that he would never order a stakeout or participate in one.    Apparently his own newspaper disagrees with him because it seems to have outdone the Herald with an idea that has been almost universally condemned. The Times sent a questionnaire to all presidential candidates asking personal questions and requesting waivers to their confidential records -- medical, academic, tax, even FBI files -- so that its reporters could sift through them and print what they liked.    Is this the trend? Will candidates have to reveal their innermost secrets and be subject to around-the-clock surveillance? Or will the press, embarrassed with the charge that it's obsessed with sex, revert to the cozy period when reporters simply didn't write about a candidate's private life?    The answer probably is that each editor will do as he pleases, which will make our political system more uneven and unfair. Candidates will be treated differently in different towns and cities, and from paper to paper. In Cleveland, for example, the Plain Dealer recently published a story that had unnamed sources accusing Ohio Gov. Richard Celeste of having extra-marital affairs.    The career of a journalist could advance overnight based on his willingness to print stories such as this, or his ability to ask indelicate questions, or conduct stakeouts. If these things become standard procedure, we can be sure that the voters will get even less of the kind of information -- voting records, political philosophy, etc. -- they need than they are getting now.    It's too bad that there wasn't an impartial, thorough investigation of the Hart episode, followed by study and debate by people in and out of journalism. When the press's performance results in the withdrawal of the leading candidate for president of the country, the problem is too serious, in my opinion, to be solved only by journalists.    I'm not talking about a government investigation or laws; plainly these are prohibited by the First Amendment. Rather, what we need is what we once had but let slip away -- the National News Council, which looked into the press's ethical problems and rendered judgments, advice and guidelines. There were 18 members (eight from the press, 10 from other sectors) and their only power was to embarrass or vindicate a journalist through publicity. At least complainants had a place to go and a body of good journalistic practices was being developed based on the decisions. But the media wouldn't even publish the decisions, so journalism's only peer review died in 1984 largely because two of the TV networks and influential newspapers such as the New York Times and the Washington Post ignored it.    Mr. Rosenthal was asked at the American Society of Newspaper Editors convention in San Francisco in April if he had changed his mind about the News Council. &quot;No,&quot; he said. &quot;It's the obligation of each editor and reporter to decide ethical standards for himself.&quot;    However, some other journalists who once opposed the concept, which the press in Britain and Canada embraced years ago, have had second thoughts -- Walter Cronkite of CBS, New York Times columnist Anthony Lewis, John Seigenthaler of USA Today, etc. But not enough to create a demand for a revival even though the Hart case dramatically illustrates the need, according to the last president of the council, Richard S. Salant, former news department director at NBC and CBS. The council's revival will happen someday, he said recently, but right now there are still too many opponents.    I find it sad for journalism that a smalltown editor like me was the first to raise the issue of a revival with Mr. Salant in light of the Hart case. No one has even asked him for his comments.    Mr. Salant, however, is philosophical, and he chuckled at the irony of Abe Rosenthal's sharp and public criticism of the Miami Herald. &quot;He was the News Council's strongest opponent,&quot; Mr. Salant said. &quot;Now he sounds like a one-man News Council.&quot;    ---   Mr. McCord is associate editor of the Arkansas Gazette in Little Rock. </TEXT></DOC>