<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0079 </DOCNO><HL> The Batan IslandersFight Wind and Rain,Between Typhoons---Outrageous Weather KeepsPhilippine Folk IsolatedAnd Ancient Ways Intact---By Anthony SpaethStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> BATAN, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>    When English sailor WilliamDampier stumbled upon this tiny island in 1687, he discovereda people dressed in clothes made of banana leaves. He drankbeer brewed from sugar cane -- &quot;very strong and I do believevery wholesome&quot; -- and witnessed a harsh form of nativejustice, when a thief was buried alive.   &quot;He did not struggle, but yielded very quietly to his punishment and they cramm'd the earth close upon him, and stifled him,&quot; Mr. Dampier wrote. &quot;His mother lamented and removed his earrings.&quot;    They don't bury people alive any longer on this dollop of land. But many other things have changed little in 300 years. The inhabitants still wear crude banana-fiber headdresses. They still drink sugar-cane beer, potent but debatably wholesome. The winds of change have gone easy on Batan.    Those are about the only winds that have, though. Batan and its neighbors, a striking but forlorn collection of islands making up the Philippine province of Batanes, are known as the typhoon capital of the Pacific. Storms batter them with such frequency and ferocity that the place and its people seem a kind of meteorological Brigadoon, sealed off from modern civilization not by time or a spell but by frightful weather.    The streets of Basco, the capital, still run in the same tight alleys designed by Spanish colonialists in the 1790s. The people still chirp in a distinctive dialect. And when the moon is high -- or so a lot of residents continue to believe -- jewelry-loving ghosts still prowl the streets while witches with disheveled hair collect centipedes and lizards to cast spells. It is a second justification for the Basco's indisputable reputation as a ghost town after dark.    The Batan islands, midway between Taiwan and the big northern Philippine island of Luzon, have had but one moment of prominence, when Japan began its World War II conquest of the Philippines on their scrubby soil. (Batan is not to be confused with the Bataan near Manila where the infamous death march took place.) Before the war and since, the inhabitants, called Ivatans, have lived in obscurity.    When the weather is good, their islands seem idyllic and unspoiled, reminiscent of J.R.R. Tolkien's mythical Middle Earth. Stone houses dot rolling farm lands neatly demarcated by hedgerows. Piebald mountains hover beyond, while the sun glints off the inscrutable seas.    An early explorer described the residents as sturdy but fainthearted, and even today the Ivatans go about their daily chores with a wary eye on the horizon. Sometimes they spot illegal fishing boats from Taiwan or, more happily, the plane from Manila, which brings in nearly all of life's necessities plus luxuries like eggs and beer. But this time of year, they watch for the phenomenon that, more than anything else, has dictated the pattern of life on the Batan islands for centuries: the typhoon.    The Ivatans distinguish between two kinds of storms. The &quot;banana typhoon&quot; merely knocks down the banana trees. The &quot;coconut typhoon&quot; uproots whole palms.    The colorful explosions of tropical flora here are all young shoots, dating from the last storm. Farmers concentrate on low-to-the-ground crops like garlic, whose bulbs can't be put to flight. The winds make the seas too fierce for profitable fishing. In the gloomy interiors of the heavy stone houses, dried fish and meat hang in preparation for rainy sieges from June to November.    Nothing develops, lest it be blown away. There is no industry, no restaurant, no hotel. Telegrams must travel by plane. Only one shop, Tolentino's hardware store, sells bottled beer.    For an evening's entertainment, basketball is played in the town plaza. Otherwise, the Ivatan men tend to sit in their dark houses drinking gin from Manila or the cheaper home brew. They reminisce about exciting events of the past, like earthquakes, cyclones and the memorable tidal waves of 1954 and 1978.    And they instruct their sons in native lore. Never marry during a typhoon, they tell them. Even a small wind at a wedding, enough to disturb a candle placed next to the bride, is unlucky.    Catholic missionaries from Spain came to Batanes in the 18th century, and by 1832 the friars could report that only nine &quot;infidels&quot; remained. But as in much of the Philippines, the Catholicism is built on a foundation of animism. Ivatans speak frequently of the anitus, spirits that disrupt the atmosphere even more regularly than the typhoons. The concepts of angels and purgatory blend easily with the deep-rooted traditional beliefs.    It shows in the attitudes toward priests. They are considered magical and not altogether benign. When a priest wears green vestments at Mass in the Batanes, says Florentino Hornido, a local historian, some parishioners think he is summoning a punishing typhoon.    The islands have only one phrase for supernatural beings or phenomena; it translates as &quot;those who cannot be seen.&quot; The ancient Ivatans had at most a vague concept of a supreme being. They believed that the souls of their leaders ascended into the heavens but that those of others remained in the turbulent atmosphere, wandering in a spirit of viciousness, helpfulness or occasional frivolity.    &quot;I am one of the big believers in ghosts,&quot; says Manuel Valones, the aged mayor of the town of Ivana, &quot;because one day, I went out to the fields to urinate. I heard laughter, but I turned around and couldn't see anyone there. They laugh, you see, when they see something funny.&quot;    The tales of the anitus are myriad: about the ghost of the dead man who told his widow to return land he had stolen; about the anitu as tall as a church; about the infant anitu found swimming in a rainwater jar, festooned with gold jewelry; about the helpful anitu who regularly cooked a villager's dinner.    The &quot;invisibles&quot; hate people who boast -- demonstrating a very Philippine sensibility -- and don't like garlic, crosses or holy water. They also don't like to be passed through by the corporeal, so a lot of people, when walking in a lonely wood, will chant: &quot;Anyone who doesn't wish to be touched, move aside.&quot; Witches, inspired by jealousy and fond of roaches and snakes, are a separate category, equally feared.    Young and old, educated and ignorant, Ivatans continue to believe in their invisible cohabitants. &quot;I've never seen an anitu,&quot; says a 30-year-old employee of Philippine Air Lines, &quot;but each week I drive the southern road from Ivana to Basco. And every time I get near the white beach, I'm always ready for one.&quot;    Forbidding as this place seems to an outsider -- it was recommended as a penal colony in the 19th century -- it is mysteriously compelling to Ivatans. They seem to revel in the strange, wind-knocked life they lead. Their brief native folk songs, called lajis, make the most of the role of the harsh winds and unforgiving seas in thwarting intruders. A love song tells of landing &quot;at a port of perfect calm.&quot;    In 1720, after the Batan islands suffered a plague of rats, the Spanish priests recommended that they be depopulated. The king of Spain sent money to move the Ivatans to a better life on the rich and sheltered farmland of Cagayan Valley, in northern Luzon.    But the transplanted people escaped, at great danger, back to their home of wind and rain and ghosts. As one contemporary account related: &quot;The love of the home shores that rocked their cradles to the angry rhythm of the stormy sea . . . lured them away from the rich and fertile soil of Cagayan back to their homes and the sterile poverty of their native lands.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>