<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870917-0148 </DOCNO><HL> South Korea: Troubled Transition --Korea's Student Demonstrators ThreatenTo Hinder the Opposition's Bid for Power---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>      {Last of a Series}   South Korea's militant students may have helped push the country down the road toward democracy. But now the struggling political opposition fears that continued campus violence could spoil its effort to take power in the coming presidential election.    Student protests last spring prodded the government into pledging democratic reforms, an accomplishment that hadn't seemed possible when the students first took to the streets a few months earlier. The ruling Democratic Justice Party and the opposition Reunification Democratic Party subsequently agreed to hold a presidential vote by Dec. 20, and yesterday approved legislative elections by next spring.    But now that summer vacations are over, students are demonstrating again, attacking riot police with rocks and fire bombs and choking on tear gas the police fire back. The reason: They don't believe the government's promises. &quot;It's a lot of talk,&quot; says a student at Seoul National University, a top university. &quot;But the government still controls the news. They still control the professors. They are still arresting student leaders.&quot; Students not only don't want to compromise with the government, they might not work with the opposition party in the presidential election campaign to turn out the ruling party.    The government has repeatedly said it will take stern measures to maintain social order. It is cracking down on anybody who assists Korea's struggling labor movement. Authorities say they have arrested 60 radical student leaders and are investigating at least 100 more. They have also arrested more-moderate student leaders at major universities -- sometimes only for talking to reporters.    Opposition figures and some diplomats think the government's tough approach might be a deliberate provocation aimed at making the students more intransigent and violent. Any serious new public disturbances, they note, could make it harder for the opposition party to win broad public support.    Describing the students' goals depends on who is doing the talking. The small radical element hasn't made any secret of its goal of toppling the government. But the majority of students aren't leftists, as Westerners understand the term.    To Western ears, what they say is extreme and naive. They mouth the vocabulary of Marxism without understanding what it means. They dismiss the threat of Communist North Korea and believe that reuniting the two nations will be easy, despite incompatible political and economic systems.    In no other nation do students play as prominent a political role as in Korea. Their tradition of activism dates back to the 15th century, and middle-class Koreans have tolerated student unrest even when they haven't agreed with student aims. Korean leaders can't afford to take the students lightly. There are about 1.2 million university students now, far more than there were in April 1960, when student demonstrations brought the downfall of President Syngman Rhee.    The students cling to their historical role as guardians of Korean society and vanguards of social change. They say they intend to struggle until they see a real change and feel Korea is independent. Yet they remain highly distrustful of all politicians, both in and out of power. A recent protest slogan even urges students not to participate in the December election.    As a result, the opposition party will have difficulty harnessing the manpower of the students in the voting. Just controlling them could prove difficult. Opposition moderates worry that any widening of violence could create a backlash, driving middle-of-the-road voters into the camp of the ruling party.    The new demonstrations are different than the round last spring. They are smaller; protesters number in the hundreds, rather than the thousands. They are confined to campuses. They last only a short time. And they aren't attracting the active participation of moderate students or the wide support of the middle class.    Furthermore, the students have been unable to forge any alliance with labor. For the most part, in fact, they have been rebuffed by the unions, which don't share their goal of toppling the government. Fist fights between workers and students erupted at one plant when dissidents tried to interfere.    But the student protests will continue and could grow more strident as the presidential election approaches, students, professors and Western diplomats say. Armed Forces Day on Oct. 1, when the government plans a large military parade, could be the first major outburst of the autumn.    The visit of Roh Tae Woo, the ruling party's presidential candidate, to the U.S. this week could further inflame student sentiment. Already anti-American, the students view Mr. Roh's meeting with President Reagan as evidence of U.S. control of Korean politics.    If the protests get out of control, the government would have reason to call off the reforms and possibly the election. &quot;I don't know if what the government is doing is provocative,&quot; says a professor at the elite Ewha Women's University. &quot;But it makes us rather nervous.&quot;    Adds another professor, &quot;Some of us are telling the students not to fall into that trap. They must be very cautious.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>