<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880923-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Delta Air to Buy Up to 215 Planes Of McDonnell Douglas and Boeing --- Top Order of $10.5 Billion Would Be Airline High; MD-11 Venture Aided </HL><AUTHOR> Judith Valente and Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> DAL MD BA UTX </CO><IN> AIR ARO </IN><TEXT>   Delta Air Lines said it plans to purchase as many as 215 new aircraft, valued at as much as $10.5 billion, in an order it split between McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Boeing Co.    If all of the options are exercised -- something that appears likely -- the order would be the biggest ever placed by an airline. The order would also be the biggest in dollar value, about $6.5 billion, for McDonnell Douglas. It significantly improves the chances for success of McDonnell's latest aircraft venture, the long-range MD-11, whose future looked uncertain just a few months ago when the manufacturer was forced to cut drastically its original estimate of firm orders for the jet.    Only a total of nine McDonnell Douglas MD-11s and nine Boeing 767s, in all valued at about $1.75 billion, were purchased under firm order. The order, which had been expected since last month, was a partial victory for both manufacturers, which had been waging a fierce battle for the big order. Boeing's bid to sell 747 jumbo jets failed, while McDonnell's hopes to cinch its first big order for its MD-90 series of &quot;propfan&quot; powered aircraft were dashed.    Delta's order for MD-11s, which includes options for 31, is the first placed by a major domestic carrier. Although several foreign airlines had said they would buy the MD-11, McDonnell Douglas had spent the past year aggressively seeking a domestic buyer to give the new aircraft, a derivative of the DC-10, an air of legitimacy. The aircraft manufacturer and defense contractor, based in St. Louis, called Delta's decision a major endorsement that it hopes will lead to orders from other airlines.    &quot;This is a real shot in the arm for the MD-11, which had been coming along slowly and almost solely overseas,&quot; a McDonnell Douglas spokesman said.    &quot;They didn't have a significant U.S. airline on their side until now,&quot; said Paul Nisbet, an aerospace analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.    Atlanta-based Delta also took options on 100 of McDonnell Douglas's MD-88s, two-engine narrow-body aircraft that it said it intends to use on domestic routes to replace older Boeing 727s and DC-9s.    In addition to the McDonnell Douglas planes, Delta ordered nine Boeing 767-300ER aircraft and took options to buy 16 more of the 767s and 50 Boeing 757-232s. The Boeing portion of the order has an indicated value of $4 billion.    McDonnell and Boeing had been locked in fierce competition to win the Delta order since early last summer. A spokesman for Douglas Aircraft Co., the unit that makes McDonnell's commercial planes, said a Douglas marketing and engineering team had met dozens of times with Delta officials in recent months, in an effort to sell Delta on the MD-11's configuration and performance capability and hammer out financial terms of the purchase.    &quot;One of our marketing executives has been living with Delta as a sole customer&quot; for the last several months, the spokesman said. In addition, Douglas sponsored &quot;Delta Day&quot; at its Long Beach, Calif., plant, presenting Delta officials with a full-size model of the MD-11 cabin, configured to meet Delta's specifications.    McDonnell salesmen apparently weren't successful in convincing Delta to be the launch customer for its new MD-90 series of jets powered by the fuel-saving &quot;propfan&quot; engine. Without mentioning the propfan engine, Delta said in a prepared statement that it would option 100 MD-88s, powered by conventional engines made by Pratt andamp; Whitney, a unit of United Technologies Corp., Hartford, Conn.    &quot;There are a lot of questions about the propfan that remain unanswered, such as: Will it be as fuel-efficient as the manufacturers say? And what will the cost be in relation to the fuel savings?&quot; a Delta spokesman said.    Delta's order also gives a big lift to United Technologies, which has sustained a loss of market share in the commercial jet-engine business in recent years.    On Wall Street, United Technologies got more of a boost from the Delta announcement than either McDonnell Douglas or Boeing. In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, as the overall market declined, Boeing stock fell 62.5 cents to close at $60.25; McDonnell Douglas rose 87.5 cents to close at $65.875; and United Technologies climbed 87.5 cents to close at $39.25. Delta stock fell 50 cents to close at $48.25 in Big Board trading.    Delta said it chose the MD-11 over its Boeing competitor, the 747-400, because of the flexibility the McDonnell plane offers. Although the MD-11 as envisioned is slightly smaller than the 747, McDonnell recently announced that it will offer customers a special &quot;stretch&quot; version. Although Delta didn't buy the stretch version for its nine firm orders, analysts said the airline may choose it in future years when it exercises the 31 options.    Delta said the original version of the MD-11 fits in well with its current Pacific route structure, in which it operates several nonstop flights from Portland, Oregon, to Tokyo and Seoul, South Korea. However, the airline may need the stretch version of the plane if Delta eventually wins the authority to serve points beyond Tokyo and Seoul.    The spokesman said Delta also selected the MD-11 because it has three engines, compared with the 747's four engines, which should allow significant cost savings.    Although Delta chose the MD-11 over its Boeing competitor, the 747-400, the fact that it still chose to give part of its order to Boeing underscores the marketing clout of the Seattle-based giant. &quot;This continues to reinforce Boeing's strategy&quot; of selling its newer twin-engine planes to replace older three-engine planes in airline fleets, said Howard Rubel, an analyst with C.J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc.    He said Delta's 767 order &quot;goes a long way&quot; toward filling out Boeing's 1990 production line for the 767s.    Delta said it plans to operate the 767s on its flights to Europe. It ordered an &quot;extended range&quot; version of the two-engine aircraft, which is equipped with special features that allow it to operate on long over-water flights. Delta's choice of the 767 reflects the growing trend in the airline industry to replace three-engine and four-engine aircraft on long overseas flights with more fuel-efficient, cost-effective twin-engine planes.    The size of the 767 order indicates that Delta, which flies to six European cities currently, intends to expand its route system across the North Atlantic as well as in the Pacific. In addition, Delta's decision to replace 50 of its aging smaller aircraft with 186-seat Boeing 757s, under an option, shows that the carrier is expecting to expand its passenger capacity on high-density domestic routes.    In the Delta competition, United Technologies' Pratt andamp; Whitney subsidiary beat out engine makers General Electric Co. of Fairfield, Conn., and Britain's Rolls-Royce PLC.    Pratt andamp; Whitney's coup represents potentially its biggest commercial order ever. The delivery of engines for the initial firm orders for planes will result in about $350 million in revenue to Pratt, the company said. However, if Delta exercises every option for every plane, Pratt would receive about $3 billion in revenue through the year 2000, industry sources said. </TEXT></DOC>