<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881117-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Oil Ultimatum: Saudis Plan to Produce Petroleum All Out If OPEC Can't Agree --- Budget Deficit Spurs Decision On Strategy if a Meeting On Quotas Isn't Fruitful --- Specter of $5-a-Barrel Crude </HL><AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST LATAM AFRIC </CO><IN> MON PET </IN><DATELINE> VIENNA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Brace yourself. The glutted oil market could soon be flooded with even more Persian Gulf crude.    Saudi Arabia, faced with widening deficits as oil prices slip, has reached a Draconian decision: Unless OPEC regains control of world petroleum markets at meetings beginning here today, the Saudis will produce all the oil they can sell.    &quot;There is no cap,&quot; declares a Saudi official familiar with the kingdom's strategy. &quot;We need the revenue.&quot;    This could mean Saudi output of as much as 10 million barrels a day, more than 40% above what the kingdom pumps now and more than twice its OPEC quota. The delicate oil markets couldn't begin to withstand such a surfeit. Leading spokesmen for the cartel, including its secretary-general, former Indonesian oil minister Subroto, have warned that oil prices could crash to $5 a barrel if the Saudis pumped oil flat out.    The repercussions would be widespread. The whole scenario is speculative, of course, but one could suppose that a single-digit oil price would, on the positive side, strongly restrain world inflation and reduce costs for countless energy users. However, demand would presumably rise, and energy conservation efforts would fall off. And because $5 is less than it costs to pump a barrel in many oil fields, especially outside the Mideast, exploration would all but cease and large amounts of production would close down. Indebted oil-producing nations like Mexico and Nigeria would be even more strapped, while the Southwestern U.S. -- its suffering banks and Sandamp;Ls, its real estate, its local governments -- would take another merciless hammering.    The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries may avert such a course. Oddsmakers in world oil markets give the crumbling cartel a 50-50 chance of resolving the deepening crisis of overproduction, which has depressed crude-oil prices by a third this year. Should the Vienna meetings achieve a new quota agreement and a commitment by members to honor it, oil prices -- now around $12 a barrel -- would certainly stop sliding, and they could increase by $2 or more.    Given the weakened state of OPEC, the Vienna get-together is regarded as a make-or-break meeting. Its outcome may determine for years to come the course of prices in the $200 billion-a-year global crude-oil market. &quot;OPEC either will reach an agreement on workable quotas for all 13 members, or it will face an extended period of sharply lower oil prices,&quot; says Paul Mlotok, a Salomon Brothers oil economist.    The Saudis could of course change their minds about the wisdom of all-out production. They would clearly prefer output controls. The kingdom is currently producing an average of 6.7 million barrels of crude oil a day, according to Petro-Logistics Ltd. of Geneva, which at about $10 a barrel brings in roughly $67 million. A year ago, when OPEC cheating was much less widespread and the markets were firm at $18 a barrel, the Saudis honored their OPEC quota of 4.3 million barrels and yet took in some $77 million a day.    Though the Saudis would certainly rather get more money for less oil, OPEC indiscipline won't permit it. Five months ago, the United Arab Emirates publicly repudiated its quota. Cheating by others became evident -- then flagrant. Oil prices stepped slowly downward until finally the Saudis, outraged at the cheating, announced that they, too, would exceed their OPEC quota so long as others did. That brought new price declines, which in turn prompted the Saudis to produce still more to meet their mounting internal needs.    To accuse Saudi Arabia of being a quota-breaker is unfair, contends Hisham M. Nazer, the kingdom's oil minister and the acting planning minister. &quot;When others overproduce and we react to that, that is not overproduction,&quot; he says. Mr. Nazer declines to comment on the likely results of the OPEC conference or on Saudi Arabia's strategy, nor will he elaborate on the kingdom's production policy.    But Mr. Nazer is clearly the man of the hour. The Saudi minister heads OPEC's long-term-strategy committee and sits on the cartel's committee on price evolution, groups that will meet jointly. Four days hence, on Monday, the regular winter conference of OPEC opens and all 13 members will begin the effort to take official action on the problem of runaway production.    Named to his oil post following the ouster of Ahmed Zaki Yamani in the aftermath of the 1986 price crash, Mr. Nazer enjoys the trust of King Fahd, many associates say. Though he is the architect of the Saudis' current emphasis on increasing revenue, Mr. Nazer declares that &quot;as long as there is an agreement and as long as there is a commitment, we in Saudi Arabia will be the first to adhere to that agreement.&quot;    Outside the kingdom, it is assumed that the Saudis' recent opening of the oil spigot is aimed at lowering prices to punish other exporters for their excesses. One widely held theory says that the kingdom wants to teach them a lesson so they will return to the OPEC bargaining table chastened.    Many believe that the Saudis are particularly keen on hurting Iran because of its long efforts to spread its Islamic revolution to stable Moslem countries. Low oil prices are especially painful in Iran, which desperately needs revenue to repair the devastation from its eight-year war with Iraq but which isn't able to increase oil production much.    Others speculate that it is really Iraq the Saudis aim to hurt -- even though the kingdom backed Baghdad in the war -- because Iraq's vast undeveloped reserves make it more of an oil-market rival. Iraq has substantially raised its production over the past year to about 2.7 million barrels a day, but it isn't part of the OPEC quota system because it won't accept a limit lower than Iran's.    Still other theories suggest that the Saudis are after the United Arab Emirates -- chronic quota cheaters -- or that their targets are Britain, Mexico, China and other non-OPEC producers, which gained market share in recent years.    But interviews with a number of individuals close to Saudi planning suggest that little, if any, of this is valid. The Saudis evidently are embarked on something far simpler than sophisticated petroleum politics. The Saudis, these individuals insist, simply need money now. Says one source close to petroleum policy in the kingdom: &quot;The game is economic, not political.&quot;    He notes that as long as the OPEC price was $18 a barrel -- still the target -- Saudi Arabia could comfortably produce within its quota. &quot;But once the price drops below $18, we have to produce and market as much as we can,&quot; he says.    &quot;People accuse us of driving down the price to hurt so-and-so, but that's nonsense,&quot; says another Saudi source. &quot;We're also hurt. We've got a deficit, too.&quot;    Since 1983, in fact, Saudi Arabia has been running the largest annual current-account deficits within OPEC, according to Petroleum Finance Co. &quot;This year will be no exception,&quot; the Washington-based consulting firm reports. &quot;The kingdom's current-account position is projected to show a deficit of $7.8 billion.&quot;    Saudi Arabia is by no means in the kind of economic straits faced by fellow OPEC members Nigeria -- with its intractable poverty -- and Algeria -- with its bloody riots. With the world's biggest reserves, Saudi Arabia is still among the wealthiest of nations. But the oil-price decline has so hurt its revenue outlook as to trigger speculation of a devaluation in the Saudi riyal. Currency reserves, once near $200 billion, are down sharply.    What's more, the Saudis haven't forgotten the effects of the price war of 1985-1986. Formerly acting as the OPEC &quot;swing&quot; producer, cutting its own production when necessary to keep total cartel output within its target range, Saudi Arabia saw its output fall from a peak of 10 million barrels a day to less than three million in a span of seven years. Its decision three years ago to raise this depressed production jolted OPEC into a new, though temporary, discipline and gained world market share for the cartel.    Yet because of the plunge in prices to the $10-a-barrel level in the spring of 1986, the move didn't increase the Saudis' revenue. &quot;They doubled production and yet saw income decline,&quot; recalls James E. Akins, a former ambassador to Saudi Arabia.    Thus, Saudi planners would like to see production restraint in OPEC push up the price to the $16 to $20 level. Mr. Nazer is said to believe the higher range could be reached quickly if total OPEC output were held to 17.4 million barrels a day. That would equal the current (unobserved) OPEC quotas plus an Iraqi limit equal to Iran's 2.4 million. It also would mean a steep cut in OPEC output; it is estimated that the cartel's members now produce a total of 23 million barrels a day.    OPEC sources say Mr. Nazer has recommended the 17.4 million ceiling. It's understood that he believes such a quota, being well short of demand for OPEC oil, would force users to draw some 3.5 million barrels a day from glutted world inventories during the first quarter of 1989.    Such a ceiling would, of course, require a return by Saudi Arabia to its output quota of 4.3 million barrels a day. It would also mean no other OPEC member except Iraq would get an increase. To bring Iraq back into the fold, Mr. Nazer favors giving Baghdad parity with Iran. In fact, he has made clear that Saudi Arabia won't sign any agreement that excludes Iraq, or other OPEC members for that matter.    A higher OPEC ceiling of 18.5 million or even 19 million barrels a day, as suggested by several other members, would be acceptable to Mr. Nazer under certain conditions, people familiar with his thinking say. His chief condition is said to be that all 13 members share equally in any increase.    The Saudi minister is understood to expect that an agreement will be reached. If there isn't one, Saudi Arabia intends to implement its decision, already made, to open the taps all the wider. Trade sources suggest that even in today's weak oil environment, the Saudis should be able to sell at least seven million to eight million barrels a day. Not only are the Saudis now aggressive marketers, they also are developing strong refining links abroad, such as their just-concluded purchase of a half interest in Texaco Inc.'s refineries and filling stations in the Eastern U.S.    Even with so much riding on the outcome, the obstacles to an agreement remain formidable. Whether Iraq and Iran will agree to identical quotas remains a question. There is controversy, too, over how to count production from the Saudi- and Kuwait-administered Neutral Zone, oil that has been going to Iraq as &quot;war-relief.&quot;    For Mr. Nazer and others who support a ceiling of 17.4 million barrels, Ecuador and the United Arab Emirates may be a bigger problem. Ecuador, though a tiny producer, is demanding a 33% quota increase. And the Emirates, now producing twice as much as their OPEC quota, are intransigent. The comment of one Emirates official shows the depth of the problem. &quot;It is time for other members to sacrifice,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>