<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861223-0148 </DOCNO><HL> In Arbitrage, Risks Are Burgeoning Along With Profits---Hazards Increase as New PractitionersTry to Anticipate Takeovers---By Beatrice E. Garcia and George AndersStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/23/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Cross a medieval Venetian trader with a riverboat gambler and what do you get?    Answer: A Wall Street risk arbitrager.    In a master's thesis in 1969, Guy Wyser-Pratte, now an executive vice president at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York, traced arbitrage -- the practice of trading like articles in different markets to profit from the price discrepancies in those markets -- to medieval Venice, where merchants traded currencies.    Today, Wall Street arbitragers play a riskier game as they try to profit from the difference between the market price and the offer price for stocks of companies involved in mergers, acquisitions and restructurings. Over the years, it has been an immensely profitable game for Wall Street, one that has had explosive growth in the past decade.    But it also has become much more risky.    For years now, many risk arbitragers have supplemented their stock plays on announced transactions by trying to identify and purchase in advance the stocks and options of companies that are about to be involved in mergers, acquisitions or restructurings. As a result, &quot;Most of today's arbitragers seem more like speculators than classic arbitragers,&quot; says a former practitioner, now a salesman-trader with a New York-based brokerage firm.    This year, Securities and Exchange Commission and Justice Department actions against insider trading have further raised the risk level for arbitragers. The charging of former Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. investment banker Dennis Levine in May and last month's record $100 million settlement and other actions against Ivan F. Boesky have thrown the arbitrage community into a fit.    Already, arbitragers estimate industrywide losses in the takeover-stock sell-off that followed the Boesky news at between $1 billion and $2 billion. Some say a few of their colleagues lost the entire year's profit in the week after the Boesky announcement Nov. 14. Others watched glumly as their annual bonuses withered along with prices of takeover stocks.    Yet the arbitragers, an unusually tight-lipped clique these days, are optimistic. Those interviewed for this article -- most of whom asked not to be identified -- generally said that once the insider-trading scandal has been fully aired, the survivors will be better off. With abusers of inside information forced out of business, they say, they expect a more nearly level playing field, fewer competitors and bigger spoils for the victors. And despite recent losses, big Wall Street securities firms say they will continue in the business of arbitrage.    Insider-trading investigations, moreover, aren't expected to have any impact on certain varieties of risk-free arbitrage, such as stock-index arbitrage. That's where traders use computers to arrange big trades and profit from differences between prices of stock-index futures and options and prices of the stock indexes themselves. In addition, &quot;classical&quot; arbitragers continue to operate as they have for decades: trading for profit on price differences between a company's convertible bonds or preferred and its common.    A handful of full-service Wall Street concerns, such as Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., Prudential-Bache, L.F. Rothschild Unterberg Towbin Holdings Inc., Salomon Brothers Inc. and Bear Stearns andamp; Co., have traditionally practiced risk, or merger, arbitrage. The basic strategy is to buy the stock of the target company in an announced merger proposal, betting that the transaction will be concluded and the stock price will rise to the price being offered by the acquirer. The risk is that the merger won't take place.    Risk arbitrage grew from an arcane art to a Wall Street mainstay in the past decade or so. It was actually rather unusual before a wave of mergers that led to changes in federal laws on acquisitions in the late 1960s. Its most rapid growth came with the heyday of hostile cash tender offers, which first became acceptable on Wall Street in the mid-1970s.    The hostile cash offers sharply boosted arbitrage profits because they often triggered bidding wars for target companies. But increased litigation and the development of defensive strategies also raised the level of risk.    About the same time, Wall Street companies, casting about for ways to replace revenue lost when fixed commission rates were phased out, beefed up their arbitrage departments or established new ones.    &quot;All of a sudden, a lot of money flew into arbitragers' hands, and they could influence the outcome of deals,&quot; says one arbitrager who has been in the business more than 10 years, part of the time with Mr. Boesky.    Now the arbitrage community has exploded to include about 300 participants, compared with barely two dozen a decade ago. As it grew, the nature of the business changed, and a burgeoning cadre of brash takeover speculators began calling themselves risk arbitragers.    What they do is seek stocks of companies they believe stand a good chance of being taken over, reorganized or liquidated. Their information may come from rumors, analyses of public information or often both. But as the Boesky scandal illustrates, it's also sometimes based on inside information.    &quot;The ideal was to be more aggressive with the funds available,&quot; a former arbitrager says. &quot;The better your performance, the more capital you could attract.&quot; An arbitrager might make 25% by establishing a position after an offer is made, he says, but he can often achieve a 35% or 50% return if he takes his position before any announcement.    Through much of the past decade, annual returns of 30% to 40% have been common among arbitragers. Investors in arbitrage partnerships typically have realized returns of 25% to 40%. They normally get 70% of the partnership's profit, with the general partners getting the remaining 30%, although Mr. Boesky always has received more than half the profit from the partnerships he has directed.    With this record of big profits, arbitrage funds have attracted some major pension plans and other institutions as limited partners. In peak years such as 1985, many limited partners in arbitrage funds earned more than 50% on their investments.    Gould Inc., an electronic products and systems concern, for example, has allocated 10% of its roughly $120 million pension plan to what a spokesman calls &quot;nontraditional, higher-return investments.&quot; Among them was a $5.7 million stake in Mr. Boesky's biggest arbitrage fund, Ivan F. Boesky andamp; Co. L.P. The spokesman said Gould was &quot;very satisfied&quot; with the fund's results until last month and didn't know about Mr. Boesky's insider trading.    Some insurance companies also have dabbled in arbitrage funds. Lincoln National Corp. had $10 million invested in Mr. Boesky's fund. &quot;Our general investment program is fairly conservative,&quot; a Lincoln official said. But he said the company does seek higher returns from a small portfolio of &quot;high-risk investments.&quot; In Britain as well, insurers such as Commercial Life Assurance PLC have invested small amounts in U.S. arbitrage funds.    Even conservative arbitragers earn eye-popping returns. Martin Sass, president of M.D. Sass Investors Service, a New York-based investment concern, set up a risk arbitrage department in mid-1985 with two analysts and a trader. He buys stocks of target companies after a proposal has been announced and increases his position as the merger nears completion. He doesn't use borrowed funds and doesn't sell stock short. Mr. Sass says his clients have no complaints about their returns of more than 20% on the takeover stocks.    Perrin Long, a securities industry analyst at Lipper Analytical Services, says that although Wall Street securities firms might not commit large portions of their capital to arbitrage, leverage can magnify the impact of the funds committee. Wall Street giants as well as limited partnerships managed by independent arbitragers usually augment their capital with bank and stock loans as well as by using equity options.    But the profits arbitragers have made over the years haven't endeared them to the rest of the financial community, other investors or corporate managements. Many were secretly pleased to see Mr. Boesky fall, and they hope he will end up taking many of his kind down with him.    &quot;We're not looking for sympathy or legal protection. But we don't deserve vilification,&quot; one arbitrager says.    Vilification or not, big changes lie ahead for the business. &quot;Arbitrage will return to what it was at the start -- a professional activity managed by some of the biggest houses on the Street,&quot; a 20-year veteran arbitrager says.    In addition to there being fewer players, there already is less money to play with. A pair of Wall Street firms privately admit they've reduced the capital they commit to arbitrage, and some investors in arbitrage limited partnerships are expected to pull out their money.    Some arbitragers estimate that perhaps half of the $15 billion that was employed in their business before Mr. Boesky's fall already has left, or soon will. They say $2 billion might have been lost as stock prices declined, that liquidation of Mr. Boesky's partnerships took about $3 billion out and that frightened investors might pull out another $3 billion.    The impact of a decrease in capital can already be seen in wider spreads in many stocks, arbitragers say. For example, when Chesebrough-Ponds Inc. received a $66-a-share offer from American Brands Inc. last month, Chesebrough's stock rose only to $61 a share on the news. Arbitragers say that in other times, the American Brands offer, which was backed by rock-solid bank financing, would have driven the Chesebrough stock right up to or perhaps above the $66 offer price.    There is something like paranoia on Wall Street these days, a trader who has been running the arbitrage department at a small brokerage firm for less than six months says. &quot;Everything that could go wrong has gone wrong,&quot; he says. &quot;I feel like the captain of an oil tanker trying to maneuver out of the Persian Gulf.&quot;    For now, though, that firm as well as its big brothers such as Merrill Lynch plan to stay in arbitrage. And some brave souls even entered the business recently. Citicorp, for example, began an arbitrage department this summer, after the Levine case was announced but before the disclosures about Mr. Boesky. </TEXT></DOC>