<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880106-0165 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Human Rights Abuses in Nicaragua </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   According to Gary Moore's op-ed article (&quot;The Agony of Southeast Nicaragua Too Long Overlooked,&quot; Dec. 11), &quot;readers of the Nov. 5 Americas Watch report on Nicaragua were given the impression that Americas Watch had looked into every nook and cranny of Nicaragua.&quot; Apparently, Mr. Moore did not read the report, because one section summarizes violations of the laws of war by the Sandinistas compiled by others, principally the anti-Sandinista Permanent Commission on Human Rights (CPDH); another section summarizes violations by the Contras compiled by others, principally the anti-Contra group, Witness for Peace. In each case, we point out explicitly that the cases summarized were not independently investigated by Americas Watch.    Mr. Moore also gives the impression that Americas Watch has not investigated Sandinista abuses in the Southeast of Nicaragua. In fact, however, much of a report we published in May 1987 was devoted to describing such abuses. That report was based on an investigation that included visits to refugee camps in Costa Rica and extensive research in the Southeast where we have conducted research on several occasions. Our May report discussed indiscriminate attacks by the Sandinistas that took place in 1986. As our November report pointed out, however, we have not ourselves obtained evidence of indiscriminate attacks by the Sandinistas in 1987. That does not mean such abuses did not take place. Given the abuses by both sides in the war that we did investigate, undoubtedly there were many more abuses that did not come to our attention.    Though we make no claim to have looked in every nook and cranny, we do make the claim that we were diligent in efforts to investigate abuses; that we are evenhanded in reporting abuses by both sides; and that our reporting is reliable. We are not aware of any group that has done comparably well on all these counts. In contrast, though Mr. Moore claims to have been diligent, I assume he makes no claim to be evenhanded, and his reporting on Americas Watch suggests that reliability is not his strong suit.    Aryeh Neier   Vice Chairman   Americas Watch   New York   ---   Mr. Moore presents important new evidence of Sandinista army bombing and strafing of noncombatants in Nicaragua. However, his broadside attack against the human-rights community at large for having &quot;concealed&quot; such abuses is unwarranted and irresponsible.    The Puebla Institute, a lay Catholic human-rights group, broke the bombing story almost a year ago. At a Jan. 29, 1987, press conference in New York, one week after its fact-finding delegation returned from Central America, Puebla presented documentation of 13 separate incidents of indiscriminate bombing and shooting against unarmed civilians by the Sandinista military. The incidents occurred in such rural Zelaya villages and hamlets as Punta Gorda, Nueva Guinea, Mahogany and Rama between late 1984 and late 1986. According to our evidence, the surprise Sandinista bombing was conducted by Soviet Hind 24 helicopters and push-pull planes, and search-and-destroy missions were carried out in civilian villages by the Sandinista Simon Bolivar and Coro de Angeles battalions, resulting in several civilian deaths, including young children. Our evidence was based on the testimony of about 50 survivors of such assaults, now living as refugees in U.N. camps along Costa Rica's northern border.    Contrary to Mr. Moore's charge that such evidence &quot;has yet to find its way into human-rights reports,&quot; Puebla investigator Ronald Radosh published an article about the Sandinista bombings in The New Republic last March 9; Puebla formally lodged a human-rights complaint against the Sandinista government specifically on the bombings with the Organization of American States' human rights commission on March 23, 1987; in April, Puebla released a 52-page human-rights report featuring the bombings entitled, Fleeing Their Homeland; and on June 17, I testified about the bombings in Congress.    In August, Puebla conducted another investigation that revealed new evidence of Sandinista murders of noncombatants. We presented this evidence in an update to our OAS case, which that organization is currently considering.    Nina Shea   Washington Director   Puebla Institute   Washington</TEXT></DOC>