<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Small Business (A Special Report): Getting Started --- The Big Idea: David Olson Didn't Invent Anything, He Just Set a Satellite Dish on a Truck </HL><AUTHOR> Paulette Thomas </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TEL </IN><TEXT>   A BORN TINKERER if ever there was one, David Olson repaired TV antennas and installed satellite dishes from the back of a truck trailer. He was successful at those jobs, small ventures that they were.    Then hit the Big Idea: Why not mount a satellite dish on the back of a truck?    It was that single inspiration only five years ago that launched Mr. Olson on a small-business dream come true. The trade-school graduate and former auto mechanic today operates a $12 million-a-year piece of the Global Village -- a &quot;satellite farm&quot; that collects, packages and distributes news, sports and cultural events to television viewers around the world.    His Houston-based company is a testimonial to the power of the Big Idea -- a flash of inspiration about possibilities. Mr. Olson invented neither the satellite dish nor the truck. But he grasped the potential of putting the two together.    His Satellite Transmission and Receiving Specialists -- STARS, for short -- has since provide the video signal for such events as the U.S.-Soviet summit in Iceland, the aftermath of the Mexico City earthquake, Prince Andrew's royal wedding and a slew of football bowls and rock concerts -- more than 2,500 events in all. It was after establishing its over-the-road success that Mr. Olson proceeded to build the Houston International Teleport, which collects data and video feeds from cable, fiber-optic and satellite transmissions, and then redistributes the information via satellite.    &quot;I can't think of any other business more attuned to the needs of tomorrow than the downlink-uplink business,&quot; says Raymond Fielding, a communications professor at the University of Houston.    Not every Big Idea, of course, gives birth to a successful business. A thinker isn't necessarily an entrepreneur. Mr. Olson happens to be both.    His timing, for instance, was right. In the heady boom-town atmosphere of Houston in the late 1970s, Mr. Olson found enthusiastic financial backing that might otherwise have failed to materialize. Once established, with expanding markets for more and faster information, he found no dearth of customers.    Moreover, his idea was born not in a moment of deep thought or in a bolt from the blue, but in the middle of a marketing ploy. He was trying to sell satellite dishes, known as &quot;earth stations&quot; -- new devices whose use had been deregulated. Because he could think of no better way of describing the newfangled equipment, Mr. Olson built a receiver on a truck trailer, and carted it around to any oilman or rancher who expressing the vaguest interest in buying one.    When the high-tech traveling salesman would pull onto a farm, &quot;People would say, 'Oh, that's great! What is it?' &quot; he recalls. At that point his dish-on-a-truck was simply accepting the signals flowing down from the satellite.    Mr. Olson completed his first successful uplinking-sending the signal up to the satellite-by capitalizing on a competitor's snafu. Mr. Olson had a contract to clear the grounds and make certain an open satellite shot was available for covering a tennis tournament at a Houston Country Club. But he discovered that a dejected technician from an established telecommunications firm, working on a big, bulky dish, couldn't get the signal to the satellite. It looked like ESPN, the leading purveyor of sports programming on cable TV, wouldn't get to broadcast the event.    Mr. Olson intervened. As the frustrated competitor gave up and quaffed a few beers, Mr. Olson crawled around the satellite dish until he found the malfunctioning part. &quot;My philosophy has always been the show must go on -- even if it wasn't exactly my show,&quot; he says. He arranged for a new working part to be airlifted in 12 hours to Houston, fixed the dish, and the remainder of the tournament was carried by ESPN.    The sports network was impressed with Mr. Olson -- and Mr. Olson with himself. &quot;I thought we could build something that didn't have the problem that their trucks had,&quot; which was focusing the signal, he said.    Explaining the idea to potential financial backers was a bigger problem, even after he did other successful uplinks of video conferences and sports events. &quot;I went to around 20 banks without a proper business plan,&quot; he recalls, &quot;starting first where I did my personal business.&quot; No sooner would Mr. Olson mention that he was competing with ATandamp;T than the bankers would politely show him the door.    Mr. Olson finally found his sugar daddy while installing a satellite dish at the home of Kenneth Schnitzer, who owned the Houston Rockets basketball team at the time. Mr. Schnitzer happened to be on one of the bank boards who listened to Mr. Olson's plea for funds. &quot;What I don't know about telecommunications would fill the Library of Congress,&quot; Mr. Schnitzer drawls today. But he was so impressed with the earnest young antenna installer that he agreed to finance his first truck, up to $500,000.    In 30 days, Mr. Olson and a few hightech specialists had built the truck for $320,000. In typical Texas fashion, Mr. Olson and his backer sealed the deal with a handshake. &quot;We didn't sign any of the papers until we had the second truck built,&quot; Mr. Olson says.    Mobile satellite transmitters had already been built by that point -- but mostly by the major television networks, and they had far too few. Mr. Olson's first 40-foot tractor-trailer rig embarked on its maiden voyage to Miami, ready to hook up the ABC network to a United States Football League game in the Tangerine Bowl. Would the delicate equipment survive the drive from Houston? &quot;We were scared,&quot; says Mr. Olson. &quot;We had more than our fingers crossed.&quot; Happily, an interview with running back Herschel Walker became the first official uplink transmission by STARS.    Eventually, the company built four tractor-trailer trucks and two &quot;semi-transportable units,&quot; which are ready to broadcast 13 hours after arriving on site. What's more, Mr. Olson had chosen trucks that could be easily airlifted on big-bellied C-130 transport planes.    But there's only so much call for earthquake images and Herschel Walker interviews. So Mr. Olson branched out, building the Houston International Teleport in the parched plains of nearby Missouri City, Texas. There, a couple of dozen satellite dishes -- in various sizes pointed to all directions of the sky-dwarf a few tiny trees. The company chose the four-acre site not only because it was cheap ($1 a square foot) but also because it happened to be a point on the globe at which international and domestic dishes can be turned to see any satellite without interfering with other signals.    Mr. Olson didn't have a grand scheme as the business grew -- few small-business owners do. But it occurred to him that he should begin wearing suits to work and listening to companies who needed to move around information. &quot;It's just evolved,&quot; he says. &quot;Everything we do just sort of happened naturally.&quot;    The company now moves data and voices for such corporate clients as Tenneco Inc., which can thus communicate with remote gold mines in Utah where no phone lines exist. STARS began &quot;encryption&quot; services -- scrambling signals for the pay-per-view industry, mostly for boxing and horse-racing events, and has grabbed 90% of the domestic market for such services. It has also hooked up with cable companies, transmitting 80 hours of programming a day from domestic and international sources.    Although still closely held, Mr. Olson has come a long way from trying to raise money from his antenna customers. His company recently obtained $8.5 million from Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., the University of Houston and a Swiss utility company. STARS started out in the black. It posted losses of less than $1 million during an expansion binge in 1985 and 1986, and broke even last year.    &quot;This is far from what I dreamed we'd ever do,&quot; Mr. Olson says. &quot;We were hoping to build a truck.&quot;    ---   Ms. Thomas is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Houston bureau. </TEXT></DOC>