<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890728-0137 </DOCNO><DD> = 890728 </DD><AN> 890728-0137. </AN><HL> Africa:@  Sudan: The Faltering of Arab Democracy@  ----@  By Robert D. Kaplan </HL><DD> 07/28/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   The kindest thing that probably could have happened to Sudan has just happened. A group of middle-ranking officers, reportedly backed by Egypt and the U.S., last month overthrew its democratically elected government.    To understand why such a seemingly retrograde step is actually a move forward, it is necessary to back up a few years to the time of another coup. April 1985 was an intense, inspiring time in Khartoum. In the midst of dust storms and 100-degree heat, tens of thousands of Sudanese, from shoeshine boys to college professors, staged a series of peaceful, well-organized demonstrations that led to a bloodless coup against the military dictator, Jaafar Numeiri.    This was one Arab revolt in which Communists, Baathists and Islamic fundamentalists played no part. Sudan's version of the Ayatollah Khomeini, Hassan el-Turabi, was safely tucked away in prison at the time. The coup's principal power brokers were members of the secular middle class -- doctors and lawyers whose unions organized the first demonstrations. It was an article of faith among almost every foreign journalist in Khartoum that Mr. Numeiri was the devil incarnate, and that the chanting protesters in the street constituted the army of the righteous.    Further inspiration was to come with free elections the following year, in April 1986, and the choice of Sadeq al-Mahdi as prime minister. &quot;Sadeq,&quot; as everyone in Khartoum referred to him, was a Western Arabist's or Africanist's dream come true: an articulate, Oxford-educated political moderate and Islamic modernist, who during his years of London exile was a frequent source of quotes and articles in a journalistic and academic subculture that brought together Arabs sympathetic to the West and Westerners sympathetic to the Arabs.    No one doubted that democracy, even with such an Olympian figure as Mr. al-Mahdi in charge, was a daring experiment for Sudan, Africa's largest country -- a sprawling, illiterate nation with little infrastructure and millions of starving people. But to say that Sudan might have been better off with Mr. Numeiri, the pro-American dictator who had led his country back into civil war, than with Mr. al-Mahdi and his band of moderate democrats was tantamount to heresy. Even Amnesty International was praising Sudan at the time for the release of political prisoners and the halt to the amputations prescribed by Mr. Numeiri as a punishment for thieves.    Never mind that the number of people who actually had their limbs amputated was about 50, while the number who had their lives saved in the last completely successful Western relief effort -- which, not coincidentally, took place when Mr. Numeiri was still in power -- was in the millions.    Mr. Numeiri in his last years at the helm was an incompetent thug, kept in power by a 30,000-man private security force that had a budget as large as the regular army. In comparison, however, to almost every other Arab and African security force, Mr. Numeiri and his group were saints. People in Sudan, unlike those in Iraq, Syria and other Islamic countries, were free to speak their mind to foreign journalists, which is why Mr. Numeiri got worse press reviews than the leaders of Iraq and Syria.    Mr. Numeiri's other saving grace was his dependency on the U.S.: It enabled Washington to bully him into allowing massive shipments of grain to Kordofan in early 1985, just in time to avert a famine in the western province. It was the last punctual delivery of emergency food aid in Sudan's history.    Prime Minister al-Mahdi started ineffectual and ended venal. At the beginning, millions starved to prove the point that Sudan's democrats were non-aligned, and were not going to take orders from impatient technocrats at the U.S. Agency for International Development. In the end, Mr. al-Mahdi was responsible for a policy of tribal massacres in the south of the country. His Arab government was unwilling to make peace with Sudan's non-Moslem, African citizens. It was also unable to defeat them on the battlefield, so it bribed friendly tribes to murder the Dinka rebels, as well as their women and children. This, of course, was in addition to starving them out.    Lt. Gen. Omar Hassan Ahmed el-Bashir, the leader of the officers' group that took power in the June 30 coup, said that Mr. al-Mahdi's government had turned Sudan into &quot;a nation of beggars.&quot; Lt. Gen. elBashir, who has promised to end the civil war and cooperate more with Western relief agencies, was being charitable.    Under Prime Minister al-Mahdi, Sudan's political life had so dissolved that by the time of last month's coup, it was conveniently forgotten that Mr. al-Mahdi's government was a democratically elected one. Mr. al-Mahdi was not an extermist who hijacked the democratic process. As much as any other Sudanese politician, he stood for the middle ground in Arab-Sudanese society. What few want to own up to is that the democratic system was less at fault than the attitude of the nation's leaders and those who freely elected them.    In the months prior to Mr. al-Mahdi's election in 1986, I had several long talks with him and his followers. They displayed an alarming lack of interest in the famine, providing short replies only when asked about it.    Mr. al-Mahdi told me: &quot;It {famine} is no longer a serious problem because international aid has been forthcoming.&quot; Famine, in his mind, was the responsibility of the wealthy West, not of any Sudanese government. More alarming was his attitude toward the non-Arab, non-Moslem southerners who accounted for roughly half the country's population. Like rulers in other Arab countries, Mr. al-Mahdi never doubted his particular ethnic and religous group's right to dominate others.    The prime minister's hesitation to accept a ceasefire in the war with the southern rebels, and his government's obstructionist attitude toward allowing food supplies into the south, very much reflected the reluctance of Arab-Sudanese to accept what is geographically obvious: that Sudan is only half an Arab polity; that it is also half an African one.    In the uncharted hell of Sudan's southern jungles, all statistics are suspect. But it is likely that Sudan's experiment in democracy has claimed even more lives than that other experiment in Arab-run democracy, Lebanon. There are no other examples, simply because in no other Arab-ruled country, save Algeria, is there any government willing to risk its hold on power through elections.    As yet, the only place that democracy in the Arab world works well is in the minds of Western idealists -- the kind who thought so highly of Mr. al-Mahdi four years ago.    ---   Mr. Kaplan, who lives in Portugal, wrote &quot;Surrender or Starve: The Wars Behind the Famine&quot; (Westview, 1988). </TEXT></DOC>