<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0156 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Big Bush Opportunity </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   The people who pitch politics are about to serve George Bush a gopher ball. It's called the trade bill. Candidate Bush could whack the thing out of the park by standing up someplace and demanding that his President veto any 1,000-page protectionist monstrosity, with or without a plant-closing provision.    With one powerful swing, Mr. Bush would free himself from four potential problems -- Ronald Reagan, Jim Baker, Big Business and Congress. He could show the electorate he's his own man, in a much more persuasive way than assuming a forceful tone of voice or staking out positions on offshore drilling and the Pledge of Allegiance. He would show himself believing in something, and defending the office he now seeks.    In this case, Mr. Bush could lead the President. Mr. Reagan vetoed the first trade bill, and has been sustained by the Senate. But the President has promised to sign a &quot;cleaned-up&quot; bill, and has signaled his opposition to the plant-closing provision and the restrictions on export of Alaskan oil. This is a blank check for congressional whim on everything else, and the Lloyd Bentsens of the world are already saying they'll raise the corpse from its crypt.    In fact the most objectionable feature of the bill is not the plant-closing provision, as feckless as it is, but the further congressional assaults on the prerogatives of the presidency. It would strip the President of the responsibility of initiating any trade retaliation, lodging it instead in the office of Trade Representative, an unelected bureaucrat subject to congressional badgering. The Vice President ought to say: No President with eight months left to serve should sign away authority that will cripple his successor. If I win the presidency, how can I conduct the foreign affairs of the U.S. if one of my underlings is authorized to work at what may be cross-purposes? This appeal, it seems to us, could scarcely be resisted by Mr. Reagan.    Or for that matter by Treasury Secretary Baker, an important player in the negotiations to sign a &quot;responsible&quot; trade bill. We admire Mr. Baker's talents, and we'd suggest he move from the Treasury to the Bush campaign sooner rather than later. But if Jim Baker is always right about matters of politics and policy, then he should be running for President, not George Bush. By staking out his own position, moreover, Mr. Bush would be sending a much-needed message to the boys on the bus that he, not the forest of Muhammad Ali-type handlers around him, is calling the shots in this campaign.    Which brings us to Big Business. The reason &quot;plant closings&quot; became the centerpiece of opposition to the trade bill is that the professed free marketeers of big business support the rest of the boondoggle. In the nearby Potomac Watch column, Paul Gigot relates the attitudes and ideas that the embroidered-pants set has brought to the trade bill. Some of these people are Mr. Bush's friends and financial supporters. By repudiating the trade bill, Mr. Bush establishes a position of independence, an answer to Democrats who in other ways will surely hit him with this traditional Republican albatross.    Finally, there is Congress, which delights in hamstringing any administration with encroachments on presidential authority. As with the congressional empire-building that followed the War Powers Resolution, the Trade Act of 1988 would sprout trade duchies all over Capitol Hill. Bob Dole was the candidate who told people he could work with Congress, and they voted overwhelmingly for the Vice President. The next President is going to have to fight this battle, but Mr. Bush has to create public support for his authority now, not next February when the Dodds and Dingells are trying to devour his policies and people. The impending thousand-page spitball offers a perfect opportunity for Candidate Bush.    Or Candidate Dukakis, for that matter, who also has a need to show presidential character and establish the importance of executive authority. We suspect, though, that President Dukakis would find it difficult to resist becoming a creature in Jim Wright's circus. Anyone who thinks this is a harsh assessment missed Assistant Ringmaster John Dingell's remark to the Journal's David Shribman earlier this week: Dukakis &quot;can't come down here with the suspicion that this is an evil place and that he brings truth, goodness, integrity and ideas of how everything should work.&quot; Mike Dukakis, who ought to be asked whether he supports transferring decisions from the President to the office of the Trade Representative, probably has to gulp and swallow that kind of guff. George Bush doesn't.    As his party's assured nominee, Mr. Bush now commands stature beyond the vice presidency, and it will mean much in terms of mandate if Mr. Reagan's successor says he does not wish to operate under the terms of this bill. There is one last reason to seize the trade-bill opportunity. The public would recognize that this is a position connected to something real. Most of the stuff candidates talk about simply isn't. It would show the difference between chatting about the presidency and acting like a President. </TEXT></DOC>