<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Damage Control:How GE and KidderManaged to Ward OffAn Impending Disaster---Softer Talk and Swift ActionAvoided Criminal ChargesAgainst Brokerage House---'A Win,' but at a High Price---By James B. Stewart and Janet GuyonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A group of top managers of General Electric Co. were having lunch at the company's Fairfield, Conn., headquarters last Feb. 12 when a secretary burst into their private dining room with terrible news.    Federal marshals had that morning entered the New York offices of Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., a securities firm acquired by GE only eight months earlier, and led away one of its top executives in handcuffs.    Events quickly took a turn for the worse.    Two days later, on Saturday, Feb. 14, Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gary Lynch, head of the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement unit, met with Kidder representatives and told them the firm was to be indicted on criminal insider-trading charges. Mr. Giuliani bluntly suggested that Kidder plead guilty.    For Kidder and GE, the prospect was devastating. Criminal prosecution and conviction, thought lawyers for the two companies, would shatter Kidder's already damaged reputation. Kidder would be barred from money management, barred from the mutual-fund business, banned from broker-dealer offerings. Its municipal-bond business could collapse. Every local and state regulator in the country would be investigating the firm, threatening even more restrictions. Foreign governments would also shun Kidder.    Then there were the likely civil suits. If convicted of a crime, the firm would be bound by findings of wrongdoing that could fuel racketeering lawsuits and treble-damage claims of untold millions. GE suddenly faced the prospect of writing off its entire $600 million investment in Kidder as worthless.    But last Thursday, 16 weeks after the trauma began, Kidder was given a new lease on life: Mr. Giuliani announced that he wouldn't prosecute the firm. Although public attention was focused primarily on the $25.3 million Kidder is paying to settle SEC charges -- the second-largest settlement in the SEC's history -- Mr. Giuliani's decision was considered a victory by Kidder and GE and climaxed one of the most stunning turnarounds in the annals of corporate scandal. How it happened is a story with important implications for other firms swept into Wall Street's biggest insidertrading scandal and for any company that finds itself suddenly confronted with crime in its midst.    At their first meeting that Saturday in February, Mr. Giuliani laid out the implications of the week's events for Kidder, which is 80% owned by GE. Martin A. Siegel, once Kidder's foremost takeover specialist, had just pleaded guilty to two felonies and described a scheme in which, he said, he swapped inside information about impending takeover attempts with Robert M. Freeman, the head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co.    Mr. Siegel said that he passed on the information to Richard Wigton, the Kidder official arrested on Feb. 12, and Timothy Tabor, a former Kidder arbitrager who had been arrested the day before. Kidder had earned millions of dollars by trading on the information allegedly received from Goldman.    Then Mr. Giuliani dropped another bombshell: The government also had evidence that Kidder officials, not Mr. Siegel, had entered into an illegal &quot;parking&quot; arrangement with Ivan F. Boesky -- the former arbitrager who had agreed to plead guilty to a felony and pay $100 million to settle other SEC insider-trading charges -- to hide Mr. Boesky's ownership of certain stocks. Kidder had been implicated by Mr. Boesky's former head trader, Michael Davidoff, though the government didn't say so at the time.    Kidder, Mr. Giuliani stated, could be criminally liable for both the Siegel and the parking schemes.    By the end of the Saturday meeting, any peaceful settlement, let alone one that wouldn't involve criminal charges, looked highly unlikely. Given the suddenness of events, there wasn't much the Kidder people could say. They didn't know the facts, and they were still reeling from the public arrests.    Kidder's lawyers from Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, the securities firm's longstanding outside counsel, took a combative approach close to that of Goldman, which vowed to fight the charges against its employee with all the resources it could muster. At the Saturday meeting, Sullivan andamp; Cromwell lawyers seemed to irritate Mr. Giuliani, belittling Mr. Siegel's reliability and questioning the strength of the government's case.    But GE wasn't so sure that Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's approach was the right one. On Feb. 12, the day the case broke, GE had put its deputy general counsel, Joseph Handros, in charge of the case. Mr. Handros, a career GE lawyer, in 1985 negotiated an end to a suspension of GE's government contracts, a suspension imposed after GE was charged with defrauding the Defense Department. The company later pleaded guilty.    In the Kidder case, Mr. Handros quickly recommended that Kidder hire Gary P. Naftalis, a partner at Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin andamp; Frankel in New York who had expertise in white-collar crime cases -- and no ties to Kidder that might influence his judgment. Mr. Naftalis, a genial former prosecutor, had sat in on the meeting the morning of Feb. 14.    GE launched an investigation the afternoon of the 14th, using lawyers from both Sullivan andamp; Cromwell and Kramer Levin and members of its own highly regarded audit staff. The auditors, coincidentally, had descended on Kidder the previous Monday for a thorough review of the firm's operations. Using government subpoenas in the case as a guide to suspect transactions, they pored over reams of Kidder trading records and Goldman records obtained from Goldman.    They conducted intensive interviews of Kidder employees. Exhaustive research was done to uncover every bit of public information about the takeover deals under investigation, in the hope of coming up with alternative, innocent explanations for the investments made by Kidder's arbitrage department. The investigators never spoke to Mr. Siegel, so they could only infer the substance of his likely testimony. Nor did they talk to Goldman's Mr. Freeman, though &quot;we would have loved to,&quot; says one of the investigators. (A Goldman spokesman says Kidder never asked to interview Mr. Freeman, who has denied any wrongdoing, as have Mr. Wigton and Mr. Tabor.)    The results of the investigation were discouraging. The trading records provided strong corroboration of what was expected to be Mr. Siegel's testimony. Although Kidder's trading in some of the stocks under investigation, such as General Foods Co., looked like it might be plausibly defended based on publicly available information, other situations were devastating.    For example, Kidder displayed perfect timing in investing in Continental Group Inc., a Goldman client, just before the emergence of a white knight whose higher bid saved it from a hostile takeover. The investigators were at a loss to explain the trading on any basis other than inside information. &quot;One or two examples like this, maybe we could have lived with,&quot; says one lawyer. &quot;But not five or six.&quot;    And Kidder, unlike Goldman, was shackled with the likely testimony of one of its own former directors, Mr. Siegel. In fact, from the moment Mr. Handros learned of Mr. Siegel's admissions, he believed that Kidder was in serious trouble.    Kidder also had to contend with the possible involvement of other Kidder officials, including Ralph D. DeNunzio, the firm's chairman and chief executive, who had asked Mr. Siegel to assume a role in arbitrage but not make it public. Mr. DeNunzio hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing; GE and Kidder officials decline comment on what its investigation learned about Mr. DeNunzio and whether he remains under investigation. GE executives have said they found nothing to indicate civil or criminal wrongdoing by Mr. DeNunzio. Mr. DeNunzio couldn't be reached for comment on any aspect of the case, but has previously denied any wrongdoing.    Corporate criminal law generally holds a firm strictly liable for the criminal acts of officials. Kidder's lawyers concluded that the law in the area is &quot;dreadful for the corporation,&quot; says one lawyer. Another lawyer involved says that the combination of the facts and the law was so bad that if the case against Kidder had gone to trial, &quot;we thought there was a serious risk that a judge would give a jury instructions directing a verdict of guilt.&quot;    During the investigation of possible criminal liability, the GE auditors picked up the pace of their broader investigation of the firm. GE officials were appalled by their discoveries. &quot;The situation was abysmal,&quot; says one person involved in the audit. &quot;There were no systems and controls. It was basically run like a family business. DeNunzio ran it as he saw fit, and things had gotten out of control.&quot;    GE swiftly decided to take control of Kidder, a decision it immediately incorporated into its strategy for dealing with Mr. Giuliani. Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, which had continued to argue that Kidder should fight the government's charges, was dismissed from the negotiations with the government and was replaced by Mr. Naftalis and his firm, Kramer Levin. GE decided that no Kidder executives, including Mr. DeNunzio, would be directly involved in further negotiations with the government. The company ordered Kidder employees to make no comments to the press like that of a Goldman employee who had vowed to &quot;bring Guiliani down.&quot;    GE's goal was to show Mr. Giuliani that GE was taking control and cleaning house. &quot;We were trying to convince the man that the Kidder that existed then and had been involved in the Siegel situation wouldn't be the future Kidder,&quot; says a GE executive.    On March 7, Lawrence A. Bossidy, one of two GE vice chairmen and chief executive of General Electric Financial Services, the holding company for GE's financial-services businesses, met with Mr. Giuliani at the U.S. attorney's offices in lower Manhattan. The GE/Kidder team viewed it as a make-or-break meeting that would probably seal Kidder's fate.    Mr. Bossidy, a man of impressive stature who gave up a potential career in professional baseball to work at GE, pulled out the stops. He emphasized that GE knew nothing about the situation when it bought the firm. He described GE's investigation and acknowledged the discovery of serious problems, though he stopped short of acknowledging criminal wrongdoing. He promised sweeping management changes. And he announced that Kidder would get out of risk arbitrage. Mr. Bossidy argued that it wouldn't be fair to punish Kidder's 7,000 innocent employees and 300,000 customers with criminal sanctions that might destroy the firm.    GE's bold proposals and its candor seemed to make a strong impression on Mr. Giuliani. &quot;He indicated we were a breath of fresh air compared to what he was hearing from other firms involved in the scandal,&quot; says one participant. Mr. Giuliani asked if Kidder would cooperate in the government's investigation, and the GE/Kidder negotiators agreed that it would. The government made no promises. Nonetheless, for the first time, the GE and Kidder negotiators saw a glimmer of hope that Mr. Giuliani might be swayed.    But time was running out. The government's deadline for obtaining indictments of the three arbitragers arrested the previous month -- Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor -- would expire in little more than a week. The negotiators felt strongly that if the government was forced to meet that deadline, it would indict Kidder along with the three. They went to Stanley S. Arkin, Mr. Wigton's lawyer, and asked him to seek a postponement. Mr Arkin agreed.    That accord may have been the highwater mark of cooperation between Mr. Wigton and Kidder, his employer. At a meeting soon after between Mr. Arkin and the GE/Kidder lawyers, Mr. Arkin learned what Kidder's cooperation with the government meant for Mr. Wigton. He was told that if Mr. Wigton was guilty, he should plead guilty and cooperate; if he was innocent, he should fight the charges; but if he fought the charges and was convicted, he risked having GE sue him for $3 million it had already paid him for his Kidder stock and having GE withhold $3 million he was still owed. GE says that it would have to consider suing, on the grounds of fraud, any guilty Kidder employee who had sold his shares to GE.    Late in March the GE and Kidder negotiators again met with Mr. Giuliani. This time, Mr. Giuliani set forth the conditions Kidder would have to meet, principally that it would have to reach a settlement with the SEC. It was implicit that if the conditions were met, Kidder wouldn't be indicted. &quot;We were ecstatic,&quot; says one of the participants.    On April 9, Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor were indicted on insider-trading charges. Kidder wasn't. (The indictments against the three men were dropped last month, but the government says it will seek broader indictments against them.) Kidder announced that it would no longer pay the legal fees of either Mr. Tabor or Mr. Wigton, and suspended Mr. Wigton. That date effectively marked the end of any cooperation between Kidder and Goldman. Relations had started to cool as word circulated that Kidder might cooperate; they froze the day this newspaper reported that Kidder had staved off indictment by agreeing to cooperate.    A Goldman spokesman says Goldman isn't angry at GE and Kidder. &quot;Kidder and GE have acted in their interests. They don't have all the facts,&quot; he says. &quot;Goldman continues to believe in Bob Freeman.&quot;    Kidder's negotiations with the SEC began the following week in Washington. Mr. Bossidy handled the initial meeting with Mr. Lynch, the SEC enforcement chief; Messrs. Naftalis and Handros took charge of the negotiations for GE/Kidder. John Sturc, associate director of enforcement of the SEC, did most of the negotiating for the agency.    The principal argument was over money, and the discussions nearly foundered when Mr. Sturc said he wanted to hold Kidder liable for Goldman's allegedly unlawful trading profits. Under the Insider Trading Sanctions Act, a wrongdoer can be held liable for treble damages of all profits generated by an insider-trading scheme. But the GE/Kidder negotiators were furious at the prospect of having to pay any Goldman damages.    &quot;This was absolutely non-negotiable,&quot; says one GE participant.    In the midst of the SEC negotiations, GE/Kidder made good on many of its representations to the government about GE's taking control and cleaning house. On May 14, GE assumed direct control of Kidder, ousting three top executives including Mr. DeNunzio as chief executive, and named a GE director to head the firm. Mr. DeNunzio remains as chairman, though his tenure in that position will be brief, the government has been assured. GE also took control of Kidder's board; Mr. Wigton was one of the directors replaced.    Ultimately the SEC dropped some of its demands, including the one about Kidder's paying any penalties incurred by Goldman, and Kidder agreed to pay $25.3 million -- including $13.7 million in alleged illegal profits -- to settle the SEC's civil insider-trading and parking cases. It also agreed to SEC supervision of controls planned by the firm to prevent insider trading and breaches of confidentiality. By Sunday, May 31, all but a few minor details of the Kidder settlement had been hammered out.    With the settlement in hand, GE and Kidder officials waited anxiously over the weekend for the final word from Mr. Giuliani. They heard nothing. Then, last Tuesday, Messrs. Bossidy and Handros got the word they had been waiting for: Mr. Giuliani said he wouldn't prosecute.    As part of the final agreement between GE/Kidder and the government, Mr. Giuliani agreed to issue a statement announcing that Kidder wouldn't be indicted. GE and Kidder weren't allowed to see it in advance, but it was an unusually warm endorsement of an institution that, four months before, Mr. Giuliani thought should be criminally sanctioned. At a later press conference he praised GE as a &quot;responsible corporate citizen.&quot;    Kidder's troubles aren't entirely over. The government's investigation of individuals at Kidder involved in the alleged parking scheme continues. Civil lawsuits by individuals and companies claiming damages from insider trading, breaches of confidentiality and other securities-law violations are a near-certainty.    But to those at GE and Kidder who knew just how close Kidder had come to criminal indictment, the transformation of Kidder from potential defendant to corporate good citizen in the eyes of the government seemed only slightly less than miraculous.    The day Mr. Wigton and Mr. Freeman were arrested, GE and Kidder officials gathered for dinner at Le Bernardin, an exclusive French restaurant in New York, to celebrate a recent Kidder deal, in what turned out to be a morose affair. It took last week's $25.3 million settlement to lift their spirits. &quot;We should have gone to Le Bernardin and had a big champagne party&quot; then, says a GE executive. &quot;This isn't a big loss for Kidder. It's a win.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>