<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880831-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Protective Orders Come Under Attack --- Plaintiffs Get Judges to Open Court Files </HL><AUTHOR> Paul M. Barrett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   In high-stakes court battles over product liability, internal corporate documents are often the best ammunition. A research report, a memo from the boss, or the minutes of a meeting, for example, can establish clearly what company officials knew about a product's safety or effectiveness -- and what they did about it.    But as defendants, manufacturers routinely press courts to wrap in secrecy any sensitive material unearthed in pre-trial investigation. Defense lawyers argue that plaintiffs demand information that could help a company's competitors, damage its reputation or stir up frivolous lawsuits.    Hoping to prevent long, costly disputes over what documents defendants have to surrender, judges grant blanket &quot;protective orders.&quot; The orders typically bar public dissemination of records and depositions even after a settlement or verdict. Plaintiffs' lawyers generally haven't balked as long as they can get the information they need to prepare for their trials.    But now, a growing number of plaintiffs' attorneys are refusing to consent to protective orders and are mounting challenges to them. These lawyers argue that protective orders tilt the scales further against individuals challenging well-heeled corporate defendants.    &quot;Essentially it makes every plaintiff's lawyer reinvent the wheel in every case,&quot; says C.F. Hitchcock, an attorney with Public Citizen Litigation Group. The Washington-based consumer advocacy organization has successfully opposed protective orders in lawsuits over the hazards of cigarettes and the Vietnam defoliant Agent Orange.    Companies hit with multiple liability suits frequently hire several regional law firms coordinated by national counsel and backed by specialists from corporate headquarters. In contrast, protective orders effectively isolate plaintiffs' lawyers, who are inhibited from consulting with each other or relying on documents pried loose in similar suits.    That is why Anthony Picadio fought such an order when representing Philip Brandimarti, a Pittsburgh man who suffered severe pelvic injuries when a forklift he was operating tipped over and landed on top of him. Mr. Brandimarti sued the machine's manufacturer in Pennsylvania state court for an unspecified amount, claiming that poorly designed safety devices contributed to the accident.    During the pre-trial investigation known as discovery, Mr. Picadio obtained accident reports from the forklift maker, Tow Motor Corp., which he says demonstrate the link between the forklift's design and numerous other mishaps similar to his client's. Determined to publicize information about what he considers to be a dangerous product, he persuaded the judge to force Tow Motor to turn over its safety documents without any restrictions.    After losing one trial but winning on appeal, Mr. Brandimarti is now awaiting a new trial. Meanwhile, Mr. Picadio has begun distributing the accident reports to other lawyers representing workers allegedly hurt by Tow Motor forklifts.    &quot;I don't see how the public interest is served by (defendants) keeping these kinds of documents close to the vest,&quot; Mr. Picadio says.    Courts are beginning to share that view. &quot;The whole idea of secrecy in a public court system is an abomination,&quot; says U.S. District Judge Jim Carrigan of Denver. He observes &quot;more and more&quot; plaintiffs' lawyers refusing to acquiesce in protective orders and trying to overturn established ones. &quot;Where there are disputes,&quot; he adds, &quot;I now tend to refuse protective orders.&quot;    Concern about the issue has also spread to Congress. In June, the House Energy and Commerce Committee approved an amendment to pending products-liability legislation that would encourage judges to permit disclosure of product hazards to government agencies and claimants in lawsuits.    To be sure, protective orders aren't in any danger of disappearing soon. Defense lawyers stress that under federal and state rules on discovery, a company shouldn't have to surrender its competitive edge as a cost of defending liability suits.    Judges grant protective orders not only in liability suits, but also in commercial litigation over such matters as antitrust and intellectual property. Moreover, other types of confidentiality arrangements -- especially secrecy pacts agreed to by plaintiffs as a condition of out-of-court settlement -- remain common, if controversial.    The change is that plaintiffs' lawyers are getting more savvy about the advantages of trading internal corporate documents, says Francis Hare Jr., a Birmingham, Ala., plaintiffs' attorney who recently completed a book on protective orders. Mr. Hare links this development with the recent emergence of numerous plaintiffs' clearinghouses, which provide attorneys with a means to compare trial tactics and evidence on purportedly dangerous products.    This kind of teamwork irks defense lawyers, who say it encourages irresponsible suits. The danger, says Edward Madeira, a corporate defense attorney with the Philadelphia law firm Pepper, Hamilton andamp; Scheetz, is that a single, highly publicized case can ignite &quot;a national crusade against a particular product&quot; before all of the facts have been examined in court.    But a number of courts have endorsed the plaintiff exchanges. Setting aside a protective order last year, the Texas Supreme Court said that &quot;allowing shared discovery is far more efficient than the repetitious system now employed.&quot; The court added that plaintiffs' cooperation &quot;make(s) discovery more truthful&quot; because companies &quot;subject to a number of suits concerning the same subject matter are forced to be consistent in their responses by the knowledge that their opponents can compare those responses.&quot;    Judges are also looking more skeptically at manufacturers' contention that valuable trade secrets are frequently at risk in liability cases.    A U.S. district judge in Wichita, Kan., recently watered down an earlier order protecting internal research records of Wyeth Laboratories, a division of American Home Products Corp. In that case, which is pending on appeal, Wyeth lost a $15 million jury verdict to the parents of a girl who suffered brain damage allegedly caused by her taking a whooping cough vaccine the company formerly produced.    Granting the parents' request to allow dissemination of the documents, Judge Patrick Kelly noted that &quot;the (trial) record does contain much, even within Wyeth's own files, which is adverse to its position here, and its desire to hold this evidence forever secret is understandable.&quot; But he emphasized that trade secrets weren't imperiled, especially since Wyeth no longer makes the vaccine.    The parents' lawyer, Ted Warshafsky, says the protective order would have sealed records, including some used during the trial, which should be available to consumers. He contends that some of the records indicate that, based on research Wyeth did in the 1970s, it could have reduced risks associated with the vaccine or produced a different, safer drug.    The company denies the charge. Wyeth's lead lawyer, Albert Knopp, insists that the company has in the past provided plaintiffs with all relevant safety information about the vaccine. &quot;The idea that there is some deep, dark secret in the Wyeth documents, some smoking gun, that's garbage,&quot; he says. More hearings on the disputed documents are scheduled for next month.    A similar confrontation is taking place in Philadelphia, where Bic Corp. is engaged in protective-order battles related to lawsuits charging that defects in the company's disposable lighters can cause dangerous fires.    In one pending suit, brought on behalf of the estate of a woman who died in a fire allegedly caused by a defective Bic lighter, a U.S. district judge rejected the company's claims that years of proprietary research on lighter design might be revealed. Concluding that Bic failed to provide specific evidence that it would suffer &quot;any significant harm to its competitive and financial position,&quot; Judge E. Mac Troutman ordered documents on safety tests and prior accident complaints disclosed without restrictions. The company has appealed the ruling.    Alan Schwartz, the plaintiff's lawyer opposing Bic, says he could have avoided hundreds of hours of extra work by agreeing to take the documents under a protective order. But he is looking beyond his case. &quot;The next person injured,&quot; he explains, &quot;shouldn't have to go through the same battle I've engaged in.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>