<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880923-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): The Chips --- Making Book on the Buck: Money Traders Profit From Tumult While Governments Seek Stability </HL><AUTHOR> Walter S. Mossberg </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MHC </CO><IN> FRX BNK MON </IN><TEXT>   IT IS 9 A.M. on a recent Friday in New York, and another battle between governments and the markets is under way for control of the U.S. dollar.    James Hohorst, who runs foreign-exchange trading in North America at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co., watches his troops from an elevated platform in a block-long trading room on Park Avenue. &quot;It's wild, really wild,&quot; he says. &quot;We're seeing tremendous demand for dollars, mostly from European and Arab investors. So we're bidding it up. But the central banks are fighting it.&quot;    Mr. Hohorst is but one field commander in an army of currency traders operating around the world. The market they run is unregulated, vast and open for business somewhere on the globe at almost any moment. From thousands of rooms linked by computer and telephone, the traders buy and sell, with lightning speed and on the sketchiest scraps of information and wild surmise, colossal amounts of dollars, marks, yen and other currencies -- at Manufacturer's Hanover alone, as much as $5 billion worth a day.    The traders thrive on volatility; the more turbulent the market, the greater their opportunity for profit -- or loss. But the governments whose money they trade hate turbulent markets. They want to minimize currency fluctuations, thus maintaining a predictable environment for trade and investment. So, every day, the traders and the governments go to war around the world.    This combat affects the world economy and the pocketbooks of every American. As currency values shift, the cost of goods and services sold across national borders shifts too. What happens to the dollar in these trading rooms influences the price of everything from imported clothing, cars and fruit in the U.S. to exports of American steel, wheat and computers.    The governments have a lot of weight on their side of the currency seesaw. In the 1970s currency exchange rates were allowed to float freely as the market dictated, but in 1985 James Baker, then U.S. Treasury Secretary, got the major trading nations to cooperate in an effort to more closely control those rates. The free float, he felt, had led to &quot;large, unsustainable imbalances&quot; in trade due to skewed currency values.    Known collectively as the Group of Seven, or G-7, these nations establish secret ranges for the value of the dollar, the linchpin currency in world trade. Then they try to enforce those ranges in the market, mainly by having their central banks -- the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank, the Bank of Japan, Germany's Bundesbank, and others -- buy and sell enough dollars and other currencies to keep the greenback's relative value where they want it.    Sometimes this works, for G-7 has enormous resources. Sometimes it doesn't, for the traders do, too.    On this Friday morning, the central banks are heavy sellers of the dollar, as they try to keep it from rising higher against the West German mark than G-7 would like. Fred Scala, a young, fair-haired currency trader at Manny Hanny, sees the effort in the dancing figures on his computer screen.    When he got to work at 7 a.m. the dollar was worth 1.88 marks, having surged in Europe while New York slept. Now, a few hours later, it is down to 1.8615. &quot;The central banks have been in big,&quot; he says. &quot;They're in strong.&quot;    He is watching the latest development in a sustained effort by the Seven to correct trade balances that have been dangerously out of whack. In 1985 the governments began knocking down the dollar's value on the markets to help the U.S. gradually extract itself from its huge trade deficit; a cheaper dollar encourages U.S. exports and discourages imports. At the same time, G-7 strove to raise the value of the yen and mark to reduce huge trade surpluses in Germany and Japan.    Broadly speaking, the strategy paid off, and the Seven then devoted themselves to gradually braking the decline in the dollar and leveling off its value. Through the first half of 1988, the governments were battling traders to keep that value from going too low; by mid-summer they were straining to keep it from rising too much again. That attempt to block a further rise is what Mr. Scala is seeing on his screen this trading day.    Mr. Scala couldn't care less about the needs and desires of the governments. Since the age of 19, he has been trading dollars solely to make lots of money for himself and his employers. Now 28 -- and looking even younger -- he's likely to pull down a six-figure income at his trade this year.    At this particular moment, the best way he and other traders figure to make money is to buck the central banks by selling marks and buying dollars. This will drive up the greenback's value to levels the governments don't think prudent, and introduce volatility the governments abhor. So Mr. Scala and thousands of other traders are doing that, carefully watching the governments' buying and selling -- will they chicken out? -- and trying to keep the dollar moving up despite the central banks' efforts.    All around his desk in the trading room, young traders in shirtsleeves pop up and down in their seats, shouting figures and cryptic bulletins. &quot;Fed selling!&quot; yells one. &quot;Bundesbank was selling 50 (million dollars) at a clip-below market!&quot; says a second.    In this nervous, jumpy world economic reality matters less than the rumors and out-of-context scraps of information that pour into the trading rooms. An alleged comment from an anonymous Japanese official can slice billions off the value of a currency, even if it is carried by an obscure news service and is denied. Regularly, money is made or lost on baseless rumors that President Reagan has had a heart attack.    The speed and impulsiveness with which currency traders move billions of dollars is breathtaking. Mr. Scala and his boss, Mr. Hohorst, who is 33 years old, both say they are too busy to read lengthy economic news stories and analyses. They rely mainly on the frantic financial wire services, and often they read only the headlines -- a single line of shorthand that appears on the very bottom of their computer screens, in whatever space isn't taken up by a long list of currency price quotes.    Just a few days before this Friday morning, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan had delivered an economic overview to Congress that had moved the currency markets. But Mr. Scala still has read neither the text, nor even the long articles and analyses of the Greenspan testimony that appeared in The Wall Street Journal and New York Times. &quot;I got what I needed off the screen,&quot; he says.    This trading-by-headline led to frantic zigzags in the dollar's value the day Mr. Greenspan testified. Asked about the dollar, he said he didn't want to see a big drop or a big rise. He wanted to see stability. He didn't get it.    The first headline across Mr. Scala's screen said only that the Fed Chairman opposed a decline. Traders began moving the dollar up. A minute later, a second headline reported Mr. Greenspan's opposition to an excessive rise. So the market moved the dollar back down a bit. &quot;The markets were terrified,&quot; says Mr. Scala. &quot;What was the chairman of the Fed trying to tell us?&quot;    Mr. Hohorst says, &quot;Ninety percent of what we do is based on perception. It doesn't matter if that perception is right or wrong or real. It only matters that other people in the market believe it. I may know it's crazy, I may think it's wrong. But I lose my shirt by ignoring it. This business turns on decisions made in seconds. If you wait a minute to reflect on things, you're lost. I can't afford to be five steps ahead of everybody else in the market. That's suicide.&quot;    Governments detest the idea of trading based on little more than sudden impulse. But they are stuck with the fact that thousands of traders, anonymous and unaccountable to the citizens of the nations whose currencies they control, are still the ultimate arbiters of value. The governments can and do influence the market, and strongly -- but they do not determine its course.    &quot;As a government official, it drives you crazy,&quot; says Robert Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs andamp; Co. and a former top international economics official in both the Carter and Reagan administrations. &quot;Government officials have a sense that they ought to be able to control their currencies, control the markets. And they get frustrated when they find they can't.&quot;    Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, last fall devoted a major address to flaying the currency traders and urged a still tougher effort by governments to manage currency rates. Japan's vice minister of finance, Toyoo Gyothen, recently proposed that the U.S., the European Community and Japan create a richly funded international agency whose sole function would be to intervene in currency markets to enforce the governments' will there.    One government official involved in exchange rate policy says: &quot;We've got to impose more discipline. If the dollar is allowed to swing too much, we get things like protectionism, which is fatal to the world economy. The currency market has gotten so huge -- every Tom, Dick and Harry is in it. A lot of them are very young people, and they do totally irrational things day-to-day. In the long run, I still think even this market is rational, and that it will reflect economic fundamentals -- but we can't afford the short-term swings.&quot;    The trading day wears on. Over a late lunch Larry Ryan, a director of Forex USA, the currency traders' association, concedes that there are too many young, inexperienced people in the business but doesn't think fluctuations in rates are that worrisome. It is government policy that needs restraint, he believes, not the markets.    &quot;No matter what happens on a day-to-day basis,&quot; he says, &quot;the markets in the long run move on fundamentals. The governments have to understand that.&quot; Without the traders, he adds, &quot;there'd be no discipline on the governments. They can't follow bad economic policies and hope to move the dollar by intervention. They don't have enough money to do that, and they're nuts to try it.&quot;    On this Friday afternoon, they have tried it and they have failed. Peering at the screen of the portable computer he has brought to the restaurant, Mr. Ryan slaps the table exultantly and announces that the dollar is back up to 1.88 marks, where it was when the central banks stepped in to try to knock it down. &quot;Today, the central banks lost,&quot; he says.    And tomorrow? &quot;They fell back today, but that doesn't mean they won't be back again tomorrow,&quot; says Mr. Ryan. &quot;We always know they're out there.&quot;    ---   Mr. Mossberg is an international economics correspondent based in The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>