<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880420-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS DEFEATED Jackson to win New York's Democratic primary election.    With about 90% of the vote tallied, the Massachusetts governor won about 51%, beating Jackson, who was capturing 37%. Gore finished a distant third with about 10%. Dukakis's scope of victory -- he scored well with all categories of voters other than blacks -- will give him at least 150 delegates, more than half of the state's 255 delegates. His showing was fueled by the failure of either Jackson or Gore to make significant dents in Dukakis's support among white voters, according to an NBC News election-day poll of voters.    In New York's Republican primary contest, Bush didn't face any serious opposition and easily won nearly all of the state's 96 convention delegates.    ---   Israel expelled eight Palestinians, including six residents of a West Bank village suspected of inciting a clash April 6 in which a teen-age Jewish girl was killed, apparently by an Israeli settler. They were sent to Lebanon. Eight other Arabs were expelled last week. The State Department reiterated its opposition to the deportations.    Tunisia called for an urgent U.N. Security Council meeting to condemn what it called &quot;Israeli terrorism&quot; in Saturday's killing of PLO military chief Khalil al-Wazir. The body of al-Wazir was flown to Damascus for burial today. Arafat isn't expected to attend the rites, apparently because of his feud with Syrian President Assad.    ---   Navy warships and aircraft searched for a missing U.S. helicopter in the southern Persian Gulf as Iran attacked two commercial vessels. The gunship, carrying two crew members, failed to return to a cruiser following Monday's raids on Iranian oil platforms and vessels. The Pentagon also said several mines were found in the area.    Tehran said 15 of its sailors were killed and 29 wounded in Monday's fighting. Iran's envoy to the U.S. also said that Tehran's forces sank an American vessel and set a U.S.-operated oil platform ablaze. The Pentagon denied the claims. In Beirut, a pro-Iranian group vowed &quot;retaliations&quot; for the U.S. actions.    ---   A court in Duesseldorf convicted Abbas Hamadi of abducting two West Germans as ransom for his brother, Mohammed, who is accused by Bonn of hijacking a TWA jet in June 1985. A U.S. serviceman was killed in the hijacking in Beirut. Abbas Hamadi was sentenced to 13 years for kidnapping, coercion and possession of explosives.    ---   The Senate approved legislation that would apply federal lobbying restrictions to former lawmakers and their top aides for the first time. The measure faces an uncertain future. Current law bans former executive branch employees from lobbying their former agencies for one year after leaving their jobs.    ---   The House cleared a ban on dial-a-porn services. The measure is expected to be approved by the Senate and signed by Reagan, but probably will be challenged in court. The chamber also passed a multibillion-dollar education bill expanding federal programs for elementary and high school students, after attaching the dial-a-porn ban.    ---   Shultz left for Moscow for three days of talks aimed at eliminating differences in U.S. and Soviet drafts of a new arms-control agreement to reduce long-range nuclear weapons as much as 50%. The secretary of state is to meet with Soviet leader Gorbachev and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze.    ---   Algerian officials said there wasn't any sign of a break in talks to free hostages aboard a Kuwaiti jetliner held by Arab hijackers in Algiers. A 20-year-old woman related to the emir of Kuwait urged her government to meet the gunmen's demands to release 17 jailed terrorists.    ---   A tornado struck northern Florida, leaving four people dead, 15 injured and destroying several homes and a college library in the town of Madison. Authorities in the town, about 50 miles east of Tallahassee, said it was the state's worst tornado since 1966, when 11 people were killed.    ---   Nicaragua's Sandinistas blamed a hardline Contra faction led by military commander Enrique Bermudez for slowing progress in four days of peace talks that ended Monday in Managua. Negotiations are scheduled to continue next week. They said Bermudez favored continued military efforts to oust the ruling Sandinista regime.    ---   Panama's ousted president said a multinational force should remove military chief Noriega from power. Delvalle, who is in hiding in Panama, made his remarks in an interview broadcast by CNN television.    ---   Denmark's prime minister called an election for May 10 and asked voters &quot;to take a stand&quot; on Copenhagen's full partnership in NATO. Premier Schlueter told Parliament he was calling the vote because of an anti-alliance resolution passed last week demanding that warships be warned against carrying nuclear arms into Danish ports.    ---   OSHA officials told a Senate panel that Bush pressured Labor Department officials to allow companies to avoid the expense of ventilating toxic gases from the workplace by having workers wear respirators that proved less effective, but cheaper. And inspectors said they were instructed to &quot;generate numbers&quot; through sham inspections.    ---   An explosion injured five people, including two Americans, outside a U.S.-operated cultural center in San Jose, Costa Rica. Authorities in the Central American country described the blast as a terrorist bombing, but U.S. officials said it was an accidental explosion in an electrical transformer. </TEXT></DOC>