<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Will Elections Calm Vanuatu's Troubled Waters?---By Michael Danby</HL><DD> 11/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> On the &quot;coconut radio&quot;  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Vanuatu's rumor mill -- there are ominous rumblings that the ruling Vanuaaku Pati (party) might launch a Fiji-style coup in the event it loses today's elections. Nevertheless, the president of this South Pacific island chain, Ati George Sokomanu, has joined Vanuatu's prime minister, Walter Lini, in assuring everyone there will be a peaceful transition of power in the event the opposition wins. At the same time, despite the Vanuatuan government's ideological differences with the right-wing Rabuka military government that installed itself in Fiji, Vanuatuan Foreign Minister Sela Molisa expressed his government's ambivalence to the Fiji Putsch. &quot;The Fijians should work out their own problems,&quot; he says.    But dire predictions about coups are probably unnecessary, if only because Mr. Lini's government is still likely to retain power with a narrow majority in the 46-man legislature -- despite a record of alienating the West and cozying up to such new friends as the Soviet Union and Libya. Formerly the Franco-British condominium of the New Hebrides, Vanuatu achieved international notoriety this January for being the first example of Mikhail Gorbachev's Vladivostok assertion of Soviet claims in the South Pacific. That month Vanuatu and Moscow cinched a $1.5 million deal that gave eight Soviet ships fishing rights in Vanuatu's waters and access to Port Vila's deep-water harbor. A proposal to follow this up with landing rights for the Soviet air carrier, Aeroflot, is conveniently scheduled to be decided after the election.    Where Vanuatu really earned its radical stripes, however, was in the Lini government's dalliance with Libya. Not only did Mr. Lini send a message of support to Col. Moammar Gadhafi following the April 1986 U.S. air strike on Tripoli terror bases, he also sent some members of his governing party to Libya for paramilitary training. To the concern of many, the ruling party's general secretary, Barak Sope, still struts around Port Vila with these Libyan-trained bodyguards.    Indeed, not until the dominant power in the region, Australia, closed down the Libyan People's Bureau in Canberra did the Lini government respond. The Australian move focused South Pacific attention on Libyan designs in the region, and only then did the Lini government drop plans to open an official Libyan outpost and send an additional 50 party cadres to Col. Gadhafi for &quot;training.&quot; Father Lini (he is an Anglican priest) did, however, send two Libyans packing when they turned up on his island uninvited at the same time as a visit by the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Vernon Walters.    The shift in Vanuatu's foreign relations has not been without its costs. For one thing the pro-Libyan record has hurt the vital tourist industry and affected the country's reputation as a safe tax haven. On top of this Prime Minister Lini has been plain unlucky. He was the victim of a stroke earlier this year, and what was left of his country's tourist facilities was debilitated by Cyclone Uma. Matters have not been helped by the Lini government's economic policy: 1986 saw negative growth, a doubling of inflation and two devaluations. Little wonder that local elections in August saw a revitalized Francophone opposition and gains to the newly formed and moderate Labor Party.    Only 40% to 45% of the people of Vanuatu are French-speaking, however, and their fears about the radical path of the Lini government were not eased by the expulsion in October of the French ambassador, Henri Crepin-Leblond. With the forced removal of Ambassador Crepin-Leblond, French technicians and teachers have been withdrawn and French aid will be sharply cut. The ostensible reason for the French ambassador's expulsion was his alleged use of $2 million in covert French aid to finance the opposition. But the real reason is simply to reflect Vanuatu's demand that total independence be granted to France's two South Pacific colonies: New Caledonia and French Polynesia.    Vanuatu's Francophone opposition, the Union of Moderate Parties, has been publishing a paper as part of its election efforts because the Lini government produces the only regular newspaper and controls the only radio service linking all the islands. But given that Anglophones outnumber Francophones on Vanuatu, the UMP -- even with the assistance of minor parties such as the National Democratic Party (composed of Vanuaaku Pati rebels) and the Seventh-day Adventist National Progress Party -- is not likely to defeat a government with even the Vanuaaku Pati's record for economic and political recklessness. If it wins representatives, the new Labor Party, headed by past president of the Vanuatu Trade Union Congress, Kenneth Satungia, is likely to align with the current government, despite official discrimination against labor unions. Many of the island's Anglophones are attached to Father Lini and his party for sentimental reasons -- they led Vanuatu to independence from the French in 1980 -- and so the government will probably stagger through to another victory.    But Father Lini himself may not stay on long after the election. Either willingly or unwillingly he may stand down at a Vanuaaku Pati Congress that has been suddenly rescheduled for after the elections, but before Parliament convenes. If Father Lini is dropped, the only man with comparable respect among the English-speaking majority is President Sokomanu. But he in turn might be challenged by the ambitious Mr. Sope, who has been to Libya three times and is responsible for much of Vanuatu's hard-line international image. Ironically, the man most likely to stave off Mr. Sope is Finance Minister Kalpokor Kalsakau. Although he is a close business partner of Mr. Sope's and from the same island of Ifira, Mr. Kalsakau is said to be disturbed at the damage the Soviet-Libyan tilt has done to the economy.    Whatever the outcome of today's elections in Vanuatu, they take place under the dark shadow of the military coup in Fiji, a disturbing precedent in a South Pacific that previously had been hailed for its peaceful post-colonial transition to democracy. Fears have not been dispelled by the insistence of the Vanuatuan president that he would prevent a Fiji-style coup. &quot;I think they know that if anything happens I have to step in to see there is no problem,&quot; he told an Australian television interviewer recently. Cynics might recall that similar sentiments were expressed by the governor general of Fiji, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, when first faced with Col. Sitiveni Rabuka's coup.    A trend toward hard-left authoritarianism seems to be gathering speed inside the ruling Vanuaaku Pati, and the impact it will have on this island nation probably depends more on the internal struggle for power within the party than any elections. This should be kept in mind when looking at the outcome of today's vote. For the path taken by the Vanuaaku Pati not only will affect the residents of Vanuatu, it also will have important implications for whether the Soviets and their Libyan surrogates will be able to gain a toehold in the once idyllic and always strategic South Pacific.    ---   Mr. Danby is editor of the newsletter Australia-Israel Review in Melbourne. </TEXT></DOC>