<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870820-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Saudi Arms Proposals Deserve a Fair Hearing---By Charles H. Percy</HL><DD> 08/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The Reagan administration confirmed earlier this week that it intends to submit for Capitol Hill review a $1 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia soon after Congress reconvenes on Sept. 9. The proposed sale would include 1,600 Maverick anti-armor missiles, 14 F-15 jet fighters, and other military hardware. There is no question that pro-Israeli members of Congress and others disenchanted with the Saudi role in the recent attack on the USS Stark will attempt to block the sale. The real question is whether pro-Israeli chest-beating, combined with a good measure of Saudi-bashing rhetoric, will once again pre-empt any debate on whether the sale is in our national interests.    Given the fate of the administration's previous requests for arms sales to the Saudis, the odds are against a debate. In the most recent case, Congress in June forced the administration to withdraw a request to sell the same Maverick missiles that will be included in the new package. Two weeks earlier, before the administration could consult even informally with Congress, resolutions were introduced in both the House and Senate to scuttle the sale of the same F-15 fighters that will be a part of next month's package. Both proposals were killed without a single word of debate on either the House or Senate floor.    This &quot;silent treatment&quot; typifies the steady devolution in congressional treatment of arms sales to Saudi Arabia. Starting with the 1981 debate over the sale of the Airborne Warning and Control System to Saudi Arabia, congressional consideration of arms sales to Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries has been reduced to Manichaean litmus tests of whether our elected officials are &quot;pro-Israel&quot; or &quot;anti-Israel.&quot; Completely lost in this emotionally charged atmosphere has been the central question of U.S. national interests -- and lately, even the debate itself.    The aborted Maverick sale in June provides a good case in point. Congress had not even begun marking up a resolution on the sale when opponents killed it by advancing a number of spurious arguments, none of which spoke to the overriding question of our national interests. The real issues in this case are our security relationship with Saudi Arabia and whether the Maverick sale should be part of the U.S. response to the Iranian threat to Persian Gulf oil and shipping. Critics focused not on these issues but on how a sale to the Saudis of the Maverick D (an improved version of the Maverick) supposedly would threaten Israel's security.    One such argument was that the Maverick D had never been sold to Israel. Unstated was the fact that Israel has not asked to purchase the Maverick D; similarly unstated was the fact that Israel produces its own anti-tank bomb and laser-guided missiles that are just as effective as the Maverick D. Most important, never mentioned was the Saudis' decade-long record of using their aircraft and missiles solely for self-defense -- and never against Israel.    A second argument was that the Saudis would be more likely to use the anti-armor Mavericks against Israel, not Iran, since it would be difficult for any attacking Iranian tanks to make it across the marshes and swamps in Iraq and Kuwait before reaching the Saudi border. However, as recent developments in the Persian Gulf have shown, the Saudis are especially vulnerable to waterborne threats -- and the Maverick D would be effective against not only tanks but also against the ships that brought them across the gulf.    But the most emotionally potent -- and most outrageous -- contention advanced by the opposition was that Saudi actions during the USS Stark incident &quot;proved&quot; that Saudi Arabia is an unreliable ally and thus not worthy to buy advanced American weaponry. The bone of contention centers on whether Saudi F-15 aircraft should have intercepted the Iraqi plane after it attacked the Stark.    As the State Department has repeatedly made clear, the mission of those Saudi fighters was not to defend U.S. ships but to protect Saudi territory and, if necessary, the American AWACS (jointly manned by Saudi and U.S. forces) that spotted the Iraqi attacker. In fact, just as there is no U.S.-Israeli agreement for the Israeli air force to protect U.S. vessels in the Mediterranean or elsewhere, there is no bilateral agreement for Saudi assistance in defending our ships in the gulf.    Blaming, and now punishing, the Saudis for what happened in the Stark incident twists the facts and shifts the responsibility from where it rightly belongs -- with us and the Iraqis. The Saudi reaction to the Stark tragedy, which Assistant Secretary of State Richard Murphy characterized as &quot;both prompt and prudent,&quot; should in no way hurt the arms sale.    But unlike other issues on Capitol Hill, when it comes to arms sales to Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries, there is no perceived middle ground. If a congressman votes for the sales, he is instantly labeled &quot;anti-Israel.&quot; This is not lost on members of Congress: If they vote the &quot;wrong&quot; way, they will be targeted for defeat in the next election by powerful pro-Israeli groups or individuals.    Consider some of the lobbying prior to last year's Senate vote over a proposed $354 million arms sale to Saudi Arabia, as reported in the Washington Post. Ensconced in a reception room off the Senate floor, a strongly pro-Israel California real-estate developer, Michael Goland, asked two uncommitted senators to imagine the political impact of a television commercial showing the wreckage of a civilian aircraft shot down by a Stinger anti-aircraft missile, the most controversial weapon in the proposed arms package.    The lobbyist's message: I can do to you what I did in Illinois in 1984. It doesn't take a political genius to figure out that $1 million in negative advertising can and does have an impact in a tight Senate race. Ed Zschau, the Republican candidate in last year's race in California, was the latest victim of this type of campaign homicide.    Congress is increasingly held hostage on arms-sales proposals for Arab countries by high-pressure lobbying that verges on blackmail. As a result, congressional review of the administration's arms-sales proposals for the Middle East has sunk to the level at which members avoid even debating the merits of proposed sales. And the administration, chastened by previous defeats, has been reluctant to move forward with even watered-down arms sales to the Saudis and other Arab friends. It is a tragic situation, and adds to the serious doubts Arab nations must have about the durability and value of close relations with the U.S.    In spite of such doubts, since June, when the administration's arms-sales proposals were scuttled, the Saudis have agreed to additional, extraordinary cooperation with the U.S. and our mutual friends in the gulf to meet the Iranian threat.    First, the Saudis have deployed their own Awacs to help monitor and protect U.S.-escorted, reflagged Kuwaiti tankers in the lower gulf. This extends the Saudis' air power for the first time beyond their own territorial waters in the gulf, an action the Saudis previously refused to take. Second, Saudi mine sweepers have been crucial in clearing mines Iran is suspected of placing in the gulf. These -- and other, still classified actions -- further belie the claim that Saudi Arabia is an unreliable ally.    In withdrawing the arms-sale request in June, President Reagan emphasized that he intended to resubmit it at a later date. As tensions continue to mount in the gulf, and as Congress moves quickly toward an early fall recess, that time is now. More important, now is the time for Congress to end its silent treatment on arms sales to Saudi Arabia and examine the paramount issues. Sensible policy should stem from debate on the facts and American interests -- not from fear and political expediency.    ---   Mr. Percy, a Republican senator from Illinois, 1967-85, and former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, recently completed a trip to the Mideast. </TEXT></DOC>