<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870713-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN WAS BRIEFED on plans to divert Iran arms-sale funds, a memo says.    The document, prepared by Lt. Col. North, indicates the president was informed of plans to tap some of the funds to support secret initiatives with Israel. The memo is dated Sept. 15, two months before the diversion of arms-sale proceeds to Nicaraguan rebels was made public. Reagan has denied being told about the Contra diversion. North is expected to be cross-examined by congressional panels today, and Adm. Poindexter, his former White House boss, is due to testify tomorrow.    Sen. Inouye (D., Hawaii), chairman of the Senate Iran-Contra panel, said he saw no grounds so far for impeachment proceedings against Reagan.    ---   Britain's envoy to Kuwait said London is willing to allow Kuwaiti tankers to fly British flags if the Persian Gulf nation requests protection against Iran. Meanwhile, Kuwaiti tankers are being inspected by U.S. officials in preparation for being reflagged and renamed as American vessels as early as this week, maritime sources said.    ---   The U.N. Security Council is expected to call this week for a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war, but is unlikely to endorse sanctions against the side that breaks the proposed truce.    ---   Iraq has leveled more than 100 Kurdish villages and relocated tens of thousands of inhabitants near the Iranian border, Western diplomats and intelligence sources said. The Kurds are seeking greater autonomy from Baghdad and have received logistical support from Iranian revolutionary guards, the sources said.    ---   Australia's Hawke won a third consecutive term, the most terms ever won by a Labor Party prime minister. Final results from Saturday's voting weren't expected until today, but with 80% of votes tallied, Labor appeared to have boosted its majority to 24 seats from 16 in the 148-seat House, and to have kept its 34 Senate seats.    ---   Pakistan has diverted for its own use millions of dollars of Stinger anti-aircraft missiles intended for U.S.-backed Afghan rebels, United Press International quoted intelligence sources as saying. Last year, only one-third of the 600 Stingers the U.S. shipped through Pakistan arrived in Afghanistan, the sources said.    ---   The U.S. is trying to determine what happened to seven Americans detained during anti-government disturbances in Panama City. At least 10 people were injured when the government put down a large demonstration against the de facto rule of Gen. Noriega Friday. The government later released 125 of those detained.    ---   Seven northern India states agreed to unite against Sikh separatists, who last week killed 74 Hindu bus passengers in three separate raids. The states, including Punjab, agreed to start immediate road patrols and to jointly hunt terrorists. Five Sikh terrorists were killed by government patrols Friday in Punjab, police said.    ---   Legislators vote today for India's eighth president, a largely ceremonial post. The nominee of Prime Minister Gandhi's Congress (I) Party is expected to win.    ---   A hunger strike continued by about 22 Anglican priests in Seoul. The fast was called following the invasion of a cathedral by riot police during protests last week. Meanwhile, President Chun was expected to reshuffle his cabinet as a prelude to new reforms, government sources said. Chun last week resigned as ruling party president.    ---   Wilkins withdrew as a candidate for the FBI directorship last week, citing personal reasons. The federal judge had been considered a front-runner.    ---   Whites will be welcome and granted a bill of rights in a post-apartheid South Africa, the African National Congress said. The statement by the largest guerrilla organization fighting the Pretoria government came on the final day of talks in Senegal with about 60 white South Africans, mostly members of the ruling Afrikaner group.    ---   Sundstrand Corp. overcharged the government by more than $130 million on Air Force and Navy contracts, a Defense Department audit concluded. A grand jury in Rockford, Ill., is investigating alleged overcharges by the aerospace company over a 10-year period.    ---   Haitian opposition leaders said Tonton Macoutes, the feared secret police supposedly disbanded when the Duvalier regime was ousted last year, reemerged during recent anti-government protests in which 22 people died. Civilians said Macoutes-led soldiers attacked people with automatic weapons during the recent general strike.    ---   Kohl arrived in Beijing for talks with top Chinese officials aimed at boosting economic ties. The West German chancellor is also scheduled to visit Tibet during his visit, the first serving Western leader to do so since China annexed the region in 1950.    ---   Colombo said six soldiers were killed and Tamil separatists set fire to a school in Sri Lanka's northern Jaffna Peninsula. Meanwhile, a group of 157 refugees, believed by Canadian authorities to be Tamils fleeing the fighting in Sri Lanka, landed in a small Nova Scotia fishing village.    ---   Died: John Hammond, 76, music critic and talent scout, Friday, in New York. </TEXT></DOC>