<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870626-0034 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A U.S. OFFICIAL SAID Reagan aides agreed to the drafting of false testimony.    Assistant Attorney General Cooper told the congressional Iran-Contra committees that Casey and Poindexter last fall acquiesced to the drafting of false testimony to Congress to conceal the U.S. role in a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran. He said the falsification was proposed by North. Cooper's testimony portrayed a pattern of deception and delay that encumbered the Justice Department's inquiry into the scandal last fall.    The congressional panels released data showing that the NSC and CIA both played a role in a November 1985 shipment of Hawk missiles to Tehran.    ---   SEOUL THREATENED &quot;stern&quot; action to crush a planned nationwide march.    As an opposition coalition urged thousands of supporters to participate today in a &quot;grand march for democracy&quot; in Seoul and 21 other cities, the South Korea government said the police &quot;will take the maximum necessary steps&quot; to disperse demonstrators. The warning followed a message to President Chun that the U.S. would oppose martial law to end more than two weeks of often violent anti-government protest.    In an apparent effort to prevent him from marching, dissident Kim Dae Jung was placed under house arrest, 31 hours after being freed from confinement.    ---   GORBACHEV URGED the Communist Party to approve economic changes.    In an address to the opening session of the Central Committee's semiannual meeting, the Kremlin leader called for changes in the Soviet economy by year's end, saying managers should be free of red tape and that limits shouldn't be set on what workers earn. Gorbachev, who faulted opponents of &quot;radical reform&quot; as selfish conservatives, offered few details and stopped short of endorsing the elimination of some ministries.    Gorbachev said the flight of a West German pilot to Moscow was &quot;an extraordinary occurrence&quot; that showed lack of discipline in the Soviet army.    ---   Waldheim met with Pope John Paul II, who ignored Jewish protests and allegations that the Austrian president was involved in Nazi war crimes. The pontiff praised Waldheim as a diplomat &quot;dedicated to the securing of peace.&quot; Waldheim's visit to the Vatican was his first trip outside Austria since being elected president last year.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that military courts have jurisdiction over cases of misconduct by military personnel, even when the actions aren't service-related. The justices also upheld a 1978 federal law that gives the U.S. Olympic Committee the right to control the commercial use of the word &quot;olympic.&quot;    ---   A former Treasury chief was sentenced by a U.S. judge in New York to a month in prison for tax evasion and five months of house arrest for the illegal operation of an offshore bank. Robert B. Anderson, 77, who served under Eisenhower, also must try to repay depositors who had losses of $4.4 million through the bank.    ---   Congressional Democrats plan to urge Reagan at a White House meeting next week to delay a U.S. plan to protect shipping in the Persian Gulf. Party leaders, hoping to obtain GOP support, said they hope to find what one aide called a &quot;face-saving&quot; way for the president to back away from the intention to escort 11 Kuwaiti ships.    ---   White House officials said Reagan had written to President Assad, offering to send a U.S. envoy to Syria in an attempt to open relations. The disclosure came as a U.S. official said the administration had been in contact with Syria over the kidnapping of an American journalist last week in Lebanon.    ---   Britain's Tory government unveiled a program designed to modernize society and undermine the remaining power bases of socialism. The proposed changes range from longer drinking hours in pubs to more emphasis on rights for trade-union members. Labor Party leader Kinnock vowed to oppose the plan.    ---   U.S. officials rejected a request by Madrid to remove a squadron of F-16 jets from Spain, the newspaper El Pais reported as the two nations resumed talks on reducing the U.S. military presence in Spain. Separately, in Barcelona, a bomb injured seven people hours before a funeral service for 18 people killed in a bomb blast last week.    ---   Pentagon sources said Libyan jets twice approached a Navy cruiser in the Mediterranean last week, prompting the ship's crew to man battle stations. It was the first overt military move by Libya since last year's U.S. assault on Tripoli and Benghazi.    ---   Reagan signed an executive order creating an 11-member national commission on AIDS. W. Eugene Mayberry, head of the Mayo Clinic, was named to head the panel. Separately, scientists said research indicates it may be possible to treat fetuses infected with the AIDS virus in the womb, a finding that could lead to prolonged life.    ---   A grenade was hurled at the walled home of the Philippines's leading churchman, Cardinal Jaime Sin, a day after the archbishop denounced urban violence. Two passers-by were injured in the attack, the sixth such bombing in Manila in two weeks.    ---   South African security forces arrested about 110 blacks during a raid on a squatter camp outside Cape Town. The search by about 800 troops and police was described as a &quot;crime prevention&quot; operation.    ---   British authorities released John Fleming for lack of evidence in connection with a $42 million robbery at London's Heathrow Airport in November 1983. Fleming, who spent six months as a fugitive, was deported to London from Miami in March.    ---   Indian police raided the Golden Temple in Amritsar to prevent extremists from proclaiming a separate Sikh government today. At least 224 people were detained, police in Punjab said. Violence wasn't reported.    ---   Violence has become the leading killer of the nation's young people, far surpassing death caused by infectious diseases, according to several new studies. Homicides, suicides and auto accidents account for 77% of deaths among 15 to 24-year-olds.    ---   French air-traffic controllers staged a daylong strike, causing the cancellation of hundreds of flights and stranding thousands of travelers. The walkout was called over a dispute about retirement benefits. </TEXT></DOC>