<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870113-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Who Causes the Trade Deficit? It Isn't Management---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 01/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   Just when the merchandise trade deficit seemed to be taking a turn for the better, it took a horrendous turn for the worse. In November it soared to a record $19.2 billion, and some analysts are beginning to wonder whether the J curve is only a bad joke.    Part of the November rise apparently was caused by efforts to beat a 22 cents-per-$100 fee on all imports, except those from the Caribbean. The fee, effective Dec. 1, was added to the new tax law to keep it &quot;revenue-neutral,&quot; but its effect obviously was protectionist.    More protectionism may be on the way. Robert C. Byrd, majority leader of the newly Democratic Senate, declared that there will have to be &quot;comprehensive trade and competitiveness legislation&quot; to restore American jobs and &quot;halt the erosion of our industrial base.&quot;    Congress, as is its wont, is likely to charge ahead and pass something, whether or not it deals with the problem. President Reagan may veto bad legislation, but whether his vetoes will be sustained in the current atmosphere is to say the least quite uncertain.    The deficit undoubtedly stems from many factors. A number of critics, however, have focused on American management, charging that it has fallen behind in technology, quality control, market research and the techniques of running an export business. But two economists, in a study for the National Bureau of Economic Research, suggest that management isn't to blame.    Robert E. Lipsey of the National Bureau and Irving B. Kravis of the University of Pennsylvania decided to take a look at the export performance of U.S. multinationals (NBER Working Paper No. 2051, available from NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, Mass., 02138, at $2 a copy).    You remember multinationals. Those are the outfits that critics said were ruining the U.S. by exporting American jobs and technology. Whatever they've exported, though, their record shows they've retained an ability to run their businesses.    Exports of manufactured products from the U.S. have declined since the mid-1950s. The U.S. share in world manufactured exports dropped from 21% or 22% in 1957 to the 16%-to-18% range in 1966. It then dropped to the 13%-to-14% range by 1977, and remained at about that level in the early-1980s.    In part the decline reflects the fact that in the mid-1950s the U.S. still was the only major industrial nation whose production plant was intact. With no war damage to overcome, American companies could sell about anything they could make at whatever price they wanted to charge. As other countries rebuilt their factories, it was natural that the U.S. would lose some market share.    But what of the multinationals? No precise figures are available for the 1950s, but fast growth of the multinationals' affiliates indicate they probably expanded their market share. In any case, U.S.-based multinationals accounted for 17.7% of world exports in 1966, and their share has remained almost unchanged since then. The export share of the U.S.-based parent companies declined between 1966 and 1977, but the gains by majority-owned foreign affiliates more than offset the drop.    The multinationals have been doing a good job for almost everyone, obviously including themselves. The U.S.-based parents, with some fluctuations, have increased their share of U.S. exports. The shares of majority-owned affiliates in the exports of both developed and less-developed host countries shows a pattern of sharp increases and, for developed countries, rough stability since 1977.    The fact that multinational affiliates have been able to outperform domestic companies in the countries where they operate at least suggests that there is nothing seriously wrong with U.S. management techniques or U.S. technology. &quot;Perhaps the greater integration of the world economy with respect to transport and communications, and hence to the ease of managerial control over activities in distant locations,&quot; the National Bureau economists write, &quot;facilitated the expansion of affiliate exports in the 1957-77 period, but even so, American management should be credited with taking advantage of these opportunities.&quot;    Since 1977, moreover, American-controlled firms abroad have more than held their own in a fast-growing world market despite stiff competition from Japan and other industrial countries.    While Messrs. Lipsey and Kravis rule out American management and technology as major causes of the U.S. trade deficit, they don't try to fully explain just what has happened. They do say that a substantial part of the decline in the U.S. export share over the past 30 years could be explained by movements in U.S. export prices relative to those of its main competitors.    &quot;That finding,&quot; they say, &quot;is further evidence, in our view, that much of the explanation for the export performance of the U.S. as a geographical entity must be looked for in the factors that determine price levels. Over the short run, at least, these are presumably monetary, fiscal and related policies that affect exchange rates and rates of inflation.&quot;    So to an extent, at least, Treasury Secretary Baker would appear to be on the right track in his long campaign to devalue the U.S. dollar. It would appear, however, that little more can be gained by pushing in that direction. The Federal Reserve, at least, worries that continuing declines in the international value of the dollar will contribute to inflation and thus offset the price gains achieved by devaluation.    If price is the major culprit, as appears to be the case, Fed policy should concentrate on preventing any resurgence of inflation. And somehow or other, it would also be desirable to make better progress toward reducing budget deficits.    Maybe it would be possible to learn something from the multinationals. Over the past three decades the multinationals obviously have faced the price problem and have had to deal with it. It is apparent that one method they have found has been to transfer output to foreign affiliates where labor costs are lower. Some companies will be able to continue to produce in the U.S. only if ways are found to cut labor costs.    Multinationals in some cases have done this by explaining the facts of life to labor unions. Others have been able to continue to produce in the U.S. by using new and more efficient machinery. In nearly all cases, presumably, the multinationals have focused on products in which they have a competitive advantage.    Change will take time and patience. A lot of time will be wasted if Congress tries to &quot;solve&quot; the deficit by passing new protectionist legislation. Even more time will be wasted if government tries to accomplish anything by lecturing management to become more competitive.    The experience of the multinationals over the past three decades surely has shown that management knows what it's doing. There are exceptions, of course, but on the average the performance has been impressive. This is the sort of knowledge that surely should be transferable. The multinationals have done well for themselves, and they have wisdom that could be of use elsewhere, especially in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>