<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870903-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Gun-Control Debate Likely to Heat UpAs Florida Eases Rules on Weapon Toting---By Ken SlocumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The national debate on gun control gets a major new testing ground next month, when Florida will begin allowing the average resident to carry a concealed weapon.    Proponents of the popular new law -- it passed both houses of the Florida legislature by more than two-thirds votes earlier this year -- say it will enable residents to protect themselves against the state's rampant crime. Opponents say it will only make the bloodshed worse.    Because of Florida's size, rapid growth and influence as a trend-setter, its move represents the most significant change in gun-control legislation since two decades ago, when laws were tightened after several prominent Americans were shot. Pro-gun activists in other states, inspired by Florida's change, are already intensifying their lobbying efforts.    Eleven other states have similar laws, but several are small, such as Vermont and Maine, and even the largest, Georgia, has little more than half the population of Florida, the nation's fourth largest state. And the violent-crime rate in those states, ranging from 51 per 100,000 per year in North Dakota to 588 in Georgia, is benign compared with Florida's 1,037 per 100,000. Dade County, which includes Miami, had the highest rate in the U.S. last year, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, with 1,791 violent crimes per 100,000 residents.    Opponents of the law expect Miami to widen that lead. &quot;The rules have changed and it's going to take calamity and carnage to bring us back to our senses,&quot; says Michael Friedman, a Democrat state representative from Miami Beach. &quot;I hope I'm wrong but I doubt it -- I think a lot of innocent people will die.&quot;    Counters Marion Hammer, executive director of Unified Sportsmen of Florida, a National Rifle Association affiliate that pushed for the new law: &quot;The guns already are out there -- the new law just makes it legal for the law-abiding citizen already carrying outside the law.&quot; That position gets some support from a small and informal poll by the Miami Herald: It found 63% of motorists responding already carry a concealed weapon of some kind.    The new law eliminates local county or city concealed-weapon laws and the need for a citizen to show special need such as threats to life or the carrying of large amounts of money. Requirements are modest: An applicant must be 21 and a Florida resident for six months and must take an approved gun-training course. In addition, an applicant can't have been convicted of a felony or have been labeled a habitual user of drugs or alcohol. There are a few areas guns can't be carried, such as police stations, courts, bars and college campuses, although students and faculty can get permits to carry stun guns.    Most everybody concedes one point: A lot of gun permits will be issued in Florida. Applications for permits won't be available until Sept. 15, but 11,000 requests are already in, and total applications are expected to reach 130,000, according to David Register, director of licensing. An estimated 15,000 to 17,000 Florida residents currently have concealed weapons permits. A training course designed for the new law by Tamiami Gun Shops in Miami has been booked solid since June, according to John Katon, president.    Both Mr. Katon and pro-gun legislators contend the new interest in legal gun-toting comes primarily from business, professional and other white-collar people, not blue-collar workers whom they say have traditionally been -- and continue to be -- part of the pro-gun community. Because the requirements are modest and have been widely publicized, most applicants are expected to get licenses.    As a sample of how the gun-toting environment will change, consider Broward County, an urban area that includes Fort Lauderdale. Until local weapons laws were wiped out by the new legislation, applicants for a concealed-weapons permit were required to pay $500, pass a stiff background check, get a mental examination, be endorsed by the police chief, obtain approval of a hearing officer after an interview and have an approved reason for carrying a gun. In a county of 1.2 million people, there are currently 22 gun permits, according to James Maultsby, assistant county administrator.    Concealed weapons may not represent the only increase. Florida Attorney General Robert Butterworth, in a letter to Gov. Bob Martinez, says the new law indirectly makes the carrying of non-concealed weapons legal even without a permit. He asked the governor to consider legislation in a special session to close the loophole.    Crime rates are the focus of much of the debate. Michael Abrams, Democrat state representative from Miami and a foe of the law, argues that &quot;anything contributing to the proliferation of weapons has a deleterious effect on the rate of violent crime.&quot;    The NRA affiliate here scoffs at that, citing FBI figures for 1986 that indicate annual violent crime rates in states where it's generally not legal to carry a gun are 645 per 100,000, about 50% higher than in the 11 states where concealed weapons are generally legal under permits.    But Ronald Johnson, a Democrat representative from Panama City, Fla., who sponsored the gun bill, contends that he didn't push it specifically to reduce crime. He says: &quot;The Supreme Court has held that the individual holds some responsibility for protecting himself and his family. Along with the responsibility, we have now given the people of Florida the right and the means.&quot;    It's a right and a means Floridians apparently wanted. Even legislators who fought the law concede that support was overwhelming and came from urban as well as rural areas. &quot;People are tired of being victims,&quot; explains the bill's sponsor Mr. Johnson.    Law enforcement groups supported the measure, but for some it was a compromise. The Florida Police Chiefs Association opposed a similar bill in 1985 and when it passed the association asked the governor to veto it. &quot;When it came up in 1987, we knew there was no way under sky blue heaven we could defeat this bill -- it was going to pass,&quot; says Willis Booth, executive director. So the group won concessions, such as training, before backing the bill.    Florida's law is already spurring new efforts for a similar concealed-weapons law elsewhere. Texas doesn't have a gun-permit system and in general allows only peace officers to carry a concealed weapon. Pro-gun forces failed to pass a uniform concealed weapons permit law this year. &quot;We're encouraged by Florida's success and we feel they've given us direction on how to make our next move,&quot; says James Brown, an Austin veterinarian and an NRA director.    He adds: &quot;We now have something to compare with Houston -- Miami. Houston is bigger, but it doesn't have any more problems.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>