<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881103-0153 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Family and Feminism </HL><AUTHOR> Maggie Gallagher </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The problem is babies: Women keep having them. Maybe not in quantities sufficient to satisfy Ben Wattenberg, but with surprising regularity nonetheless and sometimes under the most awkward conditions.    The winners in the current gender revolution, Mary Ann Mason points out in &quot;The Equality Trap&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 256 pages, $18.95), are childless professional women who want to stay that way. Trouble is, most of us female elite-types are childless professionals for a while, and the rote answers of mainstream feminism look great; then, all-too-often, baby makes two and the trouble begins. Here at last is a feminist book, concerned enough, compassionate enough, intellectually honest enough to admit the truth: Women are losing, not gaining ground.    Feminism is the only intellectually respectable political movement that is essentially moral: theoretically preoccupied with what kind of people we want to produce and how we go about producing them. It also offers women a simple moral rule of thumb by which to live: When in doubt, try to do what men have always done.    Applied to sex, this proves a disaster. As Ms. Mason puts it: &quot;Women were encouraged to reverse the hold of socialization and become sexual aggressors.&quot; Hey wo -- people, we were told, now you too can go to bars, pick up men, and engage in a little carefree hanky-panky, gratuitous friction.    O.K., gee, that sounds great I guess, we all said; legions of women dutifully dropping their skirts in politically prescribed liaisons. Until at last, a decade later, under the cover of AIDS, we've agreed to end the sexual revolution, game called on account of pain. In the end, I don't know what we proved. Certainly not our worth as women.    &quot;The Equality Trap&quot; is a generous book filled with profound personal insights and lousy economic theories. But Ms. Mason can be forgiven her economic shortsightedness, her tendency to think that somehow we can improve women's standards of living by adopting programs that impoverish the economy. I forgive her every nod in the direction of European socialism and of comparable worth for this one sentence: &quot;It occurred to me that I as much as anyone, and more than most, was responsible for creating a climate of opinion which proudly declared that women could take care of themselves as well as men could and that the union of a man and a woman was an egalitarian arrangement which could be ended at the whim of either. This simply did not work when women had children.&quot;    Thank you. I, like millions of other late baby boomers, am coping with the system the '60s generation handed down, trying to live with the choices it fashioned for us. Let me tell you, choice is an overrated virtue. Sure, women today have more choices than ever before. Unfortunately, most of them stink. Look, it comes down to this: We have the option to make sterile love, or to abort all surplus products of conception. We can do these things more or less freely; any other choice is damned expensive. If women marry (and from the rank desperation fogging up Manhattan streets, I conclude most of us apparently want to), we get to carry all of the traditional female burdens, and part of the traditional masculine ones as well. According to Ms. Mason, between 1959 and 1983 the collective number of hours women worked outside the home nearly doubled, while the number of hours they devoted to homemaking decreased by only 14%.    And these women, the exhausted, overworked, harried, married mothers, are the lucky ones. For today, every woman with children is only a divorce away from poverty, and divorce can happen at any time for any reason, or no reason at all. Thanks to no-fault fever, divorce, the most destructive event this side of the grave, is now the one thing about which you have no choice at all.    The statistics are well known but worth repeating, and Ms. Mason does just that. Single women with children are six times as likely to fall below the poverty line as are married. In fact almost 40% of white single mothers have incomes below the poverty line.    &quot;In spite of its devaluation by the current feminist wave,&quot; notes Ms. Mason, &quot;motherhood seems in no danger of dying out. It is marriage and the traditional family that are on the critical list.&quot; Ms. Mason is not the first feminist to ponder the baby question. In fact, along with Lenore Weitzman, Sylvia Ann Hewlett, Betty Friedan, Germaine Greer, Phyllis Chesler, all of whom have published revisionist works in the '80s, she is part of a new groundswell in the women's movement, a veritable third wave of feminism that is beginning, (just beginning, mind you) to grapple with women's desire for family.    What makes &quot;The Equality Trap&quot; a ground-breaking feminist work is Ms. Mason's recognition that the traditional idea of marriage, or something like it, is absolutely necessary to protect women who are doing the back-breaking, mind-wearying, soul-satisfying, utterly necessary work of mothering. Its publication may be a sign we are at last breaking free from the intellectual straitjacket elite feminists have imposed on other women's discourse, a straightjacket that has proved more confining to women than a medieval chastity belt and just as demeaning.    ---   Miss Gallagher, formerly articles editor of National Review, is currently writing a book on gender issues. </TEXT></DOC>