<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870610-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Changing Course:Admitting to FlawsIn Economy, VietnamFlirts With Capitalism---Private Enterprises Flourish,Innovation Is Encouraged;Drive to Attract Tourists---Danger of Future Anarchy?---By Barry WainStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> HANOI, Vietnam  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Twenty years ago, Nguyen Xuan Oanh ran the economy of capitalist South Vietnam when it was battling communist North Vietnam.    Today, American-trained Mr. Oanh is working for the victorious Communists and applying his expertise to the tottering socialist economy of a united Vietnam. He heads a research office, advises state agencies and has just been elected to the National Assembly.    Mr. Oanh's extraordinary resurrection reflects extraordinary times in Vietnam. The nation remains firmly committed to a centrally planned, socialist economy. But the past five months have seen a flurry of reform regulations designed to unleash productive forces and allow more local autonomy. In February, for example, Hanoi offered a year's tax break, bank loans and other advantages to people opening private shops that produce and sell consumer goods and services. Producers of export items can keep part of their foreign-exchange earnings to import materials.    Coffee shops and restaurants, clothing and tailor shops, and stalls selling household goods have mushroomed in Hanoi, giving the usually austere capital some of the free-market hustle of Ho Chi Minh City (which encompasses the former South Vietnamese capital of Saigon), where similar regulations were issued a year earlier.    Some people in Hanoi are conspicuous in new and colorful clothing. In the evening, teen-agers in jeans and T-shirts, many of the girls wearing makeup, head for the dozens of coffee shops that blast Western pop music from their darkened interiors.    Where Vietnamese once stayed silent on economics and politics, they now talk openly and volubly. Their favorite topics: rising prices, mismanagement of the country and the need to stop the economic rot.    People from all walks of life, apparently fed up with ever-sliding living standards, are saying: No more. And somehow, in a process that defies Vietnam's traditionally doctrinaire politics, they have managed to persuade the omnipotent Communist Party of Vietnam to go along with them.    The party, at its sixth congress in December, admitted it had been on the wrong track for a decade or more, and it pledged reform -- in the party itself, in the government and, most important, in the economy. Acknowledging the desperate state of the economy, the congress passed power to more pragmatic, less ideological leaders who seem determined to rectify the situation. Many of those leaders are identified with liberal economic experiments in Saigon, which was incorporated into the province of Ho Chi Minh City after the Communists took over the south in 1975.    In reality, the government, after trying for more than a decade to extinguish the flame of capitalism in the south, is turning to Ho Chi Minh City and its entrepreneurs and businessmen for help.    Enter 65-year-old Mr. Oanh, a former South Vietnam deputy premier, who has a doctorate in economics from Harvard and worked for the International Monetary Fund in Washington in the early 1960s. Jack Oanh, as he was known in the U.S., has been offering advice to the Communist authorities for years, but only now are his views being accepted. And just in time, in his opinion.    &quot;I think we've reached the bottom,&quot; says Mr. Oanh. &quot;The only way to go is up.&quot;    Vietnam's leaders finally arrived at that conclusion late last year, when they quit blaming outsiders for the nation's predicament and accepted their own mismanagement as the primary cause.    At the sixth congress, held from Dec. 15 to 18, adjustment came in the form of sweeping leadership changes and the adoption of a lengthy resolution that is supposed to chart a new economic course. Although the resolution is short on specifics, it points to the way of the future by endorsing reforms undertaken hesitantly in the past two or three years.    The outcome is a triumph of economics over ideology. It recognizes that the southern half of Vietnam, spearheaded by Ho Chi Minh City, is developing faster than the north, further widening the gap between them. That is mainly because of the south's residual capitalist expertise and the reintroduction there of liberalization measures, though the south also enjoys climatic and other natural advantages.    The Vietnamese have been waiting for conditions to improve since the Communists defeated the U.S.-backed Saigon government in 1975 and unified the country under Hanoi's leadership. The loss of foreign aid, previously given in vast quantities by the U.S. to South Vietnam and by China to North Vietnam, hampered recovery after three decades of war. The U.S. economic embargo, which continues, added to the difficulties. And Vietnam's military takeover of neighboring Cambodia in late 1978 has ended most remaining Western aid for Hanoi. The invasion of Cambodia also sparked an economically draining border war with former ally China that still flares sporadically.    On top of that, Vietnamese leaders persisted in imposing rigid Soviet-style centralized planning. When many of the plans failed, the leaders adopted the tactics that had brought them success in war: They persisted, trying to force the program through regardless of the consequences.    Today, Vietnam is described by international organizations as one of the world's poorest countries, with a per-capita income estimated at less than $200 a year for its 62 million people.    Raging inflation continues to undermine the economy, despite two major devaluations in the past two years. Millions are unemployed, and underemployment is also acute. Vietnam's aging factories on the average operate at only half of capacity because they lack power, raw materials and spare parts.    And after being able to feed itself for the first time in 1983, the country once again has to resort to imports. With Western credits cut off, Vietnam is kept afloat by the Soviet Union, which provides an estimated $2 billion to $3 billion a year in economic and military assistance.    Public patience appears to have run out in the second half of 1985 after the government increased the prices of goods in state stores as much as a hundredfold to bring them in line with those in the free market -- in effect ending three decades of rationing. State workers were compensated with extra pay, and new currency-devalued by 92% -- was introduced.    The moves, badly planned and implemented, sent the economy reeling. Prices soared as the currency, the dong, lost value daily on the black market. Rationing had to be reintroduced in parts of the country and, 14 months after the first devaluation, the dong was devalued again, by 81%. But inflation continued, accelerating to 1,000% by the end of last year.    The chaos, acknowledged in the official press, generated widespread resentment. Feeling the heat, the government sacked a vice premier. Later it ousted a first vice premier and Politburo member, five other economic ministers and the head of the central bank. It also introduced new measures to reform the economy.    But when all that failed to stem public outrage, the Politburo took the extreme measure of offering what it called &quot;stern criticism and self-criticism.&quot; Eventually, Politburo members widened their self-condemnation and admitted that the primary cause of Vietnam's predicament was mismanagement, not the maneuverings of China and the U.S., as they had previously insisted. They opened a nationwide debate to allow people to express their views.    The Politburo took its extraordinary step for two reasons: &quot;To survive and to get grass-roots support,&quot; says a Vietnamese source close to the leadership.    In any event, the strategy didn't immediately get the party and the government off the hook. With the floodgates opened, the tide of criticism inundated the leadership. In the six weeks before the party congress, 25,000 letters -- most of them highly critical -- poured into Nhan Dan, the party daily.    When the congress convened on Dec. 15, it saw the biggest shakeup in 40 years. Six of the 15 Politburo members retired or were ousted, including the top three: President Truong Chinh, Premier Pham Van Dong and Le Duc Tho, a senior party strategist. Sweeping changes were also made in the party's Central Committee and the Central Committee Secretariat, which implements policy day by day. And the congress adopted a lengthy resolution setting a course for economic renewal.    &quot;Life doesn't allow us to procrastinate any longer,&quot; the new Communist Party chief, Nguyen Van Linh, told Central Committee members in April.    In another wholesale government reshuffle in February, 12 ministers and two state commission chairmen were ousted and the cabinet reorganized. And an estimated 60% of deputies from the National Assembly, mostly aging party functionaries, were told to retire before recent elections, which were marked by a bigger selection of candidates than before and a real &quot;campaign,&quot; during which candidates listened to complaints at public meetings.    The congress set three priorities for Vietnam's 1986-90 five-year plan: self-sufficiency in food, production of enough consumer goods to satisfy demand, and the rapid generation of exports to pay for a major portion of essential imports. The resolution specifically provides for revived small-scale private enterprise, including family businesses, to operate within the mostly state-run economy.    Huu Tho, the economics editor of Nhan Dan, believes that the biggest mistake was to persist in peacetime with a subsidy-based economy. Those practices developed during the long years of war when the Soviet Union, China and others were providing the commodities to North Vietnam free of charge. Today, officials say, consumer subsidies alone account for almost a third of Vietnam's budget.    &quot;Our concept of socialism has been simplistic and unrealistic,&quot; says Mr. Linh, who emerged from the upheaval as secretary-general of the Communist Party and the man being counted on to lead the country out of the wilderness.    Mr. Linh, age 71, is credited with pioneering efforts to decentralize the economy, introduce more rational management and cut red tape when he was the party secretary in Ho Chi Minh City in the early 1980s. He worked closely with Vo Van Kiet, 64, the chairman of the State Planning Commission, who is also publicly linked to the southern reform movement. And it was Mr. Kiet, now elevated to No. 5 in the Politburo, who contacted Mr. Oanh as far back as 1979 and asked him to set up a research office in Ho Chi Minh City.    While Mr. Linh is usually tagged a &quot;reformer&quot; in the West, those familiar with him say that he could be more accurately described as a pragmatist who, by trial and error, has reached conclusions about the economy. These observers add that Mr. Linh, like most of his colleagues, is a lifelong revolutionary with little formal education.    Mr. Linh left the Politburo in 1982, officially because of poor health, but he doesn't discourage the widespread belief that he was dropped because he had been branded as a &quot;revisionist.&quot; He was reinstated in 1985 in an unusual, midterm appointment that suggests he was brought back to handle the economic crisis.    While influenced by developments in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and Cuba, Vietnam closely studies economic reforms currently under way in China, diplomats and Vietnamese say. The Vietnamese sometimes find the Chinese model more appropriate for their conditions, though political sensitivities don't allow them to admit that, the sources say.    In its quest for renewal, the government is taking advantage of the one million Vietnamese who have fled as refugees or, in a small number of cases, legally emigrated to the West since 1975. Recent regulations encourage them to send money and goods to relatives in Vietnam, instead of limiting their assistance, as in the past. Items described as &quot;means of production,&quot; such as machinery and equipment, escape import duties.    The regulations seek to channel remittances through the banking system and prevent smuggling, which has been rife. The central bank promises recipients a &quot;flexible&quot; exchange rate &quot;depending on the practical situation of the market.&quot; This suggests the bank will pay closer to the black-market rate, currently about 660 dong to the U.S. dollar, than the official 80 dong.    Ho Chi Minh City is continuing to show the way. Last month city officials authorized locally managed enterprises to enter joint ventures with foreign concerns and borrow foreign currency -- presumably from abroad, since it isn't available from state banks in Vietnam -- to import equipment and materials. Enterprises can buy or sell manufacturing licenses, acquire technology and sign contracts with foreign scientists.    The enterprise boss has the right to recruit and train his own work force, apparently without any restriction on numbers, and award unlimited bonuses to employees who innovate.    Vietnam is also embarking on an ambitious drive to attract tourists, including Westerners. And it is soon to adopt a liberal foreign-investment code that the government hopes will enable the country to compete for Western capital and technology with China and non-communist Southeast Asian neighbors such as Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia.    Foreign diplomats in Hanoi haven't figured out whether the reforms have a chance of working. They see &quot;uncoordinated bits and pieces all going in the same direction,&quot; as a diplomat puts it, but no comprehensive or cohesive plan. &quot;Reform could mean anarchy,&quot; says another diplomat.    Some analysts conclude that the visible upsurge in economic activity may be nothing more than private-sector froth on a stagnant socialist economy. They doubt that real progress can be made without wholesale structural reform, as opposed to tinkering with the system.    Observers also note that party and government officials can be expected to oppose any opening of the system that would undermine their authority and deny them some of their privileges in a society that has little of anything.    The Vietnam Courier, an official monthly, says that in one area of Hanoi many families are thinking of taking advantage of the new regulations to open private shops to make goods from scrap iron and plastic. &quot;But there, as in other places, the mood remains one of wait and see,&quot; the monthly says. &quot;For decades they have lived with a bureaucratic and authoritarian system of management and suffered from vexatious practices. So, they ask, is this going to last?&quot;    Yes, answers Mr. Linh, the party secretary-general. But he warns that it won't happen overnight, indicating that the turnaround timetable of three to four years proposed by some of his Politburo colleagues is realistic. Concludes Mr. Linh: &quot;There's no miracle cure.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>