<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880727-0048 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   IRAN SAID it would use its influence to help win the release of U.S. hostages.    Military chief Rafsanjani said on Iranian television that Tehran would &quot;intercede&quot; on behalf of the Americans held hostage in Lebanon if Washington released Iranian assets frozen in the U.S. The Reagan administration rejected the offer. A spokesman said there would be &quot;no deals.&quot; In New York, Perez de Cuellar met with Tehran's foreign minister in the first round of formal talks about arranging a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war. Details weren't disclosed. The U.N. secretary-general is to hold separate talks with Iraq's foreign minister today.    Iranian rebels based in Iraq claimed that their forces drove deep into Iran. Tehran said its forces repulsed the &quot;counterrevolutionary&quot; offensive.    ---   Dukakis criticized Reagan and Bush, declaring that Americans are &quot;embarrassed and ashamed&quot; at the administration's action or inaction on such matters as the Iran-Contra affair and Meese's legal difficulties. The vice president, meanwhile, proposed rewriting conflict-of-interest laws to cover a wider variety of misconduct as well as Congress.    Reagan lambasted the Democratic Party for its anti-administration rhetoric. The president said the criticism leveled by the Democrats at the party's convention last week got &quot;my Irish up.&quot; He pledged to give them &quot;hell&quot; in the fall campaign.    ---   The House ethics committee selected Chicago lawyer Richard Phelan to investigate allegations against Speaker Wright, including the Texas Democrat's earnings from a 55% book royalty agreement. The panel's chairman said Phelan would &quot;work at the direction of the committee,&quot; and conduct a &quot;full review.&quot;    ---   Two former Meese aides told a Senate panel they resigned in March because of what they viewed as improper conduct by the attorney general. The criminal division's ex-chief said he believed there was evidence to prosecute Meese, and the former deputy attorney general cited sagging morale at the Justice Department.    ---   The House Judiciary panel recommended that federal Judge Alcee Hastings of Miami be impeached on 17 counts of misconduct. The move came despite Hastings's recent acquittal at a bribery trial. The panel accused the 61-year-old judge of conspiring to solicit a bribe from two defendants in his court and of lying about the plot to jurors.    ---   A Pentagon office was faulted by the GAO for failing to effectively carry out its role as watchdog over the testing of weapons systems. A study of six weapons systems tested by the Operational Testing and Evaluation Office found &quot;significant problems or limitations&quot; in the testing methods.    ---   Marcos confirmed that he was negotiating a return to the Philippines, but denied a report that he offered Manila $5 billion to allow him to re-enter the country from exile in Hawaii. In Manila, talks on U.S. military bases were suspended as both sides failed to narrow differences over how much Washington will pay to use the installations.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres blamed Prime Minister Shamir and the governing Likud party for inspiring the Palestinian uprising by rejecting a U.S. plan to resolve the dispute. Peres made his remarks at the start of the campaign for November's elections. In the Gaza Strip, Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teen-ager, Arabs said.    An Israeli consular delegation left for Moscow on a mission viewed as important to improving Soviet-Israeli ties, which were severed 21 years ago. The five-member team includes a former Soviet dissident.    ---   Warring Cambodian factions neared agreement on the central issues of keeping the Khmer Rouge guerrillas out of power and of forming a transition regime to conduct elections, Indonesia's foreign minister said. At the talks outside Jakarta, Vietnam insisted that the withdrawal of its forces be linked to ending aid to the Khmer Rouge.    ---   Opposition leaders in India announced that the country's four main centrist groups would merge in a bid to present a major electoral challenge to Prime Minister Gandhi and the Congress (I) Party. The move came as New Delhi's Parliament prepared to open a new session today. General elections are to be held by the end of 1989.    ---   Burma's socialist rulers named Sein Lwin, a former army general who is considered responsible for suppressing dissent since a 1962 military coup, to succeed Ne Win, who resigned as the governing party's leader. The choice of the 64-year-old hardliner appeared to dash hopes of a change in Burma's one-party system of government.    ---   Poland said it is willing to enter talks about trade union pluralism, but it remains opposed to legalizing Solidarity, which was outlawed in 1981 following imposition of martial law. A spokesman for the Warsaw government didn't rule out a possible public role for Lech Walesa, but said the unionist couldn't act as Solidarity's chairman. </TEXT></DOC>