<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871027-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN IMPOSED an embargo on trade between the U.S. and Iran.    The president, angered by what he called Iran's &quot;increasingly bellicose behavior&quot; and prodded by Congress, imposed an embargo on all imports from Iran and nearly all exports to Tehran. The ban, which goes into effect immediately, doesn't include medical supplies to Iran. In the Persian Gulf, Kuwait has registered two tankers to fly the British flag and is in the process of registering a third. The moves allow protection by British warships.    U.S. officials said defenses are being devised against Iran's Chinese-made Silkworm missiles and that Tehran is seeking to buy 300 more Silkworms.    ---   Gorbachev is likely to sign a treaty to ban medium-range nuclear missiles, Reagan said, even though the Soviet leader has refused to set a summit date unless the U.S. makes Strategic Defense Initiative concessions. European observers also said they thought the pact will not be derailed by the summit issue.    ---   The Air Force launched a Titan rocket carrying a secret military payload from its Vandenberg base in California. The successful launch marks the restoration of the U.S. military's ability to place large spy satellites into orbit. That ability was interrupted by the Challenger disaster and back-to-back Titan failures in 1985 and 1986.    ---   Kim Dae Jung said military leaders would accept him as president of South Korea. The opposition leader is betting that U.S. pressure and the fears of some military leaders that they couldn't control South Korea would prevent another crackdown. Kim said he plans to announce his candidacy officially tomorrow.    South Koreans began voting in a national referendum on a new constitution designed to bring full democracy to the nation after years of authoritarian government. About 25.6 million people are eligible to vote on the new constitution, which goes into effect Feb. 25. The nation's 140,000-member police force was placed on full alert.    ---   A distraught customer shot and killed the branch manager of a Merrill Lynch office in Miami and critically wounded his broker before killing himself. Police said the gunman apparently was unnerved by the stock-market crash. He was described as a fairly substantial investor facing margin calls following big losses.    ---   China's Communist Party said it soon may allow peasants to buy and sell their land rights, letting some leave the land for good and others farm more efficiently on a larger scale. The announcement came as the party held its first national congress in five years to reaffirm its policy of introducing market reforms.    Tibetan monks and workers are being forced by Beijing to attend &quot;re-education classes&quot; because of violent pro-independence protests earlier this month, Western sources in Lhasa said.    ---   Gunmen in San Salvador killed the head of the Salvadoran Human Rights Commission. Herbert Anaya was the fourth head of the independent commission to be assassinated since 1980. A commission spokesman blamed rightist death squads. Rebel leaders blamed the government and said they were considering breaking off peace talks.    ---   A federal judge overruled a Justice Department effort to restrict an independent counsel's contacts with the Canadian government in the perjury trial of former top White House aide Deaver. The counsel had requested testimony from a Canadian ambassador, a request the U.S. said should have gone through diplomatic channels.    ---   Solidarity urged Poles to boycott a Nov. 29 national referendum on the government's economic and political reforms. The banned independent union movement said the referendum questions present no concrete route to democracy. It also announced elimination of its underground branch and formation of a national commission headed by Walesa.    ---   The U.S. wants to convene a high-level meeting with its allies to improve enforcement of rules restricting sales of Western technology to East bloc nations, a top State Department aide said. The meeting would also focus on reviewing what technology should be restricted and building domestic political support for the restrictions.    ---   Canada's Liberal Party leader said a government led by his party would tear up the U.S.-Canada free-trade pact. John Turner said the pact negotiated by the Conservative government would make Canada a U.S. satellite. Another opposition party also has come out against the pact and is trying to force an election on the issue.    ---   Philippine rebels bombed a business conference in the southern city of Zamboanga, killing three. The attack took place as President Aquino, speaking to troops in Manila, said the government was gaining ground in its fight against communist insurgents. </TEXT></DOC>