<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871211-0066 </DOCNO><HL> The Crash of '87 -- Before the Fall:Speculative Fever RanHigh in the 10 MonthsPrior to Black Monday---Forecasts at the Start of '87,Based on Esoteric Ideas,Led to Some Unreal Gains---The Predisposition to Believe---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>      {First in a series}   This is the headline that greeted readers of Barron's first issue of 1987: &quot;3600 on the Dow? That, says Bob Prechter, is Where We're Going.&quot; In a wildly bullish forecast, Mr. Prechter, a reigning market guru, predicted, &quot;The third and last wave is ahead of us.&quot;    Few paid much attention to the details of Mr. Prechter's esoteric Elliot Wave Theory, a technical system for market forecasting developed by an obscure accountant in the 1930s. But during a year in which Shirley MacLaine, &quot;channeling&quot; and the healing power of crystals have enthralled millions, Mr. Prechter's waves also found instant adherents, who were drawn by the rosy forecast of an ever-rising Dow Jones Industrial Average.    Stocks surged this year for reasons going far beyond Mr. Prechter. But until Black Monday, his 3600 talisman made the Dow seem low -- no matter how high it got by traditional means of valuing stocks.    The speed and the magnitude of the 508-point drop in the Dow on Oct. 19 took virtually everyone by surprise. But for some, the greatest mystery is why the Dow rose 800 points during the previous 10 months.    The search for an explanation goes back to the beginning of the 1980s bull market and especially to the beginning of this year, when the market started to soar beyond all traditional measures of valuation. By Aug. 25, when the Dow peaked at 2722.42, the stock market was &quot;the most overvalued it has ever been in the postwar period,&quot; says Leon Cooperman, who heads stock-market research at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. &quot;The market was an accident waiting to happen.&quot;    In retrospect, the giddy 1987 surge of the five-year bull market has at least some elements of a speculative craze, echoing the Tulip Mania of the 1600s, the South Sea Bubble of the 1700s and the Roaring Twenties. It was &quot;pure speculation,&quot; marked by &quot;an absolute commitment to the idea that the market will go up forever,&quot; economist John Kenneth Galbraith says. Caught up in one way or another, besides Mr. Prechter, were such disparate figures as former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, international money managers like George Soros, and strategists at many top firms on Wall Street.    At the time, of course, few people thought it was speculation. As the year wore on, analysts explained surging stock prices by citing broad, powerful forces: a supposedly endless supply of foreign -- particularly Japanese -- money, rapidly growing amounts of American cash to buy stock, and the takeover boom with its skyrocketing valuation of many companies. The government helped, too, by long keeping open the credit spigot while ignoring growing signs of excess speculation.    Just three weeks before the global crash, in its Sept. 28 issue, Fortune magazine hailed Mr. Soros, the manager of Quantum Fund, by saying some &quot;rank him ahead of even Omaha billionaire Warren Buffett as the most prescient investor of his generation.&quot; Mr. Soros told Fortune: &quot;Just because the market is overvalued does not mean it is not sustainable.&quot;    During most of the bull market that began in August 1982, many experts -- quoted in numerous publications, including this one -- believed that stocks weren't overvalued but rather were responding to a highly favorable economic climate. After the sharp 1981-82 recession, the stock market had surged on a tide of economic optimism, spurred by rising employment and corporate earnings, falling interest rates, and a conviction that the government had broken the back of inflation that had bedeviled the U.S. in the late 1970s.    As 1987 dawned, many positive forces were still at work, including an unprecedented wave of corporate takeovers and restructurings that had enriched raiders, investors and investment bankers.    Yet the mood at the beginning of 1987 was hardly bullish. The Dow had already leaped 144% from a low of 776.42 in 1982. And during the final months of 1986, the market, rocked by Wall Street's spreading insider-trading scandals and the accompanying decline of some takeover stocks, had drifted sideways. Many people expected a correction in the first quarter of 1987.    But on Jan. 5, the day the Prechter interview appeared in Barron's, the Dow jumped 44 points, at the time its biggest one-day gain.On Jan. 22, it leaped more than 51 points. Five days later, it surged an additional 43. And on Feb. 17, it set another record, gaining more than 54 points to close over 2237.    The January rally was just what Mr. Prechter and other bulls had predicted, and their forecasts took on an aura of certainty. Investors began to believe more fervently Mr. Prechter's analysis of the relationship between stock prices and interest rates and bond prices.    Typically, stock prices rise as interest rates fall and bond prices increase; higher rates make bonds a more attractive investment. But Mr. Prechter predicted that during 1987, bonds would be &quot;a net sideways performer or a net loser, while the stock market soars.&quot;    That theory got its test last April, when interest rates turned sharply upward, surprising Wall Street and inflicting large losses on the bond departments of some securities firms. The stock market, faced with higher bond yields, seemed to falter, but then it cast off its worries and soared a record 66.47 points on April 21. The next day, The Wall Street Journal's &quot;Abreast of the Market&quot; column said &quot;the surge stunned many of the most seasoned Wall Street traders and analysts.&quot; Interest rates rose further in August and September. Again, stocks faltered. But then they quickly rallied, and this time no one said he was &quot;stunned.&quot;    By August, when the Dow shot above 2700, time-honored measures of stock-market values seemed quaint anachronisms. The market, as measured by the Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index, was trading at 23 times earnings, a postwar high. Even using the most optimistic forecasts for 1988 earnings, computer models calculated price-earnings ratios that were far above the postwar average of 14.5 times earnings.    The market had become expensive by other measures as well. Stocks were producing annual dividend yields of only 2.2% -- down close to half the postwar average of 4.25%. And stocks were trading at three times book value, double the postwar average. If that seemed high, well, there was always Japan. Even adjusting for accounting differences, Japanese stocks were trading at about 60 times earnings -- and were still going up. Many other markets around the world also were booming.    By midsummer, the problem for traditionalists was that many of their models had turned bearish in January -- just when Mr. Prechter had issued his bullish forecast. Since January, they had missed a 44% rise in the Dow, and their investment performance was so dismal that many of them were busily revising their models. Others discarded the models, choosing to ignore such concepts as yield ratios, earnings and book value. Mr. Prechter wasn't fazed by the historical extremes such measures of stock values reached. &quot;I fully expected it,&quot; he says.    By September, the market had found new high priests of valuation. Among them was Mr. Soros, whose valuation credo is one that became a touchstone for the takeover-crazed 1980s: breakup value -- the value of a company if dismembered and its parts sold off.    The concept of breakup value came into prominence as a direct byproduct of the feverish takeover boom and everything that went with it: arbitrage, leverage, junk bonds, even inside information. Huge takeovers and leveraged buy-outs -- in which a company is taken private largely with borrowed money -- continued at ever higher cash-flow and earnings multiples.    When, for example, Burlington Industries announced in June that it was going private in a $2.16 billion leveraged buy-out led by Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., it was at an astonishing price-earnings multiple of about 36. Cash flow used to service debt &quot;replaced earnings as the key factor in valuation,&quot; Goldman Sachs's Mr. Cooperman says. The most important question was, he says, &quot;how much leverage could one pick up?&quot; What developed was a theory of &quot;private market value&quot; for companies far in excess of stock-market value.    The parade of deals continued: Hanson Trust PLC paid $1.8 billion for Kidde; British Petroleum took over Standard Oil for $7.6 billion; Hoechst won Celanese Corp. for $2.7 billion; Unilever N.V. bought Chesebrough-Pond's Inc. for $3.1 billion. The supply of money for takeovers seemed inexhaustible, both from junk-bond investors and from big buy-out pools such as the $5 billion raised by LBO powerhouse Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co.    In July, James L. Freeman, a First Boston Inc. strategist, told clients, in a report entitled &quot;LBO Supply/Demand Overwhelms Historical Value Notions,&quot; that $17.5 billion had been raised in buy-out pools in 1987. &quot;That is the beginning,&quot; he added. Mr. Freeman reasoned that, with leverage, pool managers could buy $140 billion of equities. There is a &quot;freight train full of money coming down the tracks,&quot; he predicted.    &quot;The market does not need retail participation; the market does not need Japanese buying,&quot; Mr. Freeman wrote. Higher stock prices would come from takeovers, restructurings and corporate stock repurchases alone. &quot;So, the question is not if the market is going up, but how soon and how much,&quot; he concluded.    Even the government's spreading investigation stemming from last year's insider-trading charges against Ivan F. Boesky and others failed to curb the hunger for takeover profits. Thrifts, corporations and even, briefly, New York's huge Chemical Bank jumped into the arbitrage business, speculating on the latest takeovers, real or imagined. &quot;There was $15 billion-plus sloshing around&quot; chasing takeover stocks, one top arbitrager estimates. Neophyte takeover speculators &quot;traded on every rumor,&quot; says Allan Gaines, the president of Gaines, Berland Inc., a money manager. Thus, &quot;if you were early buying on a rumor, you made money,&quot; he adds.    The life styles of leveraged-buy-out specialists and corporate raiders were featured in glossy fashion and decorating magazines. The New York Times Magazine brought readers into the Manhattan apartment of LBO specialist Henry Kravis, revealing an opulent temple of materialism that might have stirred envy in a 19th-century robber baron.    But perhaps the most telling takeover incident occurred in Cincinnati. There, on June 23, an obscure investment adviser, P. David Herrlinger, announced a $6.8 billion offer for Dayton Hudson Corp. Mr. Herrlinger appeared on his front lawn to tell the Dow Jones News Service that he didn't know whether his bid was a hoax. &quot;It's no more of a hoax than anything else,&quot; he said. Later, he was taken to a hospital.    Yet the news sent the giant retailer's stock soaring, with 5.5 million shares changing hands in frantic trading. &quot;It showed the predisposition of the market to believe anything,&quot; says James Grant, the editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer.    The effect of takeovers and buy-outs on stock values fed on itself. As one company was taken over, the stock of every company in that industry would be hurriedly bid up to reflect the earnings and cash-flow multiples just realized by the takeover target. After General Foods and Nabisco were taken over, for example, shares of food companies -- long regarded as dull and deserving of low multiples -- jumped to values once reserved for glamour stocks.    Dazzled by huge fees, ever-rising stock prices and the corresponding ability to return privatized companies to public hands at astronomical profits, investment bankers began thinking it was impossible to overpay for a company.    The ability to bid stocks up to such high levels, of course, depended on the availability of money to pay for them. And during 1987, money kept pouring in. The growth of the nation's money supply was once scrutinized religiously for its effect on interest rates and the stock market. But as the bull market continued, among other developments, analysts began ignoring money-supply figures as an anachronism.    But the money supply grew 12% in 1985 and 15% in 1986, unprecedented back-to-back increases. In late 1986, the Fed opened the credit spigot to accommodate a huge wave of sales of businesses and financial assets as investors rushed to beat the Dec. 31 revision in capital-gains tax rates. The money supply soared about $18 billion in December 1986 alone, helping to set the stage for January's rally, some experts say.    Presiding over the surge of liquidity was Fed Chairman Volcker, who had earned the status of a demigod on Wall Street by vanquishing inflation with a tight monetary policy in the early 1980s. But thereafter, pressured by Reagan appointees on the Federal Reserve Board, Mr. Volcker maintained a broadly accommodative monetary policy. &quot;Volcker created the new money, or liquidity, that was used as the fuel for the stock market going into orbit,&quot; says David Jones, the chief economist of Aubrey G. Lanston andamp; Co., a major government-securities dealer.    The money that poured into the system, of course, could have gone in any number of directions. But with inflation seemingly vanquished, investments in real estate, commodities, and even plant and equipment seemed unattractive. Bond returns looked paltry, and as interest rates soared in April, bond portfolios suffered enormous losses. But stocks seemed cheap. Much of the new money flooded into the stock market and into stock-market derivatives such as the futures markets.    Stock-index futures, such as a composite index of the Standard andamp; Poor's 500, had already become a powerful tool for speculation. With margin (down-payment) requirements as low as 5%, the dollar value of a huge amount of stock could be swayed by a relatively small investment.    The thriving futures markets also popularized program-trading strategies such as portfolio insurance and index arbitrage. Portfolio insurance especially helped the market's rise by reducing selling pressure from portfolio managers who believed they could protect themselves against a stock-market decline with stock-index futures.    The futures and options markets, of course, also provided vehicles for out-and-out speculation, and they generated some of the spectacular gains that led to the euphoria.    In the regulatory area, the government did nothing to rein in stock-market credit. &quot;What the government could have done -- and would have done in the 1950s when they remembered 1929 -- was to push up margin requirements,&quot; thereby curbing investors' ability to buy stock on credit, says Lester C. Thurow, the dean of Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management.    The Fed used to adjust stock-margin requirements often but hasn't since 1974, when the current rate for stocks was put at 50%. The Fed said it wanted to be freed of margin-setting responsibility, and it suggested that stock exchanges should assume the task. Although no one followed through on the idea, &quot;it was one of the things that contributed to the attitude and mood&quot; of speculation, says Howard Stein, chairman of Dreyfus Corp., a major mutual-fund complex.    About the time the market reached its August 1987 high, some positive forces were showing ominous signs of deterioration. Alan Greenspan replaced Mr. Volcker as Fed chairman on Aug. 11, and the Fed's great engine of money growth was turned off. On Sept. 3, the Fed raised its bellwether discount rate -- its rate on loans to member banks -- to 6% from 5 1/2%. The prime rate -- the banks' own basic lending rate -- rose to 8 3/4% from 8 1/4% the same day; it went to 9 1/4% five weeks later.    The magnitude of the rate increases was hard to ignore. First Boston's Mr. Freeman, for example, says he turned somewhat bearish because of them. And some experts say the rate increases were forced on the Fed by things largely out of its control: the need to attract foreign capital to finance the budget deficits. The Group of Seven industrialized nations convened early this fall to stabilize the dollar, which had been declining all year. But the very need for such a meeting only heightened foreigners' worries that the dollar's fall was about to accelerate and eat away further at the value of their dollar investments. The great inflow of foreign money that used to greet Wall Street traders every morning slowed to a trickle, then all but stopped.    No one had paid much attention, but the underpinnings of the takeover boom had undergone even more severe erosion. In April, the U.S. Supreme Court, in a surprising decision, upheld an Indiana statute plainly designed to curb hostile takeovers of Indiana corporations. The ruling seemed to sanctify other anti-takeover statutes and led to the passage of similar laws in other states.    Congress, meanwhile, was considering its own package of legislation to curb takeovers. The proposed tax bill would repeal many tax breaks related to takeovers and could halt highly leveraged deals.    Even without legislative curbs, there was growing uneasiness that the takeover boom was nearing an end. As the prices of such deals and the corresponding debt loads grew ever higher, even a whiff of recession -- triggered by higher interest rates, inflation or a weaker dollar -- raised the specter of widespread defaults by debt-ridden companies. Heading into October, the pace of takeovers had turned down from the year before.    Yet sentiment indicators hit new peaks of bullishness. The stock market dropped in early September but then snapped back. &quot;Everybody said, 'It's just like April,'&quot; when the market shrugged off bad news and hit new highs, says Elaine Garzarelli, a Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. analyst who became increasingly worried as interest rates mounted.    On Sept. 22, the Dow jumped 75.23 points, its biggest one-day gain ever, closing at 2568.05. &quot;The bears finally climbed to the top of the ladder and fell off,&quot; Gruntal andamp; Co. technical analyst Gene Jay Seagle told The Wall Street Journal at the time. Stan Weinstein, the publisher of the Professional Tape Reader, said he was &quot;convinced&quot; that a correction was over.    As for Mr. Prechter, his measures of investor sentiment turned so bullish in early September that he became worried, urging clients to reduce their stock exposure and prepare for a relatively minor correction. But prior to Black Monday, he never lost faith in his prediction that the Dow would hit 3600 before a bear market set in.    Mr. Prechter now concedes that in making the complex computations and studies of history called for by the wave theory, he made one mistake: He began measuring the final wave from August 1982, whereas he now believes that it began at the market low of 1974. Had he revised his computations accordingly, he now says, he would have predicted a peak not of 3600 but of 2700. He admits: &quot;3600 dazzled people.&quot;    Mr. Prechter was right about one thing. In January, he said that a market top is characterized by &quot;a state of euphoric belief that the only trend was up.&quot; By mid-October, the stage was set for a stock-market catastrophe.    (Revised WSJ Dec. 14, 1987)</TEXT></DOC>