<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880321-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: A Road Map for Those Driven by Distraction </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Schrage </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Though bright and exceedingly energetic, the president of a small consumer-electronics subsidiary of an East Coast entertainment company sends some of his subordinates ricocheting off the walls. &quot;His day is random,&quot; says one bemused colleague. &quot;He will walk into a meeting and disrupt it until something else catches his fancy and then he'll go off and do that. Some days, he sits by the phone and just calls. . . . I don't think he spends more than five minutes at a time on any task; he just wants to dip his beak into everything that's going on.&quot;    This president constantly complains about the demands made on his time.    The staff of a New York executive editor who oversees the publication of several trade journals doesn't know whether to be annoyed or amused by the editor's habit of interrupting conversations with them to make unrelated phone calls. The lure of the unknown -- who might be on the phone or tapping on his office door -- often seems to interest him more than whatever he's doing at that moment. &quot;You don't have a conversation with him,&quot; says one of his writers. &quot;You exchange data bursts.&quot;    The editor thinks he's doing a much better job of managing his time than he used to -- but he regrets that he can't go off to a quiet place to &quot;concentrate.&quot;    While both managers complain about interruptions, they are like many others who can best be described as interruptaholics -- people who literally crave and create the pleasures of constant distractions. The habit of placing calls while talking to subordinates, the executive who regularly pinballs through the hallway &quot;just to see what's up,&quot; the fidgeting that sweeps through the room when a meeting passes the 25-minute mark are all symptomatic of business people for whom interruption has become the quickest way to scratch a mental itch.    &quot;These are the people who taste something but don't eat,&quot; says Edward Stainbrook, professor emeritus of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the University of Southern California. &quot;There's this constant search for arousal; they want to keep constantly on a high of doing something new.&quot;    &quot;There's a lot of distractibility I see among successful executives, managers and bureaucrats,&quot; says Douglas LaBier, a Washington-based psychoanalyst who sees many urban careerists. &quot;It's one of the symptoms of distress in this whole group of the baby-boomer yuppies.&quot;    Harvard Business School Prof. Abraham Zaleznik claims that, not unlike Dr. Pavlov and his drooling dogs, many organizations literally condition their people to managerial interruptions. They insist managers take on more tasks than reasonably can be accomplished on schedule -- or they simply display a blithe contempt for the individual's time. &quot;As people become conditioned to it, that's the way to do things,&quot; says Mr. Zaleznik. &quot;People allow themselves to get caught up in those self-imposed structures; they draw a certain degree of comfort in them.&quot; There's always something else to do, and the &quot;barrier of entry&quot; is quite low -- all you have to do is pick up the phone, buzz a secretary or boot up the computer. The infrastructure of the modern office encourages self-generated interruptions.    But there's more to being an interruptaholic than corporate conditioning. This manic quality of popping from one task to the next probably reflects a personality that takes more pleasure out of starting something than finishing it. &quot;It's a defensive behavior,&quot; says USC's Prof. Stainbrook. &quot;The individual isn't getting enough reward doing the task at hand so he wants to do something else.&quot;    That doesn't necessarily mean that interruptaholics have a &quot;short attention span.&quot; The computer-company manager, for example, has been known to run meetings that last more than eight hours, and he tracks every conversational thread. He also generates a lot of the digressions and interruptions. But by skillfully pacing the frequency and duration of those interruptions, he still manages to get the job done.    The catch is that, like workaholics, interruptaholics are often not consciously aware of their behavior and its impact on others -- they're too busy interrupting themselves as they bitterly blame the demands the job makes on their time.    Many executives simply use interruptions as a technique for procrastinating. It's not unusual for a manager to allow interruptions in order to avoid dealing with a sensitive issue with a subordinate or delay writing that sales report. Interruption becomes the excuse -- a tactic -- not to get the job done on time.    On the other hand, some managers are so overwhelmed by the torrent of information spilling over their desks that generating interruptions becomes a form of cognitive self-defense; a necessary circuit breaker. These people aren't avoiding the task at hand; they need the distraction as a healthy change of pace.    This makes diagnosing the bothersome interruptaholic -- someone who has become dependent on distraction for distraction's sake -- a real challenge. But few things reveal more about an individual than the way he handles -- or mishandles -- his time. Executives would do well to examine the time-styles of their managers to see whether the work gets done because of rather than in spite of the constant interruptions. Delegating responsibility to somebody who can juggle many balls at once may be a sure way to get the job done fast. But giving that task to the &quot;busy&quot; interruptaholic guarantees that more problems will be created than solved, because this type is more interested in the novelty than the substance.    The true test of interruptaholics is the feelings they get: Do they feel antsy after talking with someone for more than 15 minutes? Does their pulse quicken just when they're beginning to get involved in writing that report? Do they feel like they have to do something even when it probably makes just as much sense to lean back and wait?    This isn't a disease -- it's a condition. Those who suspect they have a problem should first evaluate the fragmentary nature of their workday and find out for themselves whether their problem is self-imposed or created by their environment. If it is the latter, managers may best deal with their interruptaholism directly: disconnecting the phone, using a barely furnished office; hiring another secretary just to handle incoming calls. If your problem is more internal, you may want to recondition your work habits by rigidly adhering to a schedule to create a different behavior pattern. A course in time management and/or a serious re-evaluation of what parts of the job you enjoy and why may also be in order.    Of course, before interruptaholics seek help for a problem, they must first recognize that they have a problem. And because some of them manage to get the job done -- no matter how much they frustrate those around them -- they will resist changing their ways unless their behavior leads to disaster. Noted anthropologist Gregory Bateson once remarked that an alcoholic must experience two things before he is ready for treatment: the first is to admit being an alcoholic; the second is waking up in the gutter. Self-knowledge, painfully gained, is often the most effective way to manage a behavior that distracts people from getting the job done well.    ---   Mr. Schrage is a senior editor of Manhattan Inc. </TEXT></DOC>