<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880728-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Steel-Belted Tire Problems Persist As Activists Call for Federal Probes </HL><AUTHOR> Ann Hagedorn (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> RUB </IN><G> TRN </G><TEXT>   It was a hot June day in 1985. Nine-year-old Dale Alday was playing in the back of the family station wagon while his father drove across southern Texas. About 75 miles north of San Antonio, the left rear tire exploded. The auto careened out of control and smashed into a tree. Dale's pregnant mother, his father and his five-year-old sister were killed; Dale, though thrown from the car, survived.    Early this year, Dale's guardians accepted nearly $1 million on his behalf from Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co. to settle a lawsuit alleging that the accident was caused by a defect in a Uniroyal Steeler, the steel-belted radial that blew out. It was the second time in six months that the company had agreed to such a large settlement in a suit involving a Steeler; last fall, it settled a Florida case for $2 million.    Across the country, there have been more than two dozen other lawsuits in recent years, some pending and some already settled, involving steel-belted radials of various makes. Plaintiffs blame the tires, which were made from 1978 through 1984, for accidents involving at least 17 deaths and 25 injuries.    Industry spokesmen, for their part, defend their tires and contend that tire safety has improved greatly since a decade ago, when Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co. began a recall of more than 10 million steel-belted radials in the wake of widespread consumer complaint and a government safety investigation. But consumer activists and a number of tire specialists claim there are still some dangerous steel-belted radials on the road. And plaintiffs' attorneys, alleging that design or manufacturing defects have created a built-in potential for sudden failure in some radials, argue that the known accidents represent a dangerous pattern that the government should investigate.    Lately, only one make of tire has come under government scrutiny. After 301 complaints and reports of eight accidents and nine injuries, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) launched an investigation last September of Uniroyal's Laredo light-truck radial. The 1.2 million tires involved in the probe were made from 1985 through 1987. (Uniroyal denies that the tire is defective.)    Much of the argument between the plaintiffs and the tire industry comes down to a question of how to view the statistics.    &quot;It's not that every tire is dangerous,&quot; concedes Dick Baumgardner, a Louisville, Ky., tire consultant and former Firestone tire engineer who has testified on behalf of both plaintiffs and corporate defendants. &quot;But that one person out of thousands who might have a defective tire, well, it might erase his life. Statistics don't matter much in the face of death.&quot;    The companies respond that the statistics do matter. The number of suits relative to the millions of tires made each year is minuscule, they say. For example, Uniroyal produces an average of 40 million steel-belted radials annually, says a spokesman. Though a big producer, Uniroyal makes fewer radials than Firestone, and both lag behind Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co., the nation's largest tire maker.    Tread separations, says the Uniroyal spokesman, occur in fewer than 1% of the company's radials. When they do occur, he says, the usual causes are improper inflation, excessive speeds, overloading or bruising from heavy impacts.    The number of product-liability suits at Firestone, which was recently acquired by Bridgestone Corp. of Japan, &quot;doesn't even approach one hundredth of 1% of the outstanding product,&quot; notes Thomas M. Forman, senior vice president and general counsel. He says Firestone's tire specialists have found that &quot;well over half of the tires we see which are claimed to have somehow failed while on the vehicle can be directly related to lack of owner's maintenance.&quot;    Moreover, Mr. Forman says, &quot;it's relatively rare that there is a serious accident anymore that someone doesn't allege something mechanical caused it, rather than pure driver error.&quot;    Nonetheless, NHTSA became sufficiently concerned about reports of &quot;tread separations and blowout defects&quot; in Uniroyal's Laredo tire to launch its investigation. By February, the agency had asked Uniroyal for more information, including descriptions of accidents, claims or lawsuits, adjustment claims and weekly production figures for the Laredo. In a letter to the agency in April, Uniroyal asked that the investigation be ended &quot;on the basis of no defect or no unreasonable risk.&quot; NHTSA, however, is continuing to study the material submitted.    Plaintiffs' attorneys and tire specialists who claim the tires cited in the lawsuits are defective concede that certain conditions -- such as high temperatures, fast driving or underinflation -- can increase the potential for a blowout. They acknowledge that hot weather may explain why numerous accidents involving allegedly defective radials have occurred in the South or West and during the summer.    But they contend that these conditions shouldn't cause a blowout without the existence of an internal defect, such as a problem in the adhesion of the rubber between the steel belts.    &quot;At least 16 different things can happen in the factory to trigger a failure,&quot; says George Edwards, another Louisville tire consultant. He says that out of 640 tires brought to him by plaintiffs' attorneys over the past eight years, 270 have been defective. Of these, he adds, about 180 were steel-belted radials, and most eventually became the subjects of litigation.    &quot;There has been a drastic improvement in quality control over the past decade, resulting in less-defective tires, but the defects have not been eliminated,&quot; says Mr. Edwards, who in the 1970s worked as a technical consultant to Goodyear.    Mr. Baumgardner, the consultant, adds that some of the problem radials he has analyzed over the past five years have had the same serial numbers. &quot;If it were a random happening, you wouldn't expect the same serial numbers,&quot; he says. &quot;It appears something could be wrong with entire batches.&quot;    In the Alday case, filed in Kerr County (Texas) District Court but settled before trial, Uniroyal planned to argue that excessive speed was a major factor in the blowout of the tire, which it denies was defective. According to a state policeman's report, the father was driving about 87 miles an hour when the Steeler blew out.    But Robert Hilliard, the lead plaintiff's attorney, planned to counter that, regardless of legal speed limits, the tires should be able to endure speeds as high as the car itself is capable of going. &quot;The penalty for speeding in Texas is $45, not death,&quot; he says. &quot;Speeding alone should not cause a tire to fail.&quot;    Uniroyal also denied that the tire in the Florida case was defective, and presented evidence that it had been punctured by a piece of metal. Bruce Kaster, the Ocala, Fla., attorney for the plaintiff, contended in his closing argument in the trial that even if the tire had been punctured, it should have gone flat rather than explode. The company settled the case, which was heard in Marion County Circuit Court, while the jury was deliberating.    Before the settlement, the court had ordered the company to disclose to the plaintiff all lawsuits brought in the previous five years involving similar products. The company disclosed only one, a Memphis, Tenn., case that involved an allegedly defective Steeler.    But Mr. Kaster was convinced there were others. He placed ads in national legal publications in search of other attorneys with Uniroyal radial cases. About a week before the trial, he told the court he had learned of four other pending lawsuits against Uniroyal alleging a tread separation. One, which also involved a Steeler, was to begin trial the same day as his.    Consequently, the Florida judge chastised Uniroyal, saying it had intentionally misled the plaintiff. The judge, in the disclosure order, had defined &quot;similar&quot; products to be any steel-belted radials, according to court records. Uniroyal, which subsequently acknowledged a third Steeler suit, said it had misunderstood the definition of &quot;similar.&quot;    Mr. Kaster is currently representing the plaintiff in the Memphis case. He says he is outraged by what he calls &quot;a classic battle of a major industry against uninformed people out there getting hurt, and sometimes killed.&quot; However, he adds, &quot;I intend to get them informed.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>