<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880706-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Meese Resigns Abruptly, Claims Prosecutor's Report Clears Him --- But Finding Is Said to Fault Attorney General, Who Faced Growing Criticism </HL><AUTHOR> Andy Pasztor and Ellen Hume (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> JUS EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Attorney General Edwin Meese, after months of escalating calls for his departure and turmoil at the Justice Department, abruptly resigned, claiming he has been &quot;completely vindicated&quot; of wrongdoing by an independent prosecutor's report.    Mr. Meese's surprise announcement, made during what was expected to be a routine news conference in California, caught many of his critics off guard and shocked even some of his supporters in the White House. It came only a few hours after independent prosecutor James McKay's final decision to forgo seeking any criminal charges against the attorney general.    However, the report prepared by Mr. McKay is bound to prove embarrassing to Mr. Meese because it criticizes some of his activities and urges a further review by Justice Department ethics officials, according to lawyers familiar with the investigation. The approximately 830-page report remains under court seal and won't be made public until later this month, after Mr. Meese's attorneys have responded to its criticisms.    Mr. Meese said he intends to leave office by early August, and a White House official said there wasn't even a list of possible successors. Mr. Meese told reporters that the timing of his announcement and the filing of Mr. McKay's report with a special federal appeals court panel here was purely a coincidence.    Nonetheless, the move appeared calculated to allow Mr. Meese to step down -- thereby removing himself as a political lightning rod in an election year -- while still saying that &quot;the burden of false allegations&quot; of criminal wrongdoing have been lifted.    Mr. Meese, a Reagan confidant and champion of the president's conservative agenda, has recently become a clear political liability for Republicans while he fended off widespread speculation that he would resign before the November elections. In a Wall Street Journal/NBC News national survey last month voters thought by a 42%-to-30% margin that Mr. Meese should resign and had a negative view of the attorney general by a margin larger than 2-to-1.    Vice President George Bush's campaign aides made no secret of their concern that the attorney general had become a major political handicap, and the vice president had stopped defending Mr. Meese. In a statement yesterday, Mr. Bush said, &quot;Ed did the right thing and I wish him well.&quot;    First Lady Nancy Reagan and some of the president's oldest friends -- and longtime allies of Mr. Meese -- concluded months ago that he should resign. Several of these advisers then urged Mr. Meese to follow precisely the course of action he took yesterday: to wait until completion of a report that stopped short of an indictment, declare that it exonerated him, and bow out.    &quot;He was a darn good attorney general,&quot; President Reagan told reporters after the announcement, adding &quot;I'm going to miss him.&quot; Yet even the president was surprised by the timing of the announcement. When Mr. Meese told him on the telephone yesterday that he would make the announcement soon, Mr. Reagan didn't realize that he meant within a few minutes, according to White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater.    Law enforcement officials and congressional aides said they expect Assistant Attorney General William Reynolds, one of Mr. Meese's closest aides, to step down soon. And unless Mr. Reagan succeeds in quickly choosing a Meese successor that can muster broad bipartisan support, the resignation could leave the Justice Department without a leader as it pursues the sweeping criminal inquiry of suspected corruption in Pentagon contracting.    On the campaign trail, Michael Dukakis, the expected Democratic presidential nominee, called the move &quot;long overdue,&quot; but asserted that the resignation, by itself, &quot;is not going to solve this administration's problems&quot; because it &quot;has had one scandal after another, one resignation after another.&quot;    Sen. Carl Levin (D., Mich.), a longtime critic of Mr. Meese, said, &quot;It's best for the country, it's best for the system of justice, it's best for the Department of Justice that Ed Meese did what he did today.&quot;    While asserting that &quot;false allegations have been put to rest&quot; by Mr. McKay's decision to file a report instead of seeking criminal charges, Mr. Meese acknowledged that neither he nor his attorneys had received copies of the document. Last April, when Mr. McKay made his preliminary decision not to seek criminal charges against the attorney general, the prosecutor said he intended to refer some of Mr. Meese's activities &quot;for review and action by the appropriate administrative authorities.&quot;    Any such recommendations for further ethical review, according to the attorney general, are &quot;pure commentary and opinion&quot; by Mr. McKay and exceed the prosecutor's official duties.    Mr. McKay's 14-month grand jury investigation, among other things, delved into Mr. Meese's dealings with WedtechCorp. -- a now defunct New York City defense contractor at the center of a major influence-peddling scandal -- and with San Francisco attorney Robert Wallach. The inquiry also looked into whether Mr. Meese gave preferential treatment to, or improperly benefited from, a proposed $1 billion Middle East oil pipeline that never was built and other business ventures involving Mr. Wallach, an old friend.    Mr. Meese's political problems intensified in March when several senior Justice Department officials -- including the department's No. 2 official -- resigned in a protest designed to force Mr. Meese to step down. Former Assistant Attorney General William Weld, who quit as head of the criminal division, reportedly told Mr. Meese at the time that he believed there was sufficient evidence to indict him.    For months, President Reagan and Mr. Meese have insisted that the attorney general didn't do anything improper and have charged that his critics were politically motivated. Nevertheless, Mr. Meese told the president some time ago that he would leave before the end of the term, Mr. Fitzwater said.    Most White House officials expected Mr. Meese to wait until autumn. When the attorney general called Mr. Reagan yesterday to tell him that the time had come, the president simply wanted to make sure that &quot;I felt this was in my best interests,&quot; Mr. Meese said.    Mr. Meese declined to indicate his plans. Associates speculated that he might teach law at the University of California in San Diego, join the Hoover Institution at Stanford University or another conservative think tank, the Heritage Foundation, or run the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation.    Mr. Meese's resignation ends a stormy career in the Reagan administration. In the first term, he served as counselor to President Reagan and managed the White House along with two senior Reagan advisers, James Baker and Michael Deaver. In March 1985, after undergoing contentious confirmation proceedings in which his ethics were questioned by some senators, Mr. Meese took over as attorney general, a post that fit with his background as a prosecutor in California.    In office, Mr. Meese came under fire for what critics claim was a slap-dash preliminary investigation of the Iran-Contra affair. Although his early investigation uncovered that proceeds from sales of arms to Iran had been diverted to Nicaraguan rebels, members of the congressional Iran-Contra committees said he was careless and failed to prevent the destruction of important government documents.    Finding a replacement for Mr. Meese will be difficult because &quot;it's tough at this stage of the game to get people to come in&quot; to take a job that will only last another six months, observed Gary Bauer, White House domestic policy adviser.    ---   John E. Yang contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>