<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0114 </DOCNO><HL> The Constitution: 1787-1987---Suits Over Balance of Power Abound, Amid DebateOn Nature of Government Framed by Constitution---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTEXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>      {Fifth of a Series}   WASHINGTON -- Few ideas were more basic to the framers of the Constitution than the need for separation of powers among the legislative, executive and judicial branches of government.    Yet few topics now are more hotly debated in legal circles than the meaning of separation of powers for a government that has changed its shape extensively since the Constitution was written in 1787.    In this bicentennial year, legal challenges are pending to the constitutionality of federal regulatory agencies, like the Federal Trade Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission, that exercise executive authority independent of the president. Other lawsuits question the validity of the law that authorizes independent prosecutors to investigate alleged misconduct by top federal officials. And the authority of a federal commission setting new rules for sentencing criminals in federal courts is certain to be challenged soon after the rules take effect Nov. 1.    These and other cases are stirring up fundamental questions about the relationship between Congress and the executive branch. The Reagan administration is adding to the uncertainty by raising questions about separation of powers when they suit its political goals, but then doing little to help resolve the problems.    &quot;The storm clouds are building for a major constitutional controversy raising basic questions about the nature of the government established by the framers,&quot; writes Geoffrey Miller, a University of Chicago Law School professor.    Concern about the meaning of separation of powers began in the first Congress in 1789, but it cropped up only rarely after that, until relatively recently. In the past decade, however, it has become a growth industry.    In 1976, the Supreme Court ruled that Congress couldn't appoint members of the Federal Election Commission, which had enforcement power over campaign-law violations. In 1983, the high court struck down congressional vetos of executive-branch policy decisions. Last year, the justices invalidated part of the deficit-reduction law that gave an official accountable to Congress authority to order budget cuts.    This proliferation of separation-of-powers questions has resulted, in part, from Congress delegating more policy-making power to the executive branch and agencies as a way to avoid making tough political decisions. But while passing the buck, Congress has looked for novel ways to retain some control over the results.    The Reagan administration has reaped the political benefits of those novel arrangements for sharing power -- and then has attacked Congress for encroaching on executive power. The White House, for example, urged passage of the deficit-reduction law as a way of moving toward a balanced budget, despite warnings by some lawmakers that the law had constitutional flaws. Once the political fight was over, though, the administration joined the attack in court on the constitutionality of the law's automatic budget cuts.    &quot;The Reagan administration is using separation of powers as a political tool to achieve its ends,&quot; charges Alan Morrison of Public Citizen Litigation Group, a consumer group, who handled the successful lawsuits in the legislative-veto and deficit-reduction cases. &quot;But it is with the complicity of Congress,&quot; he adds.    Some constitutional experts say the Supreme Court and the Reagan administration treat separation of powers too formally. &quot;It doesn't make sense to think of the framers as creating a rigid scheme,&quot; says Prof. Paul Bator of the University of Chicago Law School. &quot;They were thinking in terms of general ideas. They very carefully mixed the powers all the time in the Constitution.&quot;    Others disagree. The Supreme Court rulings, Mr. Morrison writes, involved &quot;. . . either an intrusion of one branch into the territory of the other, or an erosion of the principles of accountability, so that the public doesn't know who is responsible.&quot;    Nowhere are the stakes greater than in the current assault on the regulatory agencies, an attack that simmered briefly in the law schools until the Reagan administration brought it to the fore as part of its agenda to restore the primacy of the presidency.    The attack puzzles Chicago's Prof. Bator, for one. &quot;The independent agencies have been with us for more than 90 years,&quot; he says. &quot;It is odd that at this late hour we think they are completely unconstitutional.&quot;    The agencies have been called a &quot;fourth branch&quot; of government because their commissioners, although appointed by the president, don't take policy direction from him and can't be removed from office simply because the president disagrees with them. This has been the case since 1936, when the Supreme Court ruled that Congress could curb a president's ability to fire regulatory officials, because the agencies exercised authority that wasn't purely executive.    But Attorney General Edwin Meese has attacked the independence of the agencies and cast doubt on the validity of the 1936 decision, warning, &quot;Increasingly, the real law-making power . . . is wielded neither by the Congress or by the president, but by relatively anonymous members of the federal agencies.&quot;    To date, however, the Reagan administration hasn't supported any of a number of lawsuits challenging the authority of the FTC, the SEC, the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.    The administration has challenged, in recent Senate testimony, the validity of independent prosecutors who are appointed by a special federal appeals court. The appointment of such prosecutors intrudes on the executive's prosecutorial authority, Justice Department officials argued -- but only after the president and Mr. Meese took credit for requesting a special prosecutor in the Iran-Contra affair. Mr. Morrison argues, moreover, that any such intrusion &quot;is very small.&quot;    Likewise, when the administration was invited by a House subcommittee to defend the constitutionality of the Sentencing Commission, it declined -- even though Mr. Meese has hailed the prospect of new sentencing rules. The panel of federal judges and private individuals, appointed and removable by the president, was created by Congress to set sentencing rules, which many experts view as a legislative task. Criminal lawyers are expected to challenge the constitutionality of this hybrid agency.    The Constitutional Convention saw separation of powers as a simple, underlying theme. But at least one delegate, Roger Sherman of Connecticut, perhaps foresaw the debate that would arise two centuries later. Mr. Sherman was author of an 11th Amendment, written during the first Congress, but never passed and unearthed only recently. It said that the three branches shouldn't &quot;assume or exercise any of the powers peculiar to either of the other branches.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>