<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880311-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Not Just for Pin-Striped Fat Cats </HL><AUTHOR> Michael S. Malone </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> ELE </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   President Reagan has joined the electronics industry's call for a restoration of the old capital-gains tax break, the differential lost during the tax reform of 1986. It wasn't a particularly loud call, however, and it didn't receive much attention.    Talking about cutting taxes, any taxes, in 1988, is like yelling into a hurricane. And cutting capital gains, for heaven's sake! Maybe a lame-duck president can dare mention the idea, but among the candidates only Vice President George Bush and Rep. Jack Kemp -- who dropped out yesterday -- had the courage to come out for a tax break that, to the man in the street, seems to benefit just pin-striped fat cats.    But that perception isn't true; particularly not in the rough-and-tumble world of electronics. In 1968, Congress increased the capital-gains tax rate. The result was a precipitous drop in the formation of high-technology companies. Consider that while the next three years did see the founding of present-day billion-dollar giant Advanced Micro Devices, that company almost wasn't started because of founder Jerry Sanders's difficulty finding enough venture capital. What other major corporations might have been created during that period had the investment money been available?    The capital drought during that period also kept existing U.S. computer-chip companies from expanding their production capacities. Then, in 1973-74 the computer and video-game markets boomed, and the demand for 16K bit RAM chips skyrocketed. The American firms couldn't meet the demand, and the Japanese moved in to fill the void.    By the mid-'70s the number of U.S. companies being founded had dropped almost to zero. This was the era of Atari and Amdahl, the latter having to go to Japan's Fujitsu for its seed money. It was during this era, with few U.S. firms to fight them, that the Japanese made their first great inroads into the world consumer electronics industry.    Only in 1978, after a lobbying effort by the American Electronics Association (under electronics executive and soon-to-be-Rep. Ed Zschau), did Congress pass the Steiger Amendment, which cut the maximum capital-gains tax rate to 28% from 49%. Two years later, the maximum rate was cut again to 20%. The result was an explosion of new companies. These are some of the most important American high-tech firms of the 1980s: Apple Computer, Sun Microsystems, LSI Logic, Cypress Semiconductor, Microsoft, Compaq, etc. They are the companies that are not only holding ground, but actually beating the Japanese.    Created at the same time as these superstars were several thousand little high-tech companies. Some have thrived; some have disappeared through mergers, acquisitions or bankruptcies. In the process, they have generated thousands of patents, employed and trained tens of thousands of people, and made electronics the largest manufacturing employer in the U.S.    Needless to say, other factors were at work here as well, including economic ups and downs (though recessions, because of the lack of competition, are traditionally the best time to start new electronics companies), interest rates, and the always important magnet of a hot product breakthrough. But beneath everything, there remains the unmistakable driving force of the improved capital formation unleashed by the cuts in the capital-gains tax rate.    Why this should be so is straightforward. Kenneth C.O. Hagerty of Public Affairs Services Inc., who was on the AEA/Zschau team, says: &quot;To compete and succeed in their intensely competitive markets, your high-tech firms have to grow at a pace well beyond their capacity to finance through retained earnings alone. They continually must go to the capital market to obtain new infusions of risk capital. The people who put up that capital know they will receive no dividends, because the companies need those dividends to grow. Rather, these investors are seeking capital appreciation and capital gains. So, when the tax on capital gains goes up substantially, so does the risk-to-reward ratio for these investors. They back away and money for new companies dries up.&quot;    Between the Steiger Amendment and the Tax Reform of 1986, an estimated one million new jobs were created by the U.S. electronics industry -- three times the total employment of the U.S. steel industry. And this took place in the teeth of growing foreign competitors enjoying comparative advantages in the cost of labor, materials and capital.    In early 1986, as the tax-reform movement was gaining momentum, Gina Despres, tax counsel to Sen. Bill Bradley, suggested that the AEA types holding out against eliminating the capital-gains tax differential were selfish, and &quot;asking to be singled out for special treatment.&quot; The overall tax cut, she argued, would result in increased stock values. And that, Ms. Despres said, would more than make up for any losses due to the increased rate on capital gains. &quot;There is no persuasive evidence,&quot; she said, &quot;for the proposition that eliminating the capital gains differential will result in a diminution of venture capital investment.&quot;    Some anecdotal evidence is in.    While the roller-coaster stock market is masking what is going on in the venture-capital industry overall, those in the midst of it are sensing a change. Says Jim Swartz, president of the National Venture Capital Association, &quot;In 1974 no one talked about venture capital. It was dead. Likewise today there is a lot less talk about venture capital among people with discretionary money to spend. They are putting their money somewhere else.&quot;    Among individual investors, who as a group represent $5 billion to $10 billion in potential venture money, says Mr. Swartz, &quot;a lot of people are waking up right now to the effects of the tax change.&quot; Among venture capital firms, the trend now, says Mr. Swartz, is to move away from high-tech ventures into leveraged buy-outs and retail investments.    One senses that underlying the opposition to capital gains tax breaks is a skewed congressional perception of what capital-gains tax breaks are all about.    The capital-gains tax differential is the driving force behind employee stock option plans, which are pervasive in the electronics industry. Joining a start-up company is an enormous risk compared with remaining with an established firm. Typically, the pay is much less, the hours are longer and job security is a memory. What attracts these adventurers, from CEO to assembly-line worker, is founder's stock. When and if the company survives, thrives and goes public, that stock will make all that risk and time worthwhile.    It has been estimated that Apple made dozens of employees into millionaires on the day it went public. Similar, but smaller, miracles occurred at Microsoft, Lotus, Compaq and scores of others. Arguably, the stock option programs at new high-technology companies are the most efficient -- and fairest -- means of wealth creation and redistribution that this country has ever developed.    Yet, as the U.S. electronics industry lobbies the federal government for relief on the capital-gains tax, it will find some of its greatest resistance from people who should know better. Consider presidential candidate and Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis. To date he has been against restoring the tax differential that may have done more than anything else to create the statewide economic &quot;miracle&quot; on which his campaign rests. Reacting to Mr. Reagan's proposal to restore the capital-gains preference, he said: &quot;I think it's preposterous. I can't imagine anything worse. . . . Cutting the capital-gains tax is about the last thing I would do.&quot;    Perhaps he should have listened to another Democrat, his own state's former U.S. Sen. Paul Tsongas. As Mr. Tsongas explained to Washington Post columnist William Raspberry in 1984, he voted against the 1978 Steiger Amendment &quot;because I was a Democrat. I considered the ethic in the House among my fellow colleagues that this was pro-business, and therefore, we are against it. That bill, which I did not support, did more for the economy of my state than anything I did as a congressman.&quot;    ---   Mr. Malone writes frequently on the semiconductor industry. </TEXT></DOC>