<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880325-0141 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: Meet the Winners in El Salvador </HL><AUTHOR> Mario Rosenthal </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> SAN SALVADOR  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The people of El Salvador repudiated the government of Napoleon Duarte Sunday, giving the conservative Arena Party a landslide victory in elections for deputies to the Legislative Assembly and municipal officers. They did it the hard way, braving a threat by Communist subversives to machine-gun anything that moved on the streets or roads on election day and the two days previous. Public transportation was paralyzed, but the people walked or rode in trucks provided by the government to cast their votes. On three previous occasions, brave Salvadoran voters stood up to similar threats not to vote, even under gunfire.    Despite the huge victory of the opposition, and the lengths to which Salvadoran voters went in order to cast their ballots, the U.S. press has shown virtually no interest in interviewing Arena members to find out how they might change the country. With few exceptions, reporters featured in-depth interviews with losing Christian Democrats and their supporters, but none with winning Arena officials, justifying their arrogance with sidebar allegations linking some Arena members with death squads. While U.S. editors may enjoy such stories, they were too stale and overworked and had no effect whatsoever on the Salvadoran electorate.    Thankfully, the Christian Democrats themselves did not display such arrogance. One of the great surprises of the election was that the Christian Democrats did not attempt to win fraudulently. And in an unusually cordial gesture, both President Duarte and his son Alejandro -- who ran for mayor of San Salvador after the Duarte-dominated Legislative Assembly revoked an anti-nepotism law -- conceded defeat on national television the very night of the election.    The second greatest surprise was that the ruling party received so little direct support from the U.S. Embassy. About all the embassy did this time was to withhold information on misuse of U.S. aid funds by Christian Democrat administrators. In the past, U.S. Ambassador Edwin Corr and his aides have operated as President Duarte's main public-relations crew, producing optimistic reports that made things look much better than they really were. But to the people of El Salvador, with empty stomachs, it was time for a change.    In addition to a majority of the municipalities throughout the country, Arena won 35 out of 60 seats in the Legislative Assembly. This is sufficient to pass regular bills, but not enough to override a presidential veto. Arena members fear President Duarte may use his veto power to counter laws designed by Arena to liberalize the current state-controlled economy.    In an interview conducted shortly after the results came in, Alfredo Cristiani, Arena president and Legislative Assembly victor, pointed out that working through the Assembly has limitations. First there is the risk of the presidential veto. Second, and even knottier, is the complete control the president has of the monetary system and the Central Reserve Bank. This power was secured through a series of decrees and regulations imposed by the Christian Democrats. This means that Arena will have little influence on credits, which today flow largely to government bureaucrats, the agrarian reform program and cooperative enterprises, to the detriment of the private sector.    Mr. Cristiani said that Arena had no intention nor desire to reverse the agrarian reform, though his party considers it a total failure. &quot;The collectivist structure of the agrarian reform is at the root of its failure,&quot; said Mr. Cristiani. &quot;The 'campesinos' are not motivated because they don't own their land, nor do they control the sale of what they produce. We plan to return those lands to private ownership, but to the campesinos themselves. When they feel secure as owners of their lands and crops -- and not insecure as members of a cooperative from which they can be expelled for any reason, including personal vendettas -- their production will multiply. At the present time it has fallen to less than one-half of its pre-reform levels.&quot; El Salvador, once self-sufficient in its basic staples of rice, beans, corn, sorghum and edible oils, must now import all these items to avert famine.    Mr. Cristiani said that the state monopoly on the internal and external commercialization of coffee and the mismanagement of the crop by the government must be completely revoked. &quot;The planters must be paid market prices and not prices plucked from the air by opportunistic politicians. As a matter of fact, the producers should be paid, period.&quot; The state coffee monopoly withholds payment for extensive periods, but charges interest and threatens to take over properties with unpaid crop loans and mortgages. &quot;Healthy competition between the government bureau and private brokers would motivate planters now about ready to give up,&quot; he said.    Although Arena sees the need to privatize the banking system to a certain extent, Mr. Cristiani said that this is very difficult because the monetary system is entirely in the hands of President Duarte.    The low-intensity war strategy, openly endorsed by the U.S. Embassy as the answer to the eight-year-old armed insurgency, may be good geopolitical strategy for the U.S. but is disastrous for the Salvadorans who are killed and wounded as a result. Arena will propose that a committee be created to formulate a National Peace Proposal, based on a national consensus and seeking a political solution. &quot;But this proposal should not violate the constitution nor destroy the democratic system,&quot; said Mr. Cristiani.    The possibility of an early end to the conflict, as against the interminable &quot;low intensity strategy,&quot; would build confidence among all groups in the country, from the campesino to the investor. But investments will not begin to flow freely until the armed conflict is ended. The laws covering investment and export incentives must be revised, he said. They are poorly written and contain contradictions that preclude any progress in those areas.    &quot;The failure or success of our work in the Legislative Assembly depends largely on the Duarte government. After our victory was clear President Duarte telephoned to congratulate us. We told him that it was not our intention to systematically oppose him in the legislature and that we hoped he would not systematically oppose our initiatives by the use of his veto power, and his control of all government operations. He agreed to talk with us to see what we could do together to solve the present crisis. I hope he was sincere,&quot; Mr. Cristiani said.    Mr. Cristiani also praised the neutrality of the U.S. Embassy in Sunday's elections. &quot;I hope that this is the way it will be from now on,&quot; he said. &quot;The U.S. should back the government and not any specific personality or party.&quot;    The most significant result of the election is that the people of El Salvador rejected Mr. Duarte's collectivist economic policies. &quot;The people of El Salvador want a free, market-oriented economy, where private enterprise and private property are respected,&quot; Mr. Cristiani said. &quot;Besides, how can there be political freedom where there is no economic freedom?&quot;    ---   Mr. Rosenthal is editor and publisher of the El Salvador News-Gazette, an independent weekly. </TEXT></DOC>