<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870603-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ABRAMS SAID he failed to question North about his role with the Contras.    The assistant secretary of state, in testimony before the congressional panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair, said he never specifically asked the White House aide about his involvement in fund-raising for the Nicaraguan rebels, despite instructions from Secretary of State Shultz to &quot;monitor Ollie.&quot; Abrams rejected suggestions that he had sought to shield the covert arms network, and also denied that he had withheld information from Congress last fall about a Swiss bank account linked to the Marine officer.    Independent counsel Walsh is expected today to make a last-ditch appeal to the Iran-Contra committees to defer granting immunity to North.    ---   THE HOUSE PASSED a bill requiring Reagan to notify Congress of gulf plans.    By a 302-105 vote, the chamber approved the measure demanding that the president give details of plans for U.S. protection of Kuwaiti oil tankers in the Persian Gulf. The measure was prompted by congressional concern over the possibility of expanded U.S. military involvement in the gulf region following last month's Iraqi missile attack on the USS Stark. Meanwhile, the Pentagon said the U.S. military forces would protect only American flag vessels and other ships carrying U.S. arms shipments through the gulf.    Despite recent comments by Reagan, Shultz said that additional allied forces in the gulf weren't vital, but that their contributions should be examined.    ---   The World Health Organization expects a surge in AIDS that could destabilize Third World political and economic systems, an official told an international AIDS forum in Washington. In the U.S., where 36,000 cases may grow nearly ninefold by 1991, AIDS will rank second to accidents as a cause of premature death among American men.    The Senate approved a $9.4 billion supplemental-appropriations bill for fiscal 1987, which was amended to require immigrants to undergo AIDS testing. It was passed 71-23. The amendment was the first congressional backing for mandatory screening for the disease.    ---   Tamil separatist guerrillas killed at least 30 Buddhist monks and three other passengers aboard a bus in Sri Lanka's Ampara district, the government said. As many as 10 other people were wounded as the rebels, disguised as soldiers, ambushed the vehicle and opened fire with machine guns.    The Colombo government ordered Sri Lanka's armed forces to defend the island's territorial waters as India prepared to send a flotilla with food and medical supplies for Tamils in the Jaffna peninsula.    ---   South Korean President Chun has chosen Roh Tae Woo, head of the ruling party, to be his successor when Chun's term ends in February. The nomination, which ended months of speculation about succession, means Roh is certain to be named next week as the Democratic Justice Party's candidate. His election is almost guaranteed.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union announced completion in Geneva of a draft treaty calling for the elimination of medium-range missiles in Europe. A Soviet official, however, said several obstacles remained. In Washington, Shultz said he expected NATO allies to express their support next week for U.S. arms talks with Moscow.    ---   A West German official said the Soviet Union may hold Mathias Rust in jail for months before deciding whether to charge him for flying a small plane over Soviet territory last week. He landed in Moscow's Red Square. Meanwhile, Pravda faulted Soviet military schools for producing incompetent graduates.    ---   The Senate Foreign Relations panel voted to reject the Reagan administration's proposal to sell a dozen F-5 jet fighters to Honduras. White House officials have said the planes are needed by Tegucigalpa to replace its aging fleet of French-made warplanes, but critics contend that the sale would escalate the arms race in Central America.    ---   China's Zhao Ziyang said he would relinquish one of his two top posts in Beijing's government at a Communist Party convention this fall. Zhao, who began an 18-day trip to Eastern Europe, said he would prefer to retain his post as the nation's premier. He also currently is acting party chief.    ---   The Pentagon has begun delaying the award of various contracts involving Toshiba Corp. pending the outcome of an investigation of alleged illegal exports sales to the Soviet Union, defense officials said. The Japanese firm and a Norwegian arms maker are suspected of shipping to Moscow technology to make submarines quieter.    ---   Syrian troops tightened security throughout Lebanon amid mounting concern over possible sectarian violence following Monday's assassination of Prime Minister Karami. Shops, banks, schools and other institutions were closed to mourn the death of the Sunni Moslem, who was killed when a bomb exploded aboard his helicopter.    ---   About 100,000 people in Athens staged a rally urging the socialist government of Prime Minister Papandreou to resign. Greek opposition leader Constantine Mitsotakis said Papandreou had lost the confidence of the people and should call elections before the next scheduled vote in 1989.    ---   Cocaine traffickers in Peru clashed with police at a security post in the country's coca-growing region, killing at least six police officers and wounding six others, the Lima government said. Eight other policemen assigned to the post were missing and believed to be hiding in the jungle.    ---   Died: Errol W. Barrow, 67, prime minister of Barbados, Monday, in Bridgetown. </TEXT></DOC>