<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870210-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Brave New World of Annual Reports?---By Edward Kulkosky</HL><DD> 02/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GMSECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The annual report we have come to know and hate is dead. Oddly, the assassins are General Motors Corp. and the Securities and Exchange Commission, plus a few co-conspirators.    This is good news. U.S. corporations are now free to reinvent and, one hopes, improve the annual report as a result of a ruling by the SEC. From now on, companies can use the reports to convey any truthful message that suits them. If they choose, they can even eliminate the annual report altogether.    The fact is, there has never been a rule that requires publication of an annual report, at least in its familiar form. Regulations require only that corporations provide certain specific information to shareholders each year, usually just before the annual meeting. Annual reports have customarily fulfilled this requirement.    Now the SEC explicitly says that if the information requirement is met in some other way, companies can do as they please with what it refers to as &quot;glossy annual reports,&quot; provided the information they include does not conflict with what is filed in their 10K reports to the SEC or their proxy materials.    The ruling by the SEC was informal and has not been widely publicized. General Motors, in a December letter to the agency, proposed to publish a summary annual report and to meet the formal information requirements separately. It said it would issue a press release with full audited financial statements; include audited financial statements in its 10K; and repeat them in its proxy materials along with other required information.    GM also said in its proposal: &quot;Since {the annual report} would no longer be used in any SEC filings or proxy mailings, it could be dropped entirely. However, we believe that it has value as a general communications medium to our stockholders.&quot;    The SEC wrote back a month later that it has no problems with the proposal. Realizing the broad implications, it decided to make the exchange of letters a matter of public record. Linda C. Quinn, the SEC's director of corporation finance, says she expects the word to spread as reporting services used by lawyers and accountants publish the letters.    The SEC position is not just a matter of hair-splitting over obscure rules. If anyone realized beforehand the traditional annual report was optional, nobody at the SEC or in the corporate world ever said so.    The Financial Executives Institute, the national trade organization for corporate financial officers, has long been pushing for summary annual reports to improve readability, and the SEC has been studying the possibility but has had reservations about procedure. It feared that condensed financial statements would be substituted for full statements, thereby violating the rules. Under GM's approach, however, full disclosure would not be sacrificed because complete financial statements would be provided in other places. The SEC's acquiescence breaks the mental logjam and allows corporations to think of their annual reports in new ways.    The SEC's approval is good news for GM because it prints some two million glossy annual reports each year and stands to save a substantial sum by producing a smaller report. The GM proposal is an outgrowth of its participation in a research project on summary annual reports conducted by the Financial Executives Institute and Deloitte, Haskins andamp; Sells, the accounting firm.    It's also good news for the many investor-relations people who have been trying to do more effective jobs in communicating to the public the investment merits of their corporations. Annual reports have all too often looked backward instead of forward, ignoring the fact that expectations attract investors, not ancient history. And in today's electronic world, where a corporation was at a time perhaps four months ago is indeed ancient history.    Is it also good news to investors? Yes, but with an important exception.    Professional investors depend more on the 10K than the glossy, and individuals spend no more than a few minutes with the annual reports they receive.    Small wonder. Even a generous observer would concede that no more than a few hundred reports are worth any more of the investor's time. That's out of some 10,000 published by public companies in the U.S. One of the reasons is that many companies feel bound by tradition to turn out the same kind of report year after year. It's as if they are saying, &quot;We and our competitors have always turned out lousy annuals and we aren't about to change now.&quot; The exchange of letters between GM and the SEC shatters the myth that there is anything mandatory or sacrosanct about the traditional glossy annual report.    The one drawback is that those corporations that are innately taciturn, through indifference or design, may use the new freedom as a way to say even less, dumping their disclosure documents into the 10K, press release and proxy materials and issuing nothing that provides perspective on where the company is headed or how it intends to get there.    On the positive side, once the word spreads that the myth has been shattered, we believe many corporations will unleash a lot of pent-up creativity and invent a better glossy report. Inevitably, the reports will become the province of communicators and not accountants or lawyers. And that should be good for companies and investors alike.    The 19 summary annual reports produced by participants in the Financial Executives Institute project sharply reduced the number of pages of financial statements, typically from 22 to 10. Otherwise, there were three approaches. One group made no other changes. Another condensed the narrative as well, but kept all the same sections. A third made significant contents changes, such as moving footnote material into the narrative; using graphs more generously; and rewriting the financial review in layman's terms.    Here are possibilities for the future:    Some companies could use the budget for their annual report to upgrade their quarterlies, resulting in rolling annual reports that provide a better sense of continuity.    New media such as floppy disks and videotapes could become more common as substitutes for or supplements to the glossy.    Under the influence of video, designers could develop graphics techniques depicting the company as a process rather than frozen in a moment of time.    Tradition is powerful, and drastic changes aren't likely to happen overnight. Sooner or later, though, the annual report game will be a brand-new one, and we'll all owe the SEC and General Motors a debt of gratitude.    ---   Mr. Kulkosky is publisher of the Corporate Shareholder, a newsletter for investor-relations professionals. </TEXT></DOC>