<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0164 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Bork and the Forgotten Amendments</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Re your July 8 editorial &quot;Justice Bork or Ukase?&quot; and July 6 story &quot;Bork's Abortion Views Looming Larger as Problem in High Court Confirmation&quot;:    Your editorial endorses the view that &quot;judges should read the Constitution, and second-guess legislatures only on the basis of what it says. If the Constitution says nothing about abortion, legislatures can allow it or ban it.&quot; Your views run afoul of the Ninth Amendment, adopted in 1791 as part of the Bill of Rights, which states: &quot;The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.&quot;    Justice Goldberg, in a concurring opinion (joined by Justice Brennan and Chief Justice Warren) to the Supreme Court's 1965 Griswold v. Connecticut decision noted that the &quot;language and history of the Ninth Amendment reveal that the Framers of the Constitution believed that there are additional fundamental rights, protected from governmental infringement, which exist alongside those fundamental rights specifically mentioned in the first eight constitutional amendments. . . . The amendment is almost entirely the work of James Madison. It was introduced in Congress by him and passed the House and Senate with little or no debate and virtually no change in language. It was proffered to quiet expressed fears that a bill of specifically enumerated rights could not be sufficiently broad to cover all essential rights and that the specific mention of certain rights would be interpreted as a denial that others were protected.&quot;    I submit that if, as is the case, the Constitution says nothing about abortion (to use your example), then Congress lacks the authority to take that right away from the people. This prohibition was extended to the states after the Civil War, through the 14th Amendment. The position you take surely would outrage James Madison and his fellow Framers of the Bill of Rights.    But perhaps I'm too hard on you. To date, the Ninth Amendment largely has been ignored by conservatives and liberals alike, the result being that both personal and economic liberties often have been abrogated. Even in the decision upholding the right to abortion, and in the majority opinion in the Griswold case (which upheld a right to disseminate birth-control information), the Supreme Court was reluctant to hang its hat on the Ninth Amendment. One only can hope that the Ninth Amendment eventually will be &quot;rediscovered,&quot; especially by those who make the most noise about reading what the Constitution says.    Marc H. Gerstein   Sunnyside, N.Y.   ---   The belief that a right must be spelled out in the Constitution before it belongs to individuals is contrary to the concept of limited government as described in that document. Our nation and courts seem to have forgotten amendments nine and 10 of that charter, the exclusionary clauses reserving unenumerated rights to the people and the states. Indeed perusal of the body of that document will reveal that there are only 21 things that Congress has the power to do. So we do have a constitutional right to privacy; further we have a legal claim on any right or activity so long as it does not interfere with someone else's rights.    Justice Bork appears to me to be just as contemptuous of our Constitution as the liberal justices whom you so commonly and correctly criticize.    John E. Sebastian   Vice Chairman   Alabama Libertarian Party   Grant, Ala.   ---   Your July 6 story reported that Sen. Robert Packwood threatened a filibuster against Judge Bork unless Judge Bork agreed to abide by the Supreme Court's prior stand on abortion. When a U.S. senator can threaten to abuse the powers of his office against a citizen being considered for judgeship and there is no outcry by the press, Senate or Justice Department for impeachment or censure, then we have come to a state of rot and decay in our government that, to me, signals a terminal case of anarchy.    The issue of abortion pales into insignificance relative to the issue of independence of our judges. The issue even may rise to one of extortion, or perhaps a violation of the law against anyone threatening a citizen to force him not to exercise a civil right to vote freely.    Eugene Dusina   Fountain City, Tenn.   ---   Once again the nation will cringe in disbelief and disgust as a nominee for Supreme Court justice is subjected to a barrage of disrespectful, and at times vicious and insulting, questions from members of the Senate Judiciary Committee. The questioners will make short shrift of the nominee's professional qualifications, judicial temperament, intellectual honesty and personal reputation in order to focus on his political background and ideology.    Confirmation hearings, whether for cabinet officers or justices, serve an essential purpose and must be retained. But the hearings should not disintegrate into ruthless sessions of political revenge.    George W. Nordham   Waldwick, N.J.</TEXT></DOC>