<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881031-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS CLAIMED that he had GOP presidential nominee Bush on the run.    With recent polls showing him narrowing the Republican's lead in several crucial states, the Democrat said Bush was &quot;dead wrong&quot; in saying Dukakis wanted to divide the country. He also challenged Bush to a debate on the eve of next Tuesday's election. Campaigning in California, Dukakis acknowledged that he was a liberal &quot;in the tradition of Franklin Roosevelt, Harry Truman and John Kennedy.&quot; In Pennsylvania, Bush denied the GOP ticket was losing ground.    Republican Sen. Dole, in an NBC-TV interview, raised doubts about the vice president's promise against raising taxes to reduce the deficit.    ---   AMBUSHERS ATTACKED an Israeli bus near Jericho, killing at least four people.    Military officials said the assailants, believed to be Arabs, hurled firebombs at the passenger vehicle as it traveled in the occupied West Bank. At least five were reported wounded. Troops clamped a curfew on the city and searched for suspects. The assault came as extra soldiers were deployed throughout the occupied territories, torn by a 10-month-old Palestinian uprising, for fear of violence during tomorrow's elections.    Opinion polls show the outcome of the balloting to be too close to call. The campaign has focused on the Arab rioting and the future of the territories.    ---   Imelda Marcos arrived in New York City to face arraignment today on federal charges that she and deposed Philippine leader Ferdinand Marcos embezzled about $100 million from the Manila government. It was her first trip from Hawaii since fleeing the Philippines in 1986. Her husband's arraignment was delayed for health reasons.    ---   The White House is expected to relax some diplomatic and trade restrictions against North Korea, perhaps as early as today, U.S. officials said. Although modest, the moves are viewed as part of a coordinated strategy with South Korea to ease tensions on the divided peninsula.    ---   A French abortion pill may generate a black market in the U.S., some pharmaceutical industry and public-health officials said. They don't expect the drug, RU 486, to be sold legally in the U.S. Last week, the drug's maker suspended distribution of the pill, but was then ordered by Paris to market it.    ---   Persian Gulf peace talks are scheduled to resume today in Geneva, and U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar said he was anxious for progress because the current Iran-Iraq cease-fire was fragile. The truce began Aug. 25. In Bahrain, U.S. sources said the Pentagon plans to withdraw its first warship from the gulf this week.    ---   Canada's ruling party has lost ground in the country's national election campaign. A poll published Saturday showed that the Liberal Party, which opposes a U.S.-Canadian trade pact, moved into a tie with the governing Progressive Conservative Party, which had been favored to win the Nov. 21 balloting.    ---   The U.S. rejected a petition Friday from American rice growers for legal action to open Japan's market, gambling that it can win concessions from Tokyo without making Bush appear weak on trade issues. Yeutter said he will trust in Japan's assurances about its willingness to give up a near-total ban on rice imports.    ---   Soviet space officials dismissed a last-minute halt to the maiden flight of the space shuttle Buran as a minor hitch and said the next attempt to put the spacecraft aloft will take place after the Revolution Day holiday Nov. 7. The liftoff was aborted Saturday when an equipment platform failed to swing clear of the Energia booster rocket.    ---   Soviet police arrested at least 50 people who gathered in Moscow and Leningrad to demand political prisoners be freed, a move Kremlin officials have reportedly pledged. Meanwhile, a conference of intellectuals and human-rights activists proposed Nobel Peace laureate Andrei Sakharov as a candidate for the Soviet parliament.    ---   Gorbachev expressed impatience with the slow pace of his political and economic restructuring plans. Speaking to a gathering of the Youth Communist League in Moscow, the Soviet leader said he'd had enough of meetings and sloganeering and said it was time for Soviet society to get to work.    ---   Seven Latin American leaders vowed to devise a common strategy to persuade creditors to write off part of their $339 billion of foreign debt. The presidents, in a communique released Saturday after a three-day meeting in Uruguay, also called for talks with the U.S. on curtailing drug trafficking and ending Central American wars.    ---   Afghanistan's president called on the U.N. to organize an international conference on the country, which would endorse its neutral and non-aligned status. The U.S. doesn't recognize the Soviet-backed Kabul government. Najibullah also said the parley would discuss aid and human-rights guarantees. </TEXT></DOC>