<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880902-0052 </DOCNO><HL> MCorp Still Faces Tough Times in Texas --- Bank's Future May Hinge on Federal Audit </HL><AUTHOR> Leonard M. Apcar (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> M GOVMT WFC </CO><IN> BNK TNM PRO </IN><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Gene H. Bishop got word five months ago that Albert Casey agreed to try to navigate failing First RepublicBank Corp. to safe harbor, the chairman of rival MCorp playfully -- and prophetically -- shipped his old friend a model of the Titanic.    But now, Mr. Casey, whose rescue plan lost out to a federal bailout plan fashioned by NCNB Corp., might consider sending the model ship on a return voyage.    Mr. Bishop's MCorp, Texas's No. 2 banking concern with $20.1 billion in assets, long ago collided with the same Texas iceberg that sank First RepublicBank, First City Bancorp. of Texas and scores of other banks and thrifts in the state.    For a while late last year and early this year, though, it looked like MCorp might do something different than its Texas rivals: survive the state's economic collapse precipitated by falling real-estate and oil values without being taken over by an out-of-state bank or bailed out by the federal government.    But some of the hopeful signs that fostered such optimism evaporated by spring. MCorp's future may now hang on the outcome of a regularly scheduled audit started in July by federal regulators. While MCorp says it doesn't expect any surprises from the examination, many fear that the Texas bank which put up the scrappiest fight for survival may soon succumb.    Even if the company gets a perfect report card, several hard choices remain for Mr. Bishop, MCorp's straight-from-the-shoulder, cigar-smoking chairman and chief executive officer. The company needs to bolster its shaky capital base -- one recapitalization effort was called off in recent months -- but if that involves federal aid, MCorp's 26 banks could wind up on the auction block. Some banking giants interested in the Texas market are eyeing MCorp, including Wells Fargo andamp; Co., the San Francisco concern that submitted a losing bid for First RepublicBank.    If MCorp raises the money privately, the stake of common stockholders would be diluted by half or more. &quot;If MCorp is wrong, it winds up like First RepublicBank,&quot; says a top New York investment banker who works with troubled banks. &quot;If it's completely right, then they get to keep half the company.&quot;    So far, MCorp has been tight-lipped about its strategy. Mr. Bishop, who refused to be interviewed for this article, has said MCorp &quot;always has under advisement&quot; the possibility of turning to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.; he has also acknowledged that new capital &quot;may be available only in combination&quot; with FDIC aid.    Apparently, the company is considering one plan in which an unidentified individual would lead a second recapitalization effort. But it also has informally consulted the FDIC to &quot;feel it out&quot; on the terms for federal aid, officials close to MCorp say.    Since it was formed in the 1984 merger of Dallas's Mercantile Texas Corp. and Houston's Southwest Bancshares Inc., MCorp has always billed itself as the &quot;momentum company.&quot; Since 1986, when plummeting oil prices and real-estate values devastated the Texas economy, that momentum has mostly been in reverse.    With about 36% of its loan portfolio in real estate loans, the company has rolled up $352.4 million in net losses since then. It has $664.3 million in foreclosed Texas real estate -- 38% in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, where values are still sliding, and 27% in Houston, where things have stabilized but a full recovery remains distant.    For a brief time, it appeared MCorp could turn things around. One reason: The low-key company was a less-aggressive commercial lender than its peers, concentrating mainly on humdrum, middle-market loans of $10 million or less. Also, the company had more loyal customers -- 97% of its deposit base came from Texas and the Southwest, a much higher percentage than at other major banks in the state -- who didn't pull out money at the first sign of trouble.    Analysts say Mr. Bishop, 58 years old, also was quicker than his competitors at identifying some losses and moving to stem them. Late last year, MCorp created a 44-person central staff, dubbed MCorp Management Solutions Inc., to try to turn some troubled loans into income. In the first half of this year, the unit converted between $182 million and $195 million in bad real-estate loans to paying status or cash, compared with $111 million for all of last year.    Mr. Bishop made some innovative cost cuts, including spinning off MCorp's 80-person facilities-management staff to an outside vendor. He raised $630 million in cash, notes and stock by selling two highly successful subsidiaries it had nurtured into industry leaders -- MNet Corp., a retail-banking grab bag that included the largest credit-card portfolio among Southwest banks, and MTech Corp., a leading data processor for financial institutions and operator of a large regional automated-teller network.    &quot;You take away that $630 million from selling those operations, and MCorp wouldn't be around today,&quot; says Frank Anderson, an analyst with D. Latin andamp; Co., a Dallas investment firm.    MCorp banks were the first in Texas to break up large, uninsured deposits into fully insured deposits of less than $100,000, which were then spread among its subsidiary banks. The aim was to prevent large, uninsured deposits from fleeing its bank when trouble struck and to give customers the full measure of federal deposit insurance. Today, MCorp has $3.2 billion in its aptly named MSure program.    While some of its troubled rivals have contended with a depositor run, MCorp's funding has held steady and even increased modestly. Keefe, Bruyette andamp; Woods Inc., which issues widely followed safety ratings for bank deposits, recently reaffirmed a &quot;D/E&quot; rating for MCorp, its second worst. But some money managers had expected the rating to hit rock bottom. MCorp's banks are so flush with cash, they routinely sell the surplus to other banks.    &quot;MCorp was much more realistic than the other bankers&quot; about what it needed to endure, says Charles W. Peabody, a Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. analyst. When he delicately queried Mr. Bishop about MCorp's future last year, the chief executive put down his cigar and told him bluntly: &quot;Let's stop beating around the bush. We've become thick-skinned and recognize that we may not survive.&quot;    But when flickers of economic growth surfaced in Texas late last year, MCorp thought it was out of danger. Its loan portfolio stopped bleeding, with nonperforming loans topping off at $1.6 billion last Sept. 30. In the 1987 fourth quarter, its loan-loss provision dipped compared with the previous two quarters; its inventory of nonperforming loans also dropped for the first time since oil prices fell.    By early 1988, it had crafted a plan to spin off half its worst loans into a separate bank to be capitalized with a note, and rounded up investors -- all Texas institutions -- willing to inject $200 million into a cleaned-up bank, all without federal assistance.    But like many hopeful signs on the horizon, MCorp's vision turned out to be a mirage. Nonperforming assets rose again, jumping nearly 12% in this year's first half. Nonperforming loans and foreclosed real estate hit $1.77 billion, or 14% of total loans and foreclosed assets at June 30, a tower of trouble that has cost MCorp $91.1 million in lost interest income and expenses this year alone. Loan-loss provisions and write-offs before any recoveries totaled $373 million in the 1988 first half, including a $124.6 million provision for second-period losses, the highest level in more than a year.    While the company generated $46.2 million in second-quarter net income, that included the gain on the sale of MTech; a $169.3 million operating loss was far worse than some analysts expected. &quot;The company faces even longer odds in its struggle for survival than we had previously thought,&quot; says Chris Kotowski, an Oppenheimer andamp; Co. analyst who also raised his estimate of MCorp's 1988 net loss to more than $380 million from about $200 million.    A crucial blow came this spring, when regulators shocked bankers and investors by declaring First RepublicBank insolvent. Suddenly unsure of his own bank's valuation of assets, Mr. Bishop felt obliged to call off the carefully plotted capital restructuring.    In July, federal bank examiners arrived for a regularly scheduled audit that may well decide MCorp's fate. If they conclude that MCorp faces more drastic loan write-downs and losses, it may become the nation's next big bank bail-out. But if they feel MCorp's books accurately reflect Texas's weak economy, the company may have a chance at independent survival.    The federal exam isn't expected to be complete until after Labor Day, but MCorp insiders have leaked one important sign of how it is going so far: Regulators apparently haven't any major quarrel with how MCorp has valued its $675 million portfolio of foreclosed real estate, which accounts for more than a third of its nonperforming loans. The bank also takes heart in its $675 million in common-stock equity and its $829 million in total shareholders equity, which look like the Rock of Gibraltar in battered Texas. The Texas banks involved in federally assisted takeovers so far have had little or no capital base left.    At the least, having some capital left may help MCorp get FDIC assistance on terms more favorable to common-stock holders, should the company decide to climb into Uncle Sam's lap.    Meanwhile, things are buzzing at MCorp's opulent new headquarters, Momentum Place, construction of which began in 1985, the company's record year for profit, and completed last year, when there wasn't any profit.    The building, designed by noted New York architects Philip Johnson and John Burgee, features a five-story, sky-lit atrium, called the banking hall, which customers enter via a marble bridge that spans the trading pit for MCorp's capital-markets operations. Upstairs, Mr. Bishop's spacious suite includes a small room with a day bed for short naps. So far, a spokesman says, the bed hasn't been used. </TEXT></DOC>