<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880517-0176 </DOCNO><HL> After INF: Getting Our Planes Off the Ground </HL><AUTHOR> John Train </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><IN> CHM ARO </IN><TEXT>   In a game of chess, when you get ahead -- by a bishop and a pawn, say -- you often force a series of exchanges: queen for queen, castle for castle and so on. After those pieces are cleared off the board, you may still be ahead just by a bishop and a pawn, but in the endgame your relative advantage has become overwhelming, so you win -- or your opponent resigns.    Similarly, the Soviets -- who are chess players -- having achieved a huge preponderance of conventional military power in Europe, are glad to see both sides' intermediate nuclear missiles taken off the board under the INF treaty, since that leaves their relative position in conventional war stronger than ever. Here the Soviets' strategy coincides with President Reagan's conviction that nuclear weapons are bad per se.    The Soviets have an advantage in Central Europe of better than 2 to 1 over NATO in tanks and ground equipment generally. But it would work out to more than that in practice. First, any attack would come from them, probably with the advantage of surprise. Next, you have to discount some of our units that have equipment in Europe but are themselves based in the U.S., supposedly ready to fly over when needed. Many of them probably won't get there.    Then, the Soviets have come up with &quot;reactive&quot; supplementary tank armor -- essentially, explosive pads that bite back at our armor-piercing projectiles. Reactive armor, tacked on to their tanks in the past year or so, renders them largely invulnerable to our basic anti-tank weapons. Finally, the Soviets could hit wherever they choose -- very possibly at the periphery of Europe, not necessarily the center. There is, to say the least, grave doubt whether the Turks would fight in Norway or the Norwegians in Turkey, even if they could be moved there.    And, any attack would be accompanied by strategic deception -- maskirovka -- one of the Soviets' greatest skills, as we saw in their reoccupation of Hungary and Czechoslovakia, and Sadat's 1973 attack on Israel, which was prepared along Soviet lines. So NATO may not stir itself until very late.    Our military chiefs do not believe the Soviets are yet capable of a complete surprise attack without a movement of supplies-fuel, ammunition and spares -- that we could detect. (Several days before our attack on Libya, our bases in England started getting calls from people living nearby about the increased level of activity.) However, in a few years they may be able to launch a &quot;come-as-you-are party,&quot; so we must plan accordingly.    To offset all this, NATO has been counting on theater-wide air supremacy. Our fighter pilots are the world's best, and our planes as good as any. But what if the Soviets were to start with disabling and follow-on attacks on our air bases? If these were to succeed, then our own planes would have difficulty counterattacking the Soviet bases, and the Soviets would dominate the air as well as the land. Even if they didn't succeed, after the inception of the INF treaty our planes would have to assume functions that the missiles were supposed to perform, overloading the system. (All this assumes that the war stays on the conventional level. If it were to go nuclear, even at the sub-strategic level, then the bases would be knocked out.)    Before the INF treaty, we could have counterattacked the Soviet bases with our Pershing and ground-launched cruise missiles (GLCMs). The Soviets have a prodigious antiaircraft defense, and might cope with many of the GLCMs. For now, though, the Pershings can't be stopped. But under the INF treaty both are traded away.    One sometimes hears it asserted that our U.S.-based ICBMs could take over European tactical targeting. But in the air they would look to the Soviets like a general strategic attack, and could well trigger an all-out strategic response. Besides, those missiles are dedicated to strategic deterrent and couldn't be spared, although some sea-launched missiles could be.    So air base operability has become a crucial issue for our European defenses. The Air Force has assigned Assistant Secretary Tidal W. McCoy to the problem, and each base commander has an &quot;operability officer.&quot; Is enough being done? That concern took me recently to Air Force bases in Germany, where I talked to base commanders, engineers, pilots, intelligence officers, squadron commanders and anyone else who could shed light on the problem.    ---   First, what does an airfield look like? Let's start with Bitburg Air Base, home of the 36th Tactical Fighter Wing, consisting of three squadrons (24 planes each) of F-15 fighters. They fly at over Mach 1.5, and can operate at a range of more than several hundred miles. Twelve thousand Americans work on and around the base, which covers somewhat over a thousand acres, a bit more than Central Park in New York. This is only about a third or a quarter as large as a similar base in the U.S., which gives us problem number one: that's much too dense.    When these bases were still quite inaccessible to Soviet attack, such compression was tolerable. Now, however, with the introduction of longer-range Soviet fighterbombers, our bases in Germany are increasingly vulnerable. (More remote areas, including Britain, are somewhat safer, since the Soviets are still not so good at air refueling). If the Air Force had its way, the fields would be several times bigger, so that the planes could be widely dispersed, and there could be more alternate runways. The German environmentalists, however, aren't willing. So the prime target area -- the planes themselves, their fuel and munitions, and the command areas -- remain more tightly bunched than they should be.    No longer, however, do you see row after row of aircraft lined up wing tip to wing tip. Instead, each plane is housed in a cylindrical concrete hangar with a huge blast-resistant door. On landing, it taxies straight in for refueling, rearming and repairs. So only a direct hit on the concrete hangar or an extremely close miss can destroy the plane on the ground. The other &quot;critical nodes&quot; -- fuel lines and the like -- are also being progressively hardened.    After an attack, you clear away unexploded bombs and mines and repair runway damage. Piles of gravel, and stacks of concrete and metal slabs are stored in convenient locations. The base commander figures out how to open a minimal runway in the shortest possible time. Repair teams rush to the spot in armored tractors and get going. To repair a crater takes a couple of hours. To help planes land on cratered runways, our air bases also have arresting cables available, like those on aircraft carriers, if need be.    The hardest -- that is, most invulnerable-bases in the Western orbit are in Switzerland, Israel and Saudi Arabia; they have deep, extensive underground facilities and can ride out an attack and deliver a punishing counterblow. Ours weren't built with the present threat in mind. The low point was around 1978-1982, when the bases could have been knocked out quite easily. NATO is now spending $250 million annually -- which should double in a couple of years -- on hardening them. The U.S. contributes just over a quarter of this. Great progress has been made in the past two or three years; more will be made in the next ones. On the other hand, the Soviets may introduce new conventional munitions with high blast effects able to cave in the structures we are building.    Gas Attack   Until recently, the Soviets, who have always been way ahead in chemical warfare, could have closed down our airfields in Germany with a series of determined gas attacks; soon, thanks to our defensive measures, this will be much harder.    It's assumed that they will use such weapons, so in an alert everyone struggles into charcoal-lined &quot;chem suits&quot; and carries on in that hot and awkward attire. You keep one suit near your work station and another where you sleep. Eventually, four per man should be available. You have to live in the suit as long as the threat persists, including relieving yourself in the pants. Meanwhile, the Soviets are carrying on research to develop mycotoxins or other agents that will penetrate the chem suits' filters.    For off-duty shifts, the Air Force is starting to build concrete dugouts for about 80 persons, where one takes off the chem suit and rests on a cot. These should be available for all the uniformed personnel on our air bases in the late 1990s. The bunkers will be crowded and grim, but should survive anything except an almost direct hit.    To enter the dugout from outside when there is gas around, you pass through a series of air locks while removing and discarding your contaminated garments in stages. The suit is itself poisonous and has to be abandoned, so pretty soon you're out of suits, although eventually it may be possible to decontaminate them conveniently. If the Soviets could mount a succession of gas attacks until the suits were used up, things would get very difficult.    And the command centers? Everyone has seen movies of World War II military airfields in England or the Pacific: The headquarters are wooden sheds with uniformed men strolling in and out. Today such buildings are akin to Fort Knox: You pass through armored doors and airtight chambers until, fully inside, you find male and female airmen working side by side. Women aren't supposed to be sent into combat, but being blown up and gassed doesn't seem to count.    Camouflage   It's surprising that in an age of satellites and hyperaccurate missiles, camouflage could remain an important tool. But to a fighter-bomber pilot streaking in over the landscape at tremendous speed, one terrain feature looks much like another. The pilot will be jittery about surface-to-air missile (SAM) attacks and being jumped by defending fighters. So he will certainly not linger over the target.    Thus, such basic camouflage measures as false runways made of painted plastic strips, dummy buildings and planes, sod planted on concrete buildings, reforestation and the like could lead him to drop his bombs in the wrong place. A remarkable example of this is the Kiev offensive in World War II: 19 out of 25 Luftwaffe attacks on Soviet airfields in fact hit decoy installations. So far, we are just beginning to camouflage our air bases, particularly planting trees in unused areas to break up the outline as seen from overhead.    Spetsnaz   A thorny problem is how to prepare for attack by Spetsnaz troops, as the Soviets call the highly trained elite forces they send behind enemy lines, often in the uniforms and speaking the language of the target country. (The Germans used similar troops in World War II, such as the Otto Skorzeny glider unit that rescued Mussolini from Gran Sasso and the disguised detachments sent behind our lines in the Battle of the Bulge.) To add to the confusion, the Spetsnaz units include female soldiers. Their big moment could come just at the outbreak of hostilities, when they would kill pilots living off base, and destroy off-base supplies and communication links, as well as infiltrate the base itself -- perhaps in hijacked vehicles -- to attack key officers and installations.    The skill and ferocity of Spetsnaz attack was shown in the Soviet seizure of the Afghan government in December 1979. Spetsnaz units invaded the presidential palace and, using weapons with silencers, murdered President Hafizullah Amin, his guards and his entourage. Then they seized the Kabul airport for the landing of occupation troops.    The usual figure for the number of Soviet agents of any description in West Germany is on the order of 50,000. This sounds like a huge number, but isn't out of line with the numbers of agents -- then called Fifth Columnists -- that the Nazis maintained in Austria, Czechoslovakia and other target countries before the outbreak of World War II. A number of these Soviet agents have paramilitary skills, and would be reconfigured as Spetsnaz troops or auxiliaries in a conflict. NATO airfields would be high on the list of their targets.    The Air Force is responsible for its own ground defense inside the base perimeter. Since airmen don't ordinarily carry personal weapons, this job is handled by the base security police. A lot of damage might occur before they could identify the Spetsnaz and put them out of action. Wrecking the main gate area would delay pilots returning to duty.    Also, radars rise above ground, making them highly vulnerable. Their loss would render the planes dependent upon their onboard radars, permitting landing only under relatively favorable conditions. (For much of the year, Germany has dismal weather.) And of course, cutting communications would be a key objective.    Other Spetsnaz troops could lay down gas barrages from concealed mortar positions a few miles away. A few gas rounds would throw the whole base into a chemical defense mode and degrade its efficiency. Since the planes are inside their concrete bunkers, Spetsnaz attackers probably couldn't destroy many of them, but they could create havoc otherwise. At Bitburg, for instance, the main intelligence headquarters is a &quot;soft&quot; above-ground building. It has only one door and no windows, which makes it a bit more secure but much more conspicuous. (There's also a smaller semihardened emergency backup.)    The security people at our bases seemed casual about the Spetsnaz threat. None of them knew about the teams of Spetsnaz troops pretending to be Polish art students recently caught in Scandinavia practicing eve-of-hostilities attacks on the homes of high military officers and fighter pilots. It was often assumed that the attackers would emerge from the immediate neighborhood of a base. The security folks felt quite confident of the attitude of the local population. &quot;Russians would stand out like a sore thumb,&quot; they said. But most Soviet agents are East Germans who settled in West Germany years ago and acquired new identities. They don't march around in red suits with hammer-and sickle armbands.    And everyone seemed taken aback when I pointed out that a few hours before hostilities, disguised Spetsnaz teams could drive up from a distance in trucks. More would probably be lifted in by helicopter or plane. A lot of civilian traffic moves in and out of an air base, and Spetsnaz attackers could undoubtedly penetrate it, some in hijacked vehicles. Inside, you have to go through a further checkpoint to get out onto the flying areas, but on my visits security was negligible.    In Vietnam, incidentally, American forces suffered greatly from Viet Cong attacks on our air bases, often by guerrillas who emerged from marvelously concealed underground tunnels where they had lived for years. They found that one of the safest tunnel locations was directly under a base, since we wouldn't bomb it!    Here is one scenario that I don't think the Air Force is prepared to cope with. Assume that a number of Spetsnaz teams penetrate an air base at night dressed in U.S. military chem suits and set off gas bombs. The base personnel have to climb into their own chem suits and masks. Recognizing friend from foe becomes all but impossible. The Spetsnaz troops commandeer military vehicles and ride around in the darkness shooting things up. Soon, our troops are firing at each other and there is utter confusion.    Air Attacks   After the Spetsnaz units had done their worst, the air attacks would start.    The external SAM defense of the air bases falls to the Army. There are about 80 of the new Patriot higher-altitude missiles defending the Bitburg area, costing $1 million each, plus some 190 lower-altitude Hawk missiles. Since hundreds of sorties could be launched against the base, the defensive missiles might be expended in the first few days. The most effective defense is still our fighters. Their use is not yet coordinated with the SAMs, so many in the Air Force believe that the commander of each wing also should be in charge of his ground-to-air defense, like RAF commanders in Britain.    The farther-out ground defense of NATO air bases is the duty of each host government. In Germany, one could expect a competent job, but in parts of the southern region, such as Greece or Spain, there would be little reason for confidence. So one irony of any conflict in Europe is that since air superiority is vital to the land battle, our Army could lose the war in rear areas where it doesn't even fight.    Thus far, the Soviets do not seem to be matching NATO's hardening of its bases by hardening their own. In other words, they seem less worried about us than we are about them. This is scarcely surprising, since the Soviets, notwithstanding their propaganda theme of insecurity, have never believed there was risk of a NATO attack. Indeed, NATO barely has the will to defend itself. So after the attack on our air bases with which a general European war probably would begin, the attacking planes might well return to concealed secondary fields and highway strips for refueling and rearmings. The Soviets also would expect to move their planes forward onto NATO bases that they seize.    ---   Is this all just a bad dream, unlikely when conflict seems to make little sense? If you think so, the Defense Department's annual book on &quot;Soviet Military Power&quot; will make for troubling reading. In the past decade the Soviets have built between three and 10 times more than the U.S. in such categories as tanks, SAMs, ICBMs and artillery.    Why? One cannot sum up the motivations of a huge, heterogeneous population in simple form, and it is a mistake to try. The point is, empires do arise and expand until they can expand no more. Revolutionary leaders typically embark on aggressive foreign policies: Napoleon, Hitler, the ayatollah. There's nothing new about Stalin and his successors. We, indeed, after our own revolution were hell for our continental neighbors: We drove out not only the British but also the French, the Spanish and the Mexicans, and we weren't much fun for the Indians. As for the Russians, they've always been tough on their neighbors. For centuries they've ground them down and expanded into their territory. It rarely &quot;made sense.&quot;    The Soviet state organs, notably the Red Army and the KGB, vastly stronger than their counterparts here, consider themselves in business, like growth-oriented executives, to expand the power and extent of the state. Holding down Soviet gains constantly exercises these organs of state, which are thus continually fortified.    Another sense of &quot;why&quot; is this: What is the payoff? Here one should remember Churchill's maxim, &quot;Arm to parley.&quot; The Soviet Union uses military force freely and brutally. It runs constant military tests and provocations, together with political warfare, against its neighbors. Because of this, it has more clout than its economic and political backwardness justify.    Frank Meehan, U.S. ambassador to East Germany, has served in many key posts in the Communist world. Mikhail Gorbachev, he finds, is an imperialist like his predecessors, but is prepared to trim his sails in the face of an adverse wind, as at present, when there are problems at home and the satellites are restless. Still, Mr. Gorbachev has not shelved his country's imperialist aims, merely deferred them. When the Soviets, looking at the world chessboard, find that the correlation of forces in some area is in their favor, they take advantage of it -- witness their massive thrusts into Eastern Europe, Southeast Asia and Afghanistan. Between such thrusts they construct illusions, talk peace and apply blackmail.    We must, of course, give great attention to the air-base vulnerabilities I have described -- to bombs (including the new explosives), gas, Spetsnaz and the rest. Our first answer to the Soviet threat to NATO air bases is hardening, defending and camouflaging them. It would be extraordinarily silly to neglect this area, and the Air Force rightly gives it high priority. Let's hope Congress does likewise.    Base vulnerability could be reduced by mixing different types of aircraft on each, as on a carrier. At present, the different types of aircraft that attack an enemy target -- anti-radar planes, fighters and bombers, coordinated by AWACs -- are collected from different bases; for instance, all the AWACs are based at Geilenkirchen, and could be knocked out en masse with one blow. Similarly, our F-4G Wild Weasels, which attack enemy SAMs, all sit at Spangdahlem. Preassembling attacking teams on a number of single bases, so that the loss of no one base could mess things up too badly, would help, although it would be a logistical nightmare.    The other answer remains the ability to counterattack. That requires a missile and aircraft force that is survivable, mobile, accurate and sufficient in number. Our own chemical capability must be kept strong. And our intelligence in the Eastern bloc must be able to find the bases to which the attackers may shift their forces.    We are, alas, a long way from this vigorous counterattck capability now. So the vulnerability of our air bases, although lessening, remains a serious weakness, which will be rendered much more serious by the INF Treaty.    ---   Mr. Train is an investment counselor and writer in New York. </TEXT></DOC>