<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Law Is Upheld That Bars Bias By Private Clubs --- High Court Ruling on Policy In New York Marks Gain For Women, Minorities </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> FIN PHA </IN><G> SUP IRS JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court upheld a New York City law that bars discrimination by large private clubs that serve a public role, such as offering meals or giving members a place to transact business.    The 9-0 decision is a major victory for civil rights and women's rights groups that have been lobbying in many cities and states to open up private men's clubs to women and minorities.    The ruling is particularly significant since a number of cities have patterned their policies on New York's 1984 law. The cities of Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, Washington and Buffalo have approved similar laws, and other efforts are in progress or were awaiting the high court's decision in Philadelphia, Boston and Detroit.    But the opinion, written by Justice Byron White, left some questions unresolved. The New York law was challenged by the New York State Club Association as written, before it was enforced against any specific club or organization. The association argued that the very existence of the city law threatened the constitutional rights of particular clubs.    Yesterday, the Supreme Court simply ruled that the law isn't invalid in every conceivable application. But Justice White implied in the majority opinion, and Justice Sandra O'Connor maintained in a separate statement joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy, that there are certain to be some clubs against which the law can't be enforced without violating the First Amendment guarantee of freedom of association.    Nevertheless, the ruling puts an end to arguments that state and local governments aren't free even to try to regulate private clubs.    New York's human rights law generally prohibits discrimination in public facilities and commercial establishments but exempts places that are &quot;distinctly private.&quot; In 1984, New York amended the law to say that clubs were no longer considered private, and were subject to the civil rights law, if they had more than 400 members, provided regular meal service and were used for business purposes by members and non-members.    The New York Court of Appeals upheld the city's law in February 1987, and the Supreme Court affirmed the ruling yesterday.    The New York law continues to exempt charitable and religious groups, and the high court yesterday rejected arguments that the exemption discriminates in favor of these groups.    The decision is the court's third in four years upholding local government curbs on discrimination by private service organizations or clubs, and there has never been a dissenting vote.    Legal Practice   The high court ruled 7-2 that Virginia can't discriminate against lawyers who live in and are licensed to practice in another state and who want the right to practice in Virginia. According to Virginia officials, the decision also affects Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Ohio, Rhode Island and Wyoming.    Virginia allows lawyers who are members of another state's bar to join the Virginia bar without taking a bar exam if they plan to live in and practice full time in the state. Lawyers who merely want to practice in Virginia but live elsewhere must take the bar exam.    In a decision written by Justice Kennedy, the high court said the Virginia practice violates the Constitution's guarantee that citizens of one state will enjoy the same &quot;privileges&quot; of citizens of other states.    The ruling is the latest step in the gradual replacement of the state-by-state legal practice with nationwide standards. The elimination of state barriers is an important trend for in-house corporate legal departments, which want the right to handle cases throughout the country without having to hire local law firms.    Nancy Nord, director of the American Corporate Counsel Association, said, &quot;For our members, it is a significant decision because they have to be much more mobile. Requirements such as residency that really don't have anything to do with competency really don't make sense.&quot;    The high court ruled in favor of a lawyer who lived in Cheverly, Md., but was hired as a lawyer for ERC International Inc. in nearby Vienna, Va.    Chief Justice William Rehnquist dissented, joined by Justice Antonin Scalia.    Prison Doctors -   The high court ruled, 9-0, that doctors who contract to provide part-time medical care for prison inmates may be sued for damages for violating the civil rights of prisoners. As a result of the ruling, other professionals who contract to provide services to the state may become subject to lawsuits for civil-rights violations, and the movement toward private management of prison systems may be slowed.    The case involves a federal law that allows lawsuits for damages for rights violations carried out &quot;under color of state law.&quot; The law is usually invoked for lawsuits against state and local officials and local governments.    But the high court said a prison inmate in North Carolina who says he was provided inadequate medical care by a private doctor in Raleigh with a part-time state contract may sue the physician for damages under the civil-rights law. In an opinion written by Justice Harry Blackmun, the court said the doctor acted under state law.    If extended to apply to private companies that contract to run prisons for the state, yesterday's ruling could make private prison officials liable for civil-rights violations just as state officials are.    Church Group Subpoenas   The justices ruled 8-1 that two Catholic Church organizations have a right to challenge the validity of a lawsuit to which they aren't a party but in which their records have been subpoenaed. The case involves an emotional fight between several pro-choice abortion groups and the Internal Revenue Service.    The pro-choice groups sued the IRS to have the agency take away the tax-exempt status of the U.S. Catholic Conference and the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, contending that the Catholic groups participate in political activities in support of anti-abortion political candidates.    The records of the Catholic groups were subpoenaed in the case. The groups refused to comply and were fined $100,000 a day by a federal judge in New York. The fine was stayed for the appeal.    Last June, a federal appeals court in New York ruled that because they weren't parties to the case the two Catholic groups couldn't fight the subpoena by challenging the lawsuit's validity. Yesterday, the high court reversed the appeals court in a decision written by Justice Kennedy, and ordered the appeals court to decide whether the lawsuit against the IRS is valid. Justice Thurgood Marshall dissented.    Other Cases   In other action yesterday, the high court:   --Refused a challenge to the practice of allowing federal district judges to sit temporarily on federal appeals courts.    --Agreed to decide when court-approved affirmative-action plans may be challenged by workers who say they were harmed by the plan. The case involves white firefighters' challenge to a Birmingham, Ala., plan.    --Agreed to decide whether the state of Nevada, as well as Louisiana, Mississippi, New Jersey and New Mexico, may deny jury trials to persons charged with drunk driving.    --Let stand a federal appeals court ruling reinstating a malpractice lawsuit against the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.    --Again refused to review the constitutionality of punitive damages, and let stand a jury award won by Marshall Durbin Food Corp. of $46,060 in compensatory damages and $1 million in punitive damages against Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S.    --Left intact a federal appeals court ruling that a northern California carpenters union discriminated against women in apprenticeship positions. </TEXT></DOC>