<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861215-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Deciding What Laws Apply to Iran-Contra AffairMay Be as Difficult as Finding Who Broke Them---By Jane Mayer and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/15/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For investigators on the track of the Iran-Contra arms-sale scandal, finding out what laws may have been violated could prove as formidable a task as finding out who may have violated them.    Legal experts and investigators say the affair raises wide-ranging questions about at least 14 different areas of law, from civil statutes governing executive-branch covert operations to criminal laws against fraud, perjury and diversion of government funds.    At this point, many crucial legal facts about the operation are still unknown. &quot;A lot depends on how the deal was done,&quot; says former White House counsel Fred Fielding. But it is already clear that the probes by Congress and by the still unnamed independent counsel will likely break new legal ground. And there is broad agreement that, whether or not the investigations result in any criminal prosecutions, Congress is likely to impose stricter controls over the executive branch's ability to conduct secret foreign policy.    Legal experts expect that whoever is chosen as independent counsel will have unprecedented leeway in shaping the criminal investigation. The leading candidate appears to be retired federal Judge Lawrence Walsh, 74-year-old former president of the American Bar Association, diplomat and Justice Department official, who served in the Eisenhower and Nixon administrations.    Mr. Walsh declines to comment, but officials familiar with the process yesterday confirmed reports, first aired by National Public Radio, that his name is one of several under final review by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and an appeals court panel.    Meanwhile, the White House is under increasing pressure to bring in its own legal expert to sort out the legal problems. On NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press&quot; yesterday, Senate Republican leader Robert Dole said that a prestigious lawyer such as former Sen. Howard Baker could advise the president on the matter.    &quot;The statute allows for a great deal of latitude,&quot; agrees Arthur Christy, the first special prosecutor appointed under the 1978 law. In past investigations, he notes, &quot;the focus has been quite narrow.&quot; But in each case, he suggests, &quot;It's up to the counsel -- he certainly has the powers.&quot;    Here are some of the stickiest legal questions raised by the Iran-Nicaragua affair:    --Arms sales to Iran: The 1976 Arms Export Control Act, the 1979 Export Administration Act, and the 1986 Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Anti-Terrorism Act all in various ways prohibit the sale of arms to state sponsors of terrorism. President Reagan formally added Iran to the list of such states in March 1984.    But all of these laws give the president special leeway in cases of national security, and the courts generally have been reluctant to abridge that power. These laws do, however, require in different ways that Congress be notified when the president is invoking national security, but the notification requirements too have loopholes. For instance, the 1976 law allows the president to waive the ban on arms shipments and the notification requirements when any single shipment is valued at less than $14 million. Administration officials have placed the value of their shipments below that limit.    Congressional committees say the Iranian arms sales also raise questions about whether the administration complied with the notification requirements in the 1980 Intelligence Oversight Act, which calls for &quot;timely&quot; notification of lawmakers when the executive branch undertakes a covert operation.    On Jan. 17, President Reagan signed a formal finding that secret U.S. arms sales to Iran are in the national interest, but it specifically directed that Congress not be informed. This finding followed at least two Israeli-arranged arms shipments to Iran, which top administration officials have said the president condoned. Although the White House at first disputed this, other administration officials have since claimed that the earlier shipments were authorized by an &quot;oral finding.&quot;    Legal experts question this concept. &quot;Findings are supposed to be reported to Congress in a timely fashion. If it's oral, how is Congress to know?&quot; asks Andreas Lowenfeld, professor of international law at New York University.    Moreover, Morton Halperin, national security expert with the American Civil Liberties Union, notes that even after the Isreali arms operation had concluded, the White House still hadn't notified Congress. &quot;There's no evidence they ever intended to notify Congress at all,&quot; he suggests. &quot;You can debate what 'timely' means, but one thing it doesn't mean is never.&quot;    While all of the above laws are fraught with political peril, none of them carries any criminal penalties.    --Diversion of profits: Attorney General Edwin Meese has stated that as much as $30 million in profit from the arms sales was diverted to the rebel Contra forces in Nicaragua. If so, investigators say the funds may very well have violated a series of congressional strictures, loosely known as the Boland amendment, barring U.S. officials from providing direct or indirect &quot;support to military or paramilitary groups&quot; battling the Nicaraguan government. The statutes also prohibit all but the State Department from seeking &quot;nonlethal&quot; aid from third parties on behalf of the rebels.    Both the supporting role played by Israel and recent disclosures that the State Department solicited millions of dollars from the sultanate of Brunei raise serious legal questions, according to investigators, who question whether all of those funds were strictly for &quot;nonlethal&quot; purposes. And central to the investigations will be the issue of whether U.S. officials set up, or even supported, a back-channel -- through numbered Swiss bank accounts -- for funding for the Contra forces.    Under the 1949 Central Intelligence Agency Act and related laws, CIA officials can spend money on covert operations only under strict accounting and procedural rules. All profits generated by such CIA-run operations must be turned over to the Treasury. Mr. Meese has asserted that the profits from the sale of arms to Iran, which he estimated at between $10 million and $30 million, belonged solely to the middlemen. But former Watergate investigator Philip Lacovara disagrees. &quot;The profit belonged to the U.S. government and had to be dealt with the same way&quot; as any other federal property or asset, he asserts.    Some lawmakers suspect that the CIA may have run afoul of the Anti-Deficiency Act, which bars the executive branch from spending funds for purposes not appropriated by Congress. This law does have some criminal penalties, but legal scholars maintain they have never been used to cover such complex, highly classified activities.    Still another difficult issue revolves around assertions by Rep. Charles Wilson (D., Texas) and others that at least some of the profits from the arms sales were deposited in a CIA-controlled Swiss bank account that also contained covert aid slated for rebels in Afghanistan and Angola. Rep. Wilson and some administration officials have maintained that the co-mingling of the funds -- which could violate the Intelligence Authorization Act -- was simply a clerical oversight that was quickly corrected.    --The investigation: A final area posing potential legal problems is the administration's handling of the investigation into these matters. While there isn't any proof that laws have been violated, investigators will scrutinize the statements and documents of officials for evidence of perjury, obstruction of justice, and even criminal conspiracy to evade what may be civil laws. &quot;Conspiracy is normally one of the areas in which any criminal investigation is conducted,&quot; confirms the Federal Bureau of Investigation's director, William Webster.    In Watergate, it was false statements by the principals as much as anything else that brought down the Nixon administration. There have been a number of inconsistencies in various officials' accounts of how the Iran arms deal worked, and who knew about it and when, all of which investigators plan to examine. Such inconsistencies can create legal problems, either in sworn testimony or in written documents. Stanley Brand, who was general counsel to the clerk of the House of Representatives for seven years before entering private practice, notes that &quot;In the government, you almost always have to fill out forms to cause things to happen. If these forms include false statements of any kind, that's considered a felony.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>