<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890818-0155 </DOCNO><DD> = 890818 </DD><AN> 890818-0155. </AN><HL> Incentives and the Rhino's Fate@  ----@  By Bartle Bull </HL><DD> 08/18/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   Like senior executives in Detroit and Pittsburgh, the natives of Matabeleland and the Masai Mara resist environmental programs unless they bring immediate economic advantage. Equally, they resent what they perceive as elitist promoters of onerous conservation policies. For a man responsible for quarterly profits or tomorrow's meal, it can be hard to take the long view.    Environmental and conservation programs generally cannot function without local support, or at least tolerance. The best way to secure that support is with economic incentives, whether in the form of jobs or tax benefits.    In Africa, it has been a long struggle. The first game conservation laws were imposed by the Dutch at Cape Town in 1657, to prevent farmers from exterminating the hippopotamuses and elephants that damaged their crops. The international wildlife conference held in London in 1900 was the first meeting to recognize the global nature of conservation. It stimulated the colonial powers, particularly the hunting-mad and animal-loving British, to establish wildlife preserves and enforce game protection.    Most post-colonial governments inherited effective park and conservation programs. Almost without exception, these decayed rapidly under the new administrations. Africa has suffered a greater destruction of habitat and wildlife in the past 30 years than in all its previous modern history.    In the better colonial programs, such as Kenya's, indigenous support for a balanced policy of conservation and licensed hunting was obtained by paying a fraction of the hunting license revenues directly to the area's tribal population. But generally the policies were suited to European sensibilities and recreations. Although Africans were employed as gametrackers and safari servants, the protected animals, and the habitat, became forbidden fruit to blacks who watched rich white visitors shoot and feast on game that was denied to them. To them, the old policies seemed to favor animals and whites over blacks.    Instead of adapting the old programs to embrace the needs of local populations, the newly independent governments of Africa permitted commercial poaching, corruption, incompetent administration, population pressure and poor land husbandry to ravage wildlife. Thus today only 3,500 black rhinoceroses and 600,000 elephants survive in Africa, down from 100,000 and two million 30 years ago. In the past eight years, the elephant population has been halved. The white rhinoceros, wiped out almost everywhere in Africa, is now being re-introduced to other countries from South Africa.    Today, thinking conservationists -- including Tanzania's Marxist president, Kenya's old white hunters, and Washington's elephant lobbyists -- all agree that economic incentives are essential to wildlife preservation. Unless the rural African supports the effort, it becomes a guerrilla war between poachers and rangers. To be saved, the animals must pay their way.    Local villagers should benefit more from tourist and hunting revenues, both with jobs and with project grants derived from the money attracted by the animals. Game rangers must be properly paid. Abusing the wildlife -- whether the culprits are video-mad tourists, poachers, corrupt officials, or shopkeepers in Tokyo, New York and Dubai -- must be made prohibitively expensive. The destruction of habitat, disruption of mating and eating habits and chasing of animals for photographs by the nearly one million tourists who visit East Africa each year are far harder on the game than were the few thousand licensed hunters in the old days. Each should pay a conservation fee. The Arab emirates, the U.S. and -- the worst offender of all -- Japan must close their markets for ivory and rhino horn, as the European Community did on Aug.11.    Properly controlled, licensed hunting can be an important element in conservation, as the Tanzanian example demonstrates. There, hunting revenues pay game wardens and help subsidize rural development. In Zimbabwe, where culled elephants are a source of meat, farmers may sell hunting rights on their land, and are thereby given an incentive to conserve the game. In Kenya, by contrast, 80% of the elephants and 90% of the rhinos have been exterminated since the end of licensed hunting in 1977.    Here in the U.S., we correctly condemn foreign environmental atrocities. But Africans, Latins and Asians will not respect our advice unless our own conduct is consistent with it. If the rich abuse the environment, why should the poor sacrifice to save it? As we recommend to other countries, so our own national policy should construct appropriate incentives for individual and corporate America.    Drastic fines and generous tax incentives, even awards, would make a difference, whether in increasing energy efficiency and so abating global warming, or in reducing wasteful packaging and chemical pollution. An environmental aim is the establishment of a price on such limited resources as clean air and water, so that manufactures and consumers pay the complete cost of a product.    Today, one consuming American degrades the global environment more than a host of Sudanese. Of course we should encourage Brazil to protect the greatest rain forest of the southern hemisphere. But we ourselves are now destroying 500-year-old trees of the greatest rain forest in the northern hemisphere, the Tongas Forest of Alaska.    It should not be profitable for a barefoot poacher to machine-gun a rhino and chop open its face, or for an entrepreneur to burn the Amazon forest. And it should not be rewarding in American business to poison the air and water. Yet automotive executives still pay engineers to contrive presentations intended to persuade congressional committees that cleaner and more efficient automobiles are impractical. It is all the same game.    ---   Mr. Bull, a lawyer and the former publisher of the Village Voice wrote &quot;Safari&quot; (Viking, 1988). </TEXT></DOC>