<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BLACK MINERS AGREED to end their three-week strike in South Africa.    The National Union of Mineworkers, faced with unyielding opposition from gold and coal mine owners, vowed to press its demands again next year. The union accepted a 10% increase in vacation pay, improved death benefits and assurances that fired workers would be rehired. The accord is almost the same as the one the union rejected four days earlier and not much better than the one it turned down to begin the nation's biggest strike ever.    Union leaders said the strike showed the union's ability to mobilize members and keep them together, and said a strike was possible next year.    ---   IRAQ RENEWED ATTACKS on Persian Gulf shipping and Iranian oil facilities.    Iraqi warplanes attacked a tanker and struck Kharg Island and other Iranian oil installations in two days of bombing over the weekend, breaking the two countries' informal 45-day gulf cease-fire. Iran said it retaliated by shelling the southern Iraqi city of Basra. Meanwhile, a convoy of two Kuwaiti tankers flying the U.S. flag and escorted by three Navy ships moved up the gulf toward Kuwait. Washington is watching the situation with anxiety.    A State Department official called the Iraqi attacks &quot;deplorable,&quot; but said they must be viewed in light of Iran's delay in accepting a U.N. cease-fire.    ---   AQUINO PLEDGED tough action against rebels after last week's coup attempt.    At least 25 people died and 275 were injured, mostly civilians, when as many as 1,200 mutinous soldiers attacked the presidential compound in Manila, military bases and the government broadcast center. Aquino's son was shot, but not seriously wounded. The rebels also took control of military headquarters in Cebu. Aquino vowed &quot;no terms for traitors,&quot; but Philippine political analysts said she has to follow up with actions.    Aquino, in her first appearance since the attempt, said mutineers tried to kill her and her family, and that renegade soldiers may yet mount attacks.    ---   Morton Thiokol officials said a test of the redesigned space shuttle booster rocket was a success. The test, the first full-scale firing of the rocket since it was redesigned in the wake of the Challenger disaster 19 months ago, was rescheduled after three attempts were aborted Thursday when support equipment malfunctioned.    ---   U.S. health officials proposed rules that would tighten restrictions on abortion-related activities by family-planning clinics receiving federal funds. Under the Reagan-backed proposal, clinics would be barred from using federal funds to counsel women on abortion or to refer them to a doctor for an abortion.    ---   Israel's cabinet voted, 12-11, to scrap the Lavi jet fighter project. Moshe Arens, a Likud minister, threatened to resign after the vote. The U.S. had pressed for ending the project, and Labor Party leaders agreed it was draining Israel's resources. The cabinet plans to seek permission for Israel to help build the U.S. F-16.    A trial began behind closed doors in Jerusalem for former nuclear technician Mordechai Vanunu. He is accused of treason and espionage for telling a British newspaper that Israel produces nuclear weapons.    ---   U.S. and Soviet officials said an accord on eliminating short and medium-range nuclear missiles could be worked out soon. Max Kampelman, chief U.S. arms negotiator, said remaining obstacles, such as verification-process details, could be overcome &quot;in short order.&quot; A Soviet Central Committee member also expressed optimism.    ---   Ortega announced new austerity measures to keep Nicaragua from sinking deeper into debt and blamed the problem on five years of war with the Contras. The plan includes higher fuel and transportation prices, tighter gasoline rationing and the gradual elimination of certain government jobs.    ---   Britain's Social Democrats were urged to resist merging with the Liberal Party. Former SDP leader David Owen made the appeal to about 1,700 members of the party at the opening of its annual conference.    ---   A gunman killed five people and wounded two in Boston's Dorchester section before killing himself. Authorities said the man was a Vietnamese refugee involved in a domestic dispute over money.    ---   Ruling party leader Roh is to meet today with Kim Young Sam, leader of South Korea's main opposition party, for talks aimed at clearing the way for presidential elections in 1988. Meanwhile, police searched for 59 people missing since the discovery in Yongin of 32 corpses, apparently victims of a suicide pact by religious cult members.    ---   Libya recaptured Aouzou, administrative center of a disputed 1,000-mile Sahara strip in northern Chad that was taken by Chadian troops earlier this month. Libya's official news agency said 460 Chadian and 10 Libyan troops were killed Friday. Western journalists confirmed the recapture of the town but reported seeing only about 30 bodies.    ---   Died: John Huston, 81, movie director, Friday, in Middletown, R.I. . . . Lee Marvin, 63, actor, Saturday, in Tucson, Ariz. </TEXT></DOC>