<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870407-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Justices Refuse to Overturn Order LettingDelta Complete Merger With Western Air---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DAL LABOR JP ETX GMTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)AIRLINES (AIR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court refused to overturn an order issued last Wednesday by Justice Sandra O'Connor that permitted Delta Air Lines to complete its merger with Western Airlines.    The Air Transport Employees Union had asked the nine-member high court to overrule Justice O'Connor. The union has been fighting the merger and trying to force Delta to honor collective bargaining agreements previously negotiated between Western and its employees. Atlanta-based Delta acquired Los Angeles-based Western last year for $860 million.    On March 31, a federal appeals court in San Francisco blocked the merger and ordered the airlines to arbitrate the labor dispute with the union. Several hours later, however, Justice O'Connor blocked the appeals court's order, permitting the merger to be completed as scheduled last Wednesday.    The effect of Justice O'Connor's emergency order was that no arbitration is required while the airlines file a longer, more detailed appeal with the Supreme Court challenging the appeals court's ruling.    Justice O'Connor explained the reasons for her action in a nine-page opinion issued two days after her emergency order. Normally courts grant stays to preserve the status quo while a case or an appeal is pending, and the union argued that the status quo meant that Delta and Western should remain separate.    But Justice O'Connor said that extensive arrangements had been made to merge the companies, and that &quot;it is doubtful that these . . . can be undone . . .&quot; The arrangements included dismissing many Western managers, relocating many employees, transferring Western's Mexican and Canadian routes to Delta, and altering flight and maintenance schedules.    In Los Angeles, Robert A. Bush, an attorney for the transport employees union, conceded that the court's action was a major setback, saying, &quot;Our theory was that the only way an arbitrator could render an effective decision was to stop the merger. Since that didn't happen, by our theory we've got a serious problem.&quot; Nonetheless, he said the union would continue to pursue the case. In Atlanta, a Delta spokesman said the carrier was pleased by the decision and would within the next three months ask the Supreme Court to decide whether Delta is legally obligated to submit to arbitration.    Benefit Cases   The justices ruled unanimously that employees who have complaints about disability benefits must make their claims under federal law and can't file civil lawsuits for damages under state law. In a second 9-0 ruling, the justices said that lawsuits making such claims should be filed in federal rather than state courts.    The two rulings make clear that when Congress passed the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) in 1974, the intent was to bring all legal disputes over employee benefits, such as retirement and disability plans, under federal law and into the federal courts.    Both opinions were written by Justice O'Connor. In one, the high court reversed the ruling of a federal appeals court in New Orleans and ruled in favor of Pilot Life Insurance Co., a unit of Jefferson-Pilot Corp., a Greensboro, N.C.-based insurance and broadcasting concern.    Pilot Life was sued in federal court in Mississippi in 1980 by an employee of Entex Inc., a Houston-based natural gas distributor for which Pilot Life provided a group insurance plan. The suit alleged under state law that Pilot Life had breached its insurance contract and its fiduciary duty by failing to pay adequate disability benefits. A federal district court threw out the lawsuit, but the appeals court reinstated it.    The Supreme Court said that Congress had balanced the need for prompt handling of insurance claims against the goal of encouraging employee benefit plans and had come up with a detailed system for handling complaints about disability payments. This plan, the court said, &quot;would be completely undermined&quot; if employees &quot;were free to obtain remedies under state law that Congress rejected in ERISA.&quot;    In the second decision, the high court reversed the ruling of a federal appeals court in Cincinnati and ruled in favor of New York-based Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., and the company for which it provided an employee benefit plan, Detroit-based General Motors Corp., the nation's No. 1 auto maker.    Metropolitan Life and GM were sued in 1981 in Michigan state courts in a dispute over disability payments for a GM employee who was later fired. The two companies succeeded in having the case transferred to federal district court, arguing that the issues were all questions of federal law. But the appeals court ordered the case back to state court, saying the employee's complaint was based on state law and that federal law arose only as a defense by the companies.    The Supreme Court said yesterday that Congress intended that if state-law claims on employee benefits are to be governed by federal law, they should also be handled in federal courts. </TEXT></DOC>