<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880429-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Budgeting Social Security </HL><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT LABOR </CO><IN> FIN ECO </IN><TEXT>   Herbert Stein gives an interesting account of the history and of his position regarding the budget status of the U.S. Social Security trust funds (&quot;The Threat of a Budget Surplus,&quot; editorial page, April 7). My inside view, as an aide to Rep. Bill Gradison (R., Ohio) when Social Security was refinanced, indicates a less benign history and reasons of greater breadth behind the new budget policy than Mr. Stein leads us to believe.    Rep. Gradison, the congressman who revived and carried into law the idea that Social Security should be off-budget, indicated some of the reasons that won over his colleagues. Other reasons were between the lines of party politics. Together the reasons add up to simple fiscal responsibility.    Historically, the Roosevelt administration enacted the Social Security system as an independently financed system of payments to the elderly based on taxes imposed on workers. The system was made an unfunded liability, on a pay-as-you-go basis. Such a basis was more popular than straight insurance because it granted windfall benefits to the first generation of elderly recipients, &quot;grandfathered&quot; into the system without providing its financing.    Divisions of opinion on the proper budget status of the system occurred during the Johnson administration when it decided to make the budget more cohesive. Those believing in representing all items of government expenditures together, regardless of source, won the day. However various observers have suggested this victory stemmed from politics not economy. They argue that the Social Security trust funds, then running a surplus, were included in the unified budget in 1969 in order to mask a deficit of U.S. general revenues, caused primarily by President Johnson's escalation of the Vietnam War.    Rep. Gradison's stated reasons for putting Social Security off-budget, as an independently financed system, echo back to economic efficiency: The government needs to determine cohesively its budget policy, but doing so requires a linkage between source of funds and expenditures. To paraphrase the argument in economists' language, all money is indeed fungible, but different constraints on resources can cause different &quot;shadow&quot; prices on income received from the different sources. Determination of the shadow prices is necessary for proper allocation of government dollars invested across projects. If a Social Security surplus masks a budget deficit in a unified budget, then both the real costs of the funds that finance general revenue expenditures and the real costs of the taxes that finance Social Security become unintelligible.    While an efficacious budget policy is important, politics again entered in establishing the new off-budget policy. A grand battle over the future of the country's transfer programs was waged quietly by the hierarchies of the two party leaderships. Democrats wanted to refinance the system by infusing general Treasury revenues, thereby breaking the historical independence of the three funds and pushing the system toward one with payments more loosely linked to work history. Republicans wanted to keep the system financed independently, thereby maintaining the incentives for work currently built into the system through the close basing of benefit payments upon work history.    A win by Democrats would have pushed the whole income-redistribution system toward less efficiency, though one with more discretion. The win by the Republicans meant a maintenance of the current level of efficiency, or perhaps greater efficiency through spillover effects that may build a more consistent incentive structure into the rest of the welfare system.    The trust funds will become an off-budget item in October 1992, by the Social Security Amendments of 1983, without general revenue funding. The upshot will be better budgeting and possibly a more efficient welfare system. The road to the Republican victory was not costless. As many as 24 seats in the House of Representatives were said to have been lost as a result of the Reagan administration's 1982 proposals to cut Social Security in order to decrease the deficit. The mixture of budgets was bad politics and arguably has been bad policy.    Max Gillman   Assistant Professor of Economics   Emory University   Atlanta</TEXT></DOC>