<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880317-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Four Iran-Contra Figures Charged With Conspiracy, Fraud and Theft --- Poindexter, North, 2 Others Accused of 'Exploiting' Covert Arms Sales to Iran </HL><AUTHOR> Andy Pasztor and Edward T. Pound (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST LATAM </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> JUS EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Former National Security Adviser John Poindexter, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North and two other Iran-Contra figures were indicted on conspiracy, fraud and theft charges in the most sweeping allegations of high-level government corruption since Watergate.    A federal grand jury, which has been investigating the scandal for 14 months, charged the two former White House aides, along with retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and his business partner, Albert Hakim, with &quot;deceitfully exploiting for their own purposes&quot; the Reagan administration's covert sale of arms to Iran.    The 23-count, 101-page indictment -- like earlier reports by lawmakers and a presidential review board -- alleged that Messrs. Poindexter and North abused their high administration posts by running covert operations outside of government controls. It charged that they directed and concealed the use of federal funds for unauthorized purposes, including the diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds to the Nicaraguan Contra rebels, then misled congressional and Justice Department investigators as part of a coverup.    According to the indictment, some of the arms-sale proceeds ended up in the pockets of Messrs. Hakim and Secord, and Col. North received an illegal gratuity from Mr. Secord. The grand jury charged that the government was deprived of &quot;honest and faithful service&quot; by Messrs. North and Poindexter that was &quot;free from conflicts of interest, corruption and self-dealing.&quot;    Yesterday's charges are certain to provide ammunition to Democratic presidential candidates who blame President Reagan's foreign-policy adventures and management style -- and by implication, Vice President George Bush -- for the twin policy debacles, which have badly damaged Mr. Reagan's image in the U.S. and abroad.    Surrounded by a crowd of reporters who had waited hours at the federal courthouse here while prosecutors made final statements to grand jurors, special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh emerged yesterday afternoon to explain the charges and to say that the grand jury probe is continuing.    Meanwhile, several blocks away Col. North, a hero to some and a villain to others, vowed: &quot;I will never give up. I will win.&quot; In an emotional statement he read to reporters at his lawyer's office, the decorated Vietnam veteran said: &quot;I did not commit any crime. I intend to fight the allegations of wrongdoing for as long as necessary.&quot;    As in his testimony last summer before the Iran-Contra congressional investigating committees, Col. North invoked his long service as a Marine and White House aide, and complained that he was &quot;caught in a bitter dispute&quot; between Congress and President Reagan over control of foreign policy.    Mr. Hakim's attorney, Richard Janis, said his client was innocent and he predicted &quot;lengthy legal proceedings.&quot;    Attorneys for Messrs. Poindexter and Secord weren't immediately available for comment.    Only hours before the indictment was released, President Reagan reiterated his view that no laws were broken during the Iran-Contra scandal. His statement encompassed Robert McFarlane, the former national security adviser who pleaded guilty last week to misleading Congress and is expected to be a prosecution witness against those indicted yesterday. &quot;I have no knowledge of anything that was broken,&quot; Mr. Reagan said in response to reporters' questions.    Asked about Mr. McFarlane's plea to four misdemeanor counts, Mr. Reagan said: &quot;He just pleaded guilty to not telling Congress everything it wanted to know. I've done that myself.&quot; Then he quickly admonished reporters: &quot;Now don't distort that. I just think Congress would like to be asking questions about almost everything.&quot;    The indictment alleged that a major goal of the conspiracy was to use the influence and positions of Adm. Poindexter and his aide, Col. North, &quot;to generate funds&quot; for the benefit of Messrs. Secord and Hakim, who managed a covert network that assisted in the Iran arms sales and resupplied the Contras. Messrs. Secord and Hakim, in turn, agreed to provide a portion of those funds to help the Contras &quot;outside of governmental accountability,&quot; the grand jury charged. In this way, it said, the conspirators &quot;exploited for their own purposes and corrupted&quot; the secret Iran initiative.    The indictment, which includes many of the details disclosed during last summer's nationally televised congressional hearings, names Col. North in 16 of the 23 counts.    In addition to the central charge that he conspired to defraud the U.S., Col. North was accused of obstructing presidential and congressional inquiries, providing false statements to lawmakers, and destroying sensitive government documents.    The grand jury also charged that Messrs. Secord and Hakim conspired to offer illegal gratuities to Col. North. In one instance, it said, Mr. Hakim set up a $200,000 investment account in Switzerland for the benefit of Col. North's family, and the indictment said Messrs. Hakim and Secord also offered the colonel &quot;financial assistance for the education&quot; of his children.    The indictment didn't accuse Col. North of accepting either of the offers. However, it charged that Mr. Secord offered -- and Col. North accepted -- a security system valued at $13,800 for the colonel's home in suburban Virginia.    In addition, it said that Col. North &quot;embezzled and wrongfully converted to his own use&quot; about $4,300 in traveler's checks. The checks were part of more than $90,000 that Col. North received from a Contra leader, Adolfo Calero, who believed the funds would be used to help free American hostages in Lebanon and support the Contras, according to the indictment.    The final count against Col. North charged that he conspired to violate federal tax laws by using a tax-exempt foundation, the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty, to help arm the Contras. Last year, two conservative fund-raisers, Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell and Richard Miller, pleaded guilty in federal court here to participating in the same scheme and named Col. North as a conspirator.    If convicted on all counts, Col. North could face up to 85 years in jail and $4 million in fines.    Gen. Secord, who spent years in covert operations before he retired in 1983 after his name emerged in another scandal, was named in six of the counts and faces up to 29 years in jail and $1.5 million in fines.    His partner, Mr. Hakim, an Iranian-American businessman who arranged millions of dollars in payoffs to Iranian military officials during the 1970s, was named in five of the counts. He faces up to 27 years in prison and more than $1.2 million in fines.    Through their private enterprise, Messrs. Secord and Hakim generated more than $48 million. This included monies from weapons sold to the Contras, private donations for the Contras from U.S. allies, and the Iran arms sales proceeds, which were deposited in overseas accounts controlled by Mr. Hakim. The Iran arms sales proceeds totaled about $30 million, but the U.S. was paid only $12.3 million. Congressional investigators found last year that the Secord-Hakim enterprise diverted $3.8 million in profits to the Contras.    As part of the enterprise, hefty accounts were set up for the benefit of Messrs. Hakim and Secord and one of their associates, Thomas Clines, a former Central Intelligence Agency official who was involved in the Contra supply efforts and whose activities still are being investigated by Mr. Walsh.    Mr. Walsh's investigators traced the money trail of the Secord-Hakim enterprise through a maze of middlemen, dummy companies and bank accounts in the U.S., Switzerland and the Caribbean.    Adm. Poindexter, who had easy access to President Reagan and briefed him daily on foreign developments, was named in seven counts, including charges of wire fraud, making false statements to lawmakers and obstructing their investigations, and theft of government property.    Mr. Poindexter, who faces a maximum 40 years in prison and $1.7 million in fines if convicted on all charges, wasn't accused of personally pocketing any proceeds from the Iran-Contra operations. However, he was accused of stealing government property by allowing the unauthorized diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds to support the Contras, contrary to congressional intent, and to benefit others involved in the conspiracy.    While the indictment doesn't include new disclosures about the covert operations, it highlights alleged efforts by Adm. Poindexter and Col. North to obstruct and mislead Congress. It alleged that Col. North repeatedly concealed his role in arming the Contras, and that Adm. Poindexter lied about his knowledge of a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran and deleted certain computer messages that he sent or received.    The indictment touches only lightly on the role Israel played in helping shape the Iran initiative, apparently reflecting the difficulties that Mr. Walsh and his staff encountered in obtaining documents or testimony from the Israeli government. It also doesn't delve deeply into Reagan administration efforts to solicit foreign funds from allies to bankroll the Contras while various versions of the so-called Boland amendment were in effect. </TEXT></DOC>