<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880601-0154 </DOCNO><HL> Reaganites Blink at Trading-Floor Showdown </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas E. Ricks </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR NDX CMD </IN><G> EXE CNG SEC CFT FED TRE </G><TEXT>   When it comes to the financial markets, the Reagan administration lacks the courage of its convictions.    Ask administration officials how they've responded to the crash, and they boast that they've prevented Congress from doing anything about the markets. Sometimes the wisest course, they intone, is to do nothing.    But preventing congressional action is hardly a Herculean feat. Congress does that all by itself. If you're a financial regulator drawing a government paycheck and consuming oxygen, you should be able at least to advance the debate. By making preservation of the status quo its goal in the argument over post-crash market reforms, the administration has blown an opportunity to streamline the financial markets along the free-market lines it once touted.    Take last month's report of the White House Working Group on Financial Markets. Its central conclusion is that we have to learn to live with technological changes in those markets.    That's fine, as far as it goes. But the working group wimped out on dropping the other shoe: If technology is good, why not remove some government-imposed impediments to technological progress? If the Chicago futures exchanges have shown the way to more efficient markets, why not encourage the New York stock exchanges to follow suit? Indeed, why not try to find and remove barriers to competition in both New York and Chicago?    Privately, Reaganite regulators will say that, yes, someone should be looking at the New York Stock Exchange's anachronistic trading structures, should be questioning the perpetuation of the stock exchange's specialist system, should be looking into electronic &quot;black box&quot; trading systems in which computers match buyers and sellers without human intermediaries. But they won't do so in public. That's mainly for political reasons: No one wants to alienate campaign contributors on Wall Street in a presidential election year. Anyway, they almost mumble, why spend the last seven months of your life in government slugging it out with the New York Stock Exchange, which can be a very tough political opponent?    Aside from having the courage of one's convictions, there are several good political reasons. First, by choosing a strategy of simply erecting obstacles to reform without suggesting alternatives, the free marketeers at the Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Council of Economic Advisers and the dissident wing of the SEC surrendered the initiative to their ideological opponents, the &quot;sand-in-the-gears&quot; interventionists who want to slow down the markets. Such deference makes one wonder what happened to the fire-breathing deregulators who rode into town seven years ago.    More important, they have failed to make their case. No one expects a distracted Congress or a lame-duck administration to do much about the markets this year. Whatever changes are made will come next year. And unlike their opponents, such as presidential task force chief Nicholas Brady and Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman David Ruder, the administration's free marketeers have left no documents, no legislative agenda, no coherent statement of beliefs to challenge their successors.    In fact, they even have failed to meet the feeble goal they set for themselves of preventing change. This administration actually has responded to the crash in two remarkably interventionist ways:   1.In April the SEC approved a rule limiting program traders' access to the New York Stock Exchange's automated execution system after 50-point swings in the Dow Jones Industrial Average -- the first time the U.S. government ever has endorsed limits on the use of computers in the markets.    2.In May the Working Group proposed &quot;circuit breakers&quot; to interrupt trading after 250- and 400-point drops in the Dow Jones average.    Ask the free marketeers about these changes, and they compound their intellectual dishonesty: These things are sops, they say quietly. We don't expect them to really have much of an effect. We had to appear to do something, they say. But what they have done without seeming to recognize it is establish two precedents that could haunt them.    With a little more effort and willpower, they could have done something more in keeping with the beliefs they espouse. They could have tried to leave their imprint on the markets, or at least on the debate over market reform.    What is so irritating about all this is that the Working Group seemed to start in the right direction. Either leverage in the markets is a concern or it isn't. The question is almost theological. If you believe low futures margins aren't worrisome, then the Working Group's analysis, as far as it goes, is compelling. George Gould, the Treasury undersecretary who heads the group, says there's a generation gap on Wall Street. The old folks -- Donald Regan's peers -- don't understand today's computerized, program-trading, futures-hedging, options-arbitraging markets, Mr. Gould contends. He's probably right.    Essentially, the Working Group detected a tension in today's markets between technology and old trading structures. Look at that as a dialectic. The thesis is innovation: computerized trading, improvements in telecommunications and new financial products, such as stock-index futures, which began trading in 1982. The antithesis is the old ways: in particular, trading systems such as the Big Board's specialists, and in general, slow-changing humans suspicious of the new market that surrounds them.    But the group shied away from stating the implied synthesis: improved trading systems, and greater disclosure about that trading.    There are a variety of ways to streamline today's markets. Institutional investors would like efficient and inexpensive ways of trading multimillion-dollar &quot;baskets&quot; of entire portfolios. They would also like to hedge their positions with block trades of stock-index futures. And they'd like to be able to trade baskets with each other. Other market participants would be less jittery if they had a better idea of what the institutions are up to.    Neither the New York nor Chicago markets like such talk much. The entire system of the New York Stock Exchange is geared to handling each stock individually. Block trades of stock futures would cut out the locals on the floors of the futures exchanges. Direct trading of baskets between institutions would cut out brokerages from hefty commissions on those big transactions. And letting the world know the order flow would hurt those who now profit by keeping it to themselves.    The information solution is interesting, for it cuts across political boundaries. Free marketeers can hardly object to the free flow of information, while populists have to like a way of helping small investors better compete with Wall Street insiders. It also is in the best tradition of U.S. securities regulation, which is most effective when based not on increased intervention but on increased information.    More information would also settle, in one way or another, a lot of investors' fears and suspicions about program trading and cross-market trading abuses such as front-running. Better knowledge will improve investors' understanding of today's markets. And if abuses are occurring in the unregulated twilight zone between the stock and futures markets, it's easier and more effective to stamp them out with disclosure to the marketplace than with beefed-up surveillance and enforcement by regulators.    But all this appears to be moot. The administration's free marketeers haven't yet found the courage of their convictions. That probably will come next year, when it won't do them any good. A year from now, when they are out of government, they will be bellyaching about the changes wrought by their successors, and they will have no one to blame but themselves.    ---   Mr. Ricks covers securities regulation from the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>