<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Buying Binge: Japan's Consumers Go On a Spending Spree, And Economy Booms --- Rise Comes as Trade Partners Are Fighting for Growth; U.S. Hopes Are Dashed --- A New Thrill: Oxygen 'Bars' </HL><AUTHOR> Damon Darlin and Masayoshi Kanabayashi (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japanese consumers are on a buying and building binge in their own country.    &quot;Using old things is old-fashioned, so you have to keep buying,&quot; says 40-year-old Tatsuo Saito, as he and his wife eye an American-size Japanese refrigerator to replace their two-year-old model. Mr. Saito, a small-business man, has recently bought a new color-television set, a new videocassette recorder, home lighting and a Mercedes-Benz.    Many Japanese, young and old, are giving up the self-sacrificing ways of the past. Though few are going into debt the way American consumers do, they clearly want to enjoy their own affluence. &quot;We are on the threshold of a new age of consumer behavior,&quot; says Ryosuke Shibata, a consumer-behavior expert at Dentsu Inc., Japan's giant advertising agency.    The result: a booming economy at a time when its major trading partners are struggling to achieve growth. The Japanese built 1.6 million new homes last year, the most since 1973. That, in turn, has triggered a surge in domestic demand that is crowding stores and forcing factories to increase production.    Japan's consumer spree has been a long time coming. Its trading partners, particularly the U.S., have pounded away for years at the Japanese to consume more and export less. The idea was that Japan's factories could sell more without further swamping world markets.    U.S. policymakers also hoped this buying would benefit American companies. But it isn't, in any big way. Unlike America's buying binge, which sucked in unprecedented quantities of foreign products and helped create the huge U.S. foreign-trade deficit, Japan's is going largely for made-in-Japan products. True, Japan is importing more -- some 60% more manufactured products than two years ago -- and exporting less. As a result, the U.S. trade deficit with Japan probably has peaked at $50 billion, but any decline this year will be very gradual.    Regardless, the boom in Japan affects American business and America's future competitiveness world-wide. That's because Japan's domestic spending boom is keeping Japanese companies prosperous at a time when many experts thought that the slumping dollar, which reduces their competitiveness in America, would leave them struggling to adjust. Most Japanese companies aren't undergoing the wrenching cutbacks that American concerns faced a few years ago when the dollar soared and priced American goods out of Japan and other foreign markets.    However, the drama of the higher yen obscures subtle but profound changes in Japan's economy, its manufacturers and its consumers. Over the past 2 1/2 years, the strong yen has forced Japanese companies to cut costs and increase productivity sharply. And it also has forced them to sell aggressively in Japan.    With more choices from abroad and more spending power, Japanese consumers have discovered buying for the sheer joy of buying. As in the glory days of American consumer spending when the dollar was strong, Japanese are purchasing record numbers of German cars, many more Japanese stereos, and trendy items such as imported water and even imported ice.    The changes are so profound that some economists and executives are saying the value of the yen is no longer strongly affecting profits at many Japanese companies. The companies have incessantly complained about the difficulty of earning a profit when every dollar earned in the U.S. and returned to Japan is worth half as much as it was three years ago. Nevertheless, manufacturers' pretax profits soared 54% in the 1987 third quarter from a year earlier, the largest year-to-year rise in nearly a decade. And profits are expected to continue climbing.    The strong yen, says Yusuke Kashiwagi, the Bank of Tokyo's chairman, &quot;is not a keen matter of day-to-day conversation anymore.&quot;    The reasons for that change are buried in the same agreement that triggered the dollar's fall, the Plaza Accord of September 1985. Although currency realignments got most of the attention, the agreement among the industrial nations also sought to increase consumption in Japan and West Germany to help narrow the global trade imbalances. And Japanese are, in fact, consuming more.    The Bank of Japan, sometimes reluctantly, did the job. Five times the central bank cut interest rates, reducing its discount rate -- its rate on loans to commercial banks -- to 2.5%. With cheaper money, Japan went on a building boom.    That stepped up demand for steel, copper, aluminum, machinery and vehicles needed for construction. New appliances and office equipment were needed to fill the buildings. &quot;In essence, it was the same sort of things they were exporting,&quot; says David Gerstenhaber, an economist with Morgan Stanley in Tokyo. Manufacturers that had been retrenching found themselves with low inventories. As a result, they increased capital expenditures, and production rose almost 25% on an annual basis. That, too, spurred the economy.    Publicly, companies were saying what Toyota Motor Corp. said in April 1986 when the exchange rate first broke 170 yen to the dollar: &quot;The situation has already gone beyond the limits of coping.&quot; But privately, they were admitting that the advantages of the higher yen were largely offsetting the disadvantages. Though it was harder to make money overseas, it became easier in Japan.    The weak dollar made raw materials, particularly oil, a lot cheaper here. Oil went as low as 13,962 yen per kiloliter (about $114) early last year from 38,267 yen a year earlier. Naphtha, a petrochemical, is quoted at about 17,000 yen per kiloliter, down from 40,000 yen before the Plaza Accord. Since June 1986, electricity rates have been cut 18% and natural gas 23%.    Most important, the streamlining was paying off. To deal with the higher yen, Japanese companies had pared operations. They began buying more parts from developing nations, where parts are cheaper. They even shifted a lot of production there, to the U.S. and to Europe. One typical result: Victor Co. of Japan Ltd., the electronics concern also known as JVC, can sell for 130,000 yen a 21-inch TV that sold for 200,000 yen two years ago.    Thus, when domestic demand picked up, the benefits of cost cutting went straight to the bottom line. Kawasaki Steel Co., which has dropped 1,900 workers from its payroll and plans to cut an additional 3,400, is expected next March to report a six-month operating profit of as much as 15 billion yen -- after only one year of losses. &quot;We didn't expect such a rapid recovery,&quot; a spokesman says. &quot;It is solely the impact of the domestic demand expansion.&quot;    Toshiba Corp. says cost cutting has reduced its cost-to-sales ratio to where it was before the yen began rising. The company began shifting production of low-tech products to developing nations and moving domestic production to high-value-added products. At a VCR plant outside of Tokyo, it halved the number of assembly-line workers by minimizing inventories and simplifying operations with more standardized parts and changed job descriptions.    Local press reports say Toshiba saved 53 billion yen by redesigning products, 47 billion yen in parts cutbacks and lower raw-material costs, and 15 billion yen through greater operating efficiency -- a total of 115 billion yen. And as Toshiba's domestic sales picked up, its pretax profit in the six months ended Sept. 30 doubled from a year earlier to 24.98 billion yen.    Domestic demand got a major push because Japanese companies discovered that they could neutralize the effects of the currency changes by selling more in Japan. Profit margins on most consumer goods are high in Japan compared with the U.S. A portable Sony compact disk player selling for $219 in the U.S. goes for $406 in Japan -- at a discount store. A Casio electronic keyboard selling for $389 at a New York discount store sells for more than twice that at a similar shop in Tokyo.    With such profit margins, Japanese companies suddenly got eager to sell in Japan. This change of heart was striking at Sony Corp. With more than 70% of its products going overseas, the maker of Trinitron color TVs and tiny Walkman radio-cassette-tape players had long ignored the domestic market.    With the higher yen cutting into profits, Sony decided to learn how to compete in Japan. It set up a test project to push into the fast-growing compact-stereo-component market, where it had only about a 7% share. The goal: a 15% market share within three years, which it has exceeded. The company formed a team of middle-level managers from sales, advertising, engineering and production to build a product from scratch.    Instead of making a highly innovative product, as Sony normally does, the team learned from Japanese retailers that its stereo, in order to sell, had to look like everyone else's. So it sent the engineers back to the drawing board. For the first time, Sony signed on a popular Japanese singing group to advertise its products, just as rival companies do. And Sony repeatedly briefed retailers on the progress of the new product, known as Liberty. &quot;We did it six months before the product even existed,&quot; says Tetsunari Hosokawa, a planner in the audio-components division.    Setting the price was trickier. Competition was coming in on the low end from products made in South Korea and Taiwan. Sony added lots of flashy computerized features, such as automatic searches, to set it off. But, at about 156,000 yen for a five-piece system, Sony kept its price lower than the competition. At the same time, Sony began reducing its dependence on exports.    The only worry, Mr. Hosokawa says, is that &quot;the competition has products coming out this spring to bash Sony.&quot;    The new competition among Japanese companies is benefiting Japanese consumers even though prices aren't low by U.S. standards. Japanese buying power is growing because inflation is almost zero and wages rose an average of 4.6% in 1986 and 3.4% last year and should climb 4.6% this year. And Japanese are buying more imports, be they top-of-the-line West German autos or cheap tape players from Singapore; that keeps pressure on to moderate prices and improve selection. &quot;Companies can't be left behind,&quot; says Mr. Shibata of Dentsu, the ad agency.    Dentsu also says new-product introduction has accelerated because of domestic demand. A new candy or ice-cream bar is introduced almost every week. In a largely homogeneous society, niche marketing is the rage. Japanese beer manufacturers that once made similar beer now produce canned draft beer, high-alcohol beer, malts, ales and, of course, brands that imitate the taste of imported beer. &quot;Even two years ago, you couldn't do that,&quot; Mr. Shibata says. &quot;Consumers weren't suffering, but they weren't buying as much.&quot;    And although Japanese aren't yet exhibiting all the American buying habits -- buying on credit is still unusual, for instance -- Mr. Shibata sees a clear trend of &quot;people wanting to lead a more comfortable life.&quot; Japanese, who used to regard it as a duty to their nation to sweat out the summer without air conditioning, are now spending twice as much money on keeping cool as they did seven years ago. Home renovation grew to a market of 10 trillion yen from six trillion in 1983. Large refrigerators are no longer unusual. In a display of refrigerators at an electronics supermarket in Tokyo, a Sears Kenmore is the smallest.    The frivolous-buying trend is shown by the hit products of 1987: large-screen TV sets, automatic bread makers, deodorant socks, sports clubs and &quot;bars&quot; where Japanese sniff bottled oxygen to get a heady feeling. Prices range from 100 yen to breathe three minutes of oxygen at the bar to 120,000 yen for an entire 2.7-liter tank to inhale in the comfort of one's home. &quot;It used to be when I thought of 10,000 yen {$80}, it was a lot of money,&quot; says Tamayose Takeyasu, a 21-year-old trading-company employee. &quot;Now, I just spend it.&quot;    How long can the consumer boom last? Some pessimists say it can't go on very long. The housing boom, for example, has peaked already; interest rates can't go much lower. But many experts see the good times and the new consumer behavior as lasting phenomena. The stock-market crash in Japan, like that in the U.S., has had little effect so far. And the Japanese government seems eager to sustain the boom. The legislature approved an outlay of an extra six trillion yen ($48 billion) on public-works projects last year, and the latest budget proposals for the next fiscal year look even more stimulative. The government says it plans to cut taxes by 220 billion yen, with the revisions focusing on lower land and housing taxes.    &quot;Japan is heading for the biggest consumer boom in a decade or more,&quot; Mr. Gerstenhaber of Morgan Stanley says. </TEXT></DOC>