<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880825-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BURMA LIFTED martial law and will consider ending one-party rule.    In a speech following a demonstration by hundreds of thousands in Rangoon, President Maung Maung, Burma's third leader in little more than a month, promised to convene a special congress of the ruling Socialist Program Party Sept. 12 to decide whether to hold a national referendum on democratic reform. He said the leadership of the party, which has ruled for 26 years, will resign if the referendum is rejected.    Many diplomats in Rangoon predicted more protests because of the hesitant timetable, and some predicted the ruling party's imminent demise.    ---   POLISH STRIKERS SHUT Gdansk's port as Warsaw rushed riot police to the city.    Police routed strikers from a bus depot in the northern port of Szczecin and a coal mine in the southern region of Silesia. Strikes at two other coal mines ended peacefully, but opposition sources said strikes broke out at two other locations and about 1,000 workers struck at the giant Nowa Huta steel plant outside Krakow. Strikers are seeking pay raises and the legalization of the outlawed Solidarity trade union.    More than 300 miners in southern Hungary went on strike, state radio said. It was the first reported worker protest of strict new economic policies.    ---   BUSH LEADS Dukakis 47% to 40% among likely voters, a new poll shows.    The Wall Street Journal/NBC poll shows the GOP presidential candidate has staged a comeback against his rival and reversed a 10-point deficit two weeks ago. Bush's approval ratings also rose sharply. But twice as many likely voters favored Democratic vice presidential candidate Bentsen over Quayle, and most believe Quayle received special treatment in joining the National Guard in 1969.    Bush said he will debate Dukakis this fall, but virtually ruled out two proposed September dates. Dukakis received the endorsement of the AFL-CIO.    ---   Chile ended a state of emergency that has been in force since President Pinochet took power in a 1973 coup in which President Allende was killed. The action comes less than a week before Chile's military commanders are to meet to nominate their candidate, probably Pinochet, for a presidential referendum planned for October.    ---   U.S. and European officials uncovered a spy ring that was supplying Hungarian intelligence agents with secret Western military data, according to a report in the New York Times. Administration officials said the spy network had existed for at least 10 years, and the documents included U.S. Army plans to defend Europe, the paper said.    ---   Soviet radio reported thousands demonstrated in the disputed Armenian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan as the republic's parliament criticized a regional development plan. In Estonia, a top Communist official said the Baltic republic's constitution may be amended to grant legal status to a party advocating greater autonomy.    ---   Israel rejected U.S. criticism of its policy of deporting Palestinians. In Washington, the State Department indicated the U.S. would vote against Israel in the U.N. if a deportation resolution comes up. Separately, the Israeli army said that its troops killed five Hezbollah guerrillas in southern Lebanon and that six soldiers were wounded.    ---   A Navy captain faces a court-martial after failing to appear for a nonjudicial hearing on charges he failed to rescue a boatload of Vietnamese refugees who say they later resorted to cannibalism to survive. The Navy said Capt. Alexander Balian, who has been relieved of command of the USS Dubuque, may now face more serious penalties.    ---   The EPA proposed minimum standards for municipal trash dumps that the agency estimated will cost $887 million a year. The proposed rules would require about 6,000 dumps to install groundwater monitoring systems. They would also close some dumps and put special conditions on others in certain areas.    ---   Rwanda's foreign minister said the number of refugees fleeing ethnic violence in the neighboring Central African nation of Burundi had swelled to more than 40,000. A Western diplomat in Burundi said reports from nongovernmental sources indicated the army was acting with restraint in quelling the violence, in which at least 5,000 died.    ---   Cypriot leaders agreed to hold unconditional talks next month in Cyprus aimed at reunifying the Mediterranean island, divided since 1974. The agreement came after a U.N.-sponsored meeting in Geneva between Greek Cypriot leader Vassiliou and Turkish Cypriot leader Denktas. Both leaders expressed optimism following the meeting.    ---   Police in Northern Ireland arrested eight men in connection with an IRA bombing last week that killed eight British soldiers, according to British press reports. Separately, two Northern Ireland policemen were slightly injured in a car bombing.    ---   North and South Korean officials said they are willing to resume talks on a nonaggression pact and on sharing next month's Olympic Games but disagreed on a date. When the talks broke up this week, South Korean officials said they probably wouldn't resume until after the Games, but a quick resumption now appears likely. </TEXT></DOC>