<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870120-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Interstate Banks Could Ease Farm Credit Woes---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 01/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   In the new budget the Reagan administration indicates it would like to kill or slash most direct-loan farm programs and instead guarantee more private loans or sell loans to private lenders. In view of the continuing troubles of farms and farm lenders, it isn't surprising that the government is changing its approach, but this change isn't likely to help.    The farming business is perhaps more dependent on credit than businesses generally. Planting costs money, and then it's months before harvests start to generate any cash flow. In the meantime farmers must buy and maintain equipment and pay the help. In recent years many farmers overexpanded, but many others were caught by a world price decline stemming from overproduction. It's tough to sell wheat abroad when other countries are producing more than they need.    For a half-century and more, federal lenders have been helping to take care of farm credit needs, and lately they've taken a beating in the process. As of June 30, 1985, close to 50% of the loan portfolio of the Farmers Home Administration, a major governmental lender, was delinquent. The portfolios of other federal lenders also are in sorry shape.    Private commercial banks in farm areas also are in deep trouble. Of the record 138 bank failures last year, nearly half were farm-area banks. The problems may be getting worse. A study by Veribanc of Woburn, Mass., based on Federal Reserve Board data, showed that the number of farm banks with more problem loans than capital rose to 207 last June 30 from 139 at year-end. Problem loans are those that are believed to require more than normal supervision.    A new National Bureau of Economic Research paper considers the farm credit problems and possible solutions. The authors are Charles Calomiris and R. Glenn Hubbard of Northwestern University and James Stock of the Hoover Institution. (NBER Working Paper No. 2085, available from NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, Mass., 02138, $2.)    The paper offers a quick survey of farm history since World War II. In the 1950s and 1960s, farmers did pretty well, expanding their real incomes, even though agriculture was providing a diminishing share of the gross national product. The reason was that the pie could be cut into fewer pieces. Farm productivity was rising at an astonishing rate, and many farm workers were moving into jobs in a rapidly growing non-farm economy. From 1955 to 1984, total output per hour of farm labor increased fivefold.    In the 1970s, the situation changed. Commodity prices soared amid the general inflation. Demand for farm exports rose. Farm income raced upward, and expectations of farm income rose even faster. Many farmers borrowed to buy land and equipment to share in the new bonanza.    &quot;Finally,&quot; the National Bureau economists write, &quot;during the 1980s farm prices declined and, faced with an appreciating dollar, exports fell sharply. Accordingly, farm incomes, and with them farmland values, declined at rates unprecedented in the postwar period. This sharp decline in income, coupled with the high levels of debt acquired during the expansion of the 1970s, has led to a sharp decline in the ability of farmers to meet their debt obligations and to the corresponding rise in farm bank failures.&quot;    Where do we go from here?    The National Bureau economists' first conclusion is that the experiences of the 1970s and 1980s could very well be repeated. More countries are agricultural producers and the number of consumers continues to expand. Farming will be increasingly involved in international trade, and that means that while some years may be very good some may be very bad. Farm incomes will be more sensitive to changes in world as well as domestic economic conditions.    The old ways of shoring up farm income -- stabilizing prices, cutting acreage and the like -- aren't likely to prevent increased farm income volatility. The primary burden will be on farm operators.    The authors argue, I think correctly, that there will be a continuing role for the federal government in farm credit, either through direct loans or by shoring up the Cooperative Farm Credit System. The current farm problems are concentrated in farms producing cash grains, general livestock or dairy products, and these farms are mainly in the Corn Belt and Northern Plains states. Local commercial banks in those areas have little chance to diversify their risks either outside of their areas or outside of agriculture because of the existing restrictions on branch banking. As long as those restrictions are there, federal farm lenders have an advantage since they can diversify nationally.    The National Bureau economists don't urge a crash effort to get rid of restrictions on branch banking, but they clearly see the advantages. They point them out by telling the story of agricultural credit in California.    &quot;The scope for improvement,&quot; they write, &quot;is demonstrated by the robust performance of California banks. California leads the country in total agricultural production and has had a higher than average percentage of troubled loans. . . . Net charge-offs as a percentage of agricultural loans were 6.1% in California and 1.8% in other states.    &quot;At the same time, California accounted for only one of the 68 agricultural bank failures in 1985. This is because large banks, which account for most of the agricultural lending in California, held only 3% of their portfolio in agricultural production loans.&quot;    Branch banking in the farm states clearly would be a help, but it would be less than a complete solution. Several of the farm states have little industry into which banks could diversify. The country is creeping slowly toward nationwide banking, and the credit needs of agriculture surely provide a reason for swifter movement in that direction.    The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. now often has trouble finding banks to take over failed farm banks. A bank with an opportunity to expand nationally might be more willing to help the FDIC by picking up a few failed institutions along the way.    Banks that take over failed farm banks, moreover, tend to pursue a very cautious lending policy. If branch restrictions keep them solely or almost solely within a troubled farm area, such a lending policy is to be expected -- indeed any other policy would be stupid. A nationwide bank would be much freer to construct a lending policy that would better serve the area.    The current farm problems are leading to an increase in farm size. The National Bureau economists seem unhappy about this, since they call it farm &quot;agglomeration,&quot; which would imply that it was all pretty much unplanned. Certainly the farmers who are going out of business didn't plan it, but the large operators, taking advantage of the economies of size, know what they're doing.    They'll need credit, too. Much of it is likely to come via the federal government for some time ahead, but given the condition of the federal budget a lot of bank lending will be needed. If the banks are to play their role they will need a wider franchise, through broader branching powers and, eventually, nationwide banking. </TEXT></DOC>