<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870318-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Britain's Alliance Is Offering a Not-So-New Deal---By Amity Shlaes</HL><DD> 03/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> TRURO, U.K. </DATELINE><TEXT>   David Steel and David Owen, two dark-haired men in two dark-wool suits, march together toward the dais at a rally here. The pair of leaders from Britain's two small center parties, the Liberal Party and the Social Democratic Party, sit on either side of the podium. Then they take turns pitching the middle-of-the-road policies of their parties' political partnership, the Alliance. &quot;The Labor and Tory parties are dancing to the tunes of their own narrow class interests,&quot; says David Owen and wins applause from a distinctly middle-class audience. &quot;A caring society, a successful society: The Alliance message is that you can have both.&quot;    Balancing is proving a successful tactic for Britain's Alliance. The two Davids, as they are known, brought the partnership victory in two of the nation's closely watched recent by-elections. In Truro, which this year is functioning as a kind of Iowa in the British political schedule, the Liberal Party last Thursday won 60.4%, the greatest majority earned by the slender party in the past 40 years. As the end of Margaret Thatcher's second term approaches -- and the likelihood that she'll call an election this year increases -- the Liberal-SDP partnership is exhibiting the clearest profile in Britain it's had since the parties joined hands six years ago.    The Alliance is getting attention because it stands a new chance of breaking a lock on British politics that Labor and Tory parties have held since World War II. A poll printed in the latest London Sunday Times showed the partnership was favored by 25% of the electorate, still behind Labor at 32% and the Conservatives at 41%, but up four percentage points from the month before. Labor's following has been weakened by troubles with trade unions, by its vociferous left wing and by the controversial non-nuclear defense policy of Labor's leader, Neil Kinnock. Mrs. Thatcher still has to explain why under mostly her government unemployment rose to more than three million, or 11.4% of the work force, from some one million in 1975. The Alliance still has to prove that its middle-ground policy -- it advocates a 1980s version of the New Deal to correct unemployment and a closer partnership with the Common Market countries -- can help Britons.    &quot;What we are talking about is the pace of political change,&quot; wrote conservative Peregrine Worsthorne, editor of the Sunday Telegraph, in a column titled &quot;A Chilling Prospect if the Labour Party Dies.&quot; &quot;{It} is beginning to look as if there is a danger of the old Labour order dying before the new Alliance is mature.&quot;    At the Truro rally voters got a demonstration of the parties' seesaw act. To show it wasn't too Thatcherite, the Alliance passed out literature that pointed to the national government subsidies brought home to the Cornish constituency by David Penhaligon, the local Liberal parliamentarian whose death in a car accident last December was the occasion for this by-election. To show it wasn't too radical, the Alliance dropped references to the nation's trade unions as a &quot;millstone.&quot; The parties waffled when it came to the controversial subject of Britain's nationalized health system. A dentist in the audience got sympathy, but no concrete suggestions, when he complained he often had to pull teeth -- rather than save them -- because the government wouldn't pay for necessary dental work.    Much of the evening, though, the Alliance found it more useful to attack. David Steel drew cheers with his critique of what he termed the &quot;yeah-boo,&quot; politics of Britain's Labor-Tory Parliament. Bigger applause came when he referred to the feuding Labor Party as the &quot;Beirut of British politics.&quot; Like leaders of any out-of-power political grouping, Mr. Steel and Dr. Owen worked hard to draw distinction between themselves and the sullied incumbents. The centerpiece in Truro for this strategy was Matthew Taylor, the Alliance's new M.P. A research assistant to the late M.P., Mr. Taylor hasn't had much time to box himself into any political definition: He's 24 years old.    Firmer evidence of what the Alliance could mean for Britain is available in the form of the parties' theoretical budget -- which was handed out last week for comparison -- with that delivered yesterday by the chancellor of the exchequer, Nigel Lawson. Like Labor, the Alliance rejected the Tories' deficit -- and tax-cutting agenda and concentrated instead on Britain's jobless. The partnership wants to cut Britain's massive unemployment by more than one million in three years -- one year longer than Labor says it would take it to trim unemployment by the same amount.    The Alliance would create jobs with a set of public-works-style measures, and a series of Regional Development Agencies -- read, subsidized businesses -- to create jobs in the public and private sectors. Rather than free businesses, the parties actually want to clamp an additional problem on: a tax to control the top limit of what an employer chooses to pay. Tax cuts were the subject of scorn in a speech by the Liberals' Mr. Steel, who asked &quot;What is the point of another tuppence off at the end of the tax if it means my son or nephew is on the end of the dole {line}?&quot;    When it adopts such postures, the Alliance shows itself true to some of British liberalism's traditions. The budget document, for example, reflects the same demand-side focus and sets of public-works-style measures that were part of the British budgets nearly 60 years ago, when the British treasury was controlled by another pair of Liberals: David Lloyd George and John Maynard Keynes. But the document also shows how far the Liberal Party has strayed from the laissez-faire definition of economic liberalism valued by many Americans and created in Scotland and England. The Alliance has opted for the 20th-century style of liberalism, no matter how far it seems to stray from even the Liberals' own party constitution, which &quot;in all spheres . . . sets freedom first.&quot;    In part, the Liberals' two faces reflect a conflict that's present in most of Western Europe's other, divided, liberal parties. West Germany's Free Democrats, for example, remain a thin -- if pivotal --party in large part because most Germans see their willingness to form coalitions with parties at both ends of the political spectrum as opportunistic, if not hypocritical. Parties such as the ecological Greens -- which have sprung up in some form from Britain to Austria -- are easier for many to understand and support. The Social Democrats -- the second partner in the Alliance -- have a clearer heritage in European politics.    By-elections -- the strongest evidence for the Alliance's new strength -- are notoriously unreliable indicators. Much of the Alliance's victory in Truro, for example, can be credited to the personal popularity of the M.P. who preceded the new victor. The 41% Mrs. Thatcher's party currently holds means she will likely enjoy a third term. Moreover, Britons across the political spectrum fear that a realignment of the British political constellation would deprive Britain's poor and its workers of any political voice.    Still, action in the constituencies indicates many voters have hopes for the group's yellow-and-black banner. Said one women who traveled to Truro to support the Alliance: &quot;I'm tired of my town. They always vote conservative. They'd elect a gorilla if it had a blue ribbon around its neck.&quot;    ---   Miss Shlaes is editorial-features editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>