<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0100 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Unquiet Americans in Saigon---By John P. Roche</HL><DD> 06/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   On Nov. 2, 1963, President Ngo Dinh Diem of the Republic of Vietnam and his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, were brutally murdered by a military junta working hand in glove with the American Embassy and the Central Intelligence Agency. Their deaths marked the final step in a campaign against the Ngos that was first launched in the American press, endorsed vigorously by W. Averell Harriman, undersecretary of state for political affairs, Roger Hilsman, assistant secretary, Far East, and Michael Forrestal of the National Security Council staff in Washington, and brought to its triumphant finale by Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge.    Although at any given time in Saigon about five anti-Diem coups were at the conversation stage, the successful one was set in motion on Aug. 23 -- the day of Mr. Lodge's arrival as a replacement for pro-Diem Frederick Nolting. Mr. Lodge clearly saw disposing of the Ngos as his primary mission: For some strange reason the Ngos seemed to feel that they, not the Americans, knew what was best for the Vietnamese people. They had the effrontery to be insubordinate puppets.    President John F. Kennedy from all accounts was appalled that the Ngo brothers had been killed, but from personal knowledge I doubt this sentiment was widely shared among the instigators. I once raised the matter with Mr. Harriman, who brusquely changed the subject. On Nov. 2, 1963, journalist Marguerite Higgins asked Mr. Hilsman, &quot;How does it feel to have blood on your hands?&quot; Mr. Hilsman's reply was egregious Kennedy macho: &quot;Oh, come on, Maggie, revolutions are rough. People get hurt.&quot;    Mr. Lodge was, in fact, positively euphoric. In a post-coup cable he noted what a model coup this had been and patronizingly suggested that his operations &quot;might be profitably studied by any organization in which leaks and a superfluity of paper are problems.&quot; What he didn't know was that when he returned to Washington at the end of the month, probably expecting a Medal of Freedom for his coup-mongering, he would report to a president only 48 hours in office, a man who as vice president had been the one outspoken opponent of the coup strategy (&quot;playing cowboys and Indians in Saigon&quot;), Lyndon B. Johnson.    This is a long windup to an analysis of Ellen J. Hammer's inch-by-inch description of the development of the coup against the Ngos, &quot;A Death in November: America in Vietnam, 1963&quot; (Dutton, 373 pages, $22.50). But since at President Johnson's request I did much of the same research 20 years ago, I have something of a vested interest in the topic. Moreover, while she has done a superb job on the Saigon situation in 1963, she has overlooked some interesting facets at the Washington end.    The most notable of these was the extent to which in 1963 the overthrow of Diem became a liberal hobby. Despite their later efforts to cover their tracks, the key American correspondents in Saigon (David Halberstam of The New York Times, Malcolm Browne of the AP, Peter Kalischer of CBS, and Neal Sheehan of UPI) and leading papers were denouncing Diem because they thought him incapable of fighting an effective war against the Communists. Their indictment of Nhu was even more horrendous: They thought -- in my judgment with some reason -- that this brilliant eccentric was preparing to cut a deal with Ho Chi Minh to neutralize all of Vietnam along the lines proposed by French President Charles de Gaulle. What they could not, and would not accept, was the thought that the Ngos understood the Vietnamese national interest better than they -- or, for that matter, the late, sainted Mr. Harriman.    It boggles the mind, but in the summer of 1963 the National Board of Americans for Democratic Action -- of which I was national chairman -- debated a resolution calling for a coup in Saigon to advance internal democracy and the conduct of the war. I thought it bizarre. If Diem and Nhu wanted to make a deal with Mr. Ho, I thought he would eat them for breakfast, but Diem was the president of the Republic of Vietnam not an American stooge: It was his country, not ours. The resolution was narrowly defeated.    Although she neglects this side of things, Ms. Hammer is masterful in her reading of Vietnamese events at ground zero, and in her justly savage evaluation of American misperceptions. The gist of her indictment is that we plunged into a society we did not understand and tried to make the people good Americans, without realizing the tenacity of their historical traditions, nor their basic indebtedness to the French &quot;mission civilisatrice.&quot;    Furthermore, Ms. Hammer realizes as have few others (only Denis Warner, Robert Shaplen, and Sol Sanders come to mind) the degree to which the Vietnamese elite played us like trout. A classic example of this was in 1960, when some generals launched a coup and American military advisers rode into Saigon with the tanks under the illusion it was a maneuver. Another was the way in which the Buddhist monk Qui Trang utilized the old tradition of self-immolation in honor of Buddha, which had no political connotations, to convince the Americans, via TV and press photos, that Nhu's fearful persecution led to such extreme protests. (Once in Saigon an immolation privately announced to the press as scheduled for 11 a.m. was postponed for several days because the photographers had been diverted by an aborted attempt to assassinate Robert McNamara.)    The real shock comes when you put down this absorbing book and suddenly realize what you have read. The leader of an allied state and his brother were murdered by American authority. Even the North Vietnamese couldn't believe we could be that stupid; a number of North Vietnamese military officials have noted that they missed a golden opportunity because they were unprepared to take the offensive. Unlike Messrs. Harriman, Hilsman, Lodge andamp; Co., Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap and the Hanoi Politburo realized that Diem was an indomitable, incorruptible, Vietnamese nationalist patriot. In comparison with him, the plotters were incompetent, unprincipled weasels. Why, then, was there so little public uproar in the U.S. at this odious enterprise that put us &quot;in loco parentis?&quot; Simply because within three weeks of Diem's demise President Kennedy fell before an assassin's gun, a tragedy with such a traumatic impact that all other issues vanished from our collective concern.    ---   Mr. Roche, former special consultant to President Lyndon Johnson, is Olin Professor of American Civilization andamp; Foreign Affairs at The Fletcher School of Law andamp; Diplomacy, Tufts University. </TEXT></DOC>