<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Mixed Reviews on Hearings Drama</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   In response to the Iran-Contra congressional hearings:    Most of the coverage addressed social, political and military dimensions of the weapons and support activities to the Contras and the roles of various American organizers. But the media and in particular the Journal -- as the foremost voice of the business community -- did not address a key and non-controvertible issue. Regardless of which way your sympathies lie for the philosophy, attitudes and expectations of the principals under investigation, the business community must have disrespect for the organizing group's incredible lack of business systems, procedures and intelligence in the way the funds contributed and expended were booked, accounted for and allocated.    Many of the contributors to the Contra weapons procurements are businessmen who had achieved extraordinary success in various business activities. While some of the principals who dispersed funds may not view structured business practices and procedures as a priority -- particularly if their lives have been spent in the military -- nonetheless, the volume, timing and diversity of funding involved surely suggest that normal business prudence and sound bookkeeping would be imposed.    As to the contributing side -- without whose intervention none of this seamy spectacle could have become visible -- how suddenly did these otherwise sophisticated businessmen come to ignore the very judgments and disciplines that initially made them wealthy.    I am surprised that the Journal has not offered up a scenario of how the accounting and allocation procedures were structured and who was most responsible for actually developing the budgets, overseeing cash flows, obtaining the best prices or discounts, balancing the books, and maintaining the internal checks and balances inherent in any business venture of this magnitude.    John D. Rich   Stamford, Conn.   ---   The Iran-Contra hearings really set the stage for the most disgraceful spectacle the American people have ever witnessed. I had to remind myself constantly that I was in America -- not Russia, China, Poland or behind the Berlin Wall, where political dissenters or prisoners are being constantly interrogated and harassed to admit to crimes they did not commit. John Nields could have been Stalin's chief prosecutor.    Covert action is not a sin. It's a way of life for millions of freedom fighters around the world. Shame on Congress for trying to criminalize and degrade a fine patriotic American. Col. North is my personal American hero, and I'm sure I speak for millions of Americans.    R.P. &quot;Pete&quot; Brzica   Sioux Falls, S.D.   ---   I am upset and frustrated by what I heard while listening to the Iran-Contra hearings. It is obvious that the entire truth of what took place has not yet been disclosed. In my view, a crime was committed, and the congressional hearings, rather than revealing the criminal nature of the operation, have become a vehicle for political posturing and, consequently, a travesty of the American system of inquiry.    Col. North has become a media superstar, thereby gaining exemption from clear-sighted scrutiny. Oliver North is a master of distortion. He claims not to have used government funds to solicit aid for the Contras, but each time he made use of the National Security Council offices, equipment and staff for this end, he was using government funds. He was clearly not working on this project at home in his spare time. This is an obvious violation of the Boland amendment. He was even, indirectly, making a fund-raising pitch for the Contras during his testimony, which I found completely inappropriate.    No one has the right to set up a separate government structure. If we make heroes of Messrs. North and Poindexter, and fail to prosecute them, we will be setting a dangerous precedent. Their actions reveal a deep disregard for the law, Congress, the American people and democracy itself. Under the guise of championing democracy in Central America, they have undermined the foundations of democracy in the U.S. The outcome of their &quot;freedom fighting&quot; has been the waste of millions of dollars, as well as a further loss of respect for the U.S. abroad.    There is currently a great underlying feeling of hopelessness and despair in this country, and the continuing misdeeds of the current administration only serve to reinforce that feeling. For the sake of our nation and our future, we should not and cannot allow those who break the law to escape prosecution.    Sherry Enenstein   San Francisco   ---   Since the mid-1960s, the general electorate has become increasingly distrustful of presidential license. We have been repeatedly misinformed and disappointed by the executive branch's unspoken agenda. Unfortunately, the legislative branch has embarked upon an unparalleled assault on the true responsibilities and prerogatives of the president and his advisers, leaving this country in a state where consensus on foreign policy will be impossible.    The executive branch has the right to make foreign policy. The president wrongfully signed the Boland amendment, but he and his advisers were entirely within their constitutional duties to execute their arrangements with the Iranian government and Nicaraguan resistance. To deny them this freedom of action will be tantamount to changing our government from the necessarily strong executive type to a city-manager type of arrangement that will make the executive branch little more than an administrative function.    We have precious little time to indulge in this whimsical soap opera of hearings that only shed light on inconsistencies of testimony. The business of this nation requires that Boland be repealed, that Congress stop interfering with the conduct of foreign policy, and that adequate means of communication between the two branches be restored.    Thomas N. Decker, M.D.   Dover, N.H.   ---   I fail to understand how those congressmen can judge anyone else when they are engaging in a completely illegal scheme. I refer to your July 3 story &quot;House Democrats Belatedly Pay Sandamp;L That Failed for Use of Planes, Yacht.&quot; Granted, the congressmen mentioned (i.e., House Speaker Jim Wright; Rep. Tony Coelho, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee; and other lawmakers) are not on the committee investigating the Iran-Contra affair. However, why don't we hear more about these lawbreakers? As Col. North's attorney repeatedly asked, let's be fair. Or is that something those men in Washington don't understand?    Helen Healy   Belvedere, Calif.   ---   Let us assume that the plans to overthrow the Sandinista government were successful but that Congress will still be smarting because it was not informed and was misinformed and so continues its probe. The following excerpt from Shakespeare's King Richard II (Act V, Scene VI) would provide a remarkable relevant commentary if we were to make the following substitutions: Adm. Poindexter for Exton; President Reagan for Bolingbroke (afterward King Henry IV), and Daniel Ortega for Richard of Bordeaux (Richard II).    EXTON: Great king, within this coffin I present    Thy buried fear; herein all breathless lies   The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,    Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.   BOLINGBROKE: Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought    A deed of slander with thy fatal hand   Upon my head and all this famous land.    EXTON: From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.    BOLINGBROKE: They love not poison that do poison need,    Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,   I hate the murderer, love him murdered.    The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,    But neither my good word nor princely favour. . . .   Milton Birnbaum   Dean, School of Arts andamp; Sciences    American International College   Springfi</TEXT></DOC>