<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880705-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Better Child Care, Cheaper </HL><AUTHOR> Lawrence B. Lindsey </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Child care has joined motherhood and apple pie in the list of causes no sensible politician can be against. There are also sound economic reasons why the federal government should assist in meeting part of the nation's child-care bill. This union of good politics with sound economics provides an unusual opportunity for the nation's politicians to do the right thing. It is also instructive as a case study in how politicians actually behave.    At present, the leading child-care proposal is the Act for Better Child Care (ABC). The bill's co-sponsors include more than a third of the members of both the House and the Senate. It is supported by Democratic presidential nominee-apparent Michael Dukakis, labor unions, women's groups and child-care professionals.    This legislation also happens to be the most expensive of all of the child-care bills on offer -- $2.5 billion. Of this, only 75% will actually find its way to subsidizing daycare expenses for the nation's families. A small share of the money will be spent establishing a National Advisory Committee within the Department of Health and Human Services. The purpose of this new agency will be the development of national standards for day care.    The states will receive the bulk of the funds, but are restricted in how much can be spent on covering child-care expenses. Training programs, clearing-houses and statewide day-care referral systems take a mandatory 15% of the program's cost. An additional 10% goes to administrative costs, which include the requirement for each state to draft a child-care plan, develop advisory committees, and hold statewide hearings on an annual basis.    Even the remaining $1.8 billion need not find its way directly into the pockets of parents whose children are in day care; the newly established state bureaucracies will determine how to subsidize day care within the context of some fairly restrictive federal rules. For example, none of the funds may be spent to support day-care facilities run by churches. Informal child-care arrangements, including paid supervision by neighbors or relatives, would not qualify for support even though this is how the vast majority of the nation's children are cared for.    Present government involvement with day care takes two direct forms: government program expenditures and a child-care tax credit.    Last year the direct government expenditures funneled through a panoply of programs such as Title XX, Head Start, the Agriculture Department's child nutrition program, and the Aid to Families With Dependent Children Income Disregard totaled about $7 billion.    The Dependent Care Tax Credit, more commonly known as the child-care tax credit, is applied against the family's income-tax liability and covers costs incurred by families of as much as $2,400 per child. The amount of the credit depends on income, with a sliding scale starting at 30% of covered child-care expenses for families making $10,000 or less and declining to 20% of these expenses for families making $29,000 or more.    In 1985, the last year for which detailed data are available, 8.5 million families applied for the credit and received a total of $3.2 billion in child-care credits. This represented a 574% increase in the value of the credit since its inception in 1976.    The child-care credit offers three principal advantages as a means of federal support for child-care costs. First, it ensures that parents, not bureaucrats, have the most say in determining what day-care services their children use. Second, the program wastes virtually no money in administrative costs. Third, the credit can be targeted to those who need it most.    On this last point, Congress has failed to make maximum use of its targeting powers. In 1988, I estimate that roughly 43% of the credit will go to families making more than $50,000, while only 23% will go to families making less than $20,000, even though the latter group is more numerous. Single-parent households with incomes under $20,000, where the adult is the only means of support, will receive an average credit of $361, while couples earning $100,000 to $200,000 will receive an average credit of $405. Certainly Congress can do better in this regard, particularly if it is willing to spend as much as $2.5 billion to achieve its ends.    Several changes could be made to improve the distributional characteristics of the credit. First, Congress could make it refundable. Under current law the credit is worthless unless the taxpayer has some income-tax liability. Thus, most low-income families receive no child-care support. Making the credit refundable under current law would cost $360 million in 1988. Of this sum, 77% would go to single-parent households and 91% would benefit households with incomes below $20,000.    Second, Congress could dramatically increase the amount of the credit, particularly for low- and moderate-income families. For example, the child-care credit could start at 50%, instead of 30%, for families making $10,000 or less, and decline to 20% for families making $40,000 or more. This change would cost $810 million in 1988, of which 84% would go to families earning under $30,000.    Third, Congress could target single-parent families. These are people who must work. From the government's point of view, paying for the family's child-care expenses is often the only alternative to welfare. In this regard, an additional 15% credit for all single-parent families could be added to the usual credit at a total cost of $510 million.    Implementing all three proposals together would magnify the costs due to some families receiving multiple benefits. But the total cost would be $2.4 billion, less than the cost of the Act for Better Child Care. This money would also be targeted to those who truly need it. Families earning less than $30,000 would receive 88% of the funds and single-parent families would receive 76%. There is simply no way that the ABC bill, with its monstrous administrative overhead and complex regulations, can match these support levels or this degree of distributional equity.    A strong case can also be made that a generous child-care credit targeted at single-parent families and low- and moderate-income couples might be largely self-financing. This analysis is based on the economics of the labor market. A parent's decision to enter the workforce is based on the net gain he or she expects to receive: the wages earned less benefits lost, taxes paid and expenses incurred. Just as the welfare system already imposes a tremendous effective tax, in the form of lost benefits, for people seeking to enter the labor force, the cost of child care represents another effective tax on labor-force participation. Currently, the highest effective tax rates in America are on parents of modest means with small children. A well-targeted credit would reduce this effective tax rate on labor supply and could pay for itself in terms of higher tax receipts and reduced welfare benefits.    The budgetary effectiveness of the child-care credit could be greatly enhanced by a fourth change in its provisions. Currently, parents are eligible for a credit on expenses up to the full amount of earnings of the lower-earning spouse. Under these rules, a part-time worker can qualify for a subsidy on full-time day care as long as he or she has a high-enough wage. Regardless of the merits of day care, there is no justification for the government's subsidizing child care during periods when the parent is not at work.    This problem can be substantially fixed by limiting the amount of child-care expenses eligible for the credit to one third of the wages of the lower-earning spouse instead of total wages. If this is combined with the three changes mentioned above, the total cost of the program falls to $2 billion. Furthermore, since this loophole currently is used primarily by upper-middle-class couples, the credit becomes distributionally more equitable. With this change, 93% of the benefits of the program will go to families earning less than $30,000 and 89% will go to single-parent families.    Given how much more can be done in supporting child care for less than the cost of the pending legislation, why does so much support exist for the ABC bill? The answer goes back to the fact that it is the most expensive bill on offer. Supporters of the low-cost and more effective alternative easily can be labeled as &quot;cheap&quot; when it comes to child care or &quot;anti-child care&quot; or, if the campaign is hot, &quot;anti-child.&quot; Economists call the tendency to buy a more expensive product of quality equal to its alternatives the Designer Label Effect. The snob value associated with paying the higher price is an attraction of the product. It is much easier for the Designer Label Effect to dominate the purchasing decision when the money being spent is not one's own, but the taxpayer's.    Direct support for child care via the credit lets Congress do far more to solve our nation's child-care problem than the Designer Label alternative it is now considering. The details of the credit can be tailored to meet congressional tastes. Any number of low-cost options can be stitched together as long as parents, and not bureaucrats, control the money being spent. The lesson to be learned from the current child-care debate is that in spite of all the noise about deficits and the &quot;need&quot; for tax increases, Congress still views the value of a program by how much it costs, and not by the good it does.    ---   Mr. Lindsey is associate professor of economics at Harvard and a fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research. Claudia Cummins, whose senior thesis this year traced the history of child-care legislation, assisted in this article. </TEXT></DOC>