<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880219-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan's Final Budget: Less for Defense --- Pentagon Outline Cuts Forces, Kills Arms Projects, Mothballs Hardware --- Changes Would Yield $299.5 Billion Outlay, Fourth Drop in a Row </HL><AUTHOR> Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GQ LK ML WX GD TGT MD GE FMC BA NOC GTE TCSFY LIT GM RTN </CO><IN> ARO AIR NUK TEL TRA </IN><G> EXE CNG DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Facing deficit pressures, the Reagan administration proposed shrinking U.S. military forces, ending more than a dozen weapons projects, and retiring older ships and aircraft.    The changes would yield the $299.5 billion level of defense spending authority the president and Congress agreed to last fall for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1. This compares with $291.4 billion for the current fiscal year, but is $33 billion less than the administration planned a year ago to seek for the coming fiscal year.    Actual outlays for defense, as opposed to spending authority, would total $294 billion. This includes spending for nuclear weapons managed by the Energy Department.    The Pentagon's scaled-down fiscal 1989 budget plan, which would represent the fourth year of decline in inflation-adjusted military spending, would defer many of President Reagan's defense buildup objectives. The goal of having a 600-ship Navy before the president leaves office won't be realized. Similarly, the Air Force has given up its goal of building 40 tactical fighter wings, which consist of 72 planes each, and instead is cutting back to 35 wings from the current 38.    And the armed services are reducing the number of uniformed personnel -- currently 2,174,000 -- by 36,000. Previously, the department had planned to increase the number of uniformed personnel in the coming fiscal year.    The Pentagon plan also would kill a number of weapon systems altogether -- a radical departure from previous budget-cutting exercises. Casualties of the budget ax include Grumman Corp.'s latest version of the A-6 attack plane, Lockheed Corp.'s Aquila reconnaissance aircraft, Martin Marietta Corp.'s ground-based, laser-guided Copperhead missile, and Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s naval blimp. The Air Force has given up on funding for an anti-satellite weapon, or ASAT.    However, the Pentagon has managed to protect some of the programs it considers the most vital -- including its efforts to strengthen U.S. submarine warfare capabilities, military space activities, and key nuclear weapons projects. In addition, the Pentagon seeks a 4.3% increase in military pay.    Though the weapons cuts and force reductions are radical by past Pentagon standards, they only would go part of the way toward bringing the defense program into line with budget realities. The Defense Department will have to cut an additional $174.4 billion out of its planned military budgets for fiscal years 1990 through 1993 to meet Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci's goal of holding the growth in the defense budget to 2% annually after inflation. And many lawmakers consider even that unrealistically high.    &quot;Even under the most optimistic scenario, it's difficult to see how defense spending will increase more than enough to cover inflation over the next several years,&quot; said Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee.    Mr. Carlucci said the U.S. isn't cutting back any of its commitments around the world. &quot;I don't know where you'd change the strategy,&quot; he said. &quot;I don't know what part of the world you'd give up.&quot;    Mr. Carlucci said his budget priorities will remain &quot;people, readiness, sustainability and efficient production rates.&quot; These will be &quot;paid for&quot; by continuing reductions in the overall size of the military forces, he said.    To keep high-priority weapons in production, the Pentagon is proposing that aging hardware be mothballed. The Navy would retire 16 of its 1960s-vintage frigates and one Poseidon-class nuclear submarine. The Army plans to retire 170 OH-58 scout helicopters and 450 utility helicopters, both dating back to the Vietnam War era. This is part of an Army plan to drop 2,000 aging helicopters over the next five years.    Similarly, the Air Force proposes phasing out a costly fleet of SR-71 reconnaissance planes. Satellites can perform the same job more cheaply. The Air Force also plans to deactivate its 474th tactical fighter wing at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada and the 401st wing in Spain, which the Spanish government has ordered the U.S. to remove. If the U.S. succeeds in finding another home in Europe for the 401st wing, it will choose some other tactical fighter wing to deactivate, Pentagon officials said.    Secretary Carlucci said he remains opposed to continuing development of the Midgetman single-warhead nuclear missile, which would cost an estimated $50 billion to deploy. But in a concession to congressional supporters of the costly project, the Pentagon is seeking $200 million to keep the program alive until the next administration decides whether it wants to proceed with it.    The Pentagon didn't propose any reductions in the area most often identified with military waste -- the fact that there are hundreds of military bases around the U.S. &quot;A number of legislative obstacles exist,&quot; Mr. Carlucci said, referring to congressional strictures that complicate the process of closing bases.    The Pentagon proposed increasing operations and maintenance accounts by 2.4% in the coming fiscal year. These pay for training, ship steaming hours, and the costs of keeping weapons in good repair. Mr. Carlucci emphasized that it is preferable to keep a smaller force that is adequately paid and ready to fight than to have a larger force that isn't. &quot;It would be a disaster if we repeat the experience of the 1970s -- where you keep the framework but hollow it out,&quot; he said.    Following are highlights from the Defense Department's proposed arms budget:   TRIDENT SUBMARINES: The Navy seeks $1.4 billion for another of the nuclear-powered, missile-bearing submarines, which are built by the Electric Boat division of General Dynamics Corp. The plan calls for $2.5 billion for 66 Trident II multiwarhead nuclear missiles, which are made by Lockheed.    ATTACK SUBMARINES: The Navy seeks $1.7 billion for the first of the new Seawolf attack submarines. The Newport News Shipbuilding unit of Tenneco Inc. and General Dynamics will compete for the job. The Navy also seeks $1.6 billion for two more Los Angeles class 688 attack submarines, which the same two contractors compete annually to build. In a further effort to improve submarine warfare capabilities, the Pentagon seeks $69.1 million to begin developing a new sub-hunting airplane to replace the Lockheed P-3.    SPACE BOOSTERS: The Air Force seeks $890 million for Titan space-launch vehicles, which are made by Martin Marietta. The Pentagon's space program also includes $275.3 million for eight medium-launch vehicles built by McDonnell Douglas Corp.    SATELLITES: The Pentagon seeks $631 million for various military satellites, including $212.7 million for General Electric's RCA Corp. meteorological satellite program, and $196.6 million for a satellite to provide global communications for the Navy. Contracts for this project would be awarded competitively.    STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE: The anti-missile program is by far the largest research and development project in the Pentagon's proposed budget, but the $4.6 billion request is down from an earlier plan to seek $6.2 billion.    TANKS AND FIGHTING VEHICLES: The Army seeks $1.5 billion for 545 M-1 tanks, made by General Dynamics, or 100 fewer than Congress authorized in the current fiscal year. The Army seeks $751.8 million for 581 Bradley fighting vehicles, made by FMC Corp., about the same level as in fiscal 1988. In a related area, the Army is seeking $134.6 million to develop an advanced anti-tank weapon capable of penetrating increasingly effective Soviet armor.    FIGHTER JETS: The Air Force seeks $702.3 million for its Advanced Tactical Fighter jet, up from $498.1 million in fiscal 1988. Two contractor teams -- one consisting of Boeing Co., General Dynamics and Lockheed, and the other consisting of Northrop Corp. and McDonnell Douglas -- are building competing prototypes of the aircraft. Meanwhile, the Pentagon seeks $3.7 billion for 180 General Dynamics F-16 jets and $1.6 billion for 36 McDonnell Douglas F-15s.    C-17 CARGO PLANE: The Pentagon seeks $2.1 billion for the McDonnell Douglas cargo plane, up from $1.8 billion in the current fiscal year. The new aircraft is replacing the Lockheed C-5, for which the Pentagon isn't seeking any funds.    NAVY FIGHTERS: The Navy seeks $1.1 billion for 12 Grumman F-14 jets and $2.4 billion for 72 F/A-18s, which are made by Northrop and McDonnell Douglas. But because the Navy's overall aircraft procurement is being slowed, the Pentagon proposes shutting down the 14th air wing at the Miramar Naval Air Station in California.    LHX HELICOPTER: The Army dropped its initial plan to develop two versions of a new high-technology helicopter. It still plans to develop a new scout and attack helicopter, however, and is seeking $180.9 million for the program. This is well below the $616 million the Army intended to seek a year ago.    MOBILE SUBSCRIBER EQUIPMENT: The Army seeks $995.7 million to continue building a new radio communications system for its forces in Europe, down slightly from the current year's appropriation. The sophisticated battlefield communications system is being built by GTE Corp. and Paris-based Thomson CSF, which is 51%-owned by Thomson S.A.    FIGHTING SHIPS: The Navy seeks $2.3 billion for three Arleigh Burke guided-missile destroyers, which are made by the Bath Iron Works Corp. unit of Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen Ltd. and the Ingalls Shipbuilding division of Litton Industries Inc. The Navy, which received funds for two aircraft carriers and five Aegis cruisers in fiscal 1988, isn't seeking to procure new ships of either type in fiscal 1989.    INTERCONTINENTAL MISSILES: The Pentagon seeks $879.9 million for 12 MX missiles, including funds to develop a plan for basing the 10-warhead weapons on railroad cars. The Pentagon backed off plans to kill the single-warhead Midgetman missile, and, in a compromise with congressional supporters of that program, is seeking $200 million to keep it alive until the next administration takes office.    ADVANCED MEDIUM-RANGE AIR-TO-AIR MISSILE: The Pentagon seeks $904.4 million for 1,520 Amraam missiles, which both the Navy and the Air Force plan to use for over-the-horizon attacks on enemy aircraft. The missiles are made by the Hughes Aircraft unit of General Motors Corp. and by Raytheon Co.    The defense budget includes as much as $30 billion for secret weapons programs that aren't listed in the official budget documents. These include such projects as Northrop's radar-eluding Stealth bomber, which will cost $277 million a plane; and the advanced long-range cruise missile.    Another secret weapons project, &quot;Tacit Rainbow,&quot; would be moved into full production in fiscal 1989 under the administration's budget. The project's name refers to low-flying cruise missiles made largely of composite materials that evade radar and other forms of detection. </TEXT></DOC>