<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870827-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Daewoo Shipbuilding Raises Pay Offer,Leading to Tentative Pact With Union---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST LABOR </IN><DATELINE> OKPO, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Leaders of striking workers at Daewoo Shipbuilding andamp; Heavy Machinery Co. tentatively agreed to end a bitter and violent 19-day work stoppage after the company agreed to a 21.4% increase in minimum pay and allowances.    The acrimonious strike, one of about 620 labor disputes that are still going on around the nation, has been the focus of increasing tension. The strike became politicized after a worker was killed Saturday during a clash with riot police and after political activists flocked here from Seoul, seeking to use the worker's death as a rallying point to challenge the government.    The government has renewed warnings about a crackdown on student dissidents' involvement in labor disputes, but it has shied away from getting directly involved in labor negotiations. With university students returning to school next week, it is unclear what effect the proposed settlement will have on continuing unrest.    Whether the proposed Daewoo settlement -- in which the the company raised a previous pay offer -- is approved by workers will be a test of whether the union leadership can control the membership. Political dissidents have spent the past several days urging workers to take a hard stance toward the company to draw attention to workers' problems nationwide and help build opposition to President Chun Doo Hwan's rule. But Yang Tong Gyu, the Daewoo union leader, dismissed the outsiders' role, saying they have served only as advisers.    The union said that if a final agreement is reached, the funeral for the worker who died, 21-year-old Lee Sok Gyu, will be held, most likely tomorrow. Work at the plant would resume Monday.    The Daewoo agreement was initialed shortly after 1 a.m. this morning, local time, following a day of shuttle diplomacy by mediators and a final 5 1/2-hour meeting between Kim Woo Joong, chairman of the Daewoo group, and Mr. Yang.    It isn't clear whether the rank and file will accept the agreement, which would boost workers' pay and allowances by 45,000 won ($51) a month. But Mr. Yang said after the agreement was reached that &quot;I think the workers will understand the difficult situation and will accept these results.&quot;    Worker reaction to the pact was mixed. About half of the 500 workers still encamped at the Daewoo hospital that strikers seized earlier this week booed the agreement early this morning. The others were unresponsive. The lateness of the hour and the official mourning period for their colleague may have played a role in that reaction.    Union members last Friday rejected a previous compromise pact made by the leaders of the newly formed independent union. The shipyard workers' minimum monthly pay, including allowances, is currently 210,000 won, according to the company.    Some of the 1,000 riot police who were bivouacked around the Okpo Tourist Hotel to protect Daewoo executives and property were withdrawn yesterday. Police said yesterday that about 1,500 riot police were sent to the island to reinforce the 3,000 already here.    Daewoo Shipbuilding wanted to settle the strike. The company says it has been incurring a daily loss of about 400 million won ($500,000) because of the strike. The company also wanted to settle the strike before the worker's funeral, because it has developed into a national day of mourning, with funeral services and protests planned in major cities throughout South Korea. Daewoo officials said they wanted to settle so that rhetoric of the funeral services would only be aimed at the government and not the company.    The National Coalition for a Democratic Constitution, an umbrella dissident group that organized nationwide anti-government street demonstrations in June, already has called for a general strike on the day of the funeral. The government yesterday apologized for the worker's death but warned political dissidents against getting involved in the labor crisis, which already has cost the country almost $1 billion.    The union had been refusing to negotiate with the company since the rank and file rejected the earlier compromise. Shuttle diplomacy yesterday by an opposition party National Assembly member and a Catholic priest breeched the impasse. After the union agreed to be flexible on the financial terms, Mr. Kim of Daewoo agreed to offer workers a wage increase of 40,000 won a month, up considerably from the previous offer of a little more than 10,000 won and other remuneration.    The face-to-face session in the banquet hall of the Okpo Tourist Hotel was drawn out because for three hours Mr. Kim refused to further increase the pay raise. Union leaders also wanted firm promises that workers wouldn't be prosecuted for striking. The company finally made vague promises that it wouldn't press for prosecution. As the negotiations wore on in the hot, mosquito-filled room, Mr. Kim was seen removing his dark blue suit jacket. The union negotiators kept their dark blue Daewoo uniform jackets on.    Yun Yong Sok, Daewoo Shipbuilding's president, said, &quot;We made excessive concessions.&quot; He said the union refused to be persuaded by the troubled financial situation of the company, so the company gave in.    The strike began Aug. 8, when strikers seized the sprawling complex where 15,000 work, including 11,000 blue-collar laborers. The union issued a 14-point list of demands, including a 70,000-won increase in monthly pay and allowances. </TEXT></DOC>