<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880919-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Outlawed Weapons -- A Scourge Returns --- Fighting Dirty: Quest for Way to Block Biological Weapons Is Itself Called a Threat --- Critics Fear an Undermining Of the Idea That Any Use Of 'Germs' Is Unthinkable --- A New Peril in Biotechnology </HL><AUTHOR> Lee Lescaze (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST FREST JAPAN </CO><IN> CHM ARO PHA </IN><G> DEF CNG </G><TEXT>      {Last of a Series}   Pentagon researchers once were asked to conjure up a battle situation in which biological weapons -- bacteria and viruses -- might be used. They imagined a large U.S. force being pushed down a peninsula toward the sea, with the nearest rescue ships three sailing days away. Dropping a nonlethal infectious agent from planes, though it would violently sicken U.S. forces as well as the enemy, could buy time until the ships arrived.    Yet the Pentagon group that devised this scenario 25 years ago concluded that even in such an extreme case, and even though the agent would cause only a temporary illness, biological warfare should be avoided: Better to lose a couple of divisions than to introduce this scourge to the modern battlefield.    Such thinking led the U.S. to renounce biological weapons unilaterally 19 years ago, and in 1972 prompted the U.S. and more than 100 other nations to sign a convention outlawing them. Now, however, some scientists and military officials fear that the extensive use of poison gas in the Iran-Iraq conflict has lowered the threshold of opposition to biological weapons as well. At the same time, genetic engineering has the potential to make living arsenals more feasible.    No nation admits to stockpiling biological weapons. But the Pentagon's top specialist on the topic, Thomas Welch, deputy assistant to the secretary of defense, says 10 nations are developing them. Other U.S. officials make clear that some are in the Middle East, and an Israeli source contends Iraq is far along in development.    President Reagan says the Soviet Union, though a signatory to the 1972 ban, is working on such weapons. Sen. Sam Nunn cites a warning in print from a Soviet official that Moscow might retaliate against an American Star Wars defense system not with new missiles, but with germs.    A Japanese politician talks privately about a future time when his nation will be even richer than it is today yet still militarily weak, and predicts Japan will want powerful deterrent weapons. Because of anti-nuclear sentiment at home, the politician thinks deadly biological agents might become an alternative.    Then there are the terrorists, less concerned than most people with consequences. Technological barriers aren't necessarily too high for them. As a past head of the American Public Health Association, Anthony Robbins, told Congress recently: &quot;Many new organisms could be built in a kitchen and produced in great quantities in a brewery.&quot;    Finally, in the U.S., the Pentagon is increasing its research on defenses against biological weapons, much of it in a big complex at Fort Detrick, Md. The program is a source of controversy. A growing number of scientists are concerned that though its intent is defensive, the U.S. program is dangerous, because it undermines the notion that any resort to biological weapons is unthinkable.    Such arsenals are truly the stuff of nightmares. Biological weapons are organisms intended to cause disease or death in people, animals or plants. Anthrax, Q fever, plague, Venezuelan equine encephalitis and tularemia are some of the chilling names that stand out in the research. Unlike other terrible instruments of war, biological weapons can spread unpredictably because they are alive.    Yet warriors haven't always shunned such methods. In colonial days, the British gave American Indians gifts of smallpox-carrying blankets. During World War I, Germany infected Romanian cavalry horses with the disease glanders. During World War II, Winston Churchill briefly considered attacking German livestock with anthrax.    In 1347, Mongols besieging the Black Sea port of Caffa began to sicken and die from the plague. Rather than abandon their attack, they used their catapults to hurl their dead into the city, spreading the disease to the Genoan defenders, who in turn fled to Italy -- carrying the Black Death with them.    No Mongol ever imagined his catapult would send the plague to Europe. Warns Jonathan King, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology molecular biologist: &quot;A biological arms race has in it the germ of creating a new scourge like another AIDS.&quot;    The uncontrollable nature of biological weapons was one reason nations could ban them. Harvard biochemist Matthew Meselson recalls that when he was working for the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1963, and the U.S. was making agents like anthrax and tularemia by the ton, no one could answer the question &quot;What's this stuff for?&quot; Inability to give a plausible answer, says Thomas Dashiell, the Pentagon's director of environmental and life sciences, &quot;was one of the reasons at that time that we were willing to sign a treaty.&quot;    President Nixon, in renouncing biological weapons in 1969, said the U.S. didn't need them no matter what the Soviets and others might be doing. The multinational convention signed three years later barred not only use but also the development, production and stockpiling of such agents.    But now genetic engineering, which offers so many possible benefits to mankind, has also put more promise into war-by-biology. What had once been expensive and slow to produce could be made cheaply and fast, and biotechnology has the potential to make infectious agents into more precise and targetable weapons.    The result is that the world is at a crossroads, contends Barbara Hatch Rosenberg, a molecular biologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. She says that if the existing convention, which has no enforcement provisions, isn't strengthened soon, scientific advances will make the weaponry more attractive, a lab accident more likely, and enforcement of the ban more difficult. Representatives of the signatories meet and review the ban every five years, but they have put off efforts to strengthen it while they await the outcome of Geneva talks to widen the chemical-weapons prohibition.    Mr. Welch at the Pentagon agrees with these scientists on the goal of tightening the 1972 convention, but on little else. A bitter battle is under way, led on one side by members of Congress and Pentagon planners and, on the other, by scientists like Ms. Rosenberg and MIT's Mr. King.    Congress and the Pentagon are convinced the threat of biological weapons in enemy hands demands that the U.S. do substantial research on defenses, seeking effective gas masks, protective clothing and vaccines. These would be only for military people, however; no one is considering a program large enough to address the civilian population. Yearly funding for the research has climbed to $60 million in 1988 from $11.2 million in 1970, and hasn't aroused opposition on Capitol Hill.    But the scientists opposing the work challenge the Pentagon's assertions that the Soviets or anyone else is developing biological weaponry. In any case, the Pentagon program is &quot;an absurdity,&quot; Mr. King of M.I.T. asserts, because there is no feasible defense against a biological attack. He says vaccination can't work because the variety of attack agents is too large. The result, he believes, is that the U.S. research program can only alarm other nations and undermine the international ban.    Mr. King says offensive and defensive research are indistinguishable. To make a vaccine, you first must make the pathogen the vaccine will defend against. Further blurring offense and defense, he adds, is the fact that the first step in launching a biological attack would be to inoculate one's own troops against the agent; thus the presence of a vaccine in a war zone would amount to an offensive threat.    The battle lines are drawn on every aspect of the U.S. program, much of which is carried out at the Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick. The program's commander, Col. David Huxsoll, says defensive research can enhance a ban by discouraging other nations from thinking they could score certain success with an attack. To Ms. Rosenberg, &quot;The danger is that if the treaty is perceived as not working, a lot of little countries will want to get into the act.&quot;    Could research microorganisms escape from the Army lab? &quot;People have seen too many movies,&quot; says Col. Huxsoll, who has a Ph.D. in microbiology and also is a veterinarian. At the facility he commands, more than 100 ventilation systems provide backups and further backups. There are ventilated suits, air locks, glass cases and showers. But opponents like Ms. Rosenberg fear that proliferation will lead to work in a lot of laboratories around the world where safety standards aren't so high.    Opposition to the biological defense program flared among academic scientists after the Pentagon asked in 1984 for money to build a new aerosol testing chamber at the Dugway Proving Ground in Utah. &quot;One problem has been that the U.S. biomedical community doesn't know this is going on,&quot; says Mr. King of M.I.T. &quot;Most say, 'What are you talking about? We renounced biological warfare.'&quot; In the most recent sign of growing awareness of U.S. research, more than 500 biomedical scientists have signed a pledge not to do work that could help develop biological weapons. Another initiative, backed by a bill in Congress, would transfer the lab research part of the biological defense program from the military to the National Institutes of Health.    Col. Huxsoll ticks off contributions he says the Pentagon program has made to health: vaccines against chikungunya, Venezuelan equine encephalitis, eastern equine encephalitis and Q fever, and a drug to treat hemorrhagic fever. He says that in 1977 and '78 there was an outbreak of Rift Valley Fever in Egypt, and only the Pentagon had a vaccine, which it made available to high-risk people there. Making many such vaccines isn't commercially rewarding and won't happen if the Pentagon doesn't do it, he says.    Meantime, what would happen, he asks, if a helicopter released a cloud of deadly infectious agents a mile windward of a ship in the Persian Gulf? Well, for one thing, he says, funding of biological defense would increase; and for another, a lot of politicians would be yelling at the Pentagon, &quot;Why in hell don't you have something to protect these folks?&quot;    Before the U.S. forswore biological weapons in 1969, the lab Col. Huxsoll now commands worked on producing them, not just defending against them. Could some such offensive work begin again, in a hidden corner of the program? Mr. Meselson of Harvard says the best safeguard is to open up the labs, and something along those lines has been done. Fort Detrick had postdoctoral fellows from nine nations, including China, Japan and Senegal, in 1987, and around the end of this year the first Soviet scientists are expected in.    Mr. Meselson, for one, isn't worried about the program on this score. &quot;If there was something really nasty happening, I'd know about it,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>