<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861229-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Freer Finance:U.S. Regulators MoveTo Let Banks EnterSeveral New Businesses---The Agencies Take SeriouslyBig Banks' Threat to DropCharters to Escape Curbs---The Urge to Underwrite---By Monica LangleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/29/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A few months ago over lunch, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker and Treasury Undersecretary George Gould discussed threats by several major U.S. banks to avoid federal regulation by dropping their bank charters.    &quot;We asked ourselves, 'What if the 10 biggest banks left the system -- what would happen?'&quot; says Mr. Gould. &quot;We had a spirited conversation, and it became clear that we didn't want to preserve regulations while losing the regulated.&quot;    The big U.S. banks, facing overseas competition and the loss of their best corporate borrowers to alternative financing methods, want badly to expand into long-prohibited fields such as securities underwriting, real estate and insurance. The prospect that such giants as Chase Manhattan, Citicorp or Bankers Trust might give up their banking charters in order to branch out has gotten regulators' attention. &quot;These threats have the potential to re-create the financial system of the 1920s, and the regulators would lose control,&quot; says Karen Shaw, a Washington financial consultant. &quot;The regulators are scared to death.&quot;    Thus, though banks' rivals claim the threats are a bluff, the regulators are moving rapidly to open the way for banks to enter a host of new businesses. Most notable are recent decisions by the Federal Reserve to permit Bankers Trust New York Corp.'s banking and commercial-lending units to find buyers for corporations' short-term notes. The Fed also has decided to hold a rare public hearing on some banks' bid for authority to underwrite (rather than merely place) such commercial paper, as well as to underwrite mortgage-backed securities, municipal revenue bonds and consumer-related receivables.    Another branch of the bank regulatory apparatus, the comptroller of the currency, probably will issue a new legal interpretation permitting banks to underwrite municipal bonds. And the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which also is involved, is preparing to let banks invest in real estate and to ease a proposed rule on sharing facilities with insurance companies.    In trying to keep the big banks happy, the regulators are acting informally, as well. Mr. Volcker &quot;is on the cocktail circuit&quot; reminding bankers that as a young economist he advocated letting banks underwrite revenue bonds, says Richard deCair, the director of a trade group called the Dealer Bank Association. Comptroller Robert Clarke recently commiserated over breakfast with executives of some big banks about their flat profits. And FDIC Chairman William Seidman has agreed to &quot;explore&quot; a long wish list given him by Charles Sanford Jr., the president of Bankers Trust.    The new activity contrasts with the regulators' previous stand that banks should look to Congress for wider authority. The restrictions derive from federal statutes like the Bank Holding Company Act and, in particular, the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act, which split commercial banking from securities underwriting. But even though the banking laws are widely considered out of date now, Congress hasn't been able to agree on comprehensive changes, partly because of lobbying by securities and insurance interests seeking to protect their turf.    &quot;The longer Congress doesn't act,&quot; concedes William Proxmire, soon to be the Senate Banking Committee chairman, &quot;the more pressure on regulators . . . to help the big banks.&quot;    The banks contend that what is at stake is whether they can remain profitable when they are being challenged by non-bank rivals in this country and by foreign banks that aren't bound by the same regulations. Since 1975, says the American Bankers Association, U.S. banks &quot;have experienced a decline in market share of financial assets held by financial institutions, while insurance companies, mutual funds, securities firms and others have made significant gains.&quot; Fed data show that at the end of 1984, commercial banks had barely more than half of the deposits and money-market holdings of households, businesses and governments, compared with 64% at the end of 1974.    The competition comes at a time when some big banks are weakened by sour foreign, real-estate, farm or energy loans. The ABA is predicting flat or slightly lower bank earnings next year.    One major threat comes from Japan, whose banks don't face the same strict rules on maintaining capital reserves and, in addition, can raise money more cheaply because of low rates on deposits. Five of the world's 10 biggest banks (in assets) now are Japanese, a recent Salomon Brothers study shows, and this year Dai-Ichi Kangyo overtook Citicorp as the largest of all.    Commercial banks accounted for only about one-quarter of the total credit market at the end of 1984, Fed data show. One problem is that large corporations that once were their best borrowers now often bypass them by raising money in overseas markets or issuing commercial paper. Some big banks, notably Bankers Trust Co., have compensated by becoming commercial-paper sales agents. The Fed now has decided that this activity doesn't violate the ban on commercial-bank underwriting because the bank doesn't make a public offering of the paper. Last week a federal appeals court also accepted this reasoning.    But not surprisingly, banks' competitors strongly oppose it. The Securities Industry Association is expected to appeal the court ruling. The big banks' threat to give up their charters rather than face continued restrictions is just &quot;a scare tactic,&quot; says Thomas Quinn, a Washington lawyer who represents the association. He adds: &quot;The banks are waving a red flag because they have failed by legitimate means to get the new lines of business they want.&quot;    The banks aren't talking of switching from federal to state charters but of operating without a bank charter at all. Doing so would get them out from under federal banking laws, but it would force them to choose between making commercial loans and accepting demand deposits.    Moreover, it is doubtful they could go quietly. &quot;Any major bank would face problems of tremendous magnitude to try to leave the system,&quot; says John D. Hawke Jr., a Washington lawyer and a former Fed general counsel. &quot;If any major banks tried to do this, it would precipitate legislation that would stall their plans for years.&quot;    The regulators nevertheless worry that losing the stability of major, diversified banks could undercut the safety and soundness of a resulting smaller federal banking system. &quot;It does make us edgy,&quot; concedes Richard Fitzgerald, the comptroller's general counsel. &quot;I rarely have a conversation now where this whole issue of the big banks evaluating their options doesn't come up.&quot;    The comptroller's office, which regulates all of the nation's 5,000 federally chartered banks, is actively working with banks for new dodges of the old slate of banking laws. &quot;We welcome creative proposals,&quot; Mr. Fitzgerald says. &quot;We work with banks all the time to find a way to get an interpretation that gives them more freedom.&quot; The office recently put together a unit to concoct new organizational structures for banks.    The Fed, which regulates bank holding companies and some state-chartered banks, is almost certain to grant broad new securities-underwriting authority for banks -- stopping just short of the full-blown underwriting barred by the Glass-Steagall Act. For two years it has had applications for such powers from some of the nation's biggest banks. Also before it is an application by J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. to offer customers an investment advisory service; this would go beyond a service for sophisticated investors that the Fed recently permitted. And Security Pacific National Bank has asked for authority to set up an options exchange.    Fed watchers predict that the central bank will grant most of the applications, perhaps with some limitations. &quot;We're seeing a shift in the Fed's attitude,&quot; says Anthony Cluff, the executive director of Reserve City Bankers, a Washington trade group. &quot;Lately I've seen Volcker shift to be more and more accommodating whenever it becomes obvious that the frustration level of the banks goes up a notch.&quot; Last week the Fed, and Mr. Volcker in a separate statement, publicly urged Congress to revise the statute banning underwriting by commercial banks.    The FDIC, meantime, plans to ease a proposed regulation requiring separate names and buildings for banks' securities subsidiaries. And the agency is likely to let banks invest directly in real estate. The Fed recently proposed allowing bank holding companies to do so in a limited way.    The regulators are making room for banks to get into insurance as well. The Fed had twice denied them authority to underwrite first-mortgage life insurance, but recently gave the go-ahead. It also has written rules letting banks sell general insurance in small towns. The comptroller of the currency has gone even further recently by ruling that banks can sell insurance anywhere in the U.S. from small branch offices. Insurance underwriters have sued to stop the ruling.    Besides entering new businesses, big banks want to reduce their expenses, which they contend are higher because of compliance with all the regulations. In response, the comptroller has just issued a new fee schedule and even eliminated some application fees.    With Japanese banks coming on strong, major American banks are asking their regulators to help in the international arena as well. The regulators are responding. FDIC Chairman Seidman, Comptroller Clarke and Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson recently traveled to Europe to meet with their international counterparts to urge them, particularly the Japanese, to reduce differences in banks' regulations. &quot;Especially on how much capital a bank must keep on hand, our banks have much stricter rules, which can affect international market share,&quot; Mr. Seidman says.    Even the White House is taking note of the big banks' demands. It might nominate a banker for one of the two open seats on the Federal Reserve Board. &quot;The White House is looking for a governor with banking experience because it now sees a need to focus on the realities and operations of the banking system,&quot; says Margery Waxman, a Washington lawyer and former Treasury deputy general counsel.    Though the regulators insist they won't become cheerleaders for the big banks, officials admit a sensitivity to their concerns. As lobbyists gathered in the Fed's opulent board room recently to hear it announce approval of certain new banking activities, Michael Bradfield, the Fed's general counsel, quipped to one lobbyist for big banks, &quot;Well, are you happy now?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>