<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871123-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID a superpower arms-control pact was &quot;virtually complete.&quot;    The secretary of state, who arrived in Geneva for two days of talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze about the accord banning U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles, said &quot;some operational details&quot; remained to be worked out before the Reagan-Gorbachev summit next month. The treaty is to be signed at the meeting in Washington. Shultz also said the superpowers had agreed to station inspectors at each other's nuclear missile sites for 10 years after the weapons are scrapped.    Gorbachev probably will meet U.S. legislators informally during next month's summit rather than address Congress, U.S. officials said.    ---   CUBAN DETAINEES HELD about 20 hostages at a prison in Louisiana.    The inmates seized 28 guards and staff members of the federal detention center during a riot late Saturday that erupted after the State Department announced that more than 2,500 of the 125,000 Cubans admitted to the U.S. during a 1980 boatlift would be subject to deportation. The U.S.-Cuba accord would allow increased Cuban immigration. The Cuban detainees released some hostages who complained of medical problems, but refused to surrender without assurances that they wouldn't be deported.    Authorities in Texas said 17 Cuban inmates at a Laredo detention center escaped. All but three of the escapees were recaptured, officials said.    ---   President Duarte demanded that leftist rebels returning to El Salvador from exile sever their links with the insurgents or risk prosecution. Rebel leader Ruben Zamora returned Saturday and Guillermo Ungo is to arrive in San Salvador today. In Nicaragua, the government released 985 political prisoners as part of a regional peace plan.    ---   About 800 Greek Cypriot women crossed a U.N. buffer zone and entered Turkish-occupied northern Cyprus for the first time in 13 years. The women, protesting the division of the island following Turkey's 1974 invasion, were blocked from further advance after scuffles with Turkish troops.    ---   Iran attacked two Greek-flag vessels in the Persian Gulf, regional shipping sources said. Tehran's military said its forces fired on U.S. helicopters that tried to interfere in one of the raids near Farsi Island. U.S. naval officials in the gulf denied the attack.    China has canceled a planned shipment of military gear to Iran, Western business and diplomatic sources told United Press International. The shipment was believed to contain surface-to-surface missiles.    ---   Carlucci has eased out the Pentagon's senior arms-control specialist, Frank Gaffney, considered a hard-line conservative. Gaffney said Carlucci, confirmed Friday by the Senate to succeed Weinberger as defense secretary, wanted to install his own choice for the post.    The Senate Judiciary panel will hold hearings beginning Dec. 14 on the nomination of Judge Anthony Kennedy to the Supreme Court. A final vote on the federal appeals court judge from California isn't likely until the first week of February.    ---   India accused Sri Lanka's Tamil rebels of attacking New Delhi's peacekeeping patrols, breaking a 48-hour truce that began Saturday. The separatist guerrillas said India had violated the cease-fire by raiding a suspected rebel camp. India has about 20,000 troops in Sri Lanka to enforce a July 29 pact aimed at ending ethnic strife.    ---   Romanians rioted in Bucharest, Brasov and other parts of the country against the communist government of Nicolae Ceausescu, Western sources said. The demonstrators reportedly were protesting wage cuts, energy shortages and failed crops.    ---   The Labor Department said it would reduce the permissible level of worker exposure to the chemical formaldehyde. OSHA said provisions of the new standard, which would lower the allowable workplace exposure to one part per million parts of air from three parts per million, will be phased in over the next year.    ---   The Defense Department said it will ground a substantial part of its fleet of 384 F-18 aircraft because some have developed engine fires. The Navy said three of the fighters' engines have caught fire during flights, and the Marine Corps, whose F-18s also were grounded, reported two engine fires last Monday.    ---   Philippine officials said a U.S.-owned Dole banana plantation in Davao province was attacked by communist rebels in an attempt to bolster recent communist threats against American targets. Separately, Manila said communist and Moslem insurgents had received $8 million in aid from foreign trade unions this year.    ---   Police in Bangladesh opened fire on demonstrators during clashes in Dhaka between backers of President Ershad and opponents demanding his resignation. Sporadic violence was reported throughout the country, the second day of a 48-hour general strike. About 100 people were injured and at least 40 others arrested, police said.    ---   The Pentagon wants to build an energy storage device as part of Reagan's space-based anti-missile project. Two companies have been chosen to evaluate the system, which would be used as a source of household electricity in peacetime and would power a laser during a missile attack.    ---   Died: James E. Folsom, 79, former Democratic governor of Alabama, Saturday, in Cullman, Ala., of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>