<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870814-0117 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Reagan's Realpolitik</HL><DD> 08/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   While we have been urging confrontation to clarify issues and responsibilities, we have to admit that Ronald Reagan's new strategy for dealing with the Democratic Congress is not altogether lacking in political artistry. In his Wednesday night speech he even invoked such largely mythical states-of-being as bipartisanship and cooperation among the branches of government. From the Senate he demanded a return demonstration of good faith, a vote up or down, in September, on his Supreme Court nominee, Robert Bork.    At the core of this strategy is what might be called a domestic version of &quot;Realpolitik,&quot; a recognition of political reality. Congress is there. A president has to deal with it. It is dominated by Democrats. The Iran-Contra shootout inflicted damage on both sides. Chief of Staff Howard Baker is an aide adept at the art of compromise. So you try both to rattle a few cages and make a few friends.    Out of this came a presidential address that was conciliatory while laying a basis for possible confrontation later. The president repeated his &quot;mea culpa&quot; about Iran-Contra, once again grating our nerves a bit with his overwillingness to accept his adversarys' characterization of that minor sideshow as somehow a colossal error on the order of a World War or Great Depression. He painted a glowing picture of successes and successes-yet-to-be in arms control. In the same vein, he spoke warmly of &quot;diplomatic&quot; processes to reform Nicaragua's Marxist-Leninists, making it clear that this is a bipartisan flier in company with Speaker Jim Wright.    On the tougher side, he said he would fight for Robert Bork, a pledge he elaborated on in North Platte, Neb., yesterday. He perhaps exaggerated the difficulty he faces in winning Senate confirmation for Judge Bork, who is indeed eminently qualified. But it was an adroit way of laying down a marker: If the Senate behaves irresponsibly on this entirely reasonable nomination, how can I go forward with compromise and cooperation?    The president's North Platte remarks also suggested that his patience with the Central American peace talks will be limited; there were suggestions from the White House yesterday that he will not leave Contra aid hanging fire if the Sandinistas attempt to prolong the negotiations.    And there was a reminder to Congress of its own key vulnerability, a woeful incapacity to uphold its budgeting responsibilities. Again the president demanded a vote, up or down, this time on the balanced budget amendment to the Constitution. If he wins the vote, he would be willing to negotiate on items in the budget. If not he will work through the states for a constitutional convention.    Some might argue that this artful approach, as contrasted to the more dynamic leadership of a few years ago, was inevitable. The Republicans, after all, lost the Senate. That emboldened the president's most ardent adversaries to strike at the Iran-Contra target of opportunity. He is not getting any younger and soon will be in the last year of his term. In short, he not only seems weaker politically -- he is weaker. Woe to the politician who does not discern realities.    But that is a description of both the truth and falsity of Realpolitik. Admitting weakness is sometimes tantamount to accepting it. The stakes are too high for a president to become overly conciliatory, particularly toward an American left that has been shown time and again to have a very narrow base of popularity. Ill-chosen compromises can destroy, not enhance, political credibility.    The president is skating dangerously close to a loss of credibility on arms control, though we suspect it derives less from political calculation than from a deeply held and understandable hope of reducing the risk of nuclear war. Instead of pushing his strategic defense initiative, which can indeed reduce risks, he instead stressed the promised agreement with the Soviets on intermediate-range weapons. Our Wednesday editorial about the Soviets' new, mobile SS-24 ICBM made clear that an Independent Nuclear Force agreement will not diminish the number of nuclear warheads in the world, only move them to more capable launchers.    Similarly, his agreement with Jim Wright on Central America has been interpreted, and correctly we think, as putting an illusory hope of Sandinista reform ahead of the interests of Nicaraguan anti-communist fighting forces. Any hope that Speaker Wright could deliver the left wing of his party to the bipartisanship banquet if peace does not dawn surely is in doubt.    And so it goes. The president is off to the ranch for a rest. Congresspersons have gone their various ways, to investigate the drug trade in the fleshpots of Amsterdam and maybe visit a few constituents. The economy is on the whole strong. International tensions, for all the horror of the Iran-Iraq and Soviet-Afghan wars, have abated. Mr. Reagan has delivered a lot to the nation and it is not asking much more at the moment. It is asking even less, and expecting less, of Congress. When the political game resumes in September we will see how well the president's Realpolitik works. </TEXT></DOC>