<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0014 </DOCNO><HL> OPEC's Daily Oil Output Drops SharplyAs World's Buying Spree Suddenly Cools---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   The world's petroleum-buying spree that sizzled through the summer suddenly has cooled, causing Middle East oil production to plunge.    According to reliable sources, production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has fallen below the 18 million barrels a day that economists consider necessary to meet world demand for the remainder of the year. OPEC's own confidential estimates project production for all of September at a daily average of 18.4 million barrels -- a drop of nearly two million barrels a day from August.    Production could rebound as quickly as it has fallen, however, because the slumping output of recent days has been caused by market forces rather than by OPEC itself. Refiners aren't buying as much because fear of a supply disruption in the Persian Gulf has lessened and storage tanks are full.    But unless the sharp drop in output is suddenly reversed, it will considerably ease the task of OPEC's so-called Committee of Three as it begins visiting OPEC heads of state next week. The ministers, as previously reported, will seek to enlist political support at the highest OPEC levels to curb recent severe overproduction and defend the cartel's base price of $18 a barrel. Their first stop is Saudi Arabia, OPEC's leading producer, where they will meet with King Fahd Oct. 6.    If OPEC production holds at the lower levels, the stage could be set for a push by some oil ministers, including Iran's representative, to raise the benchmark price at a scheduled OPEC conference in December. &quot;A $2 increase in the benchmark for 1988 is valid if we apply the brake on production,&quot; says Subroto, Indonesia's oil minister.    Mr. Subroto, a member of the ministerial Committee of Three, acknowledges that any price increase will depend on world oil supply and demand levels in the fourth quarter. Much also depends, other OPEC officials say, on the pricing position that kingpin Saudi Arabia will take.    High-level Saudi sources say the kingdom won't sway from its earlier stance -- as emphasized by King Fahd -- that the OPEC benchmark should remain at $18 a barrel for another year. If by December market forces signal that a higher benchmark is warranted, the sources say Saudi Arabia will support an increase in the official production ceiling, now 16.6 million barrels a day, but not an increase in the price.    The sudden decline in OPEC production could contribute to another run-up in oil prices on spot and futures markets. But many oil analysts and economists, skeptical of OPEC's ability to sustain production discipline, see any such price spurt as illusory and temporary.    Constantine D. Fliakos, senior oil analyst at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, cites such bearish pricing fundamentals as the recent buildup of world oil inventories as a result of jitteriness over possible supply repercussions from the Iraq-Iran war. &quot;If tensions ease in the Mideast,&quot; he says, &quot;there will be a rush to liquidate inventories, and the call on OPEC oil will be further reduced.&quot;    Although spot and futures prices recently have remained fairly stable -- ranging between $17 and $20 for the world's higher-quality crudes -- within a few weeks, &quot;there will definitely be some softening,&quot; says Hossein Tahmassebi, Ashland Oil Inc.'s chief economist. He also cites the buildup of above-ground stocks during the summer buying spree -- and the very real possibility that some OPEC members will begin discounting official prices to hold on to market share as overall OPEC production drops.    Any major disruption of oil supplies from the Persian Gulf would, of course, drive prices up. But barring a serious escalation of Persian Gulf tensions, some oil experts suggest that it will be difficult for OPEC to maintain the $18 benchmark price, much less to raise it.    If spot prices should fall below official OPEC quotes, as Ashland's Mr. Tahmassebi expects, he says companies will take even less OPEC oil, further contributing to the output decline. Anticipating price softening, Ashland and other refiners already are cutting back on purchases, contributing to the OPEC production decline.    Accurate monitoring of OPEC production is an impossible task, as oil ministers of the 13 member countries have learned. Industry projections for September production generally range around 18.5 million barrels a day, only slightly above OPEC's latest internal calculation, and a sharp drop from an August level that has been estimated as high as 19.8 million barrels a day.    But some reliable estimates put OPEC output much lower for September, probably averaging only 18 million barrels a day for the month. Petro-Logistics Ltd., a Geneva-based consulting firm that tracks tankers and uses other means to analyze OPEC oil movements weekly, finds that production was below 18.6 million barrels a day for the first two weeks this month -- and is still falling. In fact, according to Petro-Logistics, production averaged less than 17.6 million barrels a day in the second week of September, compared with 19.6 million barrels a day in the first week.    With tanker loadings erratic, a tally for only two weeks is hardly enough to establish a trend for OPEC production. But, says Conrad Gerber, president of Petro-Logistics, &quot;all indications are that it's going down further.&quot;    Middle Eastern members of OPEC account for most of the declines so far. Ironically, the bulk of the drop has been in Saudi Arabia -- the first stop on next week's production -- jawboning tour by the Committee of Three. King Fahd is certain to reiterate to the three oil ministers that the kingdom won't resume its former role of OPEC &quot;swing producer&quot; by adjusting volumes to make up for excess output elsewhere.    The ministers next will go to Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates and Iraq, all said to be producing beyond their quotas. Final stops on this leg of the tour will be Qatar and Iran. A second trip, to other OPEC countries, is set for November.    The main challenge for the ministers will be Iraq, which refuses to accept its OPEC quota, much less to abide by it. &quot;We are going to do our best to persuade all the members to be truly committed,&quot; says Arturo Hernandez Grisanti of Venezuela, one of the Committee of Three. &quot;We aren't so sure we can reach this ideal situation, but that is the direction of our effort,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>