<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Stock and Bond Prices Plummet in World MarketAs Dollar Continues Its Decline Despite Intervention---Currency Again TouchesPostwar Low in Japan ;Blue-Chip Shares Plunge---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Sellers pummeled stock and bond prices in Tokyo, London and New York yesterday in reaction to the U.S. dollar's continued decline.    Despite heavy central bank intervention, the dollar again plunged to a post-World War II low against the yen in frantic intraday Tokyo trading. It then trimmed its losses to stand at 146.25 yen late yesterday in New York, down from 147.1 late Friday.    Tokyo market sources said yesterday's decline came despite central bank purchases of about $2 billion of the U.S. currency. Central bank intervention on behalf of the dollar since last Tuesday is believed to have totaled more than $8 billion.    The Dow Jones Industrial Average, meanwhile, plunged 57.39 points, its third biggest point drop ever, on New York Stock Exchange composite volume of 208.4 million shares.    The New York stock action followed a similar rout in London, where the Financial Times 30-share index of blue-chip stocks plunged 38.4 points to 1582.2 and the broader 100-share index fell 46.1 points to 2002.5.    Earlier in Tokyo, the Nikkei index of 225 selected stocks dropped 550.45 points to close at 21,627.57.    Bond prices also fell in London and New York as investors worried that a continued slide in the dollar would quickly push up inflation and interest rates. In late New York trading, the latest-issued long-term U.S. Treasury bond was more than two points below its Friday close.    &quot;The prime movers here are the currency markets, and the stock and bond markets are just using the currency action as a cue for a needed correction,&quot; John Dessauer, an international investment adviser and money manager based in Orleans, Mass., said.    Friday's drop of nearly 37 points in the Dow Jones industrials had put market watchers on edge. Robert R. Prechter, a widely followed market forecaster, told his hotline subscribers Friday night it is &quot;possible that the long-awaited short-term correction has begun.&quot; If it has, he said, &quot;I expect it to be short, sharp and dramatic.&quot;    Grisly as it was, yesterday's U.S. stock and bond market rout could have been far worse, traders said. The strongest selling pressure was from individuals, they said, rather than the institutional investors who dominate those markets.    Early in the stock market session, the Big Board's high-speed transactions tape was running as much as 21 minutes late, a sign of heavy selling in small lots rather than in the big blocks that institutions deal in. Moreover, yesterday's Big Board volume didn't place it among the exchange's 10 busiest days, and bond traders said that although prices were being marked down aggressively, actual selling was relatively restrained.    In the foreign exchange market, Mr. Dessauer, a former international investment manager for Citicorp in Europe, said yesterday's dollar selloff means &quot;the currency markets are saying that Washington is right, that the Japanese, and eventually the Germans, are going to have to both stimulate their economies and open their markets to U.S. goods to correct their trade imbalances.&quot;    The U.S. said Friday it will impose 100% tariffs on a variety of Japanese electronic products as part of the latest move to reduce the Japanese trade surplus with the U.S.    Mr. Dessauer noted that before the Dow Jones industrials' Friday decline, the average had climbed almost 500 points this year, and that the London and Tokyo markets also had been soaring. U.S. stock market investors &quot;have been betting all along -- correctly, I think -- that U.S. trade imbalances ultimately will be corrected,&quot; he said. &quot;But in the process, they just got well ahead of the fundamentals.&quot;    The dollar's fearsome early slide in Tokyo triggered statements amounting to calls for calm from government officials.    Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, in a parliamentary budget hearing, said last month's six-nation Paris agreement sought to stabilize exchange rates at levels existing then, when the dollar was just above 150 yen. He said the central banks currently are working to stabilize the dollar at that level. Currency traders in Japan credited the statement with helping to pull the dollar off its record intraday low of 144.70 yen.    Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa also sought to cool the markets. Time remains, he told a news conference, for coordinated efforts to stabilize the dollar, &quot;and I don't want to reach any conclusions just based on day-to-day events,&quot; he said.    In London, Nigel Lawson, Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, opposed further weakening of the dollar, telling a House of Commons panel that the West German mark and the yen had risen about 60% against the dollar since five leading industrial countries agreed in September 1985 to depress the dollar's value.    &quot;That adjustment had been necessary to correct the earlier dollar overshoot,&quot; Mr. Lawson said. &quot;It was always recognized that it would take time&quot; before the Japanese and West German trade surpluses with the U.S. were corrected. &quot;That is no reason for seeking an overshoot in the opposite direction&quot; now, he said.    David G. Davis, editor of Switch Fund Timing, a market newsletter that put out a U.S. stock market sell signal March 20, called yesterday's market rout &quot;clearly the start of the correction that our 17 indicators have been predicting for the last 10 days.&quot; He said a drop in the industrial average to around 1950 &quot;looks realistic.&quot;    Mr. Davis says in the current issue of the newsletter, written late last week, that the market &quot;could drop 300 points in a matter of a few days.&quot;    The scenario he fears would begin with heavy selling of the June Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures contract by institutions seeking revenue to help offset price declines in the stocks in their portfolios. If the selling became heavy enough, it could drive the June contract price down to a steep discount from the index itself, he said.    That, in turn, could induce arbitragers to simultaneously buy the depressed futures contract and sell a basket of Sandamp;P 500 stocks, driving the stock market sharply lower.    Futures traders who routinely help institutions sell Sandamp;P contracts to offset losses in their stock portfolios said they didn't see that scenario developing yesterday. Because of the stock market's gains recently, they said, yesterday's drop wasn't big enough to trigger substantial stock-index futures sales.    &quot;We'll have no more than 200 to 300 contracts to sell for clients&quot; at today's market opening, Stephen Douglas, head trader for Leland, O'Brien, Rubenstein Associates Inc. in Los Angeles, said. The company manages about $5 billion of institutional funds that use stock-index futures in this way.    Even amid yesterday's chaotic stock market slide, some analysts were reluctant to believe a correction is under way.    &quot;I don't think this one is it,&quot; Gene Jay Seagle, a technical market analyst at Gruntal andamp; Co., said. &quot;I expect the market will right itself here and go on to new highs&quot; before a correction of 6% to 8% begins late in April. That's when money for individual retirement accounts will stop flowing into the market, he said. </TEXT></DOC>