<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Coffee Prices Plunge on Growing FearsQuota Talks Will End Without Accord---By John ValentineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Coffee futures prices plunged on the growing fear that the International Coffee Organization's London talks aimed at restoring coffee export quotas will end without agreement.    Heavy selling depressed the May contract, which dipped as low as $1.2315 a pound, before finishing at $1.2359, a decline of 5.72 cents. The March contract fell five cents to settle at $1.22 a pound.    The ICO discussions between producing and consuming nations, scheduled to end Friday, were extended, and trading yesterday reflected intense scrutiny of their progress, analysts and trade sources said.    One analyst said the talks were extended because Colombia offered a compromise proposal under which temporary quotas would be established for six months, beginning April 1, with a commitment to negotiate permanent quotas by Oct. 1.    The major stumbling block to any agreement, analysts say, is the desire by consuming nations, led by the U.S., to have the export quotas distributed among producing countries on a basis that will reflect shipments from the previous year and reserve stocks.    This would particularly affect Brazil, which in the past has had about 30% of the export quotas. The Brazilian Coffee Institute recently said Brazil shipped 9.9 million bags of coffee in 1986, compared with 19.1 million in 1985. A bag weighs 132 pounds. The decline was caused by drought damage. However, the coffee institute noted that, because of higher prices, Brazil's foreign-exchange income of $2.4 billion from 1986 coffee exports almost matched the $2.6 billion earned in 1985.    &quot;Obviously, with prices now much lower (than in 1986), Brazil has to ship even more in order to increase its foreign exchange,&quot; said Debra Tropp, an analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities, New York.    There is strong pressure on Brazil to sell coffee, Miss Tropp said. The seasonally strong demand didn't materialize late last year, leaving Brazil with large unsold supplies. Now Brazil is facing a crop estimated between 27 million and 30 million bags by trade and industry observers and as high as 33 million bags by U.S. officials. The crop, which will be harvested this spring and early summer, is more than double the estimated 11.2 million to 13 million bags produced last year and could equal the 33 million bags produced two years ago.    Nevertheless, Miss Tropp said she believes Brazil may make concessions to help achieve an agreement to avoid creating undue pressure on prices in the absence of quotas and to produce price stability. Brazil is committed to paying its producers fixed prices for their coffee, and any significant further drops in world market prices could intensify financial pressure on that nation's government, Miss Tropp said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices fell for the fifth time in the past six sessions as traders continued to react to a perceived oversupply of crude oil and refined products. Traders apparently shrugged off a report that the Saudi Arabian oil minister said the kingdom won't offer discounts on the price of its crude oil &quot;under any circumstances.&quot; Recent concerns about strains in the production and pricing agreement reached in December by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries have helped trigger the recent price slide. Yesterday, crude oil contracts for April delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange, after falling to an intraday low of $16.17 a barrel, closed at $16.39, down 21 cents a barrel. Meanwhile, heating oil prices fell while unleaded gasoline contracts edged higher. Some analysts say, however, that indications of recent cutbacks in Saudi production may augur a future price rebound. &quot;The oil market has misunderstood how much is at stake in keeping the OPEC pact in place,&quot; said Ian Gibson, a vice president of Kleinwort Grieveson Securities, a New York unit of Kleinwort Benson Inc.    ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices surged on strong volume after unconfirmed wire service reports that Citrosuco Paulista S.A., one of Brazil's largest juice exporters and processors, raised its frozen concentrate export price $50 a ton to the equivalent of $1.31 a pound on U.S. markets. &quot;Rumors of the move have been on and off in the market for about two weeks, but weren't built into prices because the last time we heard they were off,&quot; said one orange juice trader in New York. After the market closed, however, Juice Farms Inc. of Mount Dora, Fla., the exclusive distributor of Citrosuco products in the U.S., increased its wholesale price three cents a pound, to $1.32, effectively confirming the Brazilian increase, some traders said. A spokesman for Juice Farms said, however, that he hadn't been notified of a Citrosuco price increase. On the New York Cotton Exchange, orange juice prices for March delivery soared 5.75 cents a pound, to $1.3065. Uncertainty about Brazilian sales and strong demand likely will spur further increases in the coming weeks, said Paul Redstone, an analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Corn and wheat futures prices continued to be firm. Prices were buoyed by a lack of farmer selling of corn and the Agriculture Department's decision to extend 1985 and 1986 crop loans for one year, analysts said. The loan extension could keep grain off the market that would have otherwise been marketed, analysts said. Wheat futures also gained strength on the continued hope that wheat will be offered to the Soviet Union through the export enhancement program, analysts said.    INTEREST RATES: Treasury bond futures prices rose in response to indications of a weakening economy in February, but pulled back from their highs after hitting technical resistance. But analysts said that the resistance is likely to be breached and bond futures should approach life-of-contract highs during the next several trading days. The monthly purchasing managers' index for February showed a decline to 51.9% last month from 55.8% in January, indicating that inflation isn't likely to rebound soon, said Frederick Leiner, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in Chicago. Traders who had sold bond futures short in anticipation of a market decline after the economy appeared to perk up in January were forced to buy the contracts back at higher prices, noted Jon Pedersen, director of futures trading at Swink andamp; Co. in Little Rock, Ark.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Firmer cash prices helped pork belly and hog futures prices rise, analysts said. Traders are anticipating that the higher cash prices will encourage packer and retailer interest, analysts said. Light movement of animals to terminal markets and a small slaughter helped the pork belly and hog market as well. A lack of a hedging margin and low stocks also helped pork bellies firm up, analysts said. Cattle futures made slight gains on spillover strength from the hog and belly pits, analysts said.    SUGAR: Reports that Cuba is deferring all sugar shipments to meet Soviet orders prompted active buying of futures contracts. The May contract closed 0.25 cent higher at 8.49 cents a pound. Cuba has told international trade houses it is delaying shipments of sugar scheduled for this month and will honor only contracts going to the Soviet Union, according to Nauman Barakat, analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. Inc., New York. It indicates the Soviets are having a a problem meeting their needs, he said. &quot;The Soviet Union recently bought about 600,000 metric tons of sugar for a total of about 1.1 million to 1.2 million tons in the past three weeks,&quot; he said. The Soviet Union is heavily buying sugar to meet higher than normal domestic demand based on greater intake of soft drinks and a Soviet campaign to stem alcohol consumption, Mr. Barakat said. The higher Soviet purchases also reflect constricted supplies because of extreme cold in February. Significant amounts of previously harvested sugar beets were left in the fields, considerably lowering their sugar yields, Mr. Barakat said. </TEXT></DOC>