<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Study Lays Groundwork for TyingHealth Costs to Workers' Behavior---By Frank E. JamesStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   The insurance industry and employers may soon become a lot more interested in workers' life styles. And that might cost workers money.    A new study, set for release today, is the first research to broadly link unhealthy behavior with high health-care costs. Those findings, insurance executives says, lay the groundwork for a broad effort to tie health-insurance premiums to life styles.    The four-year study of 15,000 Control Data Corp. employees showed that workers with the worst life-style habits had the biggest medical bills, according to the authors, Control Data and Milliman andamp; Robertson Inc., a Milwaukee-based actuarial consultant. Health-care costs for obese people, for example, were 11% higher than those for thin ones. And workers who routinely failed to use seat belts spent 54% more days in the hospital than those who usually buckled up.    In the past, linking insurance premiums to behavior has been limited almost exclusively to life insurance, for which smokers must often pay more. Now, the breadth and thoroughness of the Control Data study is certain to &quot;carry a lot of weight&quot; among insurers in the workplace, says Dona De Sanctis, spokeswoman for the Health Industry Association of America, an organization of health insurers.    The research promises to stir heated debate among insurers, regulators, employers and workers. Some insurance regulators, for example, are considering new rules that would force insurers to build economic incentives for healthy life styles into their programs. If insurers do begin to tie premiums to employees' health habits, employers could see those costs rise or fall 20% or more based on workers' health, Milliman andamp; Robertson estimates. Workers, in turn, might see the cost of their own contributions to health insurance go up or down, depending on their life styles.    The study also raises significant legal questions. Workers may view employer surveys of their habits as an invasion of privacy, some compensation consultants say. And verifying employees' behavior after hours -- to check if they're wearing seat belts, for example -- could be nearly impossible.    Control Data started studying its employees' health habits in 1980 to evaluate its corporate &quot;wellness&quot; program, which is aimed at encouraging exercise and other healthful habits. The 15,000 workers nationwide were asked for information about seven factors: exercise, weight, smoking, hypertension, alcohol use, cholesterol level and seat-belt use. Workers were then divided into high-risk, moderate-risk and low-risk categories based on standardized health-risk profiles, and medical claims in each category were compared.    The research shows dramatic relationships between health habits and health-insurance claims costs. Some findings: People whose weekly exercise was equivalent to climbing less than five flights of stairs, or walking less than a half mile, spent 114% more on health claims than those who climbed at least 15 flights of stairs or walked 1 1/2 miles weekly. Less surprisingly, people who smoked an average of one or more packs of cigarettes a day had 118% higher medical expenses than nonsmokers.    The study is likely to be used in several ways, Milliman andamp; Robertson says. Some companies might use similar, periodic surveys of employees' habits to evaluate their own health-improvement programs. A recent study by Johnson andamp; Johnson of 11,000 employees showed such programs helped reduce health-insurance claims.    The study may also form the basis for incentive programs to improve workers' habits. Health-conscious employees might be rewarded by reducing their contributions to health-insurance costs or by increasing their benefits, says Stephen D. Brink, national health director for Milliman andamp; Robertson. Those with bad habits could see the opposite happen.    &quot;I wonder if employers aren't going to force this,&quot; says Robert B. Shapland, a vice president and actuary for Mutual of Omaha. &quot;If I were General Motors, and it costs $1,000 a car for health insurance, why wouldn't I adopt these financial incentives for my employees to get their act together and cut costs?&quot;    Such moves could add to an existing trend of asking employees to contribute to group plan health-care costs. According to the Employee Benefit Research Institute in Washington, 41% of the 22 million workers in U.S. companies with more than 100 employees paid part of their health-insurance premiums in 1986, up from 35% in 1985.    The Control Data study is only the first of several major research efforts. The Centers for Disease Control and the Carter Center of Emory University, both in Atlanta, are in the early stages of a major study to compare death and illness data to numerous life-style factors.    At least one major insurer, Prudential Insurance Co. of America, already plans to market group insurance tied to employee habits. Called Health Sketch, the costs of the program to employers will be based partly on how their employees answer more than 50 questions on such issues as family health history, stress management, and seat-belt use.    Some insurance regulators are considering forcing insurers to embrace health-improvement incentives. David Levinson, the Delaware insurance commissioner, says he plans to issue new rules later this year that would require insurance programs to include economic incentives for a healthy life style in order to be certified by the state.    &quot;It just isn't fair for the person who leads a clean life style to subsidize the debauchery of those who don't,&quot; Mr. Levinson says.    Most early programs based on the research are expected to be voluntary, however, and many employers may not be interested at all. Prudential says employers were initially far from enthusiastic about its Health Sketch plan; many wanted clear proof that cost benefits from health-incentive plans would outweigh the expense of gathering the necessary employee data.    Also, many companies may be reluctant to meddle. &quot;A lot of employers say, 'What right do we have to get involved in our employees' personal lives?'&quot; says James Nelson, a partner and actuary with Hewitt Associates, a benefits consultant. Many companies, he says, may be unwilling to &quot;do something based on what employees do outside their normal working hours.&quot;    Employers who do embrace mandatory programs may find they face some touchy issues. Forcing a worker to pay more for health insurance based on certain physical conditions, such as obesity, could raise discrimination questions, says Edward Bergmann, a Chicago management-labor relations lawyer. Also, some behaviors that affect health-claims costs will not have a debilitating effect on all workers, making a tiered system of health-insurance contributions hard to justify.    In any event, sweeping changes in health-insurance practices may be slow to come. The dangers of smoking, for instance, have been known for decades, Mutual of Omaha's Mr. Shapland notes. But &quot;to give you some insight into how things move in the insurance industry,&quot; he says, &quot;it's not too long ago that there was no differentiation (in life-insurance premiums) based on smoking.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>