<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871012-0024 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Chinese Promises, Tibetan Reality---By Peter Kedge</HL><DD> 10/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> HONG KONG  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The demonstrations in Tibet and the concomitant Chinese crackdowns that have occurred over the past two weeks in Lhasa have made headlines around the world, as well they should. Unfortunately, the closed nature of Tibet under Chinese rule makes accurate information hard to come by and thus many misimpressions have been created. It is important, however, to set out what is at stake in Tibet, which is particularly relevant to the peoples of Hong Kong, Taiwan and Macao.    My own background gives me an unusual perspective in this regard: a British citizen who has known the Dalai Lama for the past 14 years. For seven years I was a Buddhist monk in the Tibetan tradition, and indeed I met with the Dalai Lama only a few days ago during his visit to America. Here in Hong Kong I am in regular touch with Tibetans and have visited there just this June.    When the Chinese invaded Tibet in 1950, the country was relatively unknown in diplomatic circles. How ironic that the unspeakable suffering meeted out to the Tibetans in the name of the &quot;peaceful liberation of Tibet&quot; has resulted in the enrichment of other cultures through acquaintance with Tibetans and their leader. There is a recognition that, once the ancient trappings of ritual and form are penetrated, Tibet's rich culture offers a system of education and mental development as vital and relevant to the 20th century as any known to man. This is something the Chinese have missed. They claim the great monastic universities were centers of blind faith. Far from it. These universities with 20-year courses of intense study accommodated insight and understanding of human psychology, philosophy and medicine that no longer exist in the material cultures of the &quot;developed&quot; world.    More specifically, the facts about what a 1960 U.N. resolution called &quot;the genocide of the Tibetan people&quot; are finally becoming known. The U.S.-Tibet committee released a special report to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee just last month. This was presented also at a congressional staff briefing back in June, just after the House had scored China for human rights abuses in Tibet. No less a person than Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn has described the communist regime in Tibet as &quot;more brutal and inhumane than any other communist regime in the world.&quot; The reason Tibet is important today is that it holds lessons for dealing with Peking.    In particular Tibet is a lesson for Hong Kong. In 1950, with the military invasion of Tibet complete, the Tibetans reluctantly acquiesced to what was essentially a &quot;one country, two systems&quot; agreement with China -- similar to the Sino-British Joint Declaration on Hong Kong -- containing 17 points.    Again like Hong Kong, Tibet under the terms of this agreement was to retain its political system although Peking would control external affairs. The Chinese promised not to interfere with the established status, function and powers of the Dalai Lama or the Panchen Lama. Tibetans were to have regional autonomy, and their religious beliefs and customs were to be respected.    The legacy of the Chinese occupation is otherwise:    --1.2million Tibetans -- one-sixth of the population -- killed;    -- 6,254 monasteries destroyed;   --60% of Tibet's voluminous philosophic, historical and biographical literature burned;    -- the nation vivisected, with two-thirds of its originalterritory appended to the contiguous Chinese provinces withonly Central Tibet and parts of Eastern Tibet remaining asthe so-called Tibet Autonomous Region;   --Amdo, previously Tibet's northeastern province, now called Chinghai, converted into earth's largest gulag, capable of interring, by some estimates, up to 10 million prisoners;    -- one out of 10 Tibetans imprisoned; and, as late as the1970s, 100,000 still in labor camps;   --over a quarter-million Chinese occupation troops stationed on the Tibetan plateau have underwritten two decades of political re-education meetings, 14 hours of daily labor, no freedom of movement, no education or health services to speak of and two five-year periods of nationwide famine.    Against this some have argued that much of this devastation was the result of China's Cultural Revolution and that things are different now. Close observation indicates that this is not true. The destruction of 80% of the 6,254 monasteries took place before the Cultural Revolution. In short, while China pays lip service to one country-two systems, the fundamental policy of Peking is to assimilate all within its influence into the Han Chinese socialist mold. This is the means by which China has overcome opposition in every other minority area -- in Manchuria, Mongolia and East Turkestan. Today in what was Tibet there are 7.5 million Chinese to six million Tibetans; if this population transfer continues, within one to two generations the Tibetan national identity will have been lost. Yet Peking's record on its promises to Tibet does not appear to worry those who enthuse about its new promises to Macao and Hong Kong.    Then there is the talk about China's new moderation. In some fields, as the Dalai Lama himself has conceded, there have been improvements. But fundamentally nothing has changed. One ought to remember that when His Holiness presented his five-point peace plan to the U.S. Congress as a diplomatic initiative, the immediate response by China was to execute two Tibetan nationalists (the executions were also intended as a rebuke to the U.S. Congress). That peace plan was intended as a basis for negotiation with Peking, and its fifth point proposes &quot;commencement of earnest negotiations on the future status of Tibet and of relations between the Tibetans and Chinese peoples.&quot;    International pressure based on knowledge of the situation in Tibet can make a difference, which is why Peking quickly confiscated notes and diaries from Western tourists in the area and expelled foreign journalists on Thursday on a technicality. Indeed, pressure has already brought some positive results. Just last week, for example, the U.S. Senate passed a bill linking arms sales to China to the human-rights situation in Tibet. Much the same approach can be taken to China's overtures toward joining Western organizations like the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and thus gaining respectability. Granting Tibet observer status in the U.N. would at least ensure that its plight gets a hearing before the world; thus far there has been too much carrot and too little stick toward the communist world in this regard. A strong stand on Tibet today will help Hong Kong, Macao and even Taiwan tomorrow.    But this will come only with pressure. One such way to press the case is to open negotiations between the Dalai Lama's democratic government-in-exile and China right here in Hong Kong. That would give us all the opportunity to see for ourselves how China conducts itself under scrutiny. It would also provide Peking with the chance to demonstrate to the world that it can reform in human as well as economic terms.    ---   Mr. Kedge is managing director of SFE Systems, a consulting firm in industrial automation. </TEXT></DOC>