<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Weinberger Says Army Apparently SetImproper Price for CIA on Iran Missiles---By Tim Carrington and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger said the Army apparently charged the Central Intelligence Agency an improperly low price for some of the TOW missiles that the Reagan administration sent to Iran last year.    The Senate Intelligence Committee and the Federal Bureau of Investigation are looking into the Pentagon's pricing of the antitank weapons, which were taken from military stocks and handed over to the CIA for shipment to Iran. According to a member of the Senate panel, the Army's sale to the CIA may have been the first in a chain of transactions that ultimately generated profits that were passed on to the Nicaragua insurgents.    Mr. Weinberger stressed at a breakfast meeting with reporters that his conclusions about the Army's pricing are preliminary, adding, &quot;I don't have the final report from the inspector general,&quot; the Pentagon's internal watchdog. The secretary said the inspector general has &quot;three or four more interviews&quot; to conduct before completing his report on the matter.    Mr. Weinberger's statement that the Defense Department apparently undercharged the CIA raises questions about his earlier portrayals of the Pentagon as simply an honest storekeeper in the Iranian arms imbroglio, unaware of the plan to divert profits from the sales to the Contras, as the Nicaragua rebels are known.    A senator looking into the matter said that if the prices the Pentagon charged are found to have been improper, there are two possible explanations: &quot;There either had to be an error, or somebody was telling them to drop the price.&quot;    The Pentagon charged the CIA $12 million for 2,008 TOW missiles intended for Iran. Mr. Weinberger previously has said that the prices weren't negotiated in haste. &quot;There was some discussion back and forth as to what was a fair price,&quot; he said last month. &quot;The Army ultimately said this is what they wanted, and that's what they got.&quot;    Around the time the CIA was negotiating the price with the Army, former National Security Council aide Lt. Col. Oliver North was working out a $30 million sale price from Tehran. The difference, or at least part of it, is believed to have been diverted to the Contras. But Mr. Weinberger said it isn't clear whether the Nicaragua rebels actually received the money. Investigators are still trying to track the flow of the money that Iran paid for the missiles.    Mr. Weinberger said he insisted that the Army transfer the TOW missiles to the CIA according to terms of the Economy Act, which stipulates that government agencies charge one another the actual price for equipment they exchange. Although such transactions aren't unusual, the sale to the CIA was handled differently than most covert transfers in that a Pentagon &quot;special coordination&quot; group that usually oversees arms sales to the CIA wasn't involved.    Instead, Mr. Weinberger personally directed Gen. Colin Powell, at the time his military assistant, to deliver the order to the Army to transfer the weapons, according to senior Pentagon officials. Gen. Powell has been named the deputy national security adviser under Frank Carlucci. President Reagan authorized the sale of the missiles in January 1986.    Although the Pentagon's pricing irregularities may have helped create the profits that flowed to the Contras, Mr. Weinberger said he didn't learn about the alleged diversion until November, just before it was publicly disclosed by Attorney General Edwin Meese.    Mr. Weinberger said President Reagan also was surprised by the disclosure. &quot;I don't think he knew anything about that,&quot; the defense secretary said. &quot;He was misled and deceived.&quot;    Separately, Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel appointed to investigate the Iran-Contra affair, informed Mr. Meese and other Justice Department officials that he intends to take over three pending criminal investigations, law enforcement officials said.    During meetings with Mr. Meese and Associate Attorney General Stephen Trott at the department's headquarters, Mr. Walsh also spelled out for the first time some of the logistics of his investigation and how he intends to use FBI agents and other Justice Department personnel in the coming months, officials said.    In addition to setting up his own office in Washington, Mr. Walsh also accepted an offer from FBI Director William Webster for computer facilities and storage space for classified documents at the agency's headquarters, according to Reagan administration officials.    After the meeting with Mr. Meese and Mr. Trott, the Justice Department released a terse statement pledging full cooperation with Mr. Walsh and indicating that all &quot;relevant matters were referred&quot; for further investigation by the independent prosecutor. Department spokesmen declined to elaborate.    But officials familiar with the discussion said Mr. Walsh decided to take over a federal probe into the activities of Southern Air Transport, a Miami-based cargo airline that investigators believe shipped arms to Iran as well as to Nicaragua insurgents. Officials said Mr. Walsh indicated that he plans to delve into why the FBI, at Mr. Meese's request, sidetracked its investigation of the airline for at least 26 days last year.    The other two investigations for which Mr. Walsh will assume responsibility also involve allegations of gun smuggling or other criminal violations by American supporters of the Contras.    One is a grand jury probe begun last fall by the U.S. attorney's office in Miami, involving suspected illegal shipments of rifles and other weapons from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., to the Contras. The U.S. attorney has been looking into alleged ties between current or former Reagan administration officials and anti-Communist Cuban exiles who are believed to have participated in those shipments.    The other investigation that Mr. Walsh is taking over involves a Macon, Ga., grand jury inquiry into the activities of a network of private groups in the U.S. that have been supporting the Nicaragua insurgents. Law enforcement officials said the Macon grand jury is looking at the activities of retired Air Force Gen. Richard Secord. Investigators believe that Gen. Secord worked closely with Lt. Col. North in lining up assistance to anti-Communist forces in Central America. </TEXT></DOC>