<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880629-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Asian Nations Erect Barriers to Vietnamese Boat People --- Exodus Reaches New Peak as Economic Conditions Continue to Deteriorate </HL><AUTHOR> Steven Jones (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><TEXT>   Vietnamese fisherman Nguyen Dai Quy sailed seven days in an open boat to reach Hong Kong.    That was one day too long.    At 12:01 a.m., June 16, just hours before Mr. Quy's vessel bobbed into view, Hong Kong changed its longstanding policy of automatically granting refugee status to Vietnamese boat people. Mr. Quy and 30 others on his boat were classified as illegal immigrants.    Unless interviewers determine they are genuine political refugees, they have little chance of resettlement in the West. So they will be held -- perhaps for years -- in a closed camp to await return to Vietnam. Hong Kong authorities gave Mr. Quy the option of sailing on. But the 32-year-old fisherman says he would rather spend the rest of his life in Hong Kong detention than return to Vietnam.    Thirteen years after the Vietnam war ended, Asia is closing the gates to Vietnamese boat people. Faced with increasing arrivals, overflowing refugee camps and a dwindling rate of resettlement in the West, Asian governments are imposing harsher conditions in the refugees to deter the boat people. Officials in Thailand and Taiwan have even pushed boatloads of Vietnamese back out to sea.    In 1979, when the exodus of boat people peaked, non-communist Asian nations agreed to provide asylum to Vietnamese pending resettlement in third countries. Today, many Asian countries are no longer willing to accept the Vietnamese, many of whom, the countries argue, aren't fleeing repression and therefore don't qualify as political refugees acceptable for resettlement in the West.    &quot;They are simply people seeking a better life,&quot; said Sir David Ford, Hong Kong's chief secretary, in announcing the British colony's change of policy.    The first refugee wave in the late 1970s mainly consisted of ethnic Chinese, Roman Catholics, and South Vietnamese with links to the former U.S.-backed Saigon government -- all at odds with the victorious communist government. Many coming out now are ethnic Vietnamese fleeing their country's harsh economic conditions, not political persecution.    Last year, says the U.N. High Commission for Refugees, more than 28,000 boat people fled Vietnam, 44% more than in 1986 and the highest number since 1982. But only 21,337 refugees were resettled in the West last year, the first time in eight years that arrivals outpaced departures. Asian refugee-camp populations, up 25% in one year to a total of 40,000, are the highest since 1983.    Refugee workers and diplomats say the new exodus is mainly caused by worsening economic conditions in Vietnam. Crops have failed for the second year in a row, bringing millions of farmers in the north close to famine. Inflation is soaring.    An international embargo imposed after Hanoi's 1979 invasion of Cambodia effectively shuts Vietnam off from development assistance. Refugee authorities say they don't expect the flow of boat people to slow until the Cambodian problem is resolved and the West starts aiding Vietnam.    At a seminar last month in Thailand, representatives of first-asylum countries called for resettlement nations such as the U.S. and Canada to make long-term commitments to absorb more refugees, and for expansion of the U.N.-backed Orderly Departure Program, begun in 1979 to let more people leave Vietnam legally and reduce the need for illegal departures.    Aid workers say many of those fleeing Vietnam have exhausted their patience with the Orderly Departure Program, which can take years. More than 62,000 Vietnamese have gone to the U.S. under the program; the U.S. believes an additional 650,000 people are eligible.    For southern Vietnamese especially, a more attractive escape route opened last year to Thailand and Malaysia. After trekking overland from southern Vietnam to ports in southwest Cambodia, they take a short boat trip to Thailand, reducing the chances of drowning or being attacked by pirates. Using this route, almost 12,000 Vietnamese arrived in Thailand in 1987, three times the number in 1986.    The sharp rise caused Thailand to shift its policy of &quot;humane deterrence,&quot; which had stressed making refugee camps as austere as possible. In January, the Thais began pushing boats back to sea.    Officials say they can sympathize with Thailand's plight on refugees. In addition to the 14,000 Vietnamese boat people, there are 83,000 Laotians and 23,000 Cambodians in Thai camps. An additional 300,000 Cambodians have sought sanctuary along the Thai-Cambodian border.    Bangkok's push-off policy proved effective. Vietnamese boat arrivals slumped to 100 in March, down from 423 in February and 2,191 in January. In April, Thailand agreed with the U.N. High Commission for Refugees to stop repelling refugee boats. But it denied arriving Vietnamese the chance of being processed for resettlement elsewhere. Unlike earlier boat people, the new arrivals are being sent to a camp on the Thai-Cambodian border, which already houses 165,000 Cambodians, where everyone is classified as &quot;displaced persons&quot; who eventually will be sent home.    Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Hong Kong are worried that Thailand's tough policy will detour the boats to their shores. Hong Kong says some recent arrivals had originally planned to go to Thailand.    According to U.N. figures, 7,822 Vietnamese arrived in Malaysia between January and June 15, almost as many as arrived in the entire previous year. Its crowded camps hold 14,000 people.    Like Thailand, Taiwan is pushing refugee boats back to sea. Since January, a dozen boats have been stopped by the military and returned to sea after being repaired and provisioned. There are 21 Vietnamese in Taiwan's single refugee camp.    Hong Kong has never pushed away boats and maintains it never will. More than 7,600 boat people have arrived in Hong Kong this year, swelling the population of refugee camps to more than 16,000, the most since 1980.    There is little sympathy among Hong Kong residents for the plight of the new arrivals. This is because Hong Kong immediately repatriates illegal immigrants from China, many of whom have relatives in the colony. Up to 100 illegal immigrants from China are sent back daily.    The U.S. has taken about 60% of the boat people from Hong Kong. But diplomats say the U.S. and other countries aren't going to raise their quotas for Hong Kong until Britain accepts more. Britain has taken only 11% of the refugees resettled from Hong Kong to date. The U.S. has taken the largest share of the boat people, followed by Australia, Canada, France and West Germany. </TEXT></DOC>