<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861224-0171 </DOCNO><HL> Resistance to Fixed Prices, Quotas SeenAmong Obstacles to New OPEC Accord---By Youssef M. IbrahimStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/24/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   The move by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to trim oil production and resume control of prices world-wide may be the best it has ever devised.    But the plan, to cut a million barrels a day from the group's output and set a price averaging $18 a barrel, faces obstacles within and outside the group.    Among these will be massive resistance among buyers to paying fixed prices in a turbulent market, doubts about adherence by several OPEC members to their production quotas, the growing volume of unregulated, refined products sold by OPEC members, and the effects of the Iran-Iraq war on both countries' production, experts say.    &quot;It's not that it isn't workable,&quot; John Lichtblau, executive director of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation, says of OPEC's agreement. It is just that it &quot;is something new that may be very difficult to implement. In the end, the safety net is the old-and-tried production ceilings which can tighten supplies and boost prices,&quot; Mr. Lichtblau says.    Experts say OPEC's move to undo existing sales contracts by February and to abolish free-market oil pricing may render unnecessary its production cut to 16 million barrels a day. But they say the organization must steel itself against the anticipated resistance of oil companies. There is plenty of oil outside OPEC that could be sold at lower prices and a substantial amount of stored oil in company inventories.    &quot;I think OPEC production may drop (to) as low as 14 million barrels a day in February as companies go elsewhere to get cheaper oil or dip into their inventories,&quot; said one Arab oil trader, who asked not to be identified.    Within OPEC, the greatest worries concern the chronic inability of the United Arab Emirates to keep its production within its alloted quota.    The UAE, a union of seven tiny emirates, never has been a coherent political entity. Its major problem in OPEC is that its second-largest emirate, Dubai, refuses to lower its output of 350,000 barrels a day, while the UAE's chief oil producer, the emirate of Abu Dhabi, cannot continue to squeeze its own production to meet the OPEC quota of 902,000 barrels a day.    The result is that the UAE is producing closer to 1.2 million barrels a day, at least 300,000 barrels a day over its ceiling.    In addition, Kuwait and Venezuela, the two OPEC members that have moved aggressively into refining and marketing activities overseas, now sell less crude oil than refined products. This makes it almost impossible for OPEC's monitoring bodies to gauge their adherence to quotas because products, unlike crude oil, are nearly impossible to track.    Kuwait's entire quota of 948,000 barrels a day is sold as gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil and other products through its growing world-wide network of distribution outlets. Nearly half of Venezuela's production of 1.5 million barrels a day is in the form of products. Last October, OPEC discovered that Kuwait was exceeding its production quota only when the information was volunteered.    Finally, the Iran-Iraq war, which is in its seventh year, continues to be a source of difficulty for OPEC. Frequent air raids on Iran's oil-loading islands in the Persian Gulf have kept that country's production closer to 1.6 million barrels a day -- way below its quota of 2.2 million barrels a day. This has afforded a cushion for excess production by OPEC's cheaters, who have moved in to make up the gap in Iran's output without dumping too much excess oil on the market.    But Iran is getting better at fast repair work on its damaged oil facilities, say shipowners and oil company executives whose tankers call on Iranian ports. By summer, Iran may be able to bring production up to its quota, leaving little room for excess output by other OPEC members.    Iraq also is busy working on an expanded pipeline to the Turkish port of Ceyhan on the Mediterranean. By summer, it will have the ability to pump an additional 500,000 barrels a day to Turkey. This will bring Iraq's output to 2.1 million barrels a day.    Iraq's output could move even higher, to 2.6 million barrels a day, if Saudi Arabia allows it free use of a recently expanded pipeline to the Red Sea port of Yanbu. Iraq is prevented from pushing more oil through the pipeline now only because Saudi Arabia is keeping it closed in order to pressure Iraq to join OPEC's new, lower-production agreements.    This dispute isn't expected to last long. When the dispute is resolved, OPEC's only hope is to obtain Iraq's cooperation in accepting a lower production quota. Otherwise, the new Iraqi exports will flood an already glutted market. </TEXT></DOC>