<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871014-0163 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Germany's Entangled in a North Sea Watergate---By Enno von Loewenstern</HL><DD> 10/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Hardly more than a month ago people considered Uwe Barschel, age 43, prime minister of the West German federal state Schleswig-Holstein, a brilliant lawyer, successful chief of government and one of the up-and-coming young men of Germany's governing Christian Democratic Party. On Sunday, Mr. Barschel, deposed and disgraced, was found dead in a Swiss hotel room. The tale of his death is the tale of an intrigue whose grand proportions are just becoming evident. But the tale is also one that reveals much about German politics today.    The Federal Republic of Germany has seen many fights in its 40-year history. Scandals have played their part in political life. But there never has been the kind of trickery that is now emerging in the Barschel case. The famous &quot;Spiegel Affair&quot; of 1962, when then-defense minister Franz-Josef Strauss resigned after the federal prosecutor ordered the arrest of a magazine editor on charges the man betrayed state secrets, was not characterized by sinister party activities. It was a dispute of government vs. the press whose focus became a battle about the interpretation of German law. The deceit emerging in the current investigation, however, raises questions about West German party politics. Those questions are particularly addressed to Germany's large opposition party, the left-leaning Social Democrats.    In some ways, the treachery in the Barschel affair can be said to go beyond Watergate. Imagine Watergate, with Republican agents breaking in, a Republican administration on the point of collapse -- and then the Democrats blandly admitting: We knew all along they were coming, and we let them come. That, translated into German politics, is what happened in Schleswig-Holstein, that most staid and conservative northern German state.    The story broke on Sept. 12: The national news magazine Der Spiegel claimed that Premier Barschel had directed a dirty-tricks campaign against SPD opposition leader Bjoern Engholm. Der Spiegel said that a former employee in Mr. Barschel's press office, Reiner Pfeiffer, was saying that Mr. Barschel had ordered him to have detectives monitor Mr. Engholm's private life. Mr. Pfeiffer also said that Mr. Barschel ordered him to report Mr. Engholm anonymously for tax evasion, and to plant a bug in Mr. Barschel's telephone so that Mr. Engholm could be blamed.    A day later, elections were held in Schleswig-Holstein. Mr. Barschel's CDU lost its absolute majority. Together with the small center party, the Free Democrats, the conservatives now hold a precarious 37 seats, against 36 for the SPD.    Mr. Barschel hotly denied the allegations, even giving his word of honor in a dramatic press conference that his employee had lied. But the state government instituted a committee of investigation. Soon, the potential coalition partner, the FDP, got cold feet. Its leader asked not to be photographed with Mr. Barschel. Whereupon Mr. Barschel angrily resigned as prime minister, leaving the government in confusion and the CDU with the possible challenge of calling new elections.    For the CDU, the entire affair looked disastrous. To the public -- instructed by the press -- the CDU seemed to be the &quot;Dirty Tricks Party.&quot; Mr. Pfeiffer had supplied so many seemingly plausible details that the conservatives finally panicked last week and asked Mr. Barschel to resign even his remaining position as a member of the state parliament.    Mr. Barschel, for his part, made a terrible mistake: He departed the scene. He went to the Canary Islands off the African coast to prepare for his appearance before the investigating committee. But he sent messages insisting that he had been framed and would come and refute all charges. People waited skeptically. Who would have framed him? Some had suggested that the Social Democrats had cooked the whole thing up with Mr. Pfeiffer. But Social Democratic leader Engholm had flatly stated on Sept. 18 that the SPD had had no contact with Mr. Pfeiffer at all.    And then the bombshell struck.    While Mr. Barschel was still preparing his return from the Canaries, the Schleswig-Holstein SPD spokesman confessed to the district attorney that he had met with Mr. Pfeiffer on July 16, long before the scandal broke. The spokesman reported that Mr. Pfeiffer had informed him of Mr. Barschel's alleged dirty tricks. The Schleswig-Holstein SPD chairman, Guenther Jansen, also admitted having met with Mr. Pfeiffer as early as Sept. 7.    So it emerged that the Social Democrats had lied when, as the scandal broke, they claimed to have had no significant connection with Mr. Pfeiffer. And Mr. Pfeiffer had lied, too, for he had stated previously that he had first turned against Mr. Barschel on Sept. 9, when he went to to Der Spiegel. What's more: The SPD spokesman had not gone to the prosecutor on his own account. He had been called in after the police had found Mr. Pfeiffer's appointments diary with his name jotted down under the date of July 16. Had the diary not been found, nobody would know that the SPD long had been in on the story. Why had the SPD lied? Why hadn't it immediately confronted Mr. Barschel, or told the police, of the horrible story it had (it said) just been told? The party's only excuse for this behavior has been a statement that it feared Mr. Pfeiffer might be &quot;an agent provocateur.&quot;    It now seems possible that the late Mr. Barschel was the victim of a frame-up. None of the things Mr. Pfeiffer had engineered ever hurt the SPD and never could have hurt it. The tax denunciation supplied no details and was quashed on the spot. The detectives were given no hints where to spy on Mr. Engholm; instead they had behaved so conspicuously (using a snowwhite BMW with a Munich license plate) that they would have to be spotted -- and indeed they were spotted. Similarly, nothing came of the bug story. Indeed, if someone would think of cooking up a story that might somehow trap Mr. Barschel in horrible allegations without ever doing any damage to the SPD, this is exactly how he would handle it.    So everybody excitedly awaited Mr. Barschel's return. But it was too late. On Sunday morning Uwe Barschel, former prime minister, was found dead in the bathtub of his hotel room, lying in the water -- but fully clothed. Geneva police said on Monday that a preliminary autopsy showed heart trouble might have caused Mr. Barschel's death, but added they had not ruled out suicide or murder.    The story is far from ended. None of the exonerating evidence Mr. Barschel had talked of has yet been found. But it is important to note that the police weren't the first to discover Mr. Barschel's body. Reporters from the magazine Stern, whose reputation for accuracy was blemished several years ago when it published the socalled &quot;Hitler Diaries,&quot; were the first on the scene.    Regardless of how Mr. Barschel died, the Schleswig-Holstein SPD leadership will have to handle some hard questions by some angry people. More important, so will the SPD on a national level. Voters in the state are wondering whatever became of the placid Schleswig-Holstein they knew. Voters in all German states are wondering what is becoming of German politics.    ---   Mr. von Loewenstern is editorial page editor of Die Welt. </TEXT></DOC>