<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870310-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT EASED a requirement for obtaining asylum.    The justices ruled that the U.S. should grant asylum to illegal aliens who have &quot;a well-founded fear&quot; that they will be persecuted in their homeland. The decision rejected a White House appeal in the case of a Nicaraguan living in Nevada. The U.S. argued that a &quot;clear probability&quot; of persecution must be shown. The justices also allowed states to impose curbs on underground coal mining.    The court upheld a Pennsylvania law requiring coal companies to leave enough coal in the ground to avoid damaging buildings on the surface.    ---   A CONTRA LEADER QUIT as a director of the rebel umbrella group.    Arturo Cruz resigned as one of the three directors of the United Nicaraguan Opposition group. The move by Cruz, a former Sandinista official who has bipartisan support in Congress, makes even more difficult Reagan's fight to win $105 million for the rebels for next year. The resignation also comes as the House is to vote tomorrow on the release of $40 million of U.S. aid for Nicaraguan rebels.    Cruz had been dissuaded last month by State Department officials from leaving UNO's directorate following the resignation of Adolfo Calero.    ---   NORTH'S LAWYER ACCUSED Iran-Contra investigators of abusing their mandate.    During a hearing on constitutional challenges by North to halt independent counsel Lawrence Walsh's inquiry, the fired NSC aide's attorney characterized the criminal investigators as &quot;vigilantes.&quot; Meanwhile, fund-raiser Carl Channell, who worked with North to obtain support for the Contras, released audited data saying all income received by groups he controlled in 1986 came from within the U.S.    Congressional investigators appear to be moving toward granting immunity to at least one Iran-Contra figure. A meeting on the matter is expected today.    ---   Western experts said that official statistics on the Soviet Union's economic performance have been distorted to vastly exaggerate progress made under Soviet leader Gorbachev's new economic policies. These experts, however, disagree over whether Gorbachev is the author or the victim of the falsification.    ---   State Department officials said U.S. and European defense experts neared agreement on verification procedures to be included in a proposed U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating midrange missiles from Europe. In Moscow, Tass said the U.S. has placed &quot;extra conditions&quot; on the proposal, including a cut in Soviet short-range weapons.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir said he won't report to a parliamentary panel on the case involving American spy Jonathan Pollard because the matter had been thoroughly investigated. Trade Minister Sharon, meanwhile, accused the U.S. of withholding intelligence data and said Israel should stop apologizing for its role in the case.    ---   British maritime investigators said a preliminary inquiry into the capsizing of a ferry off the Belgian coast showed that water rushed through the boat's front loading doors, which apparently were left open as it left Zeebrugge harbor. More than 130 of the ferry's 543 passengers and crew were killed or are missing from the incident Friday.    ---   U.S. and French scientists are seeking to end a 15-month-old lawsuit over discovery of the AIDS virus. Statements from Washington and Paris said lawyers for the National Institutes of Health and the Pasteur Institute are trying to settle the suit, in which the French claim a share from sales of blood-test kits.    ---   Italian President Cossiga named Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti prime minister-designate. Andreotti, a five-time former premier, said he hoped to salvage the five-party coalition that collapsed last week after Craxi resigned. The Socialists, however, seemed unlikely to support any government led by Andreotti, a Christian Democrat.    ---   The U.S. and Greece postponed until &quot;a mutually suitable time&quot; exchange visits by senior government officials because of a dispute over U.S. aid to Turkey. Greek Premier Papandreou has accused the U.S. of favoring Turkey by giving it extra military aid and said this contravened a five-year accord on U.S. military bases in Greece.    ---   The Labor Department plans to issue rules soon to guarantee farm workers access to drinking water and toilet facilities. The department, however, said it would seek a rehearing of the court order requiring the action.    ---   The Philippine prosecutor recommended that charges be filed against 11 soldiers and three former officials in the 1983 assassination of President Aquino's husband, Benigno. All 14 men worked for the government of deposed leader Ferdinand Marcos. Meanwhile, Aquino opened campaigning for the May 11 congressional elections.    ---   Druse leader Walid Jumblatt said that the Hezbollah group apparently is holding Anglican envoy Terry Waite in Lebanon and that he had tried to negotiate Waite's release several weeks ago. The leader of the Amal militia, Nabih Berri, said the release of three Americans and an Indian held captive will take a &quot;little time.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>