<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881006-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Bitter Battle: Perot War With EDS Pits Former Friends In High-Stakes Affair --- Firm's Founder Hires Away 50 of Its Workers as He Chases EDS's Contracts --- Did GM Waste $700 Million? </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph B. White (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GM GME GOVMT </CO><IN> EDP PHA INS </IN><TEXT>   H. Ross Perot sounds bitter and angry, like a father betrayed by ungrateful sons. &quot;I hired them,&quot; he says. &quot;I trained them for 20 years. I gave them every raise they ever got.&quot;    Mr. Perot is talking about the men who run Electronic Data Systems Corp., which is truly his child. He founded EDS in 1962 and infused it with his feisty entrepreneurial spirit before selling it to General Motors Corp. in 1984. That spirit produced his celebrated clash with GM Chairman Roger B. Smith and his departure from EDS nearly two years ago. Now, that spirit is being turned on Mr. Perot himself.    The past week's exchange of lawsuits between Mr. Perot and EDS isn't simply more Ross vs. Roger. GM paid Mr. Perot $700 million in December 1986 to get peace and quiet and has wound up with the most viciously competitive &quot;no-compete&quot; agreement on record. The current fight, though, mainly pits Mr. Perot against his former friends and proteges at Dallas-based EDS, who are largely calling their own shots in the rapidly escalating battle against him.    The men include EDS President Lester M. Alberthal Jr.; Paul J. Chiapparone, who runs EDS's $2.9 billion-a-year business with GM; and Stuart Reeves, who runs the government-systems business that Mr. Perot's new company now threatens. These executives owe their considerable fortunes to Mr. Perot, and at least one owes his life to him. In 1979, Mr. Perot organized a rescue team that spirited Mr. Chiapparone out of Iran where he had been jailed, an episode celebrated in a best-selling book and a TV movie.    Nonetheless, these men are haling Mr. Perot, age 58, into court. They charge that the new company he started four months ago blatantly violates an agreement that he signed in GM's controversial purchase of EDS. They accuse him of &quot;predatory hiring&quot; of EDS employees and of trying to snatch away EDS customers.    Now, Mr. Perot is girding for war. He has hired more than 50 former EDS employees and is pursuing EDS contracts, including one to process some $1 billion a year in Medicaid claims for the state of Texas. EDS considers this one of its crown jewels and has declared a corporate red alert. Its employees working on the Medicaid contract are searched each day as they leave its offices in Austin, lest anyone smuggle out secrets and pass them to Mr. Perot.    Mr. Perot says he would never stoop to using purloined information to win the contract. But somehow he did get a copy of a confidential July 19 EDS memo that warns managers to shred files documenting problems &quot;that you wouldn't want to go into a courtroom.&quot; An EDS spokesman, dismayed that Mr. Perot has the document, says that the memo was the result of a &quot;miscommunication&quot; in the Medicaid office and was quickly countermanded by EDS management before any files were destroyed improperly. But the billionaire Mr. Perot is gleefully giving the memo to reporters along with a ready-made punch line: &quot;Fawn Hall lives in Dallas.&quot;    Battles between entrepreneurs and their old companies are nothing new, but the heavyweight players and the enormous stakes put this fight in a class by itself. EDS and Mr. Perot's new company, Perot Systems Corp., are vying for a big chunk of the nearly $8 billion-a-year global systems-integration and data-processing market. Both companies design, build and manage computer systems that keep track of inventory, process paychecks or help factory robots talk to each other.    EDS, the market leader, faces increasing competition. And Mr. Perot, who practically invented systems integration, presents a formidable threat to EDS's plans to increase its non-GM business to 50% of revenue from about 33% now. If EDS loses the court fight, he can continue his aggressive efforts to move in on EDS turf.    For Mr. Perot, losing to EDS now would clearly set back his new company; it would be effectively out of business until December 1989. A defeat would be an even sharper blow to his pride and his image, both of which he has staked on overcoming any challenge from GM.    GM officials, too, have their pride on the line. If the courts rule for Mr. Perot, GM will find itself in the ludicrous position of having paid him $700 million for virtually nothing.    Mr. Perot is clearly competing with EDS. But he says the letter of the buy-out agreement gives him that right as long as he works not-for-profit. As for whether he is nonetheless violating the spirit of the agreement, he says: &quot;Absolutely not.&quot;    Whether or not Mr. Perot has violated the agreement, the feelings on both sides are bitter. Mr. Perot used to say that &quot;when EDSers see a snake, they kill a snake.&quot; Now, the snakes, EDS executives think, are Mr. Perot and those who have defected to him.    Consider the case of Ross Reeves (who isn't related to Stuart Reeves). An 18-year EDS veteran, he had risen to become a vice president overseeing the company's vast network of computer centers. But on June 1, he was one of the first men to jump ship to Mr. Perot. &quot;I was bored to death&quot; at EDS, he explains.    No sooner did Mr. Reeves depart than EDS pulled the mortgage right out from under his Dallas house. EDS had arranged his below-market-rate loan, Mr. Reeves says, but when he left, the company told him to refinance immediately or have the dollar value of the discount rolled into his wages and taxed. EDS was within its rights, but Mr. Reeves says the company often had relaxed its rules for others.    &quot;It cost me $3,500 to $5,000 to get it done,&quot; he complains. &quot;Any relationship I thought I had&quot; with EDS executives &quot;was destroyed.&quot; Says an EDS spokesman: &quot;If the point is that we're being vindictive, that's petty. But here's a high-level guy who went to work for a competitor. Is there any good reason for us to continue to pat this guy on the back and say, 'Take our money'?&quot;    John King, another defector, says that when he quit EDS last June, he traveled from his Washington office to Detroit to meet with his boss, Mr. Chiapparone, and to offer to make &quot;an orderly transition.&quot; Then, he recalls, &quot;by the time I got back to my office {in Washington}, my boxes were packed up. That was the transition.&quot;    Mr. Perot's people say EDS isn't forwarding mail sent to their old offices. They add that potential customers and suppliers have been pressured by EDS executives not to do business with the upstarts. &quot;I called a government person I've known for many years,&quot; says J. Patrick Horner, Perot Systems' president. &quot;He got five phone calls from EDS demanding to know why he was meeting with us.&quot;    Such incidents mainly delight the Perot people. The highly publicized opposition from EDS, they say, provides lots of free advertising. Recruiting customers and employees alike, they add, is as simple as answering the phone or tearing resumes off the office fax machine. &quot;If we'd been left alone, our strategy would have been to grow more slowly,&quot; Gary Wright, a Perot Systems director, says.    The defectors complain that EDS has changed from the go-get-'em company they had joined to a giant, impersonal bureaucracy. If so, EDS may simply be a victim of its own success. Since being acquired by GM, it has added more than $3 billion a year in business and grown to 48,000 employees from 14,000. Such size, declares Perot Systems' Mr. King, breeds &quot;creeping lawyerism.&quot;    As if to make that point, EDS says it can't discuss the Perot situation -- on orders from its lawyers, who are led by a team from the Houston firm of Baker andamp; Botts. EDS executives are sick of Mr. Perot baiting them as lackeys who &quot;couldn't order toothpicks&quot; without approval from GM, a company spokesman says. He adds: &quot;They've been very disappointed by that kind of rhetoric, and if they were not under an order from their lawyers, they'd tell you so.&quot;    What they probably would also say, EDS insiders suggest, is that they think Mr. Perot is pursuing a vendetta against GM. He forgot that he sold his company, they believe, and that EDS executives developed great loyalty to the company itself and not only to its founder.    The men who run EDS are no slouches. Mr. Alberthal, EDS's 44-year-old president, helped build what now ranks as one of its biggest and most profitable businesses -- processing health-insurance and Medicaid claims for Texas, California and other states. In contrast to the fast-talking, acid-tongued Mr. Perot, this 20-year EDS veteran projects a soft-spoken, cautious personality perhaps better suited than Mr. Perot to managing a $4.4 billion duchy in GM's $100 billion corporate empire.    Mr. Chiapparone also is a quiet type whose experience in Iran left him chary of publicity. In a rare interview last December, he sidestepped any discussion of Mr. Perot and simply said: &quot;My whole focus is to build EDS.&quot; He apparently meant it: Last spring, he rebuffed Mr. Perot's enticements and told subordinates that he was dedicated to staying with EDS. (Mr. Perot says he talked to Mr. Chiapparone but never made a formal offer.)    Stuart Reeves, the government-systems chief, hinted at some disenchantment with Mr. Perot in a separate interview last December. &quot;We aren't Ross Perot's boys today, but we're still very confident,&quot; he said. Some of Mr. Perot's personal crusades, such as school reform in Texas, Mr. Reeves added, were &quot;a little bit of a burden&quot; to EDS.    As the conflict evolves, Mr. Perot is trying to play the underdog role he loves best -- a Tucker for the 1980s against the giant auto maker. There's some truth to that imagery. Perot Systems' main offices occupy less than a floor in a new office building in Vienna, Va., just outside Washington. The walls are decorated with posters of commemorative postal stamps. The &quot;data center&quot; is a couple of Apple Macintosh computers. Most of the company's dozen or so contracts are small.    But Mr. Perot isn't the typical little guy. His very name attracts business -- including the no-bid contract to help overhaul the U.S. Postal Service that first attracted EDS's ire last June.    And, Mr. Perot has deep, deep pockets -- made even deeper, ironically, because of GM's $700 million. So he can afford the highest-priced legal talent in the land for his little company, and he has hired it: Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore litigators David Boies and Thomas Barr.    Mr. Boies, one of Wall Street's most celebrated lawyers, recently masterminded Texaco Inc.'s defense against corporate raider Carl Icahn. Mr. Barr led Time Inc.'s 1985 defense against a $50 million libel suit brought by former Israeli Defense Minister Ariel Sharon and ran the Cravath team that turned back a huge antitrust action against International Business Machines Corp. in 1982.    In court, these men are expected to portray EDS as a corporate bully trying to crush an upstart competitor. EDS is even forcing its employees to sign new contracts, Mr. Perot's suit against the company alleges, specifying stiff financial penalties for defecting to a rival.    Mr. Perot not only admits to competing against EDS, he brags about it. When Perot Systems recently went after a customer (whom he won't name), &quot;we competed head on&quot; with EDS, he says, &quot;and they lost.&quot; But it doesn't violate the no-compete agreement legally, he adds, because &quot;we're working each contract on a not-for-profit basis for 18 months.&quot;    Whatever the courts do about the issue of whether Perot Systems is a for-profit concern, the real test could come in the arena that both sides agree matters most: the marketplace. Next month, the Texas Department of Human Services is scheduled to receive bids from companies seeking to manage the state's $1 billion Medicaid insurance program -- a contract EDS has held for more than a decade.    Under the current structure -- instituted under Mr. Perot -- EDS acts as an insurer, collecting &quot;premiums&quot; from the Medicaid plan and managing payments on claims. Estimates of the annual profit to EDS run from $7 million (from state officials) to more than $15 million (from Mr. Perot) -- between 2% and 4% of its total profit.    But now, Mr. Perot and his lieutenants are denouncing the &quot;insurance&quot; concept as simply a gimmick that gives EDS an uncontested lock on the business. Perot Systems wants the state to hire someone that will simply manage the processing of claims, not hold money as an insurer. So far, EDS appears to be winning. State officials recently put out a bid request seeking only companies that want to do it the old, EDS way. Both sides are mobilizing their political allies.    While the battles rage, Mr. Perot and EDS will expend enormous effort and amounts of money blackening each other's reputations. Mr. Perot himself acknowledges the wastefulness of the courtroom fight. &quot;This is really dumb,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>