<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880708-0188 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business: Mr. Greenspan Differentiates His Product </HL><AUTHOR> Lindley H. Clark Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON ECO </IN><G> FED </G><TEXT>   When Alan Greenspan was a hot candidate for the Federal Reserve chairmanship in 1983, some critics claimed, &quot;Oh, he's just a Republican Paul Volcker.&quot; Mr. Greenspan didn't land the job that year, but four years later he did, and at the moment he may be trying to differentiate his product.    Mr. Volcker became chairman in 1979 and soon announced he was going to do things differently. Henceforth, he said, the Fed would pay more attention to the money supply and less attention to interest rates. A number of hopeful monetarists thought he meant he would almost ignore interest rates, but that wasn't what he had in mind. Money may have been the main thing for a while, but not the only thing.    In January 1981, Mr. Volcker began getting some unsolicited advice. The Reagan Council of Economic Advisers recognized that the economy was in sad shape. The banks' prime rate had briefly touched 20% in 1980 as the Fed struggled with monetary policy. There was no official recession at the time, but the inflation-adjusted gross national product in the previous year had declined two-tenths of 1%.    The portents weren't encouraging. In Jimmy Carter's final Economic Report, he said, &quot;Over the next few years our country faces several economic challenges that will test the will of our people and the capability of our government.&quot; Jimmy really knew what he was talking about.    The key problem was inflation. The rise of the consumer price index had slowed a little in 1980, but the increase still had been 11.9%, and it was frightening people. What especially frightened the economists working for the Reagan administration was the potential cost of subduing the remaining inflation. In the past, efforts to check inflation by slowing money growth had brought on recessions, and some of the slumps had been horrendous.    So the Council of Economic Advisers suggested that the Federal Reserve go about the task gradually, slowing money growth over a period of five or six years. No one knew exactly what gradualism would achieve, because it had never been tried. But it seemed reasonable to suppose that it might shock the economy less than slamming on the monetary brakes.    In the event, however, the Fed chose to floor the brakes. The money supply, however measured, was flat in 1981. The prime rate soared above 21%, and the deep 1981'82 recession ensued. The good news was the inflation rate. In 1982, the consumer price index rose by only 4.1%, and it has stayed at about that rate or lower since then. Mr. Volcker walked into history as the man who killed inflation.    Inflation, however, takes a lot of killing. At the moment, inflation expectations are rising once again. An export boom has helped push production closer to full capacity. The unemployment rate is close to its lowest level in a decade. Despite the lower dollar, high-priced imports continue to stream in. The Midwest drought is bringing higher farm prices, which will show up in the consumer index.    Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is a student of economic history, well aware of all that has happened in the past decade. He would like to curb inflation expectations, but I believe he will differentiate his product, doing things rather differently.    He has one important advantage over Mr. Volcker: He starts with a much lower inflation rate. But he has disadvantages, too. In 1981, Mr. Volcker faced a Reagan administration that wanted to let the dollar find its own level in a free market; the last thing the administration wanted was any Fed market intervention. Since then the dollar has gone on a roller-coaster ride, first up and then down and now edging upward again.    The Third World debt problem, moreover, was relatively stable in 1981. The high interest rates produced by Mr. Volcker's tight money, in fact, helped start the problem on its way to a crisis. The debt situation, and what high interest rates and a U.S. recession might do to it, has to be much in Mr. Greenspan's mind.    Furthermore, 1988 is a presidential election year. Fed tradition dictates that the central bank keep a low profile in such years, seeking to avoid any charges that it is trying to influence the election. Mr. Greenspan, as a veteran Republican partisan, has a strong reason for wanting to appear to be above the battle.    So it may be that he has decided to try the gradualism that Mr. Volcker rejected in 1981. So far, at any rate, all of the Fed's moves have been very cautious. When the stock market crashed last Oct. 19, the Fed did exactly what a central bank should do: Mr. Greenspan announced that the Fed would make sure that the system had ample liquidity. It did, too, pumping reserves into the banks. But as the crisis eased it pulled out the reserves -- all of them.    There were those in the administration who thought the pull-out was too abrupt, but by spring the markets were worrying about inflation, not recession. So the Fed said it was tightening up money. And it was, too, in the sense it allowed an upward drift in the federal-funds rate, the fee charged on reserves that banks lend one another. The funds rate now is about a percentage point and a half above the discount rate, the fee the Federal Reserve charges on loans to member banks. In theory, banks could turn a nice profit by borrowing reserves from the Fed and lending them to other banks, but the Fed uses &quot;moral suasion&quot; to prevent that. If the Fed is serious about tightening, it will have to raise the discount rate soon.    It also may have to do more to slow the growth of the money supply. The monetary base, consisting of currency plus bank reserves, actually declined in the first half of May, but its growth has been rapid since then. &quot;Monetary policy is more accommodative -- quite a bit more than in 1987,&quot; says H. Erich Heinemann, chief economist of Ladenburg, Thalmann andamp; Co., an investment firm. &quot;The velocity of money has begun to rebound in earnest. Thus the stage is set for further growth in domestic spending at a time when overseas demand for U.S. products is soaring. As the competition heats up for a limited supply of human and material resources, so will inflation.&quot;    That's the sort of expectations that Mr. Greenspan and the Fed must head off if they want to make gradualism work. The Fed desperately needs credibility; that wasn't as much of a problem for Mr. Volcker, since in 1981 it was easy to see what the central bank was doing.    Once the Fed achieves credibility it can get big results with little action. Once the markets believe the central bank is moving against inflation, the moves themselves don't have to be drastic. To attain credibility now, however, the gradualist Fed will have to be a little less gradual. </TEXT></DOC>