<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0040 </DOCNO><HL> Cloudy Cases: Insider-Trading LawLeads to an Array of Interpretations---By George AndersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   You go to a party and meet a lawyer who advises Rupert Omnivore, a notorious corporate raider. The lawyer gives you a tip: Mr. Omnivore will soon &quot;make a run at&quot; Deadwood Industries Inc. You promptly buy stock in Deadwood. A week later, its share price surges as Mr. Omnivore goes public with his intentions.    Are you guilty of insider trading?    That sort of hypothetical question has legal experts, investment bankers and stock-market investors tied up in knots these days. Nicholas Brady, chairman of Dillon, Read andamp; Co., said in Senate testimony last month that he is confused about what is permissible and what isn't. &quot;There needs to be clarification of exactly what conduct is to be prohibited by the concept of insider trading,&quot; said Mr. Brady.    Some practices clearly are illegal, as shown by the recent guilty pleas in Wall Street's widening insider-trading scandal. Just last week, investment banker Martin Siegel pleaded guilty to leaking information about pending takeovers to arbitrager Ivan Boesky. Mr. Siegel's payoff: briefcases filled with cash, which he would pick up in secret meetings with Mr. Boesky's couriers.    But there are plenty of gray areas in insider-trading law. In fact, the Securities and Exchange Commission says it has resisted efforts to spell out precise guidelines, partly because it worries that shrewd market players may find ways to evade the spirit of the law, while just barely complying with the letter. &quot;The current approach gives the SEC a lot more scope,&quot; says Irwin Schneiderman, a securities lawyer at the New York firm of Cahill, Gordon andamp; Reindel. Mr. Schneiderman represents the investment banking firm of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which has been a focus of the government's current insider-trading investigations.    Here are some examples of what legal experts say are ambiguous areas that ordinary investors may have to worry about -- along with some sense of how the law currently stands.    The Raider's Tip   To some top lawyers, the example at the start of this story looks like a big loophole in current law. Unlike Mr. Siegel's situation, where he breached clients' confidences when he leaked information, raiders may be perfectly willing to have intermediaries tip off other investors about their next move. That's because such leaks can help move shares into &quot;sympathetic hands,&quot; aiding raiders in later stages of a battle for corporate control.    &quot;There is a real debate&quot; about whether such practices are illegal, says Dillon Read's Mr. Brady. Lawyers generally say they aren't too comfortable with raiders leaking their intentions, and they certainly aren't about to assure a raider that it's safe to do so. But so far, there hasn't been a test case, says Philip Parker, chief counsel in the SEC's enforcement division.    A critical issue is whether a tender offer is involved, says John Coffee, a securities-law professor at Stanford University. If so, Rule 14e-3 under the Securities Exchange Act strictly limits trading by interested parties. But if a raider hasn't yet decided how to wage a fight, Rule 14e-3 might not apply, lawyers say.    Still, buying on the basis of a tip may have another set of worries for investors, says Geoffrey Hazard, a professor at Yale Law School. If they are acting in concert with the raider, the entire group may be required to disclose its holdings, once these exceed 5% of a company's stock.    &quot;Insider trading isn't the only law pertaining to these situations,&quot; says Prof. Hazard. &quot;That's a point worth remembering when people hem and haw about the ambiguities of insider-trading law.&quot;    The Chain   You're an officer of Ennui Enterprises, and you're about to report disappointing quarterly earnings. You know not to sell before the news, but you tell your college roommate. He tells his daughter, who's married to a stockbroker. The broker tells his clients. They dump their stock in Ennui -- hours before the earnings are reported and the stock falls.    Have the clients done anything wrong? Have you?    Lawyers say the critical question for recipients of such tips is whether they knew, or had reason to know, that any of the sources were breaching a fiduciary duty in leaking information. If so, tip recipients shouldn't trade on the information.    In practical terms, the longer the chain, the less likely regulators are to pursue the case. Bevis Longstreth, a former SEC commissioner, recalls one inquiry that led from former Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Thayer to a series of brokers, to a group of world-class backgammon players. &quot;It was pretty remote,&quot; he recalls, &quot;and ultimately we didn't go after the backgammon players.&quot; (Officials did, successfully, bring a case against Mr. Thayer.)    Law-enforcement officials do pursue some chains, and the original leaker can face heavy sanctions. Just this week, criminal charges were filed against Israel Grossman, a New York lawyer who allegedly leaked nonpublic information to six friends and relatives about Colt Industries Inc.'s 1986 recapitalization. The recipients of the leak weren't criminally charged, but were charged in a civil case.    Early Word of News Stories   It could involve television, the business press or a medical journal. But you know in advance about a news report that should boost a company's stock. Is it legal to trade on this information?    The law is still in flux here, says Stanford's Prof. Coffee. A former Wall Street Journal reporter, R. Foster Winans, was convicted of securities fraud for leaking information about future Journal articles. His case is due to be reviewed by the Supreme Court.    On the other hand, the SEC chose not to bring a case against an Arizona researcher who traded in G.D. Searle options before appearing on CBS-TV to discuss Searle's Aspartame sweetener. The researcher said of his trading at the time: &quot;I don't feel it's unethical. I feel it's the American way.&quot;    An important test here is how such traders learned of the future news reports, says Prof. Coffee. If they misappropriated information from their employer, in violation of company policy, they would seem to be guilty of insider trading under the current Winans ruling. But it's questionable whether any insider-trading offense would occur if the investor didn't have a fiduciary duty to the news organization.    The Overheard Tip   Tired of your duties at Ennui Enterprises, you take off for the golf course instead. You can't help overhearing another group talking about their corporate acquisition plans. You buy the stock they mention. Sure enough, their bid comes a week later, bringing you big profits.    Have the other executives done anything wrong? Have you?    If the leak really was inadvertent, despite sensible precautions to avoid it, the overheard executives face little legal risk, experts say. They add that accidental tip recipients are probably in the clear, too, as long as they haven't taken unusual steps to glean the information.    But enforcement officials may ask a lot of questions before they're convinced that a leak was an accident. And Mr. Longstreth, currently a partner in the New York law firm of Debevoise andamp; Plimpton, says investors should think a little about their conscience, as well as the law.    &quot;For all the talk about gray areas, my clients can sense what's all right and what isn't,&quot; he says. &quot;They don't call me and say: 'Where's the line, so I can stay just barely on the safe side of it.'&quot; </TEXT></DOC>