<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880302-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: At the Summit Mr. Kohl Represents A Wobbly Germany </HL><AUTHOR> Amity Shlaes </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Helmut Kohl will be performing a juggling act for the world this week as heads of government of the NATO countries gather for their summit. Alliance leaders are supposed to be working together to construct post-INF strategy. But the West German chancellor faces the difficult task of representing a nation where opposition is mounting to vital NATO projects such as the modernization of short-range Lance missiles. West Germany's out-of-power parties have been pelting the chancellor with proposals leading toward a &quot;triple zero solution&quot; -- the removal of a third class of nuclear weapons. More formidable pressure comes from within Mr. Kohl's entourage, in the person of Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the Federal Republic's dovish foreign minister.    In Brussels, Mr. Kohl's prestidigitation may well succeed. Diplomats feel the odds are he'll be able to slip through the summit days without having to address the touchy Lance and short-range issue. Like Britain's Margaret Thatcher, the conservative leader was returned to power last year after successfully weathering the deployment of the intermediate-range missiles in the face of strong opposition from his countrymen. Infighting splits the pro-disarmament Green Party that gave so much momentum to the anti-missile movement. The Social Democrats continue on the wobbly course to which they veered five years ago when they fell from power. The normally divisive Mr. Genscher struck a note for NATO unity recently when he named conventional-weapons negotiations as the &quot;central problem&quot; of European security.    But the German chancellor faces longer-term problems that require more than a bit of diplomatic magic. Politicians and ideologues have succeeded in steering mainstream thought to the left in Germany. West Germany's out-of-power forces have waged an influential campaign of conciliation with East Germany and the Soviet Union -- with goals much more to the left than those of the Social Democratic Schmidt government of the late 1970s. Mr. Genscher and his Free Democratic Party have lent support to such efforts by pursuing a detentist line. The result is a sizable segment of the population interested in new detente and intent on tripping up many of the steps NATO is likely to see as crucial to the strength of the alliance.    The clearest symptom is the nation's Green Party, whose hope is to turn Europe into a nuclear-free park. In January 1987 the anti-nuke ecology group proved itself the nation's fastest growing party when it boosted the share of its votes in the national election to 8.3% from the 5.3% it won in 1983. Political savants are belittling the party's prospects because severe internal disputes this season are lessening the likelihood it will build a once-threatened coalition with the Social Democrats. But the party gained in the greening of West Germany. Thus 78% of youths contacted in a recent poll, sponsored by Stern magazine, backed the creation of a hypothetical government department called the &quot;ministry for the dismantlement of all nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.&quot;    While the Greens may have only a small part of the vote, their ideas have helped nudge the more powerful Social Democratic Party, Germany's large opposition power, toward a similar program. Once the Social Democrats were among the U.S.'s greatest allies. When East Germans erected the Berlin Wall in 1961, the Social Democrats' Willy Brandt, then Berlin's mayor, compared their action with the creation of a Nazi-style concentration camp. But today many Social Democrats are welcoming Gorbachev socialism with a line that sounds, to American ears, as if it were written from Moscow. &quot;What Gorbachev offers is the liberation of Europe and the world from the possibility of military threat from the Soviet Union,&quot; Egon Bahr, a Social Democratic foreign-policy maker, writes in a new book.    To trace the same Mr. Bahr's party activities over the past years is to see how far a non-government representation can get in making international policy. In 1985 he led the Social Democrats in preparing and endorsing a draft treaty that would create a chemical-weapon free zone in Central Europe. A year later they framed a second agreement calling for a 186-milewide nuclear-free zone along the border of the two Germanys. These policies play up to the longing -- natural enough -- for German reunification. But the draft treaties have an ominous side: They were concluded by the out-of-power SPD in direct negotiations with East Germany's very-much-in-power Communist Party.    Such measures have been helped by more conventional SPD efforts. Hans-Jochen Vogel, the gray-haired party leader, issued a pre-summit statement saying that the SPD &quot;will press so that . . . the modernization {of short-range missiles} is no longer a topic.&quot; At a high-level meeting of defense experts and politicians in Munich, Mr. Vogel voiced the party's support for the INF agreement. He blurred NATO's chosen focus on negotiating convention-alarms balances by tying it to the aim of &quot;a reduction of short-range nuclear systems and of theater nuclear weapons.&quot;    Mr. Vogel's perspective on this linkage has been shared by Foreign Minister Genscher, the most effective agent of left-leaning thought in Germany. The Free Democrats, junior partner in the Kohl coalition, have long been, as liberals in the 19th-century Anglo-Saxon tradition, the closest thing to advocates of economic laissez faire in cartelized West Germany. But on the foreign front, the party has a dovish profile. As foreign minister, Mr. Genscher has often been the tail that wagged the Christian Democratic Party. When in April West Germany's conservatives greeted the double-zero proposal with a mixture of skepticism and outright opposition, Mr. Genscher heralded it -- and, with Washington's aid, led the coalition to back INF.    The result is that Gorbymania in West Germany surpasses the phenomenon of the same name in the U.S. &quot;Perestroika,&quot; Mikhail Gorbachev's textbook placement of his new policies in the framework of Marxism-Leninism, has been No. 1 on the magazine Der Spiegel's best-seller list since it came out last fall -- while it only hit the No. 10 spot in the U.S. As early as last summer the Soviet leader had convinced 49% of Germans he was &quot;really concerned&quot; about peace, according to another Stern magazine poll, compared with President Reagan's 46%. Mr. Genscher has stood for more than a year at the top of one poll that asks citizens which politician they'd like to see play an important role in coming years.    Mr. Genscher's political ambitions are likely to cause most of the chancellor's defense challenges in the future. Pushing detente will be the central ploy in the Free Democrats' campaign to court the opposition Social Democrats in preparation for a possible Liberal-Social Democratic coalition in the early 1990s. For the moment, the German left-wing's mood is oddly muted. At a party to celebrate the INF accord last December, Greens squabbled so much they had no time to extoll the INF victory. But there's another reason the German left and liberal wings aren't making much noise lately. They don't have to -- their mission is being accomplished.    ---   Miss Shlaes is editorial-features editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>