<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870911-0067 </DOCNO><HL> Detectives on Disks: Law Enforcers UseNew Computer Software to Solve Crimes---By Hank GilmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   There are eight million stories in the naked city, and if Baltimore policeman Kai Martensen has his way, all of them will be on computer by this winter.    Mr. Martensen's version of high tech meets Hammett is a personal computer that can scrutinize clues at the scene of the crime -- such as the way the thief ransacked the master bedroom in a burglary -- furnish the police with a list of suspects, and even suggest the likely culprits.    Computer sleuths aren't just a flatfoot's fantasy. In fact, law enforcement &quot;expert systems&quot; -- software that uses the knowledge of experts to mimic human decision-making -- have caught on with a number of government officials in search of better ways to get just the facts, ma'am. The Federal Bureau of Investigation has already plugged into an expert system to help solve labor racketeering cases and the Internal Revenue Service just launched a unit to develop one, partly to ferret out tax cheats.    At this point, no one is sure whether the systems will become standard. For one thing, the software is fairly new, so its reliability is in question. And civil libertarians -- who fear some citizens might be unfairly singled-out for scrutiny because they fit a certain profile -- are saying the program itself may be a crime.    Those concerns aside, government and industry officials say expert systems can provide rookies with the skills of veteran cops and help them find the crucial flaws in what look like perfect crimes.    &quot;This isn't Star Wars here. We're talking feasible,&quot; insists Randy Manner, a manager with American Management Systems Inc., a software concern.    What hasn't been feasible is solving certain routine cases; the arrest rate for household burglaries in Baltimore County, for instance, is a &quot;dismal&quot; 15% compared with 80% for murders, says Mr. Martensen.    Part of the problem is that there are rarely witnesses to robberies. Moreover, detectives can't easily match a plethora of clues with the distinctive traits of hundreds of potential suspects. &quot;When you're a detective, how many suspects can you carry in your mind? Not many,&quot; says Joan Jacoby, executive director of the Jefferson Institute for Justice, and a participant in the project.    To help put the byte on crime, Baltimore County detectives have spent 150 hours being grilled about their investigative techniques. The third degree resulted in a set of &quot;rules&quot; that will guide the computer in its decision-making. For example: If the homeowners weren't on vacation during a burglary, the job was probably done by professionals. Amateurs rarely strike when their victims are in town. But even if the lights were on, music was playing and a car was parked in the driveway, the computer could spot the potential for an amateur's touch. After all, it wouldn't take a pro to notice the newspapers stacked on the front lawn.    The Baltimore system, which is funded by a National Institute of Justice grant, will also have rundowns of typical criminal behavior gleaned from data on about 400 break-ins that have already been solved. A ransacked bedroom, for instance, might be the sign of a novice thief. A seasoned burglar -- who knows what he's looking for -- tends to open drawers systematically, from bottom to top. There are other differences: while a professional may use a glass cutter to enter a house, an amateur might merely kick in the back door.    Spotting juvenile crime is a snap. Kids usually bypass the jewelry box for fad items such as boom boxes or trendy clothing. And they tend to strike within a mile of home -- they know when their neighbors are on vacation. Armed with this information, the computer can spit out a list of previous juvenile offenders in the area.    The expert system could also pick up more subtle clues to finger a specific suspect. For example, one local thief always moved the bathroom scale; police later discovered he used it to appraise his take of gold and silver jewelry. &quot;He brought it into the bathroom and went ahead and weighed his loot,&quot; recalls Mr. Martensen, the police chief's assistant. &quot;When he went to (a fence) to bargain for money, he had to know how much he had.&quot;    So far, though, expert systems have been more commonplace in federal agencies than in the local precinct. In fact, the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment says that 16 agencies are using some form of computer profiling, primarily for law-enforcement purposes.    The IRS is already developing 10 expert systems. One project, called &quot;Raven,&quot; is designed to help field agents determine whether late-paying taxpayers deserve penalty waivers. Apparently some generous agents don't investigate alibis extensively, which costs the IRS roughly $40 million a year. If a taxpayer claimed she was late because a house fire destroyed her records, Raven would instruct the agent to ask for the date of the blaze and to verify it with local authorities.    Perhaps the most renowned computer cop is &quot;Big Floyd,&quot; the expert system the FBI uses in labor-racketeering cases. In operation more than a year now, Big Floyd tracks the movements and activities of suspected criminals. Floyd even doles out tips to the feds, such as recommending a wire tap as the next step in an investigation. The agency is also developing a new expert system to profile serial killers.    The trouble with distilling data, however, is that profiles can quickly turn into dangerous stereotypes. The Drug Enforcement Administration's airport drug courier profile isn't computerized, the OTA says, but it is a good example of what could go wrong -- especially when race is used to single out potential suspects. A DEA profile might target as drug runners Hispanic males who pay for their airplane tickets with cash and make a phone call as soon as they get off the plane.    &quot;What we are concerned about is the use of profiles as probable cause,&quot; says Janlori Goldman, an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer. &quot;Just because a Hispanic person walks through a metal detector in the airport, doesn't mean he or she is carrying drugs.&quot;    The OTA has alerted system developers to the potential problem. &quot;Important privacy and constitutional questions are raised by computer profiling because people may be treated differently before they have done anything to warrant such treatment,&quot; it warned in a report last year.    For now, though, the main question is whether the systems can really work. The FBI is closemouthed about Big Floyd's track record. A spokesman would only say the expert system has &quot;helped&quot; agents in criminal investigations.    In the end, the long microchip of the law will probably be used primarily in investigations of repeat-offender crimes -- like burglary and arson -- where they can be the most effective.    If expert systems prove successful, they could profoundly change police work, ranging from training to the way clues are gathered, says David Webb, a superintendent of police for Devon and Cornwall, England, which tested an early version of the software. He adds that such a prospect doesn't sit well with many veteran detectives who often solve crimes using their gut as well as their heads.    &quot;The fact is, we're not detecting and not solving so many crimes about which the public feels so much apprehension,&quot; Mr. Webb says. Even only a slight increase in burglary arrests, he says, would make the expert system a success. If using such a system &quot;is to the detriment of traditional police methods, tough.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>