<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880615-0056 </DOCNO><HL> The Price Is Right: In Reverse Land Rush, Americans Now Pitch Property to Japanese --- Lure of Profits on Condos, Ranches Overcomes Fears About Foreign Investment --- Dear Tokyo: Can You Help? </HL><AUTHOR> Elisabeth Rubinfien (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> REL </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   They come from Oklahoma, from Montana, from Oregon. Three or four a week, the letters arrive at Century 21 Sky Realty here. And they're pretty much the same: &quot;I hear there are a lot of rich Japanese over there. Don't you think someone would want to buy my ranch?&quot;    That's not the half of it, either. In a Japanese-language magazine here, Morris Bibi and his wife are advertising their $2.1 million home in New York's posh Riverdale section. Mississippi real-estate broker Larry Bradley hawks 185 acres of farmland in a Japanese newspaper. And New York developer Madison Equities and realestate manager Helmsley-Spear Inc. stage seminars in a Tokyo hotel to tout luxury condos on Manhattan's Upper East Side.    In the U.S., it's fashionable right now to deplore the way Japanese investors seem to be buying up America. But from this end, it is clear that a lot of Americans are trying their level best to sell the place -- or at least their little hunks of it.    With their huge trade surplus, high savings rate and strong yen, the Japanese have become the Arabs of the 1980s. Their pockets are overflowing with dollars, and now American property owners are beating a path to the cash. For every eager Japanese buyer, there's a hungry red-white-and-blue seller. &quot;As I see it, that's the American way,&quot; says Mr. Bradley, the Mississippi broker. &quot;It's the free-enterprise system, and we all operate on it.&quot;    Yes indeed. From 1984 through 1986, the enterprising Japanese have more than tripled their U.S. real-estate investments to $2.48 billion, according to the U.S. Commerce Department. They haven't accumulated as much property as the British, Canadians and Dutch, who have been at it longer. But in 1986, the latest year for which figures are available, the Japanese were by far the biggest foreign players, sinking more than $944 million into U.S. property. Estimates for 1987 indicate the same pattern.    That makes some Americans jumpy. They fear inflated property prices, dependence on foreign capital, and less control over industrial, political and community developments. The Washington consulting firm of Smick-Medley andamp; Associates recently found that 78% of those polled favored limits on foreign business and realestate investment. Honolulu's mayor has already proposed a law controlling foreign purchases of non-commercial property there after a Japanese buying spree caused a 32% jump in residential prices.    Still, other Americans -- from investment bankers to rural homeowners -- continue pressing the Japanese to buy more.    Listen to Madison Equities and Helmsley-Spear sell condominiums in the Waterford, a luxury building on Manhattan's Upper East Side. &quot;Today we are offering the opportunity to own a piece of New York,&quot; croons the speaker as crystal chandeliers glitter and dim overhead and the Manhattan skyline flashes across a huge screen at the front of the Tokyo hotel ballroom. The rapt audience of 300 is taking in a free seminar on foreign investment.    The pitch is tailored to appeal to status-conscious Japanese, from glossy gold-and-white booklets about the $160,000 to $480,000 apartments to remarks by Helmsley-Spear representative Lee Weissman. The &quot;tasteful, refined&quot; neighborhood, he says, is where &quot;the city's most well-established families live.&quot;    It works. As the crowd streams out, a stocky middle-aged Japanese man in a plaid jacket and scuffed white shoes stops at a row of worktables, points at the building plan on the wall and asks a saleswoman, &quot;How much for that penthouse? I want that penthouse.&quot; Within two days, the man has made his down payment, 15 other units have been sold, and Madison Equities' $600,000 promotional budget for Japan has paid for itself.    Americans want Japanese buyers mainly because many will pay more than the going rate in the U.S. Japanese institutional investors regard a 10% to 15% premium on a prime property in a major U.S. city as still a good deal. Cautious and patient, they buy with a 10-year to 40-year outlook, plenty of time for handsome appreciation. Americans often want a three-year to five-year payoff.    Japanese individuals often accept inflated prices because they are ignorant of U.S. market conditions and the prices look cheap in yen terms. Very few seek U.S. properties to use; most are small investors who have been shut out of real estate at home by outlandish prices. So American sales pitches increasingly aim at the pool of savings held by Japanese individuals.    It's easy to see why the Japanese respond. In a typical issue of Nihon Keizai Shimbun, a major business newspaper, one ad offers new condos not quite in the center of Tokyo. Two 9-by-12-foot bedrooms and a living-dining room run 79 million yen (about $630,000). Two pages later there's a better option -- a luxury midtown Manhattan condo with twice the space priced at no more than 66 million yen, offered by New York's Eichner Properties Inc.    In contrast to $13,000-a-page ads stand some of the recent letters from rural America to Century 21 Sky Realty Inc., a Tokyo franchise of the big U.S. real-estate network. In seven pages of longhand on lined yellow paper, one middle-aged U.S. couple lovingly describe the 500 acres they're trying to sell in southern Oregon. Nancy Nelsen, an agency general manager, says she tried to explain that the property is off the beaten track for Japanese investors. But the couple had a comeback. They thought a new -- and presumably quite rich -- Japanese owner could move onto the land, build a heliport and then commute anywhere he desired.    A number of American real-estate brokers, and some savvy individuals, are advertising in a new Japanese-language magazine called the Worldwide. Page after page of glossy color ads surrounds alluring articles on American life and interviews with major developers. One Ohio advertiser even has a Japanese interpreter ready to help, if needed, with responses.    One recent issue offered Mr. and Mrs. Bibi's contemporary-design Riverdale home, with its 14-foot ceilings, quarteracre of land and large swimming pool. Though in the shadow of Manhattan, it is &quot;very much in the Japanese style,&quot; says Frieda Bibi, explaining that the couple hoped to attract a Japanese family moving to New York. &quot;And let's face it,&quot; she adds. &quot;The Japanese people have been buying quite a lot of property in and around New York City.&quot;    Warming up, she then lists the quality Riverdale schools (&quot;I know the Japanese people are very, very into education&quot;) and an already international neighborhood (it has &quot;all kinds of people&quot;). The $2.1 million price is negotiable, but Mrs. Bibi hopes a Japanese buyer will come closer to the asking figure than a U.S. buyer.    Dennis Haserot and his partner in a small Hawaiian firm have run up $60,000 in bills in the past year promoting development property in Hawaii and Southern California to the Japanese face to face. Staying at a top Tokyo hotel and pounding the pavement, they have concluded only one deal. But that was 140 acres in Hawaii sold to Hasegawa Komuten Co., Japan's largest condominium developer, for $2.9 million.    Frustrated neophytes trying to tap the presumed hoard of Japanese money can resort to unorthodox tactics. &quot;I started hearing Japanese are buying here and buying there and I thought, gee, maybe I ought to try and do this,&quot; explains Ron Hutchison, the president of Caron Realty Inc. of Englewood, Colo. He wrote to a Wall Street Journal reporter in Tokyo asking for introductions in exchange for a confidential finder's fee. (The Wall Street Journal's conflict-of-interest policy prohibits such activities by employees.)    &quot;What am I going to do?&quot; asks Mr. Hutchison when questioned about his offer. &quot;Write to Tokyo and say, 'Someone please help me'?&quot; He says he didn't realize his proposal to a journalist might pose an ethical conflict. In fact, paying for introductions is common real-estate practice.    Big, sophisticated developers have it easier. Seminars and established Japanese sales networks turn up clients primed to buy. &quot;In Japan, people are buying sight unseen,&quot; says Helmsley-Spear's Mr. Weissman. &quot;Japanese who purchase units at less than 60 million yen each don't need to look at them.&quot;    At their Waterford promotion, Madison Equities and Helmsley-Spear made special arrangements to handle everything from the investors' U.S. tax filings to managing the apartments they bought. For each of the first two years, Madison Equities also guarantees Japanese buyers who rent out their properties a 7% return on their money, not bad compared with Japanese bank rates of under 5%.    The sales material doesn't mention, however, that the Tokyo investor will pay 10% to 40% more than what Madison Equities quotes potential buyers back in New York. And the New York buyers may be able to negotiate an even lower figure; the Japanese price is firm. Mr. Weissman says the price in Japan is higher because of the guaranteed return, the special services provided to Japanese buyers, and the fact that some apartments sold from here will be furnished.    Mr. Weissman says all risks, the price differential and the effect of possible currency changes will be fully disclosed as closing comes near. &quot;We want to develop and maintain a reputation with the Japanese investment community,&quot; he says.    In some deals, however, critics worry that naive Japanese investors may be burned, because Japan's disclosure laws aren't as stiff as U.S. rules. Brokers and developers charging premium prices especially irritate some American real-estate experts. &quot;They're just trying to take advantage of the situation, and that's unfortunate,&quot; says Ken Keddington, a partner in Arthur Young andamp; Co. in San Francisco who advises Japanese real-estate investors.    The Japanese government is worrying, too. It not only wants to protect Japanese clients but also wants to stem foreign criticism by controlling Japanese speculators who are exporting the quick trading tactics that drove Tokyo prices through the roof. Stiffer reporting laws on foreign real-estate transactions are under consideration.    That would mesh nicely with the goals of Honolulu's Mayor Frank Fasi. Japanese speculators have created havoc in his district by buying mass lots of residential properties at inflated prices. He blames speculator-driven prices for the high taxes that anger his constituents. He wants to regulate foreign investment in residential, agricultural and conservation properties, since he can't control the sellers.    &quot;They don't give a damn about how they affect the rest of the community,&quot; Mr. Fasi says. &quot;A person has every right to sell for what he can get, but if we had a law controlling foreign investors or foreign speculators, he wouldn't have the opportunity to do that.&quot;    Talk like that echoes loudly here. Keidanren, Japan's main business organization, has established a forum on investing in the U.S. more discreetly. Many Japanese are embarrassed by the showiness of some investors and are wary of joining in. Japanese financial institutions such as life-insurance companies are especially concerned because U.S. regulations on foreign investment wouldn't just hit speculators. They would also limit pension funds, which now view U.S. real estate as a security, like stocks or bonds.    Regulation could make Japanese investment money harder to come by for those eager to sell U.S. properties. But some major American real-estate brokers are already figuring out how to keep their hands in Japanese pocketbooks by selling someone else's turf. Says Mr. Weissman, &quot;We're thinking of London and Canada next.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>