<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880627-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Military Scandal, Again </HL><AUTHOR> Robert Higgs </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS CNG </G><TEXT>   As the latest episode of a long series of military-industrial scandals unfolds, we know what to expect: investigations, indictments, trials, and a great many media reports and commentaries. Pentagon officials, consultants, corporate officers and members of Congress probably will be implicated. Some may end up in jail. Congressmen will call for hearings. New laws will be enacted. But when all this has run its course, the military procurement system probably will remain nearly the same. Fundamental reforms are not likely, even in the wake of scandalous revelations, because the system serves too many politically influential interests.    But fraud has never been, and is not now, the major problem. For every dollar diverted by fraud, there may be a hundred wasted by congressional patronage and micro-management, military intransigence and inefficiency, contractor mismanagement and cost padding, and pure bureaucratic bungling at the Pentagon. All of it has ample precedent.    In the winter of 1917-18, the government's program for mobilizing the economy nearly ground to a halt. The government adopted a priority system, but practically every order received a &quot;rush&quot; designation, hence no real priority at all. Independent procurement bureaus of the Army, Navy and civilian agencies competed against one another. According to a contemporary, the separate purchasing agencies &quot;beat the whirlpool to froth with their bidding and scheming against each other, each obsessed with a mad determination to achieve his own goal.&quot; Interservice rivalry reached heights fully as absurd then as now.    Fortunately for everyone, the war ended before the inherent flaws of the government's &quot;wartime socialism&quot; could reveal themselves fully. The Wilsonians hastened to proclaim their management of the war economy a shining success, and the public swallowed the story.    Meanwhile, Congress had taken advantage of the crisis to promote projects of its own. Under the guise of wartime necessity, the Lever Act of 1917 prohibited the production and importation of distilled beverages. The same act created the Fuel Administration, which nearly brought U.S. industry to its knees in 1918 by ordering a five-day &quot;fuel holiday&quot; followed by nine &quot;heatless Mondays.&quot; Congress also saw fit to raise income-tax rates to levels far beyond those contemplated by the ratifiers of the 16th Amendment.    Preparation for World War II witnessed at least as many foul-ups. Roosevelt would neither delegate real authority nor use it effectively himself. He disbanded the War Resources Board established in 1939 and suppressed its report, because it had recommended arrangements that trenched on presidential discretion. In 1941 he created the Office of Production Management to coordinate rearmament but crippled the agency by placing it under the joint authority of businessman William Knudsen and unionist Sidney Hillman.    Members of Congress seemed to worry more about patronage than Hitler. After making sure that their friends and relatives received cushy government jobs, they occupied themselves passing legislation to exempt farm laborers from the draft, keep agricultural prices high, steer war contracts to small businesses, and attain other similarly public-spirited purposes. Before the elections of 1944, Congress roused itself to pass, without a single dissenting vote, the GI Bill, providing various benefits for the 15 million future voters who had served in the armed forces.    During the war the armed forces rejected criticism and proposals to control costs. Although Harry Truman's Senate investigating committee criticized the military for making contracts like Santa Claus, Congress and the armed forces agreed that the best way to solve the problem was by throwing money at it. In the first half of 1942 alone, the government placed contracts valued at more than $100 billion (in current dollars), creating a demand far beyond the economy's capacity to respond.    The procurement program was a &quot;buckshot operation.&quot; Chaos reigned. According to an official history: &quot;Merchant ships took steel from the Navy, and the landing craft cut into both. The Navy took aluminum from aircraft. Rubber took valves from escort vessels, from petroleum, and from the Navy. The pipelines took steel from ships, new tools, and the railroads.&quot; By spending so much, though, the authorities accomplished great things in spite of waste.    With virtually unlimited access to funds, the Army and Navy entered into what an official Army historian, Elberton Smith, describes as an &quot;intimate relationship&quot; with the arms contractors. For a large part of the business, negotiated cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts replaced the sealed-bid, fixed-price contracts previously dominant. The government supplied contractors with working capital, raw materials, equipment, often entire factories. When contractors did invest their own money, they received special tax status wherein postwar losses could be charged against wartime tax liabilities. All these arrangements yielded contractors hefty profits at little or no risk.    Then as now, procurement agents cared more about speed of delivery and quality of product than about cost. Their own rewards depended on getting the goods and getting them fast, and they were spending the taxpayers' money, not their own. They became extraordinarily accommodating to the contractors. As Smith describes the arrangements: &quot;Contracts ceased to be completely binding; fixed prices in contracts often became only tentative and provisional prices; . . . potential losses resulting from many causes -- including errors, poor judgment, and performance failures on the part of contractors -- were averted by modifications and amendment of contracts.&quot;    Sound familiar? It should, because it also describes the procurement system that has flourished ever since. The opportunities for waste, fraud and abuse, political as well as economic, have been stupendous and have not wanted for takers.    Virtually all disinterested investigators agree that, relative to what was promised and expected, postwar weapons systems generally have cost too much, taken too long to develop and performed too poorly. But if misfeasors have been abundant, critics have scarcely been in short supply. Besides the incessant inquires of Congress and scholars, there have been three extensive studies by so-called blue-ribbon commissions: the Hoover Commission in 1955, the Fitzhugh Commission in 1970 and the Packard Commission in 1986. Each commission turned up similar problems; each made similar recommendations; each was about equally successful, which is to say, each had little impact on the system's fundamental structure and functioning.    Why so little success? Partly because each paid little attention to considering why its predecessors had failed. More important, elected and appointed officials face incentives to opt for quick fixes; elections are always around the corner. Reforms -- largely symbolic gestures and slight rearrangements of the organization chart -- are announced with a flourish, but political authorities invest only token resources in follow-up. Adversely affected parties hunker down and wait for the storm to pass.    In light of the foregoing, one is entitled to skepticism about whether anything worthwhile can be done. Getting the job done will require political entrepreneurship of the first rank. Treating these problems as just another item on a long list of political tasks will never allow reformers to marshal sufficient resources to overcome their many opponents, who possess all the advantages of inside information and entrenched position.    Success also will require an appreciation of history's lessons. One is that contractual forms make little difference when no contract is binding. Another is that Congress can spoil any system. Somehow, congressional involvement in the details of defense procurement must be curbed.    When it comes to those who work for the Pentagon and the armed forces, history shows that putting good people on the job won't help much. The problem is the system, the inherent incentives and constraints, not the people. Of course, the government's contracting officers ought to have training, experience and authority commensurate with their great responsibilities; and they, along with their counterparts in industry, ought to be made accountable. But none of this is the key. The main goal must be greater correspondence between the private interests of those who operate the system and the public's interest in having adequate national security at minimum cost.    ---   Mr. Higgs is Simon professor of political economy at Lafayette College and editor of &quot;Arms, Politics and the Economy,&quot; to be published this year by the Independent Institute of San Francisco. </TEXT></DOC>