<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881116-0072 </DOCNO><HL> The U.S. vs. U.S. v. North </HL><AUTHOR> L. Gordon Crovitz </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT LATAM MDEST </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> EXE JUS DEF CNG </G><TEXT>   One of the strangest courtroom spectacles of modern times is scheduled for Friday. The government will file a friend-of-the-court brief blasting the government's own criminal prosecution. This could never happen under normal circumstances because a prosecutor who violated Justice Department policies would be taken off the case and probably fired.    But never is now, because the prosecutor is Lawrence Walsh, conducting his case against Lt. Col. Oliver North. With a trial scheduled to begin soon if difficulties over use of classified materials can be resolved, Mr. Walsh last month finally explained the legal theories he's relying on in several hundred pages of briefs. His arguments against dismissing the most important charges, including Count One's conspiracy charge, de pend on legal positions entirely inconsistent with many long-held views of the executive branch.    The Justice Department last week warned the judge in the case, Gerhard Gesell, that Mr. Walsh &quot;mischaracterizes basic constitutional principles of separation of powers and executive branch authority,&quot; and noted that no one in the executive branch &quot;had an opportunity to review or respond&quot; before Mr. Walsh's legal arguments were filed. Mr. Walsh responded that he &quot;rejects the suggestion that {he} mischaracterized the law,&quot; and &quot;strongly opposes this wholly unjustified, 11th hour motion.&quot;    Mr. Walsh is an independent counsel, but the statute creating these special prosecutors says they &quot;shall, except where not possible, comply with the written or other established policies of the Department of Justice with respect to the enforcement of criminal laws.&quot; If an independent counsel refuses, he can be dismissed for &quot;misconduct.&quot;    Executive-branch officials are especially angry about the positions Mr. Walsh took suggesting that Congress is superior to the executive branch in conducting foreign policy. Abraham Sofaer, legal adviser at the State Department, sent a letter to Attorney General Dick Thornburgh suggesting a response to the Walsh filing. According to sources at several agencies involved in the controversy, lawyers at the White House then helped organize the prospective filing against Mr. Walsh, which was joined enthusiastically by the Justice, State and Defense departments, the National Security Council, the National Security Agency and the CIA.    It's not hard to see what has all these agencies so exercised. Here are some of the arguments that the Justice Department brief should declare out of bounds:   Congress, not the president, has the major say in foreign policy. In defending the constitutionality of the Boland amendments, Mr. Walsh makes the flat assertion that &quot;the Founders believed that Congress should have the ultimate authority in this area {of foreign and military affairs}.&quot; The more accepted view is the precise opposite. The Federalist Papers stress how the Constitution invigorated the earlier feeble executive by making the president the commander in chief. As Lt. Col. North's lawyers note (citing a study that originally appeared in this space last year), presidents have sent troops or war materiel abroad more than 100 times without any congressional authorization.    Mr. Walsh dismisses the leading Supreme Court case on this subject, U.S. v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp. (1936), which referred to the &quot;very delicate, plenary and exclusive power of the President as the sole organ of the federal government in the field of international relations.&quot; This especially outrages the Justice Department, where lawyers in separation-of-powers disputes over foreign policy for 50 years have relied on the phrase, &quot;Curtiss-Wright, so we're right.&quot;    Congress's power is so supreme that executive-branch officials can go to jail for violating laws Congress might have passed. A huge stumbling block to the Walsh prosecution is the ambiguous and possibly unconstitutional Boland amendments. The first question is whether they applied to the National Security Council staff and thus Lt. Col. North. We now know that President Reagan never thought so. &quot;The President's Intelligence Oversight Board (PIOB) delivered their annual report to me on September 13, 1985,&quot; President Reagan wrote, responding to questions from Mr. Walsh. &quot;That report, which our records reflect I saw, concluded that the Boland Amendment did not apply to the activities of the NSC staff.&quot;    This is the only interpretation of the Boland amendments by the executive branch, yet Mr. Walsh mysteriously dismisses the PIOB opinion simply as &quot;discredited,&quot; though he doesn't say by whom. He also ignores the fact that Lt. Col. North relied on this view, which would make it hard to prove he intended to violate the law. Mr. Walsh also argues that the Boland amendments would be constitutional if they did apply to the president's staff. That conflicts with one of the most fundamental principles of U.S. law, that Congress is powerless to limit through statute the president's constitutional powers.    Mr. Walsh may suspect he will lose both these arguments. He makes the further argument that whatever the status of the Boland amendments, the statute on &quot;conspiracy to defraud the U.S. government&quot; makes it a crime &quot;even when the wrongdoers violate no specific substantive criminal statute.&quot; In other words, it's a crime to &quot;conspire&quot; to commit a non-violation if that non-violation is something Congress might later outlaw. The following dumbfounded many lawyers throughout the executive branch:   &quot;Even if it were the case that the activities of North and his co-conspirators had fallen within some sort of loophole in the Boland Amendment, or were found not to violate specific provisions of the structure of legal control over covert action, the broader problem with their deceitful activities would remain: the defendants, aware of a clearly expressed congressional statutory effort to limit and closely monitor funding for the contras, chose to hide their activities from Congress to ensure that Congress would not have the opportunity to consider whether to close any such loophole.&quot;    This is a mind-boggling theory of criminalization. Under the Anglo-American system, crimes are supposed to be defined with precision, not by what Congress might do. The Walsh view is more reminiscent of the Soviet crime of &quot;hooliganism,&quot; with its definition changing with the political winds. This analogy is no exaggeration. Proposals for a total ban on aid to the Contras lost in both the House and Senate. Mr. Walsh ignores the fact that the Boland amendments were compromises that everyone at the time understood would leave the president and his NSC discretion to keep the Contras going until Congress passed new aid.    Congress doesn't have just oversight powers over the president, but supervisory powers as well. Consider this sentence from Mr. Walsh: &quot;Although Congress has not seen fit to prohibit covert operations, it has put in place requirements of reporting and accountability that enable it to exercise substantive control over particular operations when it should prove necessary.&quot; Mr. Walsh assumes that Congress could prohibit covert operations, a debatable proposition. He also assumes Congress can exercise &quot;substantive control,&quot; despite the president's dual role as commander in chief and chief executive.    In another section, Mr. Walsh criticizes the defendants for trying to &quot;thwart the normal processes of constitutional government by acting unilaterally.&quot; Such actions might be an affront to a system of legislative supremacy, but not to our system of checks and balances. The president and his staff often act without prior congressional approval and even with congressional opposition, on matters from negotiating treaties (beginning with President Washington) to transferring battleships to endangered allies (Franklin Roosevelt in 1941) to dispatching the Marines (innumerable occasions from Jefferson to Reagan).    At another point, Mr. Walsh suggests that Congress could prohibit the president himself from soliciting funds for groups like the Contras from other heads of state or from private citizens. He also repeats the charge that it's a crime for a charity to raise funds to buy arms, despite the contrary position taken by officials at the Internal Revenue Service and the Justice Department itself. In contrast to the rather scholarly arguments on behalf of separation of powers in the North briefs, the Walsh briefs are sprinkled with references to a &quot;secret slush fund&quot; and a &quot;secret war.&quot;    In a sense, this deep conflict between the executive branch and Mr. Walsh is simply another sign of the perversity of &quot;independent&quot; counsel. But it also matters that Lt. Col. North is now being tried based on charges that no normal federal prosecutor would bring. This makes equal treatment under the law a joke for accused executive-branch officials. This lesson will not be ignored by future officials, who will fear that pursuing executive-branch policies could mean risking prison.    This prosecution also runs the real risk of new judicial rulings that adopt a view of the &quot;government&quot; -- here Mr. Walsh -- that would redefine the relative positions of the executive and legislative branches in foreign policy. The system we had before Iran-Contra was not perfect, and certainly the executive branch needs to tighten its own self-regulation, but any system that gives Congress control over foreign policy is a guarantee of paralysis.    President Reagan has the ultimate power to call off the entire case by issuing pardons. The Walsh briefs strengthen the likelihood of such a move by highlighting the weakness of the prosecution. Whether President Reagan will issue pardons could depend on how much he cares about protecting the powers of the presidency.    ---   Mr. Crovitz is assistant editor of the Journal's editorial page.    ---   {See related story: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): If Not Now When?&quot; -- WSJ Nov. 16, 1988}</TEXT></DOC>