<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0088 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Pakistan in the Balance </HL><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>   President Zia ul-Haq's death should set alarms clanging in the noncommunist world. For years, the Pakistani leader had stood firm against Soviet expansionism. His support for the Afghan mujahideen helped force the Soviets to begin pulling uniformed troops out of Afghanistan. But the war in Afghanistan is by no means over. President Zia's courage could prove to have accomplished little if his successor is less stalwart and if the U.S. is lulled into believing -- against all evidence -- that Mikhail Gorbachev really has forsworn imperialism.    Right now, Pakistan's government is in the hands of a caretaker president, Senate Chairman Gulam Ishaq Khan, who is said to share Mr. Zia's toughness. Parliamentary elections are scheduled for November, but we know little about who will assume permanent leadership. All we know is that Pakistan will continue to face intense Soviet pressure.    When the U.S. State Department helped pressure President Zia into signing the Afghan peace accords in April, many Westerners assumed the Soviets had agreed to go home. But in fact the agreement to withdraw &quot;foreign&quot; troops was between Moscow and its own quisling government in Kabul and was interpreted only to mean uniformed troops, if it means even that. By some estimates, a large force of Soviet Central Asian troops now serves in Kabul military units. Kabul also has at its disposal a Soviet-trained secret police force, called the WAD, with a small army of at least 20,000 agents. In short, the Soviets may withdraw some troops but they clearly plan to maintain a presence in Afghanistan if they can.    A key part of that strategy is to shut off outside aid to the Afghan mujahideen resistance. To that end, Soviet-supported attacks on Pakistan have continued since the April accords. An Agence France Press dispatch on August 8 reported that an Afghan air force plane was shot down by a Pakistani F-16 while attacking Afghan refugee camps 30 kilometers inside Pakistan territory, near Miram Shah. The pilot, who survived, was not Afghan, but Soviet.    The Afghan KGB, or WAD, continues terrorist assaults in Pakistan. The most recent was a July 25 explosion near a Pakistani army officers mess at Peshawar. Since bombs are WAD's stock in trade, it rates top suspicion for the explosion that blew President Zia's plane out of the sky. That is another way of saying that the explosion could have been the ultimate extension of the campaign by the Russians to get the Americans and Pakistanis out of their hair while they try to consolidate their hold on Afghanistan by means other than actions by uniformed Soviet troops.    The terrorist campaign, which has killed hundreds of civilians, already had brought domestic pressure to bear on the Pakistan government to stop antagonizing the Soviets. Moreover, there is widespread unhappiness inside Pakistan with the continued presence of some three million Afghan refugees on Pakistan territory. The country's next leader will face a serious challenge from a largely left-wing opposition, of which Benazir Bhutto is the best-known example. Ms. Bhutto -- now six months pregnant -- has been reserved in her reaction to President Zia's death, but she is on record as favoring the expulsion of the Afghan refugees from Pakistan and good relations with the current Kabul regime.    There are other threats. India -- the large, ever-quarrelsome neighbor -- continues to curry favor, receive aid and buy arms from the Soviets. If the U.S. State Department continues to be glasnost-happy it won't be much help in supplying Pakistan's next president with the kind of anti-Soviet resolve needed to support the mujahideen on the battlefields of Afghanistan. Nor is it a help that U.S. legislators such as Rep. Stephen Solarz may very likely be tempted once again to use a U.S. aid embargo as the blunt instrument to stop Pakistan from developing nuclear weapons. This kind of brinksmanship serves none but the Kremlin.    Finally, Pakistan's next president will be facing an Asian scene in which the balance has been sliding away from the West. The pro-Western shah is long gone from Iran. India's prime minister, Rajiv Gandhi, is increasingly taking his mother's old pro-Soviet slant. Former U.S. military bases in Vietnam now serve the Soviets. America has vacated its bases in Thailand, and is in jeopardy of losing its bases in the Philippines. Offsetting some of this was the astounding headway made by the Afghan resistance, backed by a Pakistani president who would not let the Soviets dictate the terms. President Zia's successor -- when he emerges -- will start out with less political capital at home, less stature abroad. The Soviets, no doubt, will be ready to test his resolve. For that, the West had better be ready too. </TEXT></DOC>