<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861223-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Tobacco Farmers Brace for Lean Times in HopesPrice-Support Cuts Will Yield Long-Term Benefits---By Richard KoenigStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/23/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD) </IN><DATELINE> MAYSVILLE, Ky.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the office of the Home Tobacco Warehouse here, Garner Murray rocks in a chair by the space heater, makes liberal use of a spittoon and ventures a guess about the remaining weeks of the 1986-87 burley market. As a veteran warehouse agent, he has been observing tobacco auctions for most of his 84 years. This year, prices and volume are down.    Does he foresee a late surge? No, he says, &quot;I feel like the bottom is going to drop out.&quot;    Mr. Murray's glum view is shared by many farmers bringing their leaf to market in this Ohio River town for the first time since the overhaul of the federal tobacco program. The changes -- involving debt relief for farmers in exchange for their agreeing to reduced price supports and production -- were written into a budget reconciliation act enacted by Congress this year. In effect, Congress agreed to save the program if farmers agreed to sacrifice part of their income, at least for the short term. Now comes the time of sacrifice in the auction houses of Kentucky and other burley-belt states.    Over the long run, it is argued, the reduced price supports will help U.S. tobacco claim a larger market share in the U.S. and abroad. Then tobacco production will be allowed to expand. While waiting for those benefits, though, farmers must get through this period of painful adjustment.    &quot;The thing just doesn't turn around overnight,&quot; says Kirk Wayne, the president of Tobacco Associates, a Washington-based trade group promoting tobacco exports. &quot;Regrettably, I think, a lot of people were under the impression it would.&quot;    Kentucky, where burley is the leading cash crop, illustrates what farmers are coping with. Sales in the current Kentucky market, which opened in late November and will probably close sometime in January, may total about $500 million. That would be less than in any other annual burley market of this decade and little more than half the record sales of the 1982-83 market.    The tougher terms of the tobacco program pervade the Kentucky economy. According to several estimates, some 80,000 farmers in this state grow burley, the air-cured tobacco that adds flavor to blended cigarettes. For most of those growers, burley isn't the sole source of their livelihood. Yet for many it is an important supplement to other farm income or income from jobs off the farm. As many as 60,000 other Kentuckians, including many farmers who no longer grow tobacco, also feel the pinch of the overhaul, since they still own federally assigned production rights, or quotas. These quotas can be leased, and the lease values rise and fall with price supports.    But then, anyone with a stake in tobacco growing hadn't any attractive alternative last year except to go along with revision in the program that underpins the market. The tobacco program is supposed to operate at no cost to the government -- a condition designed to defuse criticism from anti-smoking activists and Reagan administration budget cutters.    Yet high price supports had led to a huge surplus of burley and of the flue-cured tobacco grown in southeastern states such as North Carolina. Tobacco-grower cooperatives, which buy the surplus with loans from the Agriculture Department's Commodity Credit Corp., saw their debt rise above $3 billion. Growers thus faced potentially ruinous increases in the federal assessments they pay to cover debt and storage costs. &quot;It turned out to be an albatross. There was no way anybody could survive,&quot; says Fred Bond, the general manager of a flue-cured tobacco cooperative in Raleigh, N.C. Indeed, some growers raised the once unheard-of idea of pulling out of the program, which would have left the government having to unload the unwanted tobacco to recoup its loans.    Hence the revisions. The growers, who approved the revisions by referendum, agreed to the lower price supports and quotas, partly through new formulas, and partly through a continuation of earlier Agriculture Department decisions. The cigarette manufacturers agreed to gradually buy the bulk of the surplus, some of it at a discount, as well as to contribute to future debt and storage payments. The Agriculture Department hasn't estimated its eventual write-off related to the discounts, which apply mostly to tobacco stored before the program was required to be self-sustaining in 1982.    The revisions are clearly curbing the surplus. Less than 5% of the burley crop, for instance, is being bought under price supports in the current market compared with nearly 12% a year ago. More tobacco is now being taken from stockpiles than added, so assessments on farmers should remain manageable.    Still, burley growers are rankled because the Agriculture Department cut price supports of certain top tobacco grades just before the market opened. Despite a corresponding increase for lower grades, growers contend they were hurt by the cut for reasons that involve the way buyers bid on the various tobacco grades. The average price that burley is fetching has dropped a couple pennies from this time last year, to about $1.58 a pound.    Price supports will remain under pressure since they are set according to a formula that gives a lot of weight to a running average of previous years' market prices. The lower market prices of the current burley market reflect not only the recent cut in supports but also an average cut of 26 cents a pound made in 1985 in anticipation of the revisions.    The other worry of farmers is volume. Shrinking quotas plus drought in some areas have made the burley crop now on the Kentucky market one of the smallest in decades. Cigarette consumption in the U.S. continues to be stagnant, and tobacco imports now fill about a quarter of the needs of U.S. cigarette makers. Even with lower price supports, U.S. tobacco can't compete on price with tobacco from such countries as Brazil and Zimbabwe, though cigarette makers will pay a certain premium for what they consider the high quality of U.S. tobacco.    Noting the market erosion in the U.S., Sen. Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) argues that &quot;exports are the way to pump life back into the tobacco industry.&quot; He notes relaxed trade restrictions that could make it easier to sell U.S. cigarettes in Japan, Taiwan and South Korea as reasons for tempered optimism.    &quot;If the growers are patient,&quot; says Robert Clements, an executive at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., &quot;then some years out, I think, production will go up.&quot; But he cautions that Reynolds, a unit of RJR Nabisco Inc., based in Winston-Salem, N.C., doesn't expect immediately sharp gains in Asia. And the surplus that cigarette companies have agreed to buy will satisfy part of their burley demands for several years.    For many Kentuckians who want to continue farming, there are few options to simply hoping that longer-term benefits from the revised program will come about. Burley still yields more revenue per acre than most other crops in the state, particularly since other crop prices also are weak. &quot;In these tough times,&quot; says Ray Mackey, president of the Kentucky Farm Bureau, &quot;you look around for anything else on the farm that's good, and it's not there.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>