<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0093 </DOCNO><HL> The SEC's Case Against Drexel: Drexel Faces a Stockholder Suit Claiming Injury From Wrongdoing Alleged by SEC </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen J. Adler and Laurie P. Cohen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> WIX </CO><IN> STK SCR BON </IN><G> SEC JUS </G><TEXT>   Piggybacking on the Securities and Exchange Commission's complaint against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and others, a prominent plaintiffs' lawyer filed suit on behalf of shareholders allegedly injured as a result of insider trading and other wrongdoing asserted in the SEC complaint.    Meanwhile, the two lead counsel in pending shareholder class-action suits against Ivan Boesky, Drexel and others, said they would ask the judge for permission to include in these suits additional allegations drawn from Wednesday's SEC action.    Lawyers said, however, that they do not expect suits against Drexel by companies whose stocks were alleged to have been traded illegally by Drexel and others. In fact, many of those companies said yesterday that they remain loyal Drexel clients.    Plaintiffs' shareholder lawyers spent yesterday analyzing the SEC complaint and plotting lawsuits. Such lawyers typically get a fixed percentage of any award or settlement -- often 20% to 25% in big cases -- and generally are prepared to file suit rapidly as soon as at least one shareholder approaches them.    Richard Greenfield, the shareholders' lawyer who filed what is believed to be the first suit late yesterday, received his first call from a shareholder seven minutes after newswires reported the SEC's filing late Wednesday afternoon.    Mr. Greenfield said he believes that potential liability against Drexel and the other defendants in all shareholder litigation could reach the billions of dollars, although his complaint specifies no amount. Lawyers for defendants, however, played down the impending shareholder litigation and maintained that their clients are innocent of any wrongdoing.    In his suit filed in federal court in Philadelphia, Mr. Greenfield seeks class-action status to represent what the complaint claims are more than 10,000 shareholders who traded in the stocks named in the SEC complaint between Jan. 1, 1984, and Dec. 31, 1986.    Mr. Greenfield's suit claims that Drexel engaged in a criminal enterprise that makes it liable under civil provisions of the federal racketeering law.    To prevail under the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, plaintiffs must prove such racketeering-related acts as mail or wire fraud were involved. The holders must also cite at least two different acts in which fraudulent trades were conducted. It's unclear, however, whether a shareholder must prove he was hurt by both trades, lawyers say.    &quot;The SEC complaint talks about an overall scheme to defraud,&quot; said Mr. Greenfield. &quot;We are going to basically pick up on that theme to tie together all the victims of any of the laundry list of transactions involving owners of publicly held securities.&quot;    RICO suits can be particularly potent because damages are tripled.    The shareholder litigation could proceed independent of the outcome of the SEC suit or any criminal action that might be brought.    The suit filed yesterday also includes more usual claims under federal anti-fraud laws banning market manipulation. In such a suit, a shareholder typically has to prove that he bought or sold shares that were subject to insider trading or other market manipulation and that he lost money as a result of that manipulation.    For example, if a shareholder sold to a person buying on inside information and the company was later taken over at a higher price, the shareholder would receive damages equaling the difference between his sale price and the takeover price. Put differently, the shareholder would get the benefit of the insider trading profits made on his shares. In a RICO action, he could receive three times that amount.    The suit filed yesterday is expected to be just the first of many. &quot;Plaintiffs' suits have historically followed SEC actions,&quot; said Andrew M. Lawler Jr., who is representing SEC defendant Pamela R. Monzert, a junk bond trader in Drexel's Beverly Hills office. &quot;If you're unfortunate enough to be named (by the SEC), it immeasurably increases the chances that you'll be sued by a shareholder who never heard of you before.&quot;    Attorneys for the defendants said that virtually all of the suits that may be filed would name Drexel as a defendant, while there would be fewer suits against the individual defendants who may not have been involved in all of the trades where insider trading, stock manipulation and other charges are alleged.    However, companies named in the SEC complaint as possible victims of insider trading or other securities violations indicated that they were not likely to sue Drexel or the other SEC defendants.    &quot;Based on our current knowledge of the situation, we would not anticipate that the filing of this complaint will have any negative impact on our relationship with Drexel or its people,&quot; said a spokesman for one of the companies, Wickes Cos. of Santa Monica, Calif. The spokesman added that &quot;the filing of these charges won't have any impact&quot; on the company's planned leveraged buy-out, which is being handled by Drexel.    Other companies that were allegedly subjects of unlawful activities by the defendants also said they don't intend to sue and plan to continue as Drexel clients.    The one named plaintiff in yesterday's suit is M.I. Grossman, who owned shares of Harris Graphics Corp., now a unit of AM International Inc. Named as defendants are Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. and Michael R. Milken.    The companies whose securities are included in the complaint are Diamond Shamrock Corp.; Occidental Petroleum Corp.; Storer Communications Inc.; Pacific Lumber Co.; National Gypsum Inc.; Stone Container Corp.; Wickes; Fischbach Corp.; Harris Graphics Corp.; MGM/UA Entertainment Co.; Lorimar Inc.; Lorimar Telepictures Inc.; MCA Inc.; Phillips Petroleum Co.; Viacom Corp.; and Burnup andamp; Sims Inc.    Meanwhile, lawyers representing shareholders who sued Mr. Boesky and Drexel Burnham last year said they would ask New York federal Judge Milton Pollack to allow them to amend their complaint.    Plaintiffs' lawyer David Berger said the amended complaint probably would include &quot;not only additional parties but also ultimately probably additional causes of action, and above all it would greatly expand the quantification of liability.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>