<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880630-0201 </DOCNO><HL> Pakistan's Zia Knows How to Stay on Top --- Combining Piety, Cunning, He Buys Opponents' Loyalty </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> ISLAMABAD, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Gulshan Dadan Khan Colony, a quiet borough just outside the capital, grew up years ago next to a little-used military camp. When the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, Pakistan's neighbor, U.S. arms provided through Pakistan to anti-Soviet Afghan guerrillas were stored at the camp, turning it into a giant ammunition dump even though it was next to residential neighborhoods.    One April morning, someone in the camp dropped a volatile phosphorus shell, sending the arms dump up in a ball of fire. Houses toppled. U.S. Stinger missiles, machine guns and mangled human limbs came raining down on what was left. Hundreds of people were killed or injured. In most other places, the political fallout would have been equally devastating. But the way Pakistani President Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq managed to defuse the situation helps explain how he has held onto power in the 11 years since he installed himself in a military coup.    He has survived two coup attempts, the wrath of the international human-rights community and pressure from India and the Soviet Union. He has stayed friendly with prickly Iran to the west and China to the northeast, while at the same time making himself America's best ally between Tel Aviv and Bangkok and one of its largest aid recipients. From 1982 to 1987, Mr. Zia's Pakistan received $3.2 billion in U.S. economic and military aid; Washington is considering an additional $4 billion for the next six years.    President Zia does it with a combination of piety and cunning. Oozing deceptive humility, he gives opponents what they want, exacting loyalty in return.    Any other military government that had just let a whole neighborhood go up in smoke would likely have hushed things up. But not the government of President Zia. Pakistanis wanted accountability, so even before the blasts had stopped, reporters and photographers were freely picking their way through the rubble and unexploded shells. Civilian legislators promised a no-holds-barred investigation.    But the army is one constituency President Zia can't afford to anger. So, as the team investigating the disaster homed in on two top generals, on May 27 President Zia dissolved the civilian side of the government, alleging the civilians were corrupt and that Pakistan needed more religion. He promised elections in 90 days and has been making economic changes.    The mood is peaceful today in Gulshan Dadan Khan Colony thanks to another element of Gen. Zia's survival strategy: His regime quickly compensated survivors.    &quot;Zia-ul-Haq has given everybody the chance to fill their bellies,&quot; says chemist Mohammed Yunis Ghaznavi. A shell blasted his garage away, and he got a check for about $4,500. He says that places him among the many troublemakers who got everything from cabinet posts to irrigated farmland during the Zia years.    &quot;If he hadn't compensated us, there would have been hell,&quot; he says. &quot;People are fed up, all right, but everybody who is fed up over here has got his price.&quot;    Pakistanis who are fed up with President Zia frequently cite his unfulfilled pledges to restore democracy. He launched his 1977 coup, code-named Operation Fair Play, with a pledge to hold elections in 90 days. The deadline came and went. Two years later, he tightened martial law and presided over the hanging of his predecessor, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, who had been convicted of ordering a political murder. He jailed dissidents and banned political parties. Again, he called for elections, and again he failed to hold them.    President Jimmy Carter, put off by President Zia's behavior and alarmed by evidence that Pakistan was building a nuclear bomb, cut off U.S. aid.    President Zia found other allies among the middle class, Pakistan's businessmen, and, most important, among the Moslem nation's religious hard-liners. They were ready to embrace anybody who wasn't Mr. Bhutto, a populist who had called for land reform and who had nationalized industries as he uttered Islamic pieties -- at the same time that he held vast tracts of farm land himself, drank, womanized and, apparently, rigged elections. By the end of Mr. Bhutto's years as prime minister, the economy was exhausted, rioters were in the streets and Moslem extremists had whipped up a mass movement much like the one that toppled Iran's shah.    Mr. Bhutto's foes mightn't have wanted martial law, but they did want a return to order, and an honest, pious president. President Zia gave them their wish.    &quot;Fortified by deep religious conviction, animated by the spirit of Islam, and sustained by an ideological 'elan vital,' Gen. Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq . . . is an enlightened and progressive soldier-statesman,&quot; trumpets his official biography.    At state dinners, the president pours wine for his guests, but in adherence to Islam never touches a drop himself. He refuses to live in the marble sprawl that is the official president's dwelling, preferring smaller quarters outside the capital.    The president set up Islamic courts and began having criminals publicly flogged. Thieves were to have their hands surgically removed, but no doctors were willing to do it. Foreign films were banned or censored. Banks were forbidden to pay interest and mullahs were sent to homes and offices to make sure people were praying five times a day.    The president &quot;so skillfully exploited the (religious) fundamentalist terminology in this country that he threw the fundamentalists off balance,&quot; says political scientist Tahir Amin. &quot;He blunted their revolutionary edge.&quot;    Then, when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in late 1979 and Pakistan faced superpower expansion just over the border, President Zia turned even that threat into an asset. He gave the Afghan Moslem guerrillas free reign to operate in Pakistan and passed on to them arms supplied by the U.S. and other nations. He also sheltered an estimated three million Afghan refugees fleeing the war.    And since 1981, the aid that President Carter cut off has been pouring back -- despite the continuing Pakistani nuclear program and the lack of democracy.    The Americans haven't forgotten the nuclear issue, but in an attempt to deflect criticism President Zia has become a disarmament activist, pushing to make the subcontinent a nuclear-free zone. That passes the nuclear guilt to India, which has already exploded nuclear devices.    As for democracy, in 1983 President Zia called for elections yet a third time, and kept his promise. In 1985, a parliament took office and martial law was lifted. But the civilian experiment was a fiasco. Most members of parliament were powerful landlords who simply pressed their thousands of sharecroppers to vote for them. Many of them squandered their budgets handing out gifts to constituents. In three years of civilian power-sharing, inflation tripled. The civilian government was so bad that President Zia could make even its dissolution look like a gift to the nation.    But how long can President Zia continue juggling his opponents while failing to create a government that can address Pakistan's problems? Minor events like power failures increasingly lead to riots and massacres these days.    Even Islam, which President Zia has used to unite the nation behind him, now threatens to divide it. This year's Ramadan, a month of daylight fasting, ended in rioting when leaders of rival Moslem sects couldn't agree on the arrival of the new moon, which marks the end of Ramadan. Hundreds died as people who were still fasting fought with people who had stopped.    &quot;There is no consensus in Pakistan,&quot; says a Western social worker. &quot;If they can't even agree on when they saw the moon, how are they going to agree on an economic policy?&quot;    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: President Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq&quot; -- WSJ July 6, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>