<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Small Business (A Special Report): Opportunities---Where the Money Is---By Udayan Gupta</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   To bankroll a small business, many people begin by tapping their savings accounts, spouses or parents. Not Dick Scoppettone. He threw a Tupperware party.    Champagne flowed and a grand piano tinkled in the background in Mr. Scoppettone's Santa Cruz, Calif., home while a slide show flashed on the wall behind the assembled guests.    When the bash was over, the entrepreneur, a former real estate broker, hadn't sold much Tupperware. But he was well on his way to raising $300,000 for the launching of his project, a musical comedy called &quot;Surferboy.&quot;    That's one way to raise money. And as unorthodox as such tactics may be, they can &quot;convey the dynamism of an idea to investors and get them involved,&quot; says Donna Hamlin, a San Jose consultant who helps seekers of start-up capital create videotape and slide shows. Other entrepreneurs turn to former employers, state-funded business support centers or a little-noticed federal grant program.    For many, these are the only sources of funds. Of the tens of thousands of businesses launched each year, only about 3,000 to 4,000 get money from institutional investors. And few start-up companies qualify for financing from other big lenders.    &quot;It's hard to get business loans from banks, especially if the amounts are for less than $500,000,&quot; says Hyman Shwiel, of Ernst andamp; Whinney, the accounting firm. &quot;And banks won't lend without collateral, which most small companies don't have.&quot;    As for private venture capital, one industry executive says, &quot;if you don't have a company with the potential to go public or be acquired in five years -- and a sales growth rate in excess of 30% -- forget it.&quot;    New businesses nevertheless do get funded. What follows is a rundown of some of their less obvious sources of financial support:    Federal Grants   For technology-minded entrepreneurs, the federal government now is one of the most active sources of start-up capital. Through the Small Business Innovation Research, or SBIR, program, 11 federal agencies have provided more than $1 billion since 1983 to 2,371 small high-tech companies, according to Innovation Development Institute, a Swampscott, Mass., concern that monitors such grants. &quot;The grants are neither debt nor equity, and can be extremely critical to the growth of a small high-tech company and its products,&quot; Anne Eskesen, president, says.    Almost $3 million in SBIR grants from such federal agencies as the Defense Department helped finance the early years of Scientific Systems Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., software maker founded in 1976. It used some grants to create successful products, such as computer software used by utilities to forecast energy demand. Other grants are helping to develop software that will let manufacturers check the performance of production equipment. The company went public late last year, raising $3.5 million in an initial stock offering.    Under the SBIR program, federal agencies that spend more than $100 million on external research contracts are required to allocate 1.25% of that money to small businesses with fewer than 500 employees that are owned and controlled by U.S. citizens.    &quot;The program provides pre-venture-capital funds for high risk research. It's money you can't get elsewhere,&quot; says Roland Tibbetts, SBIR program manager at the National Science Foundation.    The grants, supervised by the Small Business Administration but administered individually by agencies such as the National Science Foundation and Department of Energy, are usually doled out in two phases. Phase I grants -- usually less than $50,000 -- are used to test the technological feasibility of a project. Phase II grants of as much as $500,000 are then provided to develop a prototype or demonstration model. But Phase II grants are contingent on the entrepreneur finding additional financing or a corporate partner.    State Investments   States are becoming aggressive advocates of entrepreneurs. State legislatures in Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts and New York have voted in recent years to create programs to invest directly in entrepreneurial businesses. And many state-based pension funds are adding new capital to the effort. State commerce departments often act as clearinghouses for such investment programs, officials say.    Jeffrey Wilkins received $8 million from the Public Employee Retirement System of Ohio last year when he launched Discovery Systems, a maker of optical and compact disks. Mr. Wilkins, who had launched Columbus-based CompuServe Inc. in 1969 and sold it to Handamp;R Block Inc. in 1980, says that dealing with the state pension fund wasn't bureaucratic at all. Negotiations were trouble-free, he says, and there were only a few strings attached. One was that Discovery be located in Ohio.    The Massachusetts Technology Development Corporation provides between $100,000 and $200,000 in capital to state-based start-ups, and &quot;acts as a catalyst for financing from private venture capitalists,&quot; says John Hodgman, its president. At the end of June 1986, the state-sponsored agency had invested $7.4 million in 37 companies, with an additional $38 million provided by private venture groups.    Special Centers   Besides investing directly in young businesses, states such as Ohio, Michigan and Massachusetts are creating so-called incubators and technology centers to reduce an entrepreneur's need for start-up capital. Incubators typically are low-cost office complexes that provide basic business services such as accounting, legal advice and secretarial help. In Ohio, for example, entrepreneurs affiliated with one of the state's six technology incubators receive low-rent office space and access to attorneys and accountants, as well as technical support.    Technology centers seek to develop products. They bring entrepreneurs together with corporate sponsors and university researchers to explore technological change. In Massachusetts, entrepreneurs in the state's five technology centers work closely with state universities and companies such as Digital Equipment Corp. and Analog Devices Inc. &quot;The idea is to convert basic research into applications,&quot; says John Hodgman, &quot;We want to bring the research to where it's feasible as a commercial product.&quot;    Going Public   Even though the stock market responds best to mature companies, some start-up companies, mostly in high-tech businesses, have found public investors.    When venture capital was hard to find in 1984, the founders of PictureTel Inc., a Peabody, Mass., maker of products that convert video signals into digital signals and compress them, decided to seek public investors instead. But PictureTel's founders had no business experience, and the company hadn't any products or revenue.    To convince investors that they were serious about their endeavor, the founders offered to limit their own initial holdings in the newly public PictureTel to a special class of preferred stock. If the company founders succeeded in developing a working prototype within 15 months, however, they could convert each share of their special stock into two shares of common stock. If they failed, they would get only one common share for each special share.    Public investors liked PictureTel's approach. The company raised $4.2 million through its initial public offering. The product prototype, successfully completed in 10 months, helped the investors raise an additional $6 million this March.    Individual Investors   For most entrepreneurs, though, individual investors are the primary source of capital, says William Wetzel, a professor of business administration at the University of New Hampshire. These people provide more than $3 billion annually to more than 20,000 new businesses.    To link entrepreneurs with potential investors, the University of New Hampshire and the Business andamp; Industry Association of New Hampshire launched the Venture Capital Network in July 1984. It uses a computer to match potential investors with entrepreneurs, most of whom are looking for less than $500,000 of financing. Since inception, the network has provided more than a thousand introductions for over 200 entrepreneurs. About a dozen of these introductions have resulted in actual financings, Prof. Wetzel says.    Early this year, the California Technology Stock Letter in San Francisco launched the Venture Capital Connection, a similar matching service for investors and entrepreneurs. Networks that are more informal now are organized by almost every venture capital club.    Sometimes a former employer will give a new business a lift. When Alexander Nichols Jr. opened a computer retail store called Computer Friend in Pittsburgh, his former employer, Aluminum Co. of America, came through with a large order to purchase paper. Now Alcoa buys computer parts and peripherals, too. The aluminum maker accounted for almost half of Computer Friend's $500,000 in 1986 sales.    Other fledgling businesses get help from companies that want to supply equipment to them. Jeffrey DeSantis and his Consolidated Imaging Corp. in Suffield, Conn., received more than $1 million in financing from a unit of West Germany's Siemens AG when he purchased a computerized axial tomography scanner from Siemens. Without the financing, the provider of mobile imaging services never would have been launched, Mr. DeSantis says.    ---   Mr. Gupta reports on venture capital from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>