<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871028-0080 </DOCNO><HL> The New West -- Western Gloom:Resources-Rich BasinFinds Its TreasuresDon't Bring Prosperity---Coal, Uranium and Oil FalterIn Wyoming, Montana;Ranchers Also Hard Hit---Global Rivals Partly to Blame---By Dennis FarneyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG)PETROLEUM (PET)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   BLACK THUNDER MINE, Wyo. -- North America's largest coal mine is only a dot on an ocean of land, the Powder River Basin. Raw, empty country as stark and sweeping as Mongolia, it is a realm of cloud shadows floating over buttes and rangeland, of thunderstorms boiling up suddenly and trailing curtains of rain over the vastness, of lonely outposts such as Recluse and Spotted Horse and Crow Agency. At its edges are the mountains: the Bighorns, the Black Hills, the Laramies.    And beneath it, treasure -- or so its people always thought. Now, they wonder.    Blessed with oil, incredibly rich in coal, surfaced by grazing land, the Indiana-sized basin, which covers part of both Wyoming and Montana, is one of the West's mother lodes. In the late 1970s and into the early 1980s, it was gripped by a roaring boom. Today, the bottom has dropped out. &quot;People never realized a boom-bust cycle could run so fast,&quot; marvels Patrick Sweeney, the regional director of the Western Organization of Resource Councils.    Similar disasters are afflicting much of the West. The widely ballyhooed Age of Coal has never arrived, the uranium industry is near death, oil exploration is still torpid, commercial shale oil remains a dream, farmers and ranchers are failing. Many local economies have plunged into depression, and the hardest-hit states, including Montana and Wyoming, are suffering from constricted budgets.    The West, of course, is used to this: Boom and bust are woven into the fabric of its history, as the bleached bones of uncounted one-time boom towns testify. But the conviction is growing in the region that this bust is different, that this one may never be followed by a rip-snorting, light-your-cigars-with-$20-bills boom.    Prices for some commodities, notably copper, have perked up in recent months. And boomlets will still awaken specific industries; gold mining, for instance, is expanding greatly. But the overall prospects of the resource lands remind some Westerners of the old blues refrain: You may get better, but you'll never get well.    &quot;Natural resources will continue to be very important to us,&quot; says Idaho Gov. Cecil Andrus, who was Jimmy Carter's interior secretary. &quot;But I doubt we'll ever again see the kind of resources boom we've experienced before.&quot;    The reasons are many, bewilderingly diverse and beyond the control of anyone out here. They range from better-insulated houses in the U.S. to labor rates in Chile to big mineral strikes in Canada. What they add up to, however, is this: a new West more at the mercy of global competitors and societal change than ever before, one that will have to reduce a historical overdependence on the products of field, forest and mine or slowly wither.    Nowhere is the paradox of the new West -- distress amid enormous natural wealth -- more sharply etched than in the Powder River Basin. It lives and dies on minerals. Huge photos of strip mines and utility smokestacks hang in motels and restaurants, framed like art prints. Trailer camps in the sagebrush, like flotsam on a beach, testify to the high-water mark of the past energy boom.    Wright, Wyo., built by Atlantic Richfield Co.'s coal unit to house the boomers, sprang up almost overnight. The town is a phantasm of split-levels erupting from empty prairie, a place where most inhabitants are under 30 and almost none are over 50, a place whose cemetery still has no one buried in it.    Optimism has always come easy to the basin, a place of Brobdingnagian scale and limitless vistas. &quot;If You Don't Have an Oil Well . . . Get One,&quot; advises a sign in the Cowboy Bar, one oasis on the range. Free-spending oil and coal workers have scrawled their names on hundreds of dollar bills and tacked them to the ceiling -- each greenback a testimony to exuberance, to confidence. That confidence is shaken now.    At Arco's Black Thunder Mine, enormous coal trucks still scuttle like beetles in the great pit. Since 1977, Black Thunder has strip-mined enough coal to fill a train 12,000 miles long, and that is only a chip off the basin's titanic deposits -- coal enough, by one estimate, to meet all current U.S. needs for almost two centuries. But who will buy that coal in the future, and for how much?    Here in Campbell County, spot coal prices, which hit $8 a ton in 1978, fell almost to $3 this summer -- a ton of coal for the price of a pound of coffee. Thunder Basin Coal Co., Arco's operating subsidiary, is still working off long-term utility contracts at higher prices and is making money. But its $200 million investment in the mine has lost much of its allure.    &quot;At today's prices, nobody would build a mine like this -- nobody,&quot; Thunder Basin President J.A. Herickhoff says. &quot;You'd be better off leaving the money in a certificate of deposit. A lot better off.&quot;    Up in Montana, Brewster Pretty On Top, a Crow Indian, yanks a lever, and the 20-story Big Horn dragline bites off 115 cubic yards of dirt, pivots, and drops it like a bomb. Later, the 35,000-ton mechanism walks itself to a new position, groaning at each ponderous step. It is working the Absaloka mine of Westmoreland Resources Inc., 25 miles from the grassy hillside where Gen. George Armstrong Custer made his last stand. The mine once contemplated production of 11 million tons of coal a year. It is now producing about two million.    Nearby, work crews have dismembered the great metallic carcass of a second dragline, Crows Nest, and shipped it off to West Virginia. The Absaloka has coal seams totaling 50 feet in thickness and enough reserves to last two centuries, but West Virginia coal is closer to more customers.    Ten years ago, few people in the West's coal country foresaw the industry's current difficulties. Environmentalists and others were more worried that big hunks of the Great Plains and the Mountain West, including the Powder River Basin, would become a &quot;national sacrifice area&quot; -- the land torn up by power shovels and the towns overrun by hordes of raucous boomers, all so cities could have power.    Utility planners were forecasting steady, large gains in national electricity demand, and coal companies were rushing to the West for the fuel. A 1971 federal study had projected up to 21 gigantic coal-burning plants exporting power from the Montana portion of the basin alone. As recently as 1984, an environmental-impact report identified 125 potential sites for feeding crushed coal into an interstate slurry pipeline.    None of this happened, and, although the West is still selling a lot of coal, it isn't selling anything like what the industry was built to supply. One big reason: Utility planners were confounded by the success of energy conservation and the development of alternative power. Every tightly insulated house, solar array, wind farm and mini-hydro project, every industrial plant making electricity from its own waste heat has taken a nick out of coal's prospects. Now, the industry is shadowed by the acid-rain issue as well.    The $2.3 billion Colstrip generating station and mine, whose 692-foot smokestacks loom above a new town east of Absaloka, are eerie monuments to the boundless optimism of the past. The costliest private-power project ever built in Montana, it is also the only one of the once-envisioned 21 basin plants to get built. And it, too, is struggling with soft markets.    Between 1979 and 1986, the time it took to complete Colstrip's fourth and last generating unit, electricity prices bounced from 2.4 cents per kilowatt-hour to 3.3 cents -- and then slid all the way down to 1.4 cents. Midwestern demand for Colstrip coal has plunged, too. &quot;In the '70s, coal was going to be our national salvation,&quot; says a spokesman for Montana Power Co., which operates Colstrip. &quot;Today, coal is fighting for its market share with everything else.&quot;    Oil, the other linchpin of the basin's economy, also faces an uncertain future all over in the West, though for different reasons. The West's &quot;easy oil&quot; -- reserves obtainable at low exploration and production cost -- has been heavily exploited already. Old fields are reaching their peak or playing out, and estimates of undiscovered reserves have been declining. In a crucial way, the West is drying up.    The best remaining prospects are often in places expensive to drill. When sheiks half a world away tightened their production and prices soared close to $40 a barrel in 1980 and 1981, U.S. oil men could justify blowing $10 million on a single wildcat well atop a frozen mountain, as well as developing known reserves as fast as they could. But when oil plummeted below $10, as it briefly did last year, their enthusiasm disappeared.    Four years ago, more than 100 oil rigs were punching holes in Wyoming; late last year, only 23 were. Recently, the pace has picked up, stimulated by an uptick in the price of oil, but it is still far below what it was. Without considerably higher oil prices, it may not get much stronger.    The result, in the basin, is depopulated towns and desperate workers. Edgerton, Wyo., lost about half its 1983 population of 1,100, as oil boomers hitched up their trailers and left. In the one-store hamlet of Spotted Horse, former roustabout Craig McGee, a slight man in scuffed boots and torn jeans, downs a beer and reviews his job search: tried to get hired as a dogcatcher but wasn't qualified, tried for a jailer's job but failed.    &quot;There must have been 180 guys there with the same idea,&quot; he says wryly. Now, he ekes out a living as a ranchhand, his wife tends bar in Spotted Horse, and they raise pigs on the side.    Elsewhere in the basin states, and through much of the rest of the West, the fortunes of other resource industries have fallen more and more under the influence of foreign producers. In many cases, the U.S. is finding it difficult or impossible to match the lower labor costs and the rich deposits being developed abroad.    &quot;We're competing on a world scale in all these commodities, and we are the high-cost producer in virtually every one,&quot; says Jules Kamin, a Los Angeles economic consultant for QED Research Inc. &quot;The resource states simply can't rely on doing what they've done in the past.&quot;    The domestic uranium industry, the world's production leader only a few years ago, is already near collapse. Jeffrey City, Wyo., a once-bustling mining town west of the basin, today is a husk of what it was. In the former center of U.S. production, the Grants Mineral Belt of New Mexico, little is left of the business but mountains of faintly radioactive mine waste. One reason for the industry's bleak outlook: Its ores generally are only a fraction as rich and therefore much more expensive to process, as some bonanza lodes discovered in Canada and elsewhere.    Copper, another Western mainstay, is enjoying a revival -- for the moment. Demand is up, prices have risen from the depths this year, and idle pits in Western states are producing again. But the modest boomlet could be snuffed out as quickly as it arose; the fortunes of domestic copper have become increasingly subject to policy whims of foreign producers.    The U.S. industry has been losing its clout. It produced 24% of the world's copper in 1970, but now that market share has been chopped nearly in half. Big foreign mines with richer deposits and far cheaper labor can -- and have -- easily undercut U.S. mines (the Chilean giant, Codelco, is believed to have the world's lowest cost of production). In years past, they have flooded markets with excess copper for reasons of state: to create jobs and bring in precious hard currency. When demand slackens, they could do so again.    The pickup in copper hasn't helped Montana much, anyway. Once the keystone of the state's economy, the mile-wide mine at Butte known as &quot;the richest hill on earth&quot; was abandoned by Anaconda Co. in 1983, and although another concern has reopened it on a modest basis, the city remains deeply depressed.    So does the whole regional economy of the Powder River Basin states. Wyoming's total property valuation dropped by one-fifth in just the past year, and its combined income from severance taxes on minerals and royalties from production on federal lands has plummeted to $186 million from almost $300 million.    Ranchland values have fallen, too, and some owners, including former Gov. Ed Herschler, have lost properties to creditors. Ranching as a way of life and a profitable enterprise has been fading anyway, here and elsewhere; people eat less beef now. Kendrick Harmon, grandson of legendary Wyoming cattle baron John B. Kendrick, says: &quot;There are mansions out here, huge palaces, built with cattle money from the glory days. But nobody builds mansions on cattle money now.&quot;    Grappling with the budget crunch, the Wyoming legislature cut spending but still had to tap a &quot;rainy day&quot; fund for $72 million, wiping out half the pot in one stroke. The downturn &quot;is the worst thing that's happened to us since the Depression,&quot; says Phil Kiner, state administrator for research and statistics.    Montana, even more deeply traumatized, has had to swallow budget restrictions and its pride. In decades past, the state had been in the constrictor-like grip of Anaconda, which treated it as a colony, dominating politics, crushing all opposition and extracting a fortune from Butte while leaving little behind. When the coal boom began, Montana was determined that this time it would get from its resources the money needed to chart its own future.    Thus, it slapped a huge 30% severance tax on coal -- earning for its lawmakers the title of &quot;the blue-eyed Arabs&quot; -- and channeled the proceeds into three giant trust funds. Now, it has had to take $74 million from the education fund, all but gutting it. And, faced with soft markets in coal, it has pruned the severance tax itself to stay competitive.    Former state Sen. Thomas Towe, the author of the coal tax and lead defender of the trust funds, argues that these actions have cost the state something ephemeral but important: a budding sense of self-respect, the feeling that, at last, Montana was gaining control of its destiny. But he concedes that others are asking, &quot;Why leave {the trust funds} to future generations? We live right now. And our economy is devastated.&quot;    The feeling of powerlessness, of being manipulated by outside forces, is felt by old-timers who remember a different Montana long ago. Patty Kluver, a hardy, defiant widow of 66, is one of them. Mistress of a 40-square-mile spread near Colstrip, she fought in the courts for years to keep a coal company, which owns the subsurface rights, from digging up a piece of it. She lost. Now, she is battling to keep the company from polluting a pristine creek. But looking out over her domain, she says: &quot;Nothing protects us now.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>