<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870410-0157 </DOCNO><HL> Is Often Played in Snow---By Ken WellsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> KODIAK, Alaska  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Silver-dollar-sized snowflakes come tumbling out of the mist, delighting Andy Lundquist. &quot;With any luck,&quot; he says, &quot;it'll even get worse.&quot;    Luck just pours down on Mr. Lundquist, the chairman of the third annual Pillar Mountain Classic -- a two-day, one-hole, par-70 golf tournament recently completed here. It is played over a course so perverse and in weather traditionally so bad that merely finishing is a feat. Indeed, by the time a half-dozen four-wheel-drive pickup trucks groan up the side of Pillar Mountain for the final day of this year's event, flakes are pelting horizontally through an enveloping fog.    &quot;It's a lovely day for golf, gentlemen,&quot; says Glenn Yngve (pronounced ENG-vay), another tournament official. Emerging from his truck, Mr. Yngve leads a gaggle of players, clutching golf bags and pulling their parkas tightly around them, in a 10-minute trudge to a level spot of snowy ground. He bids play to begin with an admonition: &quot;Remember: Keep one foot on the ground and no stabbing above the elbow.&quot;    Warren &quot;Pogo&quot; Good ignores Mr. Yngve's advice, steps up to his ball and wallops an eight-iron. The ball -- painted Day-Glo orange to improve its visibility -- slices off into the billowing snow and disappears (forever, it turns out) into the murky gloom. Mr. Good, like Mr. Yngve a commercial fisherman, won this very tournament two years ago; this time, he forfeits a stroke and says: &quot;I got a bad feeling about this.&quot;    Small wonder, considering the course. It is a four-mile, 1,400-vertical-foot climb roughly following a rocky, abandoned four-wheel-drive road. A steep ravine and ball-swallowing alder thickets define the rough on the lower course.    Above the tree line, icy winds, freezing temperatures, blowing snow, thigh-deep drifts and impenetrable fog alternate to keep things interesting. The hole -- a green plastic five-gallon bucket -- sits in a bowl of snow at Pillar Mountain's peak.    Professional Golfers' Association tournament rules apply, with exceptions for local conditions. Golfers must play balls where they lie or forfeit a stroke. But players are allowed to carry hatchets and handsaws to clear away thickets and can tote snow shovels to probe for lost shots and topple shot-blocking snow banks.    Bending the rules seems to be rampant and is generally tolerated if cleverly executed. An example: Last year, a player whose shot landed in his caddy's backpack 50 yards downrange was allowed to retrieve his ball from the backpack -- technically a violation -- and play it from the top of a bottle sticking up from the pack.    But the shenanigans come to a halt during the playoff round, when the top seven golfers from the tournament's first day are stalked by scorekeepers.    It was during a dark, cold lull in the fishing season three years ago that the Pillar Mountain Classic crawled out from beneath a wager at Tony's Bar and became a golf tournament. A bored Mr. Ingve laid down $100 and bet fellow fisherman Steve &quot;Scrimshaw&quot; Mathieu that he could golf to the peak of Pillar Mountain, looming right above town, in fewer strokes. Kodiak, a town of 5,000 and hub of a huge salmon-fishing industry, lacked a real golf course but had no lack of would-be golfers, or bettors either. Soon there were 21 other challengers.    Mr. Good, who won the first event, couldn't participate last year when a volcano blew up near Anchorage and grounded his flight from that city to Kodiak. Mr. Mathieu prevailed, shooting a course-record 43 despite icy 80-mile-an-hour winds. So this year's tournament, which attracts 43 entrants, nine of them women, is billed as a showdown of the former champions.    Most participants are locals, but the challengers include Dwight Mahoney, a fisherman from Camden, Maine, and Shailer Cummings, a Miami scientist who has entered himself and his caddy as a team known as the &quot;Miami Slice.&quot; The winner will get $746.14 -- what's left after giving half of the entry fees to Kodiak charities and deducting expenses associated with stocking the tournament's liquor supply.    With his opening swing in the tournament's qualifying round, Mr. Mathieu proves that playing good golf here doesn't always count for much. He lofts a straight-arrow 100-yard shot -- only to lose it in an alder thicket.    The same fate awaits his next effort; and Mr. Mathieu, an affable but competitive spirit, caucuses with his caddy, Clifford Truman, and his spotter, a man who goes by the name &quot;Coyote,&quot; whose jobs are to stand downrange and track his shots. Mr. Mathieu's advice -- not printable in this newspaper -- seems not to make much difference. Yet a third shot falls unfindable into the rough.    John &quot;Buddha&quot; Ure, a competitor in Mr. Mathieu's foursome, tells Mr. Truman: &quot;Scrimshaw's going to have to replace you with an ugly dog, partner.&quot; Mr. Truman, looking mournful in a red floppy wool hat, says: &quot;I'm not sure, but I think he's already fired me.&quot;    Coyote, who won't confess to having a last name, is clearly having a poor day. Usually considered an eagle-eyed tracker of golf balls, he gained tournament immortality last year for tracking down an inebriated golfer who had wandered off for what could have been an eternal nap in the snow.    On Mr. Mathieu's fourth shot, Coyote finds redemption by spotting a ball buried in a tangle of alders and spruce. He sizes up the effort required to clear a swath for a shot and declares it impossible, saying: &quot;I don't have enough alcohol to tackle a job like that.&quot;    That makes it a considerable job, since Coyote is carrying a pint of brandy in one pocket, a pint of mystery liquor in another and a jar of white lightning tucked inside his buckskin jacket. Less daunted by the task at hand, Mr. Mathieu begins a logging operation. His 30 minutes of sawing proves pivotal: His next shot lands in a clearing 150 yards beyond, and he ends up with a 39 to enter the final round.    Just up the trail, Toby Sullivan, clinging like a mountain goat to a ravine wall, manages to get a seven-iron on his ball, perched half-way up the steep, grassy face. The ball spurts up optimistically, but gravity quickly intervenes. The ball thumps down, rolls between his feet and skitters into a creek 30 feet below. Mr. Sullivan, who seems to end up in the ravine a lot, won't win the tournament but does win the best nickname: Lee Ravino.    At the top of the course, in thick, swirling fog, Maria Minkoff takes her 160th shot of the day and says, &quot;I can't believe I'm doing this.&quot; Neither can a lot of people. Ms. Minkoff has waddled all the way up the course dressed in a Daisy Duck costume. She waddles off into the fog and ends up with a 172.    Meanwhile, Mr. Good, whose amateur golfing credits include two holes in one, easily makes the finals by blazing to a record-setting 30. Later, at Tony's Bar, the official tournament headquarters, he explains his strategy. &quot;I bought a lot of drinks for my competitors last night. I left early myself. I suspect I created a lot of hangovers.&quot;    In the final round on Day Two, the seven finalists start from scratch at the midway point on the course. The swirling snow and soupy fog give Mr. Good the hangover he had given to others. He loses ball after ball and finishes dead last with a 24. Mr. Mathieu gets a literal case of cold feet when he forgets to wear plastic bags over his tennis socks. It seems to chill his game, and he finishes in a three-way tie for third with a 20.    Meantime, Rick Lindholm, a Kodiak building contractor and tournament newcomer, has made it to the brink of the green with only 13 strokes. He chips his ball off a rock. It skitters into a deep footprint near the cup and pops out -- right into the bucket. Mr. Lindholm is the new champion with a 14.    Unheralded Tony Durr, the editor of the Kodiak newspaper, sneaks into second with a 19 and says, in retrospect, it was easy: &quot;When I quit trying to play golf, I did all right.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>