<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871118-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Security Slips at NATO's South Flank---By Jed C. Snyder</HL><DD> 11/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Wherever one looks abroad, it seems the U.S. is being asked to leave or to reduce its military presence. Virtually every bilateral access or basing agreement Washington maintains with its allies is in some jeopardy of &quot;renegotiation.&quot; This is particularly the case with its NATO allies, many of whom find it attractive to suggest Yankees go home. Observers question if the U.S. can afford the humiliation of being expelled from allied territory and suggest a strategic retreat might be in order.    Over the past several years, Washington has found it increasingly painful to renew agreements that govern the level of the U.S. military presence overseas. Typically, these bilateral treaties establish the conditions under which U.S. forces maintain access to installations on foreign soil. That access is constrained by a number of factors, the two most prominent being the host country's sensitivities to international and regional concerns and its desire to exact as high a price as possible for continued American access.    As a result of postwar streamlining -- the number of bases has been reduced to about 700 from about 2,300 during World War II's peak -- the U.S. became heavily dependent on a cluster of facilities in Southern Europe. These would be a major staging area for U.S. reinforcements during an East-West crisis. Host governments have exploited the new value of these installations, and question if they serve their interests to the same extent they do those of NATO or Washington.    Now the U.S. finds itself in a difficult struggle to maintain an overseas presence. Spain has announced it will not automatically renew the 34-year-old treaty with the U.S. that governs the American presence at several key air and naval bases. Spain is demanding that the U.S. Air Force abandon Torrejon Air Base near Madrid, where two squadrons of F-16s would, in a crisis, rotate to Turkey and Italy, vitally contributing to southern flank defense. In addition, Torrejon serves as a major staging, reinforcement and logistics airlift base for U.S. forces stationed in Europe.    After seven rounds of negotiations, Spain has refused to compromise, even refusing an offer to relocate the aircraft to another base location in Spain and to reduce the F-16 deployment by 30%. Spanish Defense Minister Narcis Serra, who has often described himself as &quot;pro-NATO,&quot; insists on some reduction in the U.S. presence as a minimum condition for renewing the defense agreement. He adds that Spain's own military forces can offset the loss of the F-16 wing. It is difficult to take this statement seriously, since the government of Felipe Gonzalez has refused to integrate Spain's forces into NATO's military framework. If Washington and Madrid are unable to agree within six months, the U.S. may have to prepare to withdraw entirely from Spain by May 1989.    In Greece, negotiations continue over whether U.S. forces will be allowed to remain after the current Defense and Cooperation Agreement expires December 1988. The Pentagon expects to lose access to at least one facility as part of a compromise that might allow U.S. forces at other bases to remain. The U.S. military presence in Greece has been an effective political issue for leader Andreas Papandreou, who has argued that such a &quot;large&quot; foreign military presence threatens Greece's &quot;non-aligned&quot; power, an odd designation given its membership in NATO. In fact, less than 2% of all U.S. forces in Europe are stationed in Greece. But Mr. Papandreou has defined Greek non-alignment as any policy that opposes the West. Recall his refusal to allow the use of Greek ports and air facilities for the resupply of U.S. forces serving in the U.N. Multinational Force in Lebanon. Even the United Nations, evidently, fails Mr. Papandreou's purity test. The contradiction between Greece's commitment to NATO and Mr. Papandreou's pro-Soviet brand of non-alignment seems, so far, to go unnoticed by the Greek public, which has generally applauded the government's anti-U.S. stance.    A second-order threat has appeared in two other Southern region nations, whose allegiance to the U.S. and NATO has generally been unquestioned in the past. Shortly after coming into power in August, the new conservative government in Portugal announced that unless it received substantial increases in U.S. economic and security assistance, Lisbon would re-evaluate whether the key U.S. air base at Lajes could continue to operate. Lajes serves as a critical refueling facility for U.S. military aircraft en route to Europe. It is also a key staging point for NATO anti-submarine warfare operations in the Azores.    Turkey refuses to ratify a new base agreement with the U.S. because the U.S. Congress cut the White House's current assistance request by 40%. Both Turkey and Portugal feel they are entitled to greater shares of U.S. aid in return for continued U.S. military access, particularly in light of the enormous levels of assistance that Washington grants Israel and Egypt. Those nations together receive more than 50% of the total annual foreign-assistance appropriation. Yet they have denied the U.S. a permanent military presence.    The challenge to a continued U.S. threat is not limited to Southern Europe. The Philippines has announced the future of Clark Air Base and Subic Bay -- the U.S.'s two most important installations in Asia -- will be decided by public referendum. In the case of all bases, though, the rising costs of overseas operations have been aggravated by a declining resource base and the insulation of special allies from U.S. budgetary pressures. Earmarking security-assistance funds for countries that maintain a &quot;special status&quot; with Washington has become a difficult problem for policy planners. With foreign-assistance resources decreasing annually by as much as 20%, it will be increasingly hard to commit sufficient amounts of aid to guarantee access to every country. Defense planners may be forced to choose. Further, the U.S. may be forced to reduce the levels of aid now given to Egypt and Israel, committing these new funds to those countries willing to accept a U.S. military presence.    A 25% reduction in aid to Israel and Egypt, for example, would increase the amount of assistance available to key basing states by more than 60% without jeopardizing Israel's security. If Greece and Spain were removed from the basing network and their security assistance was suspended and redistributed, aid for Turkey alone could increase by as much as 40%, greatly accelerating the timetable for Turkish force modernization, which is sorely needed. Turkey, with the largest land army in Europe, guards only one of two Soviet-NATO borders. Finally, this new policy could facilitate approaches to potential new allies -- Morocco, Tunisia and Cyprus -- whose strategic location presents new basing opportunities.    The choices are difficult. Clearly, a U.S. military presence reflects a bargain: Allow the U.S. to protect its international interests and your national interests will benefit as a result. That argument will not be compelling to all. But if the network of U.S. allies shrinks, and those remaining are genuine allies, then both the U.S. position and NATO's can only be strengthened. Perhaps, in some places, Yankees should search for new homes.    ---   Mr. Snyder, deputy director of the Hudson Institute in Washington, served in the State Department during the first Reagan administration. </TEXT></DOC>