<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880804-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN VETOED a $299.6 billion defense-authorization measure.    In a move that is expected to sharpen the campaign debate on defense, the president contended that the Democratic-controlled Congress had filled the bill with &quot;unilateral concessions&quot; to the Soviet Union. He also complained that it would slash funding for his space-based antimissile project. Supporters conceded a lack of votes to override the veto, and they probably don't have enough time to pass a new bill for the fiscal year starting Oct. 1.    The veto message included themes from Bush's presidential campaign, but Reagan emphasized that his decision was based on national security.    ---   THE HOUSE IMPEACHED federal Judge Alcee Hastings of Florida.    Voting 413-3, the chamber approved 17 articles of impeachment against the judge for high crimes and misdemeanors. He faces trial in the Senate. The central charge against Hastings is that he conspired to obtain a $150,000 bribe from defendants in a criminal case in return for leniency. He was acquitted of the charge in a federal court trial in 1983. Hastings, the first black federal judge in Florida, has said he is a victim of double jeopardy.    If convicted by a two-thirds majority in the Senate, Hastings would be the sixth federal judge in U.S. history to be so removed from the bench.    ---   Dukakis released medical data to refute unsubstantiated rumors that he had been treated for depression. The move by the Massachusetts governor followed a remark by Reagan, who called the Democratic presidential candidate &quot;an invalid.&quot; The president later said he &quot;was just trying to be funny.&quot;    ---   The Soviet Union released Mathias Rust, the West German flier who piloted a light plane into Red Square in 1987. Moscow called the release a humane act. Rust, 20, who had served 15 months of a four-year prison term for illegally entering Soviet airspace, returned to Frankfurt. His flight caused a shake-up in the Soviet military.    ---   Angola and Cuba rejected South African proposals for ending the 13-year-old Angolan war, but negotiators for the three nations and a U.S. mediator agreed to continue peace talks in Geneva. Pretoria offered Tuesday to grant independence to Namibia by next June if Havana's troops withdrew from Angola by the same date.    ---   Burma's government placed Rangoon under martial law after thousands of masked students marched through the capital to denounce new leader Sein Lwin, an ex-general who is held responsible for the ruthless supression of riots in March. He assumed power last week. Burmese radio said the move was taken to preserve security.    ---   Senate Democrats agreed to seek nonlethal aid for Nicaragua's Contras, but to defer action on renewing supplies of weapons to give the rebels and the Managua government another chance to reach a settlement in the country's civil war. The measure is expected to be offered later this week.    ---   Iran reported Iraqi air raids on industrial targets inside its borders as talks on a U.N. cease-fire in the eight-year-old Persian Gulf war remained stalled over Baghdad's demand for direct truce talks with Tehran. A senior U.N. diplomat said Iraq has twice refused to accept a peace timetable proposed by Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar.    ---   A PLO official welcomed Jordan's decision to sever legal ties with the Israeli-occupied West Bank, saying it placed Israel and the U.S. &quot;face to face&quot; with the PLO. In Amman, Palestinians urged the PLO to hold talks with King Hussein's government about the future of the Arabs in the West Bank.    ---   Vietnam has suspended assistance in the search for missing American servicemen and in resettling former political prisoners because of a &quot;hostile&quot; U.S. policy toward Hanoi. The action stalled recent agreements on the issues during a period of improvement in U.S.-Vietnamese relations.    ---   U.S. and Canadian astronomers found 10 planet-like objects orbiting distant stars, a discovery that intensifies speculation about the existence of life beyond Earth. By analyzing the color changes of light collected from stars, a report by the scientists said they have discovered &quot;what might be a very large planet&quot; about 90 light years away.    ---   A group of white South Africans refused to report for compulsory military service in a gesture of mass defiance. In public statements in four cities, 143 men announced that they wouldn't serve because they viewed the army as an instrument of unjust race policies. They could face six years in jail.    ---   India's high court released a Sikh sentenced to death for plotting the October 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, but confirmed that two others convicted in the slaying should be hanged. The three judges said the government hadn't proved that the Sikh, a police inspector, had plotted to kill Gandhi. They ordered him freed.    ---   Greece said it will close an American Air Force base near Athens. The base is one of four military installations operated by the U.S. in Greece under a defense agreement that expires at the end of the year. Athens didn't indicate when the base would be closed. Negotiations on a U.S.-Greece bases pact are to resume next month.    ---   Died: Raymond Carver, 50, short-story writer and poet, Tuesday, in Port Angeles, Wash., of lung cancer. </TEXT></DOC>