<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880616-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Paranoia Invades Report on Man-Made Microbes </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard D. Davis </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><TEXT>   In an apocryphal tale Sam Goldwyn had to get a temperamental actress to be filmed holding a small snake, so he arranged to have a much larger one also brought to the scene. When faced with this monster she screamed, but then relented when he said, &quot;You wouldn't mind this little one, darling, would you?&quot;    Some of us have felt a similar relief on seeing the recently released report of the Office of Technology Assessment on field-testing genetically engineered organisms. An early draft was alarmist and inconsistent, reflecting a long controversy between ecologists and microbiologists over this issue. Moreover, despite vigorous criticisms, later drafts showed little improvement. However, in the democratic process the mills grind in curious ways, and the final product is much less inflammatory.    Nevertheless, the report still bristles with compromises, for while it emphasizes the importance of advancing genetic engineering and the low probability of harm, it is still built on a curious assumption: &quot;Virtually any organism deliberately introduced into a new environment will have a small but real chance of surviving and multiplying. In some cases, an undesirable consequence might follow.&quot; Virtually all microbiologists and evolutionary biologists would consider this statement an indefensible example of ecological paranoia. The whole field of bacterial genetics, which has given rise to modern molecular biology, is based on producing variants that are obviously harmless and obviously unable to spread in nature.    Fortunately, the news media have chosen to focus on the reassuring statements rather than on the qualifications, and so the report has had a beneficial impact on public opinion. On the other hand, since the primary purpose of the OTA is to provide Congress with reliable technical assessments, the likely impact of this report on future regulation is even more important. From this point of view it has some real defects.    First, while the report proposes that planned introductions be sorted into high, medium and low categories of review, it opposes the exemption of any class of engineered organisms at this time. Instead, it says, all applications should be judged on a case-by-case basis. To the lay reader this must seem like a reasonable conclusion, on the assumption that we are feeling our way in an entirely novel world of engineered microbes. But, in fact, we know a great deal about the microbial world, most of whose members play beneficent rather than disease-producing roles. Moreover, we have had decades of experience in the commercial distribution of microbes engineered by earlier techniques.    The OTA report is thus built on a naive view of the microbial world. Moreover, it is quite at odds with the conclusions of other responsible groups: a committee of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Institutes of Health-Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, and even the Environmental Protection Agency. Current EPA regulations exempt from review a large class of recombinant bacteria; and many microbiologists believe they should go further and follow the NIH-RAC guidelines, which exempt virtually all non-pathogens.    Of course, the effects of any regulatory system ultimately will depend on how it is implemented, and the agency can create exemptions. But discouraging them, as the OTA report does, is unfortunate. For lack of exemptions will clearly hinder progress in this field -- and not only in industry. It would prevent any graduate student in an agronomy department from testing even a slight genetic modification of an organism without going through a cumbersome bureaucratic procedure.    While the issue of exemptions is the bottom line of this report, some of its other features also deserve comment. One is the failure to reinforce, or even to mention, a fundamental point made in the National Academy report: that regulation of a novel organism should be based on its characteristics, rather than on the technique by which it has been derived. Recombination of DNA in the test tube has become a standard part of modern biology, possible even in high-school curricula.    The report also fails to emphasize that biotechnology is not so radically novel. Mankind has carried it out for thousands of years, in the form of domestication: the selection of heritable variants of animals, plants or microbes that better serve human purposes. The new genetic techniques accelerate and expand this process. It is therefore important to recognize that domestication has not generated unexpected costs, as physical technologies have done; and in general its products do not grow beyond the areas where we cultivate them. If the new techniques lead to more radical changes, they will be even less likely to spread in nature.    The OTA report deserves further criticism for talking down to its audience. On many points it notes that some scientists feel one way, and others feel another way. Rarely does it spell out the specific arguments, although 132 pages allowed it plenty of space to do so, and the interested audience could surely understand the arguments. One cannot escape the impression that some members of the committee preferred to ignore these arguments rather than to analyze them. On the other hand, the report deserves credit for rejecting the model that ecologists have stressed: certain &quot;exotic&quot; organisms, well adapted by evolution, have become pests when transplanted to a new environment.    Finally, the report calls for increased funding of research on assessment and management of risks to the environment. But its argument is not strong. In fact, just as concern over hypothetical risks from recombinants in the lab has dwindled with advancing knowledge and experience, so it seems very likely that field-testing will have a similar history (excepting the interest of the military in pathogens).    Even more important, the history of other sciences suggests a much better argument for promoting increased research on bacterial ecology. The positive applications, aimed at maximizing the benefits from the new techniques, will surely offer this field a larger future than does the current negative approach. Moreover, this emphasis on research aimed at hypothetical dangers has its own danger: building a constituency of scientists with an interest in fanning the flames of public concern over a dwindling problem.    ---   Dr. Davis is Lehman professor of bacterial physiology, emeritus, at Harvard Medical School. </TEXT></DOC>