<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870416-0112 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)COMPUTERS (EDP)AEROSPACE (ARO)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Unlike the U.S. auto makers, American industry generally isn't facing a choice in the wake of the declining dollar -- a choice of matching price increases on imported goods and thus grabbing quick profits or of holding prices fairly steady and thus increasing market share in the U.S.    Some industries, such as steel, are so glutted world-wide that the companies are simply scrambling to survive. Others, such as the military-equipment industry, haven't had to choose between short-term profits and long-term gains because price plays a small role in sales of their products. And in sectors such as textiles, the main competition is coming from Asian nations whose currencies are pegged to the dollar and whose producers thus aren't much affected by the dollar's slide against most major currencies.    However, some industries, including the booming paper makers, have been able to raise prices. The weaker dollar helps the industry even though many paper products are commodities sold at world prices and many U.S. imports come from Canada, whose dollar hasn't risen much against the U.S. dollar. Domestic paper-product prices have generally risen because U.S. export markets have improved with the weakening dollar. For commodities such as pulp and linerboard, the U.S. industry has regained its position as &quot;the world's low-cost producer,&quot; a Weyerhaeuser Co. spokesman says.    And some industries, such as capital goods, are just beginning to face a choice of quick profits vs. market share.    &quot;Foreign capital-goods producers are only starting to increase prices, so it's hard to say what will happen, but U.S. capital-goods producers are more likely than some other companies to maintain prices and increase their market share,&quot; says Lawrence Chimerine, the chairman of Wharton Economics, an economic consulting firm. He notes &quot;a weaker world-wide market for capital equipment than for paper, plastics and other nondurables&quot; and adds that &quot;there's a tremendous amount of cost-cutting still going on.&quot;    Many industry executives agree.    &quot;We're not looking at this as an opportunity to raise prices,&quot; says Donald G. Shively, an executive vice president at Cincinnati Milacron Inc., a maker of machine tools, plastics machinery and robots. &quot;We're trying to hold the line on prices and improve profits by cutting costs.&quot;    The capital-equipment makers aren't cutting prices, however. Reginald Eklund, the chief executive of Yale Materials Handling Corp., says the maker of electric trucks isn't trying to underprice Japanese lift-truck makers to win market share. &quot;We don't think it would work,&quot; he says. &quot;If it did, it would be a very expensive game because these are big companies with deep pockets.&quot; Similarly, Caterpillar Inc., a construction-machinery concern, says it isn't underpricing imports.    In the steel industry, the dollar's plunge has hurt many foreign exporters but so far has aided U.S. producers very little. American steelmakers are suffering not only from direct steel imports but also from huge imports of manufactured steel goods. And steel-using manufacturers that moved overseas to take advantage of cheap labor and the then-overvalued dollar won't return overnight.    Moreover, it is unclear just how much direct imports will be reduced by the weaker dollar. Foreign steelmakers had already captured a quarter of the U.S. market by 1982, when the dollar began climbing against the yen, but trade restrictions protected the U.S. companies a bit. Now, &quot;steel companies are slow to reap the benefits of the dollar's decline,&quot; says John Tumazos, an Oppenheimer andamp; Co. analyst.    Battered by slack demand and low prices, American steelmakers certainly would support any price increases initiated abroad. But foreign producers haven't given them much opportunity so far, raising export prices only modestly even though their domestic prices are up sharply. They aren't likely to forsake hard-won markets.    &quot;Cutting back exports to the U.S. would simply mean losing their position in the U.S. market, which is still the biggest and highest-priced market in the world,&quot; says Peter F. Marcus, PaineWebber Inc.'s steel analyst.    And although the dollar has dropped against the yen, it hasn't done so against the currencies of many developing nations -- which are quickly becoming the world's major steel exporters. Of the 14 nations in a steel-weighted dollar index constructed by Mr. Tumazos, Japan is the only significant steel exporter whose currency is weaker today than in 1980. Yet Japan's share of the U.S. import market has dwindled from 39% in 1980 to 23%. Whatever Japan has yielded, the developing nations have absorbed.    For computer makers, the weak dollar's effects are so ambiguous that &quot;we don't have a specific strategy&quot; for dealing with them, says Michael B. Evans, Commodore International Ltd.'s chief financial officer.    The weak dollar increases reported sales and profits and may slow the industry's price cuts, which average 15% to 20% a year, but, overall, U.S. computer makers are insulated by their overseas plants that supply local markets. Wang Laboratories Inc., which had only one Taiwan plant 18 years ago, now has operations in Taiwan, China, Scotland, Ireland, Mexico and Australia. The weak dollar affects such plants just as much as foreign rivals.    American computer companies aren't raising prices or rushing to bring production back to the U.S. to exploit the weak dollar. Even with swings of 20% to 40% in the dollar, they want local plants attuned to foreign markets. And Asian competitors, rather than raising U.S. prices, are taking lower profits to keep market share.    In the defense industry, the falling dollar isn't influencing most international sales because decisions to buy weapons are generally based more on technical and political grounds than on relative prices. In addition, arms sales to foreign governments generally include &quot;offset&quot; agreements, under which sellers cushion the currency impact on buyers by returning some of the money through subcontracts or licensed co-production.    The U.S. medical-equipment market, still dominated by American companies, also hasn't been much affected by the falling dollar. &quot;The majority of American companies don't compete that directly with foreign manufacturers&quot; in the U.S., says David Lothson, a PaineWebber analyst. &quot;The American technology {in medical equipment} is by and large quite superior to virtually all of the others in the world.&quot; Becton, Dickinson andamp; Co. says it has made &quot;no particular price increases of note&quot; in response to the weak dollar.    In scientific equipment, such as instrumentation and measuring devices, foreign companies have made huge gains in the past decade or so in all markets. But so far, according to Willard W. Brown, a First Albany Corp. analyst, some Japanese companies haven't &quot;raised prices sufficiently to offset the loss sustained because of the stronger yen. The Japanese say they're going to maintain market share.&quot; Robert Quillinan, the chief financial officer of Coherent Inc., says the laser manufacturer hasn't noted any Japanese competitors raising prices. </TEXT></DOC>