<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870716-0103 </DOCNO><HL> New Study Strengthens Suspected LinksBetween Electromagnetism and Cancer---By Bill RichardsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)UTILITIES (UTI) </IN><TEXT>   After nearly a decade of uncertainty, scientists are beginning to sound warnings that low-frequency electromagnetic fields -- generated unseen and unfelt by everything from power lines to pop-up toasters -- may pose a significant cancer risk.    New York state health authorities last week unveiled a study that appears to link exposure to electromagnetic fields with leukemia and other cancers in children. &quot;If the results are correct,&quot; says David Carpenter, a New York health official who headed the study, &quot;as many as 10% to 15% of the cases of childhood cancer may result from residential electromagnetic field exposure.&quot; About one child in 10,000 in the U.S. has cancer.    Scientists say New York's study requires additional scientific corroboration, but is the most solid evidence to date that some sort of connection exists between electromagnetism and cancer. At least nine scientific studies published since 1985 have raised that possibility, although critics say most are scientifically flawed.    &quot;We have taken what was seen as a flaky fringe idea and raised it to a reasonable scientific premise,&quot; said David Savitz, an epidemiologist at the University of North Carolina's school of public health and one of the three researchers who conducted the New York study.    New York's findings already have utility experts and others scrambling for additional research. If the study's findings hold up, the utility industry could face &quot;multiples of billions of dollars&quot; in regulatory and legal costs, says Leonard Sagan, program manager for radiation studies at the Electric Power Research Institute, a utility-funded research group in Palo Alto, Calif. Dr. Sagan calls the research to date on the effects of electromagnetism &quot;fragmentary and inconsistent&quot; and says some studies haven't found any apparent relationship between magnetic fields and cancer. But he says the institute is spending $2.5 million to study the subject this year and will step up its spending next year.    Some state officials aren't waiting for more research. New York's Dr. Carpenter, who heads the School of Public Health Sciences at the State University of New York at Albany, says the state's findings &quot;are sufficiently worrisome that we should begin to change the way we wire our homes and not delay for another five to 10 years for additional epidemiological studies.&quot;    Officials in Florida recently began drawing up regulations to limit the amount of electromagnetism that new power lines may generate. Six states already limit the intensity of electrical fields around power lines, but Florida would be the first to restrict magnetism around its lines.    &quot;We didn't have a standard, and it appears from recent research that magnetic fields may be causing biologic or health effects,&quot; says Hamilton S. Oven Jr., siting coordination administrator for the state's environmental regulation department.    Florida's proposed standard limits the strength of electromagnetic fields at the edge of new power-line rights-of-way to between 30 and 500 milligauss. The final standard would be set after public hearings. A gauss, named for the 19th century physicist, is a measure of the intensity of a magnetic field. Physicists estimate that the electromagnetic field 200 meters from a high-voltage line would register about 10 milligauss, the strength of such a field in an average home.    In California and Florida, utilities are facing lawsuits from school districts fearful of potentially harmful health effects from proposed high-voltage power lines. And in Texas, Houston Lighting andamp; Power Co. is appealing $25 million in punitive damages awarded by a Houston jury to the Klein Independent School District. District officials filed suit after the utility strung a 345,000-volt line next to a school complex with 6,500 students.    &quot;People were concerned there were unanswered health questions about that line,&quot; says Donald Collins, Klein's superintendent. &quot;They didn't want their children to be subjected to an experiment.&quot;    A spokesman for the Houston utility says the high-voltage line has been closed down and is being rerouted away from the school complex. &quot;We still feel the body of scientific research doesn't support the jury's finding,&quot; the spokesman says.    Power lines generate both electric and magnetic fields, reflecting the voltage or thrust of electricity through wires and the actual amount of current in the wires. Until the late 1970s, researchers concentrated most of their efforts on the effects of electric fields around high-voltage power lines, often relying on fragmentary anecdotal evidence such as reports from farmers that cows near high-voltage lines seemed to give less milk.    But in 1979 two University of Colorado researchers examined 491 homes in the Denver area where youngsters had died of cancer. The study showed that an unusual number of deaths occurred in homes near secondary power lines, and the two scientists concluded that long-term low-level electromagnetic fields from the street lines seemed to be related to the cancer incidence.    Critics poked a number of holes in the study, but it triggered other efforts to match magnetic fields and cancer. Some recent studies, for example, show unusually high levels of cancer among workers with heavy exposure to electromagnetism, such as electricians, utility workers and motion-picture projectionists.    New York's Dr. Carpenter says the state decided to launch its investigation after a controversy erupted over the construction of a high-voltage power line near Syracuse in the late 1970s. The state hired Mr. Savitz and two University of Colorado professors to study electric and magnetic fields in 123 Denver-area homes where cancer cases were reported in children. Their three-year study plugged the methodological holes in the earlier Wertheimer-Leeper study and found as much as a threefold higher incidence of child cancer in houses with the highest electromagnetic fields.    Still, Mr. Savitz says the researchers haven't been able to establish electromagnetism as a cause of cancer. &quot;We don't know if there's a cause-and-effect relationship,&quot; he says. &quot;There's a strong justification for concern, but we clearly can't document the hazard like you can for asbestos or cigarette smoking.&quot;    Medical investigators are rushing to plug that gap. One San Antonio, Texas, research team has reported finding that exposure to electric and magnetic fields increases the growth of cancer cells and their resistance to destruction. Other teams are studying how magnetic fields apparently trigger cancer growth. Certain intensities of magnetic fields apparently prompt abnormal movements of calcium into cells, which in turn appear to activate a calcium-dependent enzyme.    &quot;The speculation is that the enzyme may be changing the activity of key cellular oncogenes -- genes involved in regulating cell growth and associated with cancer,&quot; says Jerry Phillips, director of biomedical research at the Cancer Therapy and Research Center in San Antonio.    Dr. Phillips says the techniques are available to merge various scientific theories and determine whether electromagnetism and cancer are linked. &quot;We could have some important answers within five years,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>