<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Missile Fight:Reagan's Arms PoliciesAre Damaged by ActsOf His Warring Aides---Weinberger's Star Wars PushImperils Both That PlanAnd Hope of Soviet Pact---Rereading the ABM Accord---By John Walcott and Tim CarringtonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Disputes, confusion and contradictions are undermining President Reagan's nuclear-weapons and arms-control policies, eroding congressional support for his Strategic Defense Initiative and perhaps endangering Mr. Reagan's prospects for negotiating new arms-control agreements with the Soviet Union.    In the past two months, deep divisions have appeared among Mr. Reagan's senior advisers and between the administration and congressional leaders over such critical issues as the development of mobile missiles, the interpretation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, and how quickly to proceed with deployment of the first elements of the president's SDI missile-defense system, known as Star Wars.    The divisions began to open late last year when Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger pushed Mr. Reagan to accelerate deployment of the first phases of SDI. According to an aide, Mr. Weinberger acted &quot;without fully briefing&quot; the vice president, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the secretary of state, the acting director of the Central Intelligence Agency or the acting national security adviser.    Opposition in the administration and in Congress now threatens to undo a fragile bipartisan coalition that has supported Mr. Reagan's campaign to replace existing arms-control agreements and offensive weapons with as yet undeveloped missile defenses. Mr. Reagan hopes that beginning in the next decade, his new SDI program will form the heart of the nation's strategy for preventing nuclear war.    Now the administration is embroiled in intense bickering over the related issues of how to interpret the ABM treaty and whether to begin an earlier-than-contemplated deployment of anti-missile weapons based both in space and on the ground.    Air Force Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, the head of the SDI program, is soliciting support for a plan for a first-phase deployment of the anti-missile weapons. But Adm. William Crowe, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, says that &quot;a deployment decision is premature until sufficient data are available&quot; to determine whether such weapons are feasible. Secretary of State George Shultz also is cautious. Yesterday he told Congress that the administration won't deploy any part of the Star Wars system until it has a &quot;clear, confident idea&quot; of what the entire system would be.    In the past, the administration pushed Star Wars as a research program, with no decision on whether to deploy it coming before the early 1990s. But, in a change of position, Mr. Weinberger is scrambling to commit the U.S. to the Star Wars program, which Mr. Reagan considers his top military priority, in such a way that neither Congress nor the president's successors can abandon it.    Mr. Weinberger had opposed a push last August by some Republican legislators, including Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana and Reps. Jack Kemp of New York and James Courter of New Jersey, to accelerate the schedule for deploying missile defenses. He feared that a partial deployment -- especially one that didn't include space-based weapons -- might provide fodder to SDI critics, who have long claimed that the program is only intended to protect U.S. missile bases, not populations, from attack.    But two things happened last fall to change Mr. Weinberger's mind, according to Pentagon officials. First, it became evident to Pentagon officials that the SDI program was in trouble. Congress had slashed the budget requests, and contractors and laboratories hadn't coalesced behind the project with sufficient conviction -- or formed a lobbying force powerful enough -- to guarantee its survival after Mr. Reagan left office.    Second, last Sept. 5, the Pentagon conducted a rocket test in space that showed that guided missiles, launched from space, could track and destroy fast-moving enemy rockets. Moreover, the SDI office claimed that the U.S. could begin fielding these so-called kinetic kill vehicles in the early 1990s. Under the original schedule, the task of reviewing the results of the strategic defense research and deciding whether to deploy anti-missile systems would have fallen to President Reagan's successor in the early 1990s.    After a series of briefings from an enthusiastic Gen. Abrahamson, the head of the SDI office, Mr. Weinberger became a convert to early deployment. Then, in December, he launched a two-pronged campaign. The first aim was to try to change the administration's interpretation of the ABM treaty in order to permit more flexible tests of space-based weapons. The second was to persuade President Reagan to declare that the U.S. had decided to deploy the first space-based and ground-based weapons as early as 1993, even though doing so would violate the 1972 treaty.    According to other senior Pentagon, State Department, and White House officials, Mr. Weinberger proceeded without either subjecting the early-deployment plan to normal Pentagon research and development review procedures or telling his colleagues in the National Security Council what he was doing.    On Dec. 17, these officials say, Mr. Weinberger, accompanied by Gen. Abrahamson and Assistant Defense Secretary Richard Perle, briefed the president on the prospects for early deployment of some anti-missile weapons in space. The Pentagon team said that the September test had been so successful that it now was reasonable to believe that some space-based defenses could be activated within six to eight years.    Congressional officials, following briefings by Gen. Abrahamson, reported that at the meeting Mr. Weinberger urged the president to declare that the U.S. would begin deploying defenses in space as quickly as possible. Such a declaration would amount to an announcement that the U.S. intended to abrogate the ABM treaty. That agreement, which bans space-based missile defenses, has been one of the more durable arms-control pacts, and many in Congress -- and even in the administration -- believe that an unambiguous, unilateral abrogation of the 1972 treaty would set back U.S.-Soviet relations and arms-control negotiations.    The defense secretary, with support from White House public-liaison chief Patrick Buchanan, then spearheaded a push to get Mr. Reagan to declare himself for early deployment of SDI in his January State of the Union address. The declaration was included in an early draft but it was removed after National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci pointed out that the president hadn't made a decision, according to administration officials.    Meanwhile, Pentagon officials began selectively lobbying Congress on the issue. Gen. Abrahamson briefed supporters of SDI on the progress made during the fall and the improved prospects for early deployment. But when Democratic Sen. William Proxmire of Wisconsin, a skeptic, sought a similar briefing, Pentagon officials told him no such briefing was available.    And when Paul Nitze, the administration's senior arms-control expert, met with Rep. Courter on Jan. 28, it quickly became evident to some who were present that Gen. Abrahamson hadn't briefed Mr. Nitze as thoroughly as the congressman. &quot;It was clear he hadn't had the same briefing,&quot; says one official.    Finally, according to senior administration officials, when the president gathered his top advisers at a meeting of the National Security Planning Group on Feb. 3, Secretary Shultz and other top officials appeared shocked to learn for the first time that Mr. Weinberger had recommended early deployment to the president seven weeks earlier.    Although Mr. Weinberger's push for early deployment and for a reinterpretation of the ABM treaty apparently was calculated to safeguard the SDI program from further budget cuts, the Pentagon's frontal assault on the ABM treaty may have the opposite effect.    Sen. Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed Services Committee and is a possible 1988 presidential candidate, warned the president in a letter last Friday that reinterpreting the treaty without first consulting Congress would provoke &quot;a grave constitutional crisis&quot; and could mean &quot;the end of arms control under your administration.&quot;    Sen. Bennett Johnston, a Louisiana Democrat and chairman of the Senate Appropriations defense subcommittee, recently assailed &quot;the absolute folly of premature deployment of SDI.&quot; While he would support more money for Star Wars research, Sen. Johnston said, he would fight any deployment program.    Many politicians who support research are reluctant to support deployment of a controversial system they fear could start a new arms race in space. Moreover, many scientists contend that the president's Star Wars plan won't work.    Talk about early deployment is rallying opposition to Star Wars generally. &quot;The people who are taking this ploy may be hurting SDI,&quot; said Joseph Nye, a nuclear-strategy expert at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.    Meanwhile, Arnold Horelick, a Soviet expert at Rand Corp. in Santa Monica, Calif., says: &quot;I don't think this kind of disarray helps us in negotiations with the Soviets. I think this kind of behavior encourages some in the Soviet Union to believe they can get what they want without making any concessions, simply by holding on to their present positions and waiting for the internal battles in Washington to undercut the administration's programs.&quot;    Internal battles rage on other arms-control fronts as well. The administration has three different positions on the desirability of mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles, or ICBMs. This is complicating military planning and making it difficult for the administration to present a consistent set of proposals on strategic-arms control.    Differences also have arisen on what the administration's arms-control goals are. The White House has called the abolition of nuclear weapons its &quot;ultimate goal,&quot; but in a recent speech Mr. Perle, the Pentagon's top arms-control expert, dismissed that hope as &quot;dangerous nonsense.&quot;    Mr. Horelick, along with some senior White House and State Department officials, believes that time is running out for the Reagan administration to negotiate an arms-control deal with Moscow.    Supported by the angry congressional reaction, Mr. Shultz, Adm. Crowe and other opponents of making an immediate decision to proceed with deployment of space-based missile defenses appear to have stalled Mr. Weinberger's drive.    In an effort to soften opposition, the administration has decided to start a series of briefings of congressional leaders and European allies.    But Mr. Weinberger may have won the most important battle. Even Mr. Shultz now has endorsed the broader interpretation of the ABM treaty, which could give the Pentagon more leeway to test new weapons while complicating the efforts of Soviet arms negotiators in Geneva to impose tighter restrictions on the SDI program.    &quot;In Geneva, we're talking to the Soviets about defining the limits of the ABM treaty, while in Washington we're relaxing the limits,&quot; says Rand Corp.'s Arnold Kanter, a former State Department official.    Meanwhile, the latest SDI budget carries requests for big fund increases for kinetic kill vehicles, which would be space-based platforms to fire guided projectiles at Soviet missiles in the early phase of their trajectories. Money for developing and testing these weapons would jump to $251 million in the administration's fiscal 1988 budget request, from $108 million in fiscal 1987, when financing declined slightly from the previous year.    The Pentagon near-term deployment plan would involve multiple &quot;weapons garages&quot; floated in space. These would carry sensors to detect and track enemy missiles, and guided missiles that would home in on the missiles just after they are launched. Meanwhile, there would be ground-based interceptors to destroy missiles that eluded the space garages.    According to assistants to the Joint Chiefs, there hasn't yet been a thorough military assessment of whether this system would strengthen the U.S. military position. Moreover, the Pentagon has yet to provide data on how much this or any other SDI system would cost. Secretary Weinberger says he is &quot;deeply suspicious&quot; of any cost estimates made to date. &quot;We don't know,&quot; he says flatly. Meanwhile, the Joint Chiefs are concerned that, with budget growth virtually stalled because of fiscal constraints, the project could drain funds from other military programs. </TEXT></DOC>