<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871223-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Is Trade Deficit as Big as It Seems?---By Mack Ott</HL><DD> 12/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDA EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   According to most forecasters, the U.S. merchandise trade deficit for 1987 will top $175 billion. It ballooned to a single-month record of $17.63 billion in October as surging imports overshadowed the continuing, but smaller rise in reported exports. Meanwhile, debate rages about whether the U.S. can compete internationally, whether the deficit is finally declining, and whether fair trade requires protectionist barriers to foreign goods. To avoid policy blunders in addressing this highly charged issue, it is essential that the deficit be accurately measured. Yet recent discoveries of unreported U.S. exports to Canada demonstrate that U.S. trade data are inaccurate.    In June, the Commerce Department reported the U.S. merchandise trade deficit with Canada had been substantially overstated for the past several years. The overestimate resulted from underreporting of U.S. exports to Canada. The discrepancy resulted primarily from truckers not filing export documents. The 1986 discrepancy resulted in a $10.7 billion upward adjustment in U.S. exports and a reduction from $23 billion to $13.3 billion in the U.S.-Canadian trade deficit -- a 41.7% correction.    Although the Commerce Department has published reconciliations of the U.S. and Canadian trade data for several years, these reconciliations have not been used until this year to adjust the estimates of either the Canadian or the overall U.S. trade deficits. Pressure from financial analysts and the growing size of the discrepancy finally led to the correction.    A provocative question posed by this discrepancy is whether U.S. exports to other countries are similarly understated. A look at U.S. trade with the other G-7 countries -- Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom -- can provide a gauge of the total understatement as these countries account for half of reported U.S. exports and two-thirds of the reported U.S. trade deficit. Data from the International Monetary Fund reveal an apparent understatement of U.S. G-7 exports throughout the 1980s. The correction of U.S. G-7 exports has averaged nearly $12.5 billion a year since 1981, or about 12.9% of U.S. G-7 exports. The resulting overstatement of the U.S. G-7 trade deficit has been substantially higher: 27.6% during 1981-86 and 13.6% during the current year.    Corroborating evidence for these corrections exists in the U.S. balance-of-payments data. By accounting identities, the U.S. current-account balance and capital-account balance must exactly offset each other. In other words, the U.S. trade deficit must exactly equal the net increase in U.S. indebtedness measured by capital inflows. Yet during 1981-86, the difference between the two has averaged $22.65 billion, and in the first half of 1987 it is at an annual rate of $24.11 billion. Economists and policy makers have generally assumed the capital-account balance to be understated and that the current-account balance is an accurate measure of the deficit; however, an understatement of total U.S. exports (world-wide) of $20 billion-$25 billion a year is consistent with the $12.5 billion understatement for the half of U.S. exports that go to the G-7. In short, the G-7 trade data and the U.S. balance-of-payments data both suggest that the U.S. trade deficit is overstated.    Why should foreign imports be a better measure of U.S. exports? And why are the export data so bad? Import data are directly collected by a single government agency; they provide revenue from tariffs; and they provide politically important measures of goods subject to quotas. These aspects of import accounting encourage government agents to amass accurate import data. Conversely, for exports, self-interest induces underreporting.    First, the exporter files the declarations. Simple sloth and costs of reporting will result in some underreporting if the penalties for not reporting or the likelihood of detection are small. The value of individual export shipments, if small, increases the likelihood of omissions.    Second, sellers have strong incentive to underreport export sales because, if undetected, their taxable income is reduced.    Third, the U.S. places onerous restrictions on certain classes of technological merchandise exports, classes or groups constituting an estimated 40% of U.S. manufactured exports. These restrictions, in the name of national security, fall most heavily on technological machinery -- CAD/CAM systems and machinery, computers, office machinery and telecommunications equipment.    The export licenses required to be able to sell these goods also restrict the resale or use that the foreign importer can make of them. Such restrictions raise the costs of U.S. machinery to foreigners, making it less competitive. Consequently, some export smuggling will be induced. This can take the form of nonreporting, underreporting of quantities shipped, or undervaluation of exported goods in order to disguise their actual type.    Of course, the first two incentives also are operative for foreigners' shipments to the U.S. But the export underreporting discrepancy for European countries is substantially smaller than for the U.S. because exporters in the Economic Community are reimbursed for the value added tax (VAT) on exports.    The G-7 export data and their corrections imply a substantial overstatement of the trade deficit with the most advanced industrial economies. The correction for the U.S. trade gap with the world would be much greater as 50% of U.S. exports go to non-G-7 nations.    There are important messages in these trade discrepancies. First, the underreporting of U.S. exports and the resultant exaggeration of the trade deficit mean real gross national product and, perhaps, its growth rate also have been understated. This may cause political damage if the exaggerated deficit fires protectionist fervor. Second, the corroborating evidence in the balance-of-payments data raises questions about U.S. foreign debtor status. If the current-account deficit has been overestimated, then the U.S. did not become a net debtor in 1985. Third, while the incentives to underreport would cause little real damage if their impact were limited to exaggerating the trade deficit with no political reaction, the incentives to underreport reflect reductions in actual exports (viz: export restrictions). Such reductions produce real damage to the U.S. economy -- perhaps greater than the potential security damage they seek to ameliorate.    ---   Mr. Ott is senior economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. </TEXT></DOC>