<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): Viewpoint---The Task at Hand:After Decades of Excuses, It's Time forAmerican Managers to Learn Technology---By Lester C. Thurow</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   WHEN IT COMES to inventing new technologies, America has no peers. More than a proportionate share of new ideas are still American ideas.    It was not always so. Prior to World War II, basic scientific breakthroughs tended to come from Europe. Then, for two or three decades after World War II, America had effortless technological superiority --it had no peers either as an inventor or user of new technologies.    Now that era is gone, too. America faces foreign competitors -- Japan, West Germany, South Korea, Taiwan -- that are certainly America's equals when it comes to rapidly employing new technologies and sometimes its superiors.    When new production technologies first started to appear abroad, it was fashionable to blame U.S. managerial stupidity. Steel managers were stupid to still be building open-hearth furnaces while others had switched to oxygen furnaces. Their stupidity was confirmed when they were several years late in switching to continuous casting.    But as industry after industry has been late in shifting to new process technologies that later would prove to be the right technologies, isolated management stupidity has become a less satisfactory answer as to what is going wrong. No one thought semiconductor-chip manufacturers were stupid, yet they too started to lag the Japanese in delivering each generation of new chips. Everyone understands that industrial robots are the wave of the future, yet a recent World Bank study finds the U.S. started employing robots later than Japan and is still far behind it in the number of industrial robots in use. In terms of robots per worker, it is also behind Germany, Sweden and Belgium.    Given such widespread lags in adopting new process technologies, systematic failure has to replace isolated stupidity as a central explanation for what is going on. But what is its nature?    Part of the problem can be traced to a low-saving society and higher real costs of capital. But while a high cost of capital can explain why Americans invest less in new technologies, it cannot explain why they are slow to invest in those technologies.    A greater foreign emphasis on quality seems to be part of the problem. Initially, auto robots did not meet standard rates of return on investment criteria either in Japan or the U.S. Workers in both countries were cheaper than robots. But robots were introduced in Japan in dirty jobs such as painting and welding, where it was difficult for a human worker to do a high-quality job hour after hour, day after day.    The same situation now seems to be developing in the use of powdered metals. Higher-quality parts, such as the fans in turbochargers, can be made with powdered-metal technologies, but those parts are more expensive today than fans made with old-fashioned cut-and-grind technology. American producers aren't willing to pay for those higher costs in the short run or to bet that learning curves will lead to both higher quality and lower costs in the future. Foreign producers are.    At this point, American managers usually invoke the tyranny of the quarterly profit statement, a stock market that evaluates them based upon those quarterly profits, and the high American risk of unfriendly takeovers if one's profits are not smoothly rising. According to this argument, if American managers took a risk on new technologies and these hurt short-term profits, they would simply be replaced by managers who would not take a risk on new technologies.    There also is an open question as to whether American managers have lost contact with the technologies they are supposed to be managing. Compared with the rest of the industrial world, more American managers come up through nonproduction jobs in law, accounting or marketing -- far fewer have a technological background than in either Europe or Japan. These nontechnical managers may understand the technologies being employed by their firms, but they don't have enough background to develop intuitions on which of the possible technologies now on the horizon are apt to further develop and which are apt to be discarded.    As a result, incumbent managers have no way to judge the merits of revolutionary changes in production technologies. So they procrastinate, waiting for it to become clear which technology is the best. By the time the answer is clear, foreign firms may have a two- to three-year lead in understanding and employing those new technologies.    The problem is found not just among managers of manufacturing facilities. Those in the investment and marketing communities also don't know where to place their bets. The ignorance and resultant risk aversion of the industrial manager is reinforced by the ignorance and risk aversion of his investment banker, advertising manager and accountant.    Engineers and scientists often are accused of believing too strongly in untried technologies and plunging ahead where caution is warranted. Sometimes the charge is true, but foreign managers with technological backgrounds have had a better betting record in recent years than their American counterparts without a technological understanding.    At this point it is possible to blame business schools for part of the problem. Often, implicitly and to some extent explicitly, American students are taught that a good manager can manage anything, and that it is not necessary to have a technological understanding of the process one is trying to manage. A change in teaching practices will have to be part of the solution.    This is not to say that every MBA needs an undergraduate degree in engineering and science. But it is to say that he or she should be master of the two cultures -- able to understand scientific arguments as well as those from the humanities, to know something about the history of revolutionary technical change, to understand the dynamic possibilities in learning curves. It has got to be possible for those who have not majored in science and engineering to understand the arguments of scientists and engineers. Business schools have got to take on the task of teaching them.    Every executive in America, for example, should now be taking a cram course in the likely impact of superconductivity. If it becomes commercially feasible, the industrial world is going to be turned upside down. What was impossible (very dense semiconductor chips for high-speed computing) now becomes possible; what was the right place to locate an activity (near an electrical generating plant), now becomes the wrong place to locate it. Scientifically, Americans will lead the charge toward superconductivity. Whether they lead the way in commercial applications remains a challenge for the business community.    New process technologies create a management problem not presented by new products. New products are invented in the laboratory. They don't require a lot of management input, and once invented, new production facilities can be built for them without disrupting existing facilities.    By contrast, new production technologies are disruptive. They must be invented on the factory floor. If successful, they often disrupt well-established patterns of behavior for both managers and workers. They have a heavy management component that cannot be avoided. Yet production is often the human dumping ground for American firms. It gets the lowest-quality managers and engineers; it pays the lowest salaries. The brightest and the best are on the management fast track in finance or off in the research labs inventing new products. Messy production problems just don't get attended to, or they are avoided by delaying shifts to new technologies. Don't do it on my watch; don't reduce the profits of my profit center! Do it later!    Reversing what has become a common pattern -- late adoption of new technologies -- is the central technological problem facing American industry.    ---   Mr. Thurow is the dean-designate of MIT's Sloan School of Management. </TEXT></DOC>