<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861211-0138 </DOCNO><HL> </HL><TEXT>...e Mr. Gorbachev'scapital plant-modernization goals, but people who take pridein overtaking the West militarily want to build on, notabandon, that achievement.   Hence the appeal of a revived detente that would helpbring in more technology and capital, undermine support formilitary spending in the West, and lessen the need forheavier Soviet military spending while increasing the payoffsfrom any new military programs undertaken.   This strategy worked in the 1970s. The Soviets made agreat leap forward in military power and in extending theempire not only through their own vigorous efforts but alsobecause their enemies relaxed. The U.S. took the accords onballistic missiles and missile defenses as a general signalto spend less on arms and to develop many fewer weaponssystems. For example, the number of known Soviet systemsdeployed in the first half of the 1980s -- which reflectednew projects put in development during the detente of the1970s -- was twice that of the U.S.   The story of the 1980s is different. By the end of the1970s, the Soviet detente/arms-control strategy was erodingand almost met its demise with the invasion of Afghanistan.Since then, the U.S. has recovered somewhat militarily, theoverseas parts of the Soviet empire are under challenge onall fronts, and the Soviet economy is in deep trouble.   To the Soviets, the 1970s are a better model, and we areseeing an attempt to revive it. The Soviet leadership hasreason, once again, to be hopeful. Congress, which slowedresearch on more accurate guidance for missiles for a periodin the 1970s, now prohibits testing of anti-satelliteweapons, strictly limits production of chemical weapons,favors a narrowly restrictive interpretation of testing ofantimissile defenses under the ABM treaty, and has threatenedto impose a one-year moratorium on all nuclear tests.Self-limitation, which borders on paralysis in some areas,has not been confined to Congress. It was the executivebranch that chose not to deploy the neutron bomb in Europeafter the Europeans had agreed to it and that long neglectedimprovements in the command-and-control systems.   Internally, the Soviet leadership faces a more complexchoice than guns vs. butter. It is nuclear missiles (anddefenses against Western ones) vs. conventional weapons(especially higher-technology ones and those capable ofdelivering both nuclear and conventional munitions) vs.supporting embattled members of the empire vs. investmentgoods vs. consumption goods. In the internal struggles, acoalition may exist between some in the military and theeconomic modernizers on the merit of investing more inhigh-tech, flexible capital equipment even at the expense ofreduced weapons procurement now in order to be able toproduce better weapons later.   A precedent is Khrushchev's move in the 1950s to reducethe army, create the strategic rocket force and cut militaryspending (then increase it in the 1960s). Now there aresimilar pulls in these and other directions, and no one knowshow they will be resolved in the short run. But unlesseconomic performance improves over the long run, a decade ormore, the Soviet Union will lose ground militarily.   One pull that has been widely noted in the West is towardgiving higher priority to non-nuclear forces. Former Chief ofStaff Marshall Ogarkov is interpreted as advocating this --with a strong nuclear backup. But the savings realizable fromthis shift are likely to be small, because the Soviets spendmuch less on nuclear than conventional forces. And, if theyslow the pace of modernizing their nuclear forces and have asmaller number, they might still end up spending more onthese forces because of the new weapons' higher cost.   They clearly don't want to face the array of advancedtechnologies that the SDI could produce. Better to get theU.S. to abandon these defensive efforts (as it did in the1970s) or persuade Washington to wrap them in a web ofconstraints. On form, these constraints would be rigorouslymonitored and enforced by the American press and politicalsystem.   We may indeed have a &quot;historic opportunity.&quot; But given therecord of earlier agreements and what we know about theSoviet internal situation, this &quot;opportunity&quot; may be no morethan a way of facilitating a Soviet switch in militarystrategy and the bolstering of this adversary's capacity fora more diversified arms challenge. Instead of relaxing andrelieving Moscow, the West should do its best to leave theKremlin with only one viable option: dealing with itsinternal problems by spending less on the military and theempire and taking further and bolder privatizing steps.   ---   Mr. Rowen is Rust professor at Stanford's Graduate Schoolof Business and a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution.Mr. Wolf is director of Rand Corp.'s research ininternational economic policy, and dean of its graduateschool.</TEXT></DOC>