<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861224-0168 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev Faces Resurgence of Nationalism---By Bohdan Nahaylo</HL><DD> 12/24/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   For at least two days in the Soviet Union last week Kazakh students took to the streets of their republic's capital, Alma-Ata. They were protesting the replacement of Kazakhstan's long-serving party leader, Dinmukhamed Kunaev, by a Russian. In an unusual display of candor, Moscow acknowledged that &quot;hundreds&quot; of students had been involved, that there had been cases of arson and violence and, perhaps most significantly, that the outbursts were inspired by &quot;nationalists.&quot;    The protests provide a dramatic reminder of a fundamental fact about the Soviet Union too often overlooked in the West. The Soviet Union is the world's largest multinational state and its last great empire. The disturbances in the Kazakh capital also highlight the intractable and potentially explosive nature of the nationalities problem in the Soviet Union generally, and in Central Asia in particular.    The Soviet Union is, essentially, the former Russian empire, recast in a Soviet mold. Despite Soviet claims that the nationalities problem inherited from the czarist &quot;prison of nations&quot; has long been successfully resolved, and a harmonious federation of &quot;free and equal&quot; peoples established, important decisions are still made in Moscow. The Russians, who constitute barely half of the Soviet Union's population of 280 million, retain a position of political and cultural dominance.    Whereas the Kremlin continues to place emphasis on political -- and, under Mikhail Gorbachev, economic -- integration, the non-Russian elites seek to maximize whatever latitude is afforded their republics. Tensions and resentment are exacerbated by Moscow's disregard for national sensibilities, particularly in how teaching of the Russian language is promoted. In each republic the teaching of Russian is advanced, ostensibly for practical reasons, at the expense of native tongues.    Though Moscow's overall objective has been to weaken national distinctions, official policy has not been uniform. In the post-Stalin period, the Ukraine, Byelorussia and the Baltic republics have been subjected to tighter political controls and greater pressure to assimilate than, say, the Georgians, Armenians and Central Asians. In the case of the Turkic-speaking people, Moscow, until recently, even preferred to rule through the native elite.    The Gorbachev leadership's accent on &quot;openness&quot; has made the gap between theory and practice in the area of Soviet nationalities policy clearer. On June 25, for instance, Moscow television disclosed that racial disorders had recently broken out in Yakutsk. This announcement interrupted a longstanding Soviet practice about not discussing national antagonisms.    The Eighth Congress of Soviet Writers, held the same month, also provided evidence of discord. Various non-Russian representatives listed one grievance after another about Moscow's control over the national-cultural life of their nations, and the way in which their native languages are being progressively squeezed out of the educational system and public life by Russian. Terms like &quot;great-power chauvinists&quot; were used, and the notion that Moscow knows what is best for non-Russians was explicitly challenged.    Since then, non-Russians have continued to be outspoken in airing their anxieties about the role of their languages. In the Baltic republics, where only a few years ago there were nationalist protests, some authors have even complained that speaking in public in the mother tongue is construed by some Russians as a hostile display of nationalism.    In Byelorussia, which in the past has sometimes been cited as an example of a republic where resistance to Russification is weak, a remarkable campaign in defense of the native language has developed in the paper Literatura i Mastatstva. Tension has reached the point where the Byelorussian Ministry of Education is being accused of hampering the study of the native language in schools.    For the non-Russians the problem is far more complex than just pressure to give up their native languages. Another difficulty is the distortion of their national history. Soviet history books and school books usually make it seem as if the very purpose of these nations' existence is to find happiness and fulfillment in the arms of Russia. As one Ukrainian writer put it, the &quot;loss of national memory today has become especially acute, alarming.&quot;    In the case of the Kazakhs, some things will be hard to forget. During Stalin's collectivization drive in the 1930s, their nation was abruptly forced to abandon its traditional way of life. The campaign to transform the nomadic Moslem people -- breeders of livestock -- into a secular group tied to the land, cost an estimated 1.5 million lives, or between 15% and 20% of the Kazakh population. No wonder that at the writers' congress in Moscow the Kazakh author Olzhas Suleimanov asked how he and others could be expected to be open in their writing if they were not allowed to examine the collectivization period.    The Kazakhs experienced a second difficult period in the mid-1950s, when Khrushchev launched his famous scheme to boost grain production by cultivating the huge expanses of virgin and arable land in Kazakhstan and southwest Siberia. This led to an influx of manpower from the European part of the Soviet Union, which soon threatened to swamp the Kazakhs in a Russian-speaking sea. Local feeling was ignored. When anxious Kazakh communists and intellectuals expressed concern, their complaints were dismissed.    Nevertheless, under the leadership of Dinmukhamed Kunaev, who was the Kazakh party chief for over two decades, the Kazakhs gradually began to come into their own again. Regarded as a Brezhnevite crony by Western observers, Mr. Kunaev in his own republic appears to have been something of a paternal figure. His removal was not entirely unexpected, but the tactless manner in which he was replaced by a Russian was interpreted as an insult to resurgent Kazakh pride.    Moves by Moscow, such as the ouster of Mr. Kunaev, amount to an abrogation on the part of the Kremlin of its longstanding modus vivendi with the Central Asian elites: In return for political loyalty, the latter were rewarded with concessions in the cultural sphere and affirmative-action policies.    Now the Kremlin has also stepped up the offensive against Islam and nationalism in the Central Asian republics. In mid-November, on his way to visit India, Mr. Gorbachev stopped off in Tashkent and attacked local communists who participate in Moslem rituals, by warning that &quot;even the lightest divergence between words and deeds is impermissible here.&quot;    The Kremlin's tougher line toward the &quot;Moslem&quot; republics reflects demographic anxieties provoked by the rapid population growth of the seemingly unassimilable Central Asians. At present the Soviet Union is home to about 50 million people of Moslem extraction, and by the turn of the century between one in four and one in five Soviet citizens -- and more among those of draft age -- will be from a Moslem background.    Moreover, there are pressing economic, military and political considerations that have led Moscow to abandon its former flexibility in dealing with the Moslem regions. The Gorbachev leadership has placed a premium on improving economic performance and ensuring that all republics pull their weight. This has meant continuing campaigns against corruption in Central Asia, most notably in Uzbekistan, where the crackdown has been extensive. Under Mr. Gorbachev, the Kremlin has acted to break up the local power cliques that had formed over the years as a result of affirmative-action programs. Furthermore, Moscow has made it clear that it wants &quot;surplus labor&quot; from Central Asia to migrate to areas of the Soviet Union where there is a shortage of manpower.    The new drive against corruption and economic inefficiency in Central Asia has not been matched in scope or severity in any of the other non-Russian republics. Moreover, the fact that it has been accompanied by an offensive against Islam and nationalism has given the campaign a distinctly &quot;Central Asian&quot; flavor. Not surprisingly, the Uzbek party leader acknowledged earlier this year that his people had begun to interpret Moscow's actions as &quot;anti-national.&quot;    Given that Mr. Gorbachev's overriding concern is to overhaul the economy, Moscow's efforts to break up local cliques and to root out corruption in Central Asia are likely to continue. Whether it is wise for the Kremlin to heighten tensions by simultaneously challenging the cultural and historical heritage of the increasingly assertive Central Asian peoples is another matter. Evidently, Mr. Gorbachev is attempting to kill two birds with one stone: improving the economic reliability of the region, and, at the same time, reasserting Moscow's control over an area that is likely to become more troublesome for him in the future.    ---   Mr. Nahaylo, a research analyst for Radio Liberty in Munich, is completing a book on opposition to the Soviet regime. </TEXT></DOC>