<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A SOVIET OFFICIAL SAID a West German who flew to Moscow may be tried.    The official said that even if a trial is held, 19-year-old Mathias Rust, who flew a light plane from Finland and landed in Red Square, would be freed soon. The official also said the pilot should be thanked for pointing out &quot;holes in our defenses.&quot; Rust said he had contact with a Soviet jet en route. The Kremlin fired its defense minister, Marshal Sokolov, and its air defense chief in the incident.    The choice of Dmitry Yazov, a politically unknown army general, as new defense minister strengthens Gorbachev's hand in military and foreign policy.    ---   REAGAN CALLED for broader AIDS testing and barring infected immigrants.    In his first major address on the disease, the president called for mandatory testing of all federal prisoners and asked for a review of other federal programs, such as veterans hospitals, to see if testing is appropriate there. He encouraged states to test marriage license applicants and prisoners, and ordered the virus added to the list of diseases for which immigrants can be denied entry to the U.S.    Scientists and doctors are to gather for an AIDS conference in Washington today and the issue is expected to be a major topic at the Venice summit.    ---   REAGAN PLANS TO SELL 1,600 Maverick air-to-ground missiles to Saudi Arabia.    The administration notified Congress it plans to proceed with the missile sale, valued at $360 million, in 30 days. Opposition is expected to be intense because many in Congress complain the Saudis appear reluctant to aid the U.S. in protecting Kuwaiti tankers in the Persian Gulf. Congress is continuing to press Reagan to enlist allied help in the gulf, which he intends to seek at next week's Venice summit.    Iran said its navy recently seized seven Kuwaiti speedboats in the gulf. It also said it was prepared to prevent U.S. intervention in the gulf.    ---   A former CIA official contradicted statements by Assistant Secretary of State Abrams, due to testify before congressional panels today, who has sought to distance himself from covert Contra-aid operations. Sources said the CIA station chief's closed-door testimony shows senior aides knew of arms shipments.    ---   The Pentagon will continue pushing for total elimination of intermediate-range nuclear missiles. Reagan is backing a proposed treaty that would allow both the U.S. and the Soviet Union to keep 100 such warheads after removing the rest from Europe, a setback to Defense Secretary Weinberger, who supports total elimination.    ---   Shiite Moslem guerrillas clashed with Israeli-backed militia groups in southern Lebanon. Lebanese security forces said at least 22 people were killed. Israeli army units took up positions in the area 18 miles north of their border and 17 Shiite villages were shelled. Three civilians were killed in the bombardment, Beirut radio said.    ---   Buddhist monks and students scuffled with police at a temple in Seoul, while supporters of dissident Kim Dae Jung rallied in front of his home in the South Korean capital, where he is being held under house arrest. Prime Minister Lee apologized to the nation in a radio address for the Jan. 17 killing of a student while in police custody.    ---   Botha asked Reagan and other Western leaders for help in ending racial violence. A pro-government newspaper said the South African president asked the leaders to break ties with the African National Congress.    ---   Britain protested the abduction of one of its diplomats to Iran's senior envoy. Iran said charges were to be made against Britain's second most senior diplomat in Tehran after he was abducted and freed 24 hours later last week. London said that on no account would it answer any such charges.    ---   Vietnamese gunners shelled a refugee camp in Thailand, killing seven Cambodians and wounding 18, a Thai military officer said. The 30 mortar and artillery shells were reportedly fired from within Cambodia.    ---   South Pacific nations offered to send a delegation to Fiji to help solve the political crisis in the island nation following a May 14 military coup there. Australian Prime Minister Hawke said he would lead a delegation if Fiji's governor-general agreed.    ---   The Edmonton Oilers won hockey's Stanley Cup, four games to three, defeating the Philadelphia Flyers, 3-1 in the final.    ---   Died: John F. Kidde, 81, former president and chairman of Kidde Inc., Saturday, in Belleville, N.J. . . . Baron Leon Lambert, 58, former chairman of Groupe Bruxelles Lambert, Thursday, in Brussels. </TEXT></DOC>