<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870717-0169 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:A Voice of Dissent From the Salvadoran Military</HL><DD> 07/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   The following is an excerpt from an interview with Col. Sigifredo Ochoa Perez that originally appeared in the El Salvador News-Gazette. Col. Ochoa resigned from the armed forces last month after 26 years of service because he was in disagreement with the policies of the Christian Democrat government. He has become the most important figure in El Salvador's democratic opposition:    News-Gazette: Why did you choose this moment to resign?    Col. Ochoa: Mine has not been a hasty decision. What has troubled me is that we in the military have our hands tied by bad politicians. The war can be won in a short time if the different forces can be united, and not from the military point of view. This kind of a war is not purely military; it is the result of a series of circumstances of the past that I believe can be remedied, but not with demagogy, and not by taking from those who have or distributing what others have produced. There must be an agrarian reform, but not like the one carried out; nor a banking reform that was more political than technical.    The army is a good one. We have learned to fight this thing. But when the army is close to victory, the orders come . . . the cease-fire and the order to withdraw, and that is where everything falls apart.    Unfortunately the Americans don't know us. When an American begins to get to know the country, he leaves. The American trainers aren't going to teach us anything. I think that we must solve our own problems. And one of these days we will have to sit down with the subversives and give them some political space.    News-Gazette: You said that when victory was near the order to stop fighting came. Doesn't that come from the U.S. policy makers who believe that the war cannot be won militarily and that a convergence with the left must be sought?    Col. Ochoa: The U.S. changes its policy every four years. It is not a consistent policy like that of the Soviet Union, which has a single line for a prolonged period. With the Americans we don't know where we stand. Today they are our allies, tomorrow they can abandon us to our fate. The present government hardly acts at all; it only reacts to what Washington says, and that is the problem.    News-Gazette: Do you mean that the strategy {of not permitting a military victory} comes from Washington?    Col. Ochoa: I think so, because it has been said that we don't do anything by ourselves and that is why they do a number of things. I think that in the tactical area it is different -- plans and all that are made {here} in the General Staff. But the overall lines are adapted to what the U.S. sees as having priority for its national security and political interests and this is given the highest priority.    If we are hoping that the Americans will solve our problems, we are lost. I ask myself, why the U.S., the most powerful nation on the face of the earth, the major defender of human rights and individual integrity, has imposed a series of socialist measures on us. Why didn't they experiment on a small state like Vermont or Maine? I would like to know how the U.S. landowners would react when the first lands were taken from them, or their factories, or their banks. I think this is an attempt to change the image of the U.S. And there we have the case of the Christian Democrats: a product of U.S. foreign policy.    They are afraid of a &quot;coup d'etat,&quot; but I don't think that will happen because the coup mentality has disappeared in El Salvador. We must defeat this Christian Democrat government with votes, and they must respect this position.    News-Gazette: If there is a mistaken military strategy that does not lead to victory -- a strategy supported by the U.S., accepted by the government and imposed on the military institution -- then, where does that leave the people of El Salvador?    Col. Ochoa: Well, that is the big problem. It is the people who suffer. The people are the main victim. If the strategy upstairs is mistaken, the number of dead and crippled civilians and military personnel involved in the war all serve no purpose. I think that the strategy is wrong: The war strategy is completely mistaken. We are involved in a war and somebody has to win. I never heard of a war that was a draw. One side or another wins in a war. Communism will win in El Salvador, or we will defeat communism. A decision must be made.    News-Gazette: Is it is possible to mix Marxism with democracy?    Col. Ochoa: No, that is not possible.    News-Gazette: And isn't that precisely the strategy of the low intensity war imposed by the U.S. and implemented through a government that does not permit a military victory, as you have said?    Col. Ochoa: Exactly, we get military assistance with a dropper, enough to keep us alive, but not enough to make us healthy. But I object to the description of low intensity war, since for us it is a high intensity war, given the number of dead, wounded, crippled and the suffering and destruction that assail us. I think the U.S. should put its feet firmly on the ground and define itself, because at times one fears being an ally of the U.S. Nobody knows how the U.S. Congress will react, nor the other institutions that have to do with us. I think that the Americans should appreciate us more and acknowledge the important role that we are playing in containing the communist advance to the North and the powder keg of Mexico. We will solve this problem ourselves. Guatemala has it almost under control, but there was no American aid there, and perhaps that was their great advantage. American aid has tied our hands.    I think that we have been made into a beggar nation. Instead of developing our own economic infrastructure, we have been living off charity. If there is something that we Salvadorans have a right to be proud of, it is our ability to work. But we have been a guinea pig for a socializing experiment that has only served to ruin the nation. It is a mistake to believe that the laboratory is useful; it is good for nothing. We don't wish this fate on any of our brother republics.    News-Gazette: Does the Salvadoran army have the capability of achieving a military victory over the subversives?    Col. Ochoa: I think so. The armed forces of El Salvador have the capability of achieving a military victory, but the political determination to achieve a military victory does not exist in the government. If the army were given objectives and told, &quot;we want victory in such a period of time,&quot; the army has the capability and it has the leadership to achieve it. There are many companions-in-arms who are very good -- the officers, the noncoms and the combat units are all very good. But you must remember that the political part is what decides the military part. If there is no political determination on the part of the government, or because the government doesn't want it, or because there is some alien hand that refuses to give the government the green light, this makes it impossible for the armed forces to achieve a rapid military victory, even if it has the capability. </TEXT></DOC>