<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871221-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Bresser's Resignation UnderlinesProblems of Brazilian Economy---Policy Change Isn't Seen,But Search for SolutionTo Debt Crisis to Suffer---By Mary Williams Walsh and Peter TruellStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   The resignation of Brazil's finance minister, Luiz Carlos Bresser Pereira, isn't likely to radically alter the nation's economic policy, but it indicates that serious economic management isn't possible in Brazil and slows the search for a solution to the country's foreign-debt crisis.    Brazil is hurtling toward a chaotic 1988, in which an economic slowdown is likely that would further reduce its ability to meet debt payments and could help trigger a crisis for Western banks.    Mr. Bresser's resignation Friday, in a dispute over fiscal austerity, is the latest symptom of Brazil's sickness, providing a new indication that management of the nation's huge economic problems is blocked by political considerations. President Jose Sarney is fighting to prolong his term in office, and special-interest groups, on which he depends for political support, demand continued access to state funds.    &quot;An economist who has to manage the economy of a country has to follow some very logical rules, like cutting spending and bringing about an environment that encourages investment,&quot; said a Sao Paulo businessman, Lawrence Pih. &quot;And that isn't possible in this political scenario. We're on the verge of hyperinflation, and still nobody is paying attention to public spending.&quot; Inflation is approaching an annual rate of 400%.    Mailson da Nobrega, the general secretary of finance, was appointed Mr. Bresser's interim successor, becoming the fourth finance minister in Mr. Sarney's term and the third in 1987. It wasn't clear who would become the permanent minister, although Mr. da Nobrega could keep the post.    Economist Andre Lara Resende said, &quot;The name is almost irrelevant. What we have right now is a lack of authority. The government isn't able to make any decisions now. It's paralyzed.&quot;    Mr. Bresser Pereira illustrated this paralysis after resigning. He said his main problem in government had been the president's &quot;lack of firmness.&quot;    For example, the departing minister said he told the president 10 days ago that the government would have to close about 15 state enterprises -- inefficient, overstaffed companies that are principal culprits in causing deficit spending and inflationary pressure. According to Mr. Bresser Pereira, the president agreed. A Finance Ministry team spent a week drawing up details, but Mr. Sarney spent the week listening to lobbyists for the state enterprises. By the time Mr. Bresser Pereira returned with a finished plan last Thursday, the president had turned against it.    &quot;It is very discouraging that special-interest groups can have so much power over the president,&quot; Mr. Pih said.    President Sarney is engaged in a single-minded drive to keep the presidency for five years instead of four. Mr. Pih and other business executives believe that President Sarney is rewarding governors and ministers who support his drive for a five-year term with pork-barrel projects, making fiscal discipline impossible.    Experts in Brazil don't think the departure of Mr. Bresser Pereira will lead to a new policy toward Brazil's international creditors. Still, they fear the economic drift caused by political paralysis will disrupt the nations' relations with its bankers. &quot;The question isn't having a hard-line policy toward the bankers,&quot; said Mr. Lara Resende, the economist. &quot;It will be a question of not having any policy.&quot;    Both Brazil's chief debt negotiator, Fernao Bracher, and its central bank governor, Fernando Milliet, were appointed by Mr. Bresser and are expected to be replaced. Mr. Bracher, who has been in daily negotiations with his country's creditors, told Brazil's major bankers Friday that he would resign but would continue negotiating until his replacement is named.    Brazil has been pressing the bankers for concessions; it hasn't paid interest on its $67 billion foreign-bank debt since it declared a debt moratorium last February. Brazil is the giant of Latin American debtors with $113 billion of obligations, about 30% of all Latin debt. Of that, $22 billion is owed to U.S. banks.    Chaos in Brazil could severely damage big U.S. banks, which don't have the reserves to write off large parts of their loan portfolios or even to follow last week's Bank of Boston decision to increase its reserves against loans to troubled debtor countries to 54% of their face value.    Immediately following Mr. Bresser's resignation, Brazil sought to reassure creditors with a telexed message insisting its policy hasn't changed. &quot;This event doesn't alter Brazil's intention to proceed with the Interim Financing Agreement,&quot; the message said. Under that agreement, Brazil and its main banks reached a compromise settlement on the nation's estimated $4.5 billion of interest arrears whereby Brazil put up $1.5 billion and its banks agreed to lend $3 billion.    William R. Rhodes, the Citicorp executive who chairs the committee of 14 banks that negotiates Brazil's bank debts, said the banks will continue with plans to make the first disbursement under the interim agreement before the end of the month.    The Brazilian message also confirmed that Brazil intends to honor its commitment to continue negotiations toward a restructuring of its foreign debt.    Mr. Bresser took office last April. His term was marked by frustrated efforts to slow inflation and curb deficit spending. In May, he halved growth targets for the year and started talking about the need to reduce farm subsidies and increase government revenues. In June, he decreed a three-month price and salary freeze, cut off subsidized credit to farmers, capped government salaries and banned most new loans by government credit agencies.    In August, he launched a series of quarterly targets called the Macroeconomic Control Plan in an attempt to bring deficit spending under control. He called his reforms &quot;a question of life and death.&quot;    Mr. Bresser's goal was to cut Brazil's budget deficit to about 3.5% of the nation's total output of goods and services during 1987, from the 6.5% that was being predicted in April.    But Mr. Bresser had no political support. He was repeatedly thwarted by the president, governors and some ministers. State-bank loans continued, despite the ban. Government officials kept claiming their over-the-cap salaries. When Mr. Bresser was out of the country, the president would undercut him by saying no one had authorized his proposals.    The result: Unofficial budget-deficit projections are still at about 6.5% of economic output, just as if Mr. Bresser had never launched his programs.    Mr. Bresser's Waterloo was his fight this month for a fiscal overhaul. The package was to have included increased tax revenues, cuts in government spending and subsidies and the closing of as many as 20 state enterprises.    The first version of the fiscal package was turned aside by President Sarney. The second version would have involved taxes on interest, capital gains and profits. It was supposed to have been unveiled last Thursday. As the day approached, Brasilia was crowded with lobbyists from poor and distant states, state enterprises, agricultural interests and businesses. Once again, word was leaked that Mr. Sarney was rejecting the main points of the package. It was the final straw for Mr. Bresser.    There has been speculation that his successor will be a businessman. But because of the holidays, it is unlikely a new minister will be named before January.    The interim minister, Mr. da Nobrega, was director of the European Brazilian Bank in London before joining Mr. Bresser Pereira at the Finance Ministry, and is said to be a knowledgeable economist. Some observers think he might be given the job on a permanent basis. </TEXT></DOC>