<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0055 </DOCNO><HL> The Pioneers:Women Who FoughtSex Bias on Job ProveTo Be a Varied Group---Some Who Went to CourtWeren't Ever Feminists;Others Hardly Benefited---But a Few Still Carry Torch---By Martha BranniganStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><DATELINE> WADLEY, Ga.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In a red brick house on 23 wooded acres by Boggy Gut Creek, a pioneer in the fight for women's rights springs from the breakfast table to get fresh coffee for her husband, Billy. Though hurrying to get to church, Lorena Weeks has fixed the usual spread of eggs, grits, ham, cheese and juice. Before leaving, she cleans up while Billy retires to his easy chair to ponder a fishing trip.    If this isn't exactly a feminist's picture of Eden, that's fine with Mrs. Weeks. She never was a feminist. She was simply a worker who demanded the same treatment men got, one of a group of women who filed early lawsuits that dismantled much of the apparatus that made women second-class citizens in the world of work.    Those suits, filed over the past 23 years, gave shape and force to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbids sex discrimination in employment. Though covert bias persists, these cases have helped countless women by lifting the more obvious barriers to equal treatment. &quot;Most laws and policies that on their face discriminate have been struck down,&quot; says Barbara Bryant, an Oakland, Calif., lawyer specializing in sex-discrimination cases.    But what of the women who did this?    No Heavy Lifting   Twenty years ago, Lorena Weeks, now 58, was a Southern Bell Telephone Co. clerk. She wanted a higher-paying job as a switchman, but the company said a state labor rule barring women from jobs that involved lifting more than 30 pounds -- about the weight of an average two-year-old -- made the promotion impossible.    Horsefeathers, thought Mrs. Weeks. She sued and in 1969 won a landmark decision opening to women not only the switchman's positions but also other previously all-male jobs. Today, 140 women at Southern Bell are switchmen (now called &quot;switching-equipment technicians&quot;), and many have other jobs once reserved for men.    Mrs. Weeks always believed that the rule, whose stated purpose was to protect women from overly strenuous work, was actually just another way of preserving the best jobs for men. A union official, she recalls, told her that he didn't want women to get such jobs because men were the &quot;breadwinners,&quot; an idea she rejects. &quot;My daddy died in a boiler explosion at a sawmill when I was nine years old,&quot; she drawls. &quot;My momma worked herself to death at age 38. I knew the man wasn't {always} the breadwinner.&quot;    Often on call day and night to maintain equipment, Mrs. Weeks held a switchman's job for 20 tough years. Weathering the resentment of supervisors, forced to fight for training and favorable postings, she learned what many women learn: that winning in court is often only a start.    When the company installed new equipment, she says, her supervisors tried to banish her to an old facility instead of retraining her. Mrs. Weeks, who blames a few individuals rather than Southern Bell itself, says: &quot;They were fixing to kick me out. They were gunning for me, and I knew it.&quot; She threatened to go to court again, and the supervisors caved in.    An impeccably neat woman whose rough-skinned hands attest to a life of hard work, Mrs. Weeks took early retirement -- and a $30,000 payment -- four years ago, and she has been a domestic whirlwind ever since. On this day, she plans to attend church, deliver a salad for a meal following a neighbor's funeral, and fetch soda and pizzas for tonight's church social for teen-agers.    Her church, where she directs the Sunday school, is at the center of her life, but its pastor and most members don't know of her lawsuit. &quot;I kept it to myself,&quot; she says. &quot;That was a chapter in my life, and now I've gone on to other things.&quot;    So has Leah Rosenfeld, who lives in Mariposa, Calif. A plain-spoken country woman, Mrs. Rosenfeld, 77, currently fights for humane treatment of animals. Once, she would take dozens of stray dogs and cats into her home; now, at a shelter for which she helped raise the money, she pokes a crooked finger through a cage to scratch Ranger, a mischievous mongrel with an unholy habit of killing chickens. His tail wags furiously.    Back in 1967, Mrs. Rosenfeld was fighting Southern Pacific Co. Facing a divorce and with eight of her 12 children still at home, she sued the railroad to get a better-paying job as an agent-telegrapher -- a kind of station manager. The railroad said these jobs were closed to women under a California &quot;protective&quot; law barring them from work requiring overtime hours and the lifting of more than 25 pounds.    The diminutive Mrs. Rosenfeld, who even at age 60 could lift 100-pound feed sacks and work 80 hours a week on her ranch and in her job, got the California law voided in federal court. She also got the job, which she held until retiring in 1974 -- genially fending off the sexist jokes and teasing of male co-workers. Sometimes, she recalls, they would say, &quot;'Hi, Rosie, how's your love life?' and I'd say, 'Don't you wish you knew?' or 'Same as ever' or 'Wonderful.' Anything that popped into my head. Anything but the truth.&quot;    Paying the Price   For Thelma Bowe, a former production worker at Colgate-Palmolive Co., the move into &quot;man's work&quot; was smooth, with little harassment. Her 1965 lawsuit overturned a company policy that allowed male workers to bid internally on certain higher-paying jobs that opened up but barred women from doing so on the ground that the work was too strenuous.    For Mrs. Bowe, who left school after the eighth grade and spent 35 years on the line before retiring, the court case was a moment of glory in a generally uneventful life. &quot;Everybody knew who Thelma Bowe was back then,&quot; she says, beaming.    The victories of other women, however, were bittersweet at best. They opened the doors for many, but they themselves paid a high price in pain and humiliation and gained few benefits.    Dianne Rawlinson's ordeal began in a Montgomery, Ala., beauty shop in 1975, where she was shampooing the hair of attorney Pamela Horowitz. Ms. Rawlinson, who had a degree in psychology with an emphasis on counseling criminals, told her customer that she was working there only because she couldn't get a guard's job at any Alabama prison. State law said guards had to be at least 5 feet 2 inches and 120 pounds; she was tall enough but not nearly heavy enough.    Out of this chat grew a successful lawsuit pressed by Ms. Horowitz (&quot;It always amused me that I went from the beauty shop to the Supreme Court,&quot; she says). In the suit, she proved that the statute, while not mentioning women, excluded far more of them than men. Ms. Rawlinson got a guard's job in 1976, and a peck of trouble with it. &quot;Sometimes when you win, you lose,&quot; she says today.    She says she was immediately branded a troublemaker and harassed by some supervisors. When the lights failed one night, a superior sent her to the front office, away from the prisoners; the next day, she was reprimanded for leaving her post. &quot;I saw then that this sort of thing was going to happen over and over,&quot; she says.    Transferred to another prison, she was placed under official investigation. Authorities decline to say why, and no charges were ever filed against her. In 1980, she quit in order to marry another guard; couples weren't allowed to work together. Then, her life crumbled. She developed uterine cancer, and her marriage failed.    &quot;I realize now he should have quit, not me,&quot; she says. &quot;It was so traumatic: quitting a job I really loved, finding I had cancer, getting a hysterectomy, getting divorced -- all in six months.&quot;    Since then, she has gone from job to job and currently is a counselor for the Veterans Administration. Though her court victory brought her little, she has never regretted filing her suit. &quot;A girlfriend of mine would never have gotten into the prison system otherwise. Now, she's a sergeant,&quot; Ms. Rawlinson says proudly.    Similarly, some female faculty members at the University of Minnesota owe something to Shyamala Rajender, but she herself never got to enjoy what she fought for. In 1972, Ms. Rajender, an assistant professor of chemistry and the only woman in the department, was denied promotion to a tenure-track position. Forced out -- her contract wasn't renewed -- she filed a sex-discrimination suit.    The trial, held years later, traumatized her. &quot;You have to watch yourself being torn apart,&quot; she says. &quot;I was made out to be the worst teacher in the world.&quot; She recalls one professor testifying that she was so bad that 150 students left her classes in one semester. Ms. Rajender adds that the professor, who supposedly had signed the student transfer slips, was later shown to have been out of the country at the time. She says she then produced records proving that transfers had been few.    The case was settled in 1980 by a consent decree that forced the university to adopt &quot;sex-neutral&quot; criteria for hiring, salary, promotion and tenure, plus an affirmative-action plan that gave hiring preference to women candidates whose qualifications were reasonably close to the men's. The decree has slowly increased the number of women faculty members campuswide. Four of them are among the 42 professors in the chemistry department; two have tenure, and two are in tenure-track posts.    Ms. Rajender also got a $100,000 settlement, but she had long before had to abandon her ambitions as an academic and had become a lawyer. Still scarred by her experience, she now is a patent attorney at Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California, the only woman among its six patent lawyers.    &quot;I like the job, but I still sense discrimination,&quot; says Ms. Rajender, who is of Indian extraction. &quot;All the choice opportunities go to young white men. I get what they discard. Sometimes, I think of going to court again -- but once you've been through it, you think twice.&quot;    Accidents and Ironies   Martha Gilbert never wanted to be a crusader, would never have been if nature's timing had been different, and lost her case anyway. Yet few litigants have done more for more women.    She sued General Electric Co. for denying her disability payments for pregnancy while providing them for other disabilities. She lost in the Supreme Court in 1976, but that controversial decision stirred Congress to amend the law; it now defines discrimination because of pregnancy as a violation, and countless pregnant workers have benefited. &quot;She lost the battle,&quot; says Wendy Williams, an associate professor of law at Georgetown University, &quot;but she precipitated the winning of the war.&quot;    Mrs. Gilbert, who still works for GE in Salem, Mass., seldom thinks of her case and calls her role as lead plaintiff a coincidence. &quot;I just happened to be pregnant,&quot; she says. &quot;There were seven of us, and my name came first in the alphabet.&quot;    Mary Sprogis of Mission Viejo, Calif., would never have pinned United Airlines to the mat if she had stayed single. In 1966, Mrs. Sprogis, then a United flight attendant, married her pilot husband, Harold, aboard a San Francisco-Los Angeles flight. When she told her supervisor, the woman said, &quot;Congratulations. You're fired.&quot;    Mrs. Sprogis knew that United then forbade female flight attendants to marry but allowed male attendants to do so without losing their jobs. &quot;But I was idealistic,&quot; she recalls. &quot;I knew there was a new law on the books, and I couldn't see how they could just flagrantly continue with what they were doing.&quot; She sued.    United argued in court that it was a business necessity to have only unmarried women in the air; married ones would always be worrying about their children instead of the passengers. Critics believed that the carrier simply wanted nubile young women with maximum appeal for businessmen. United lost.    Mrs. Sprogis flew until 1978, when she resigned to spend more time with her children. She and her husband, who is still a pilot, now operate an aviation-consultancy business. Meanwhile, a subsequent classaction lawsuit filed by other attendants who had left United because of the no-marriage rule dragged on for 18 years; it was resolved only last July, with United agreeing to pay almost $33 million in back wages and rehiring 475 women. About 400 others had already got their jobs back, thanks to the class-action case.    A continent away from the Sprogis household, Sharron Cohen muses before her computer screen at home in Gloucester, Mass., and then taps out another paragraph of what she calls a &quot;trashy novel&quot; for Harlequin, a publisher of always-steamy but never-seamy romances. She has sold several but adds that she is &quot;semi-embarrassed&quot; by her new calling.    In 1970, she was Air Force Lt. Sharron Frontiero, the wife of a veteran who was attending college, and she was hopping mad at the military. At that time, military women had to prove that their husbands were dependents, drawing at least 50% of their support from their wives, before the women could get a housing allowance and medical benefits covering their husbands. Males in the military got those benefits automatically, even if their wives earned more than they did.    Her class-action suit overturned that statute. She was awarded back benefits -- and got a lesson in irony. &quot;By the time they were paid, we were divorced. And you know, they scrupulously split those payments down the middle,&quot; she says wryly.    Remarried to a physician who shares in household chores, Mrs. Cohen says motherhood has focused her life on something more than the 14th Amendment guarantees in the Constitution. &quot;The issues that excite me now,&quot; she notes, &quot;are school libraries and public-school budgets.&quot;    The Activists   Most of the women pioneers either weren't ardent feminists to begin with or have since found other causes and interests. But for Elizabeth Hishon and some others, sex discrimination in the workplace remains a central issue.    Eight years ago, attorney Hishon sued the Atlanta law firm of King andamp; Spalding, contending that although her annual progress reports were encouraging, she had been denied a partnership because she was a woman. The firm rejected the bias charge and argued that such a case couldn't be brought anyway. But in May 1984, the Supreme Court ruled that partnerships such as law firms can indeed be sued for sex discrimination in selecting partners. The next month, King andamp; Spalding settled the Hishon case with an unspecified payment to the plaintiff.    Today, the firm -- which once staged a bathing-suit competition for female summer interns and named a Harvard woman as &quot;the body we'd like to see more of&quot; -- has four women among its 82 partners. About a third of its associates are women. Bradley Hale, a partner, insists that the Hishon case has had nothing to do with the firm's selection process.    Mrs. Hishon, a corporate and commercial-real-estate attorney, is herself a partner -- in a different firm. She believes that her case has, &quot;to some extent, helped me attract clients. It's resulted in my being singled out as an activist in a positive sense.&quot; She speaks on sex discrimination and still gets phone calls from women seeking advice about job bias.    So does Penny Harrington, an outspoken feminist who became the first woman police chief in a major U.S. city when she was named to head the Portland, Ore., force in 1984. Unlike the other pioneers, Mrs. Harrington hasn't set any sweeping legal precedents -- yet. But she has been the consummate infighter, a highly visible woman who has refused to tolerate any perceived bias as she struggled up the ladder in what has always been an archetypal &quot;man's job.&quot;    Since 1972, Mrs. Harrington has filed some 40 administrative complaints with the state, charging the police force with various acts of job discrimination against her. Gradually, she rose to captain, and she was popular until becoming chief. Now, she is out of a job.    She resigned under pressure last year after a special commission issued a scathing evaluation of her management; as chief, she had plainly lost the confidence of many officers, and the department was in turmoil. Mrs. Harrington blames much of what happened on rampant sexism (&quot;absolute nonsense,&quot; says the mayor's office) and has filed a sex-discrimination suit in federal court.    She also is considering a new career of counseling women victims of job bias. &quot;I get calls and letters from women all over, some of them pretty desperate,&quot; she says. &quot;I'm trying to figure out how a counseling service could be set up nationally and how I could get paid for it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>