<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880725-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.N. OPENED a two-pronged drive to end the war between Iran and Iraq.    As fighting continued in the Persian Gulf region, a team of military experts organized by the world body arrived in Iran, and was expected to arrange the technical details of a cease-fire, troop withdrawals and the repatriation of prisoners of war. The U.N. team is scheduled to travel to Iraq later this week. In New York, the U.N.'s Perez de Cuellar planned to meet separately with the foreign ministers of Iran and Iraq, and said he hoped to persuade them to meet one-on-one this week to discuss a truce.    A U.S. official predicted that the gulf fighting would end within 10 days and Carlucci said the U.S. military would be withdrawn as soon as it's &quot;prudent.&quot;    ---   Dukakis and Bentsen concluded a three-day campaign swing across the country that was designed to play on the themes of last week's Democratic convention. In New Mexico, Bush proposed a &quot;Children's Tax Credit&quot; to help parents meet child-care costs. The cost is estimated at about $2 billion a year.    Reagan returned to Washington after a weeklong vacation in California, with the drought, aid to the Nicaraguan rebels and the fall presidential campaign on his agenda. The president, in his weekly radio address Saturday, accused the Democrats of obscuring a vague, liberal platform.    ---   Burma's socialist rulers proposed dismantling Rangoon's tight control over society. The move came after leader Ne Win announced Saturday that he wished to resign after 26 years in power. He called for a referendum to decide the fate of the country's one-party political system. A party congress was to decide today about his resignation.    ---   Costa Rica's President Arias warned in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that the Central American peace process he designed is imperiled by hard-liners on both sides of the Nicaraguan conflict. On Saturday, San Jose agreed to a Contra request to host a new round of talks between Managua and the rebels.    ---   South Africa confirmed that it had held talks with Angola and Cuba on ending the 13-year-old civil war in Angola. U.S. representatives were present as mediators at the military negotiations Friday and Saturday in Cape Verde. The nations earlier this month agreed to a broad set of principles to be used as a basis for a peace accord.    Pretoria's police killed four blacks who allegedly hurled hand grenades at a roadblock in the tribal homeland of Bophuthatswana. About 12 police officers were injured in the attack and shoot-out that followed.    ---   Afghan guerrillas bombarded the southern edge of Kabul, killing at least 10 people, the Soviet news agency Tass reported. A Soviet military officer broke with Moscow's official position and said he doubted that Afghanistan's military could survive once the Red Army withdraws. He predicted that Islamic fundamentalists would gain power.    ---   The FDA has decided to formally allow Americans to import for personal use small quantities of foreign medications that aren't approved for sale in the U.S. The agency's commissioner announced the policy at a conference on AIDS in Boston. The FDA has been criticized for failing to quickly approve the use of new drugs, especially for AIDS.    ---   Hezbollah's spiritual leader called for a solution to the problem of foreign hostages held in Lebanon, saying that he felt &quot;pain for the detention&quot; of the captives. He accused the U.S., however, of playing politics with the issue. The pro-Iranian extremist group is believed to be holding 18 Western hostages, including nine Americans.    ---   Cambodian peace talks are scheduled to begin today outside Jakarta. The informal talks organized by Indonesia and aimed at arranging a political settlement of the nine-year conflict, will involve the four opposing Cambodian factions and representatives of several Southeast Asian nations.    ---   Thailand's Premier Prem appeared poised to retain his post, as unofficial results from general elections showed his four coalition partners in Bangkok's caretaker government capturing nearly 60% of a new 357-member parliament. Moslem separatist violence erupted during the balloting, and at least two people were killed.    ---   Armenian factories worked over the weekend in an effort to make up for losses incurred during a two-week strike to demand transfer of the Nagorno-Karabakh region from Azerbaijan. Soviet newspapers said more than 100 factories in the Armenian capital of Yerevan were operating.    ---   Israeli troops killed two Palestinians during demonstrations in the occupied West Bank as Arabs celebrated a Moslem feast day. Israel's government sent 1,400 riot police to maintain order in Jerusalem's Old City as Jews observed a day of fasting.    ---   Pedro Delgado of Spain won the 75th Tour de France. The three-week bicycle race covered more than 1,864 miles. </TEXT></DOC>