<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880413-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Survival Strategy: Texaco's Chiefs Battle To Revitalize the Firm And Repulse Raiders --- But Talk of Tension at Top Could Presage Difficulties In Achieving Turnaround --- Screening Videotapes of Icahn </HL><AUTHOR> Allanna Sullivan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TX TXC TWA MDEST </CO><IN> PET BCY TNM </IN><DATELINE> WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Welcome to Jim and Al's, a friendly place -- sort of.    Jim is James W. Kinnear, the president and chief executive of Texaco Inc. Al is Alfred C. DeCrane Jr., the chairman. Mr. Kinnear tells a funny story about how Mr. DeCrane rescued him from a stuck elevator in the Chrysler Building in 1966 by ordering the New York City Fire Department to break through a wall. &quot;We've been friends for more than 20 years,&quot; Mr. Kinnear says.    Mr. DeCrane tells other stories of camaraderie at the top of the nation's seventh-largest corporation. &quot;I can't say that since Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire we're the world's greatest dance team,&quot; he says, &quot;but there aren't any conflicts.&quot;    Or are there? Less than a week after emerging from its traumatic, yearlong bankruptcy proceedings, Texaco is buzzing with talk of tension at the top. Members of the inner circle say that disagreements over corporate strategy between these two starkly different men may be slowing decision-making at a crucial time. The issues, insiders say, chiefly involve how quickly and to what degree long-troubled Texaco should try to restructure itself.    For the moment, the two executives are setting aside their differences and, equally important, trying to convince the investment community that such differences don't exist. If investors lose faith in Texaco's ability to turn around, they are more likely to side with outsiders -- and at least four potential raiders are threatening the joint leadership. One of them, the acquisitive Carl C. Icahn, has accumulated 14.8% of Texaco's stock and would like to see the company sold; he has threatened to seize five of 14 board seats, including Mr. Kinnear's, through a proxy fight at Texaco's June 7 annual meeting in Tulsa.    &quot;It's like 'Dynasty'! 'Dallas'!&quot; exclaims Irwin Jacobs, a well-known raider in his own right who has profitably traded three big positions in Texaco stock in the last year. &quot;There's the players, the story, the confusion!&quot;    The intrigue runs highest inside Texaco's fortresslike headquarters building here in White Plains. Besides helping Mr. Kinnear and Mr. DeCrane defuse talk of executive-suite tension, aides are busily mapping strategy for the prospective fights against raiders.    Some aides have taken it upon themselves to screen videotapes of network appearances by Mr. Icahn. This material, says a Texaco executive, has inadvertently included outtakes -- material never broadcast. It isn't clear what network or networks may have supplied the outtakes, but the networks all have policies against providing such material.    By screening the videotapes, Texaco hopes to establish patterns of statements and subsequent actions by Mr. Icahn that might pop up again. &quot;We want to establish what every action means,&quot; says one executive, &quot;the significance of every move.&quot; Texaco aides are also reading up on other potential attackers, including oil man T. Boone Pickens and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co., the New York investment partnership that is long on moxie and money.    &quot;We may have Carl Icahns snapping at us,&quot; Mr. Kinnear says, &quot;but we're going to snap right back at them.&quot; To these fighting words Mr. DeCrane readily assents.    The two are clearly united behind one overriding goal: getting the chance to become heroes instead of goats in the aftermath of Texaco's bitter legal battle with Pennzoil Co. And this is no mere public-relations campaign; it is a personal quest. For four years, Texaco has been a litigation factory rather than an oil company, and Mr. Kinnear and Mr. DeCrane were part of the management team that got Texaco into the mess. Now, once and for all, they want to prove themselves worthy as oil men.    Mr. Kinnear rhapsodizes over Texaco's future while staring from his office window. &quot;I want Texaco to become one of the most admired companies in the U.S.,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm going to change the company's image, make it forward-looking, successful, friendly, a good place to work and invest your money in.&quot;    Even if Mr. Kinnear and Mr. DeCrane win the proxy fight, they will have precious little time to complete one of the most ambitious turnarounds in corporate history. &quot;We figure we've got nine months to a year,&quot; says one high executive. If good things don't start happening by then, shareholders who have stuck with management that far may start deserting. So Texaco, once likened to &quot;an elephant galloping downhill&quot; for its ponderous bureaucracy and poor results, is furiously planning for the annual meeting and beyond.    Ad hoc planning sessions routinely spring up in the halls of the headquarters building. Several times a week, such well-known investment bankers as Eric Gleacher of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. stride in and out of the conference room adjacent to Mr. Kinnear's antique-furnished office. David Boies, a million-dollar-a-year litigator in the blue-chip law firm of Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore, spent two years encamped here while Texaco waged its history-making court fight with Pennzoil. But even though the litigation is settled, he still meets daily with Texaco's top officials and presides over a wing of as many as six additional outside lawyers with permanent offices here.    In addition, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom, a law firm best known for representing raiders, is standing by to help defend Texaco. Packages of &quot;fight material&quot; attacking Mr. Icahn are almost ready to be mailed to shareholders. Mr. Kinnear, Mr. DeCrane and other Texaco officials are set to spend hours on the phone persuading big investors to support management.    And there is talk in the air of quickly, before the annual meeting, reinstating the $3 annual dividend that Texaco wiped out during its bankruptcy proceedings or of announcing a stock-repurchase program -- anything to help defuse Mr. Icahn's proxy-solicitation effort.    In the two-man partnership running Texaco, Mr. Kinnear is clearly the man in a hurry. In his view, the best defense against any plundering by takeover artists is a strong restructuring plan. He wants quickly to shed billions of dollars of assets before anyone else gets the chance to carve the company into little pieces. Insiders say the sale of at least an interest in the prized Texaco Canada Inc., an action once forsworn by Texaco, is now under serious consideration.    But the pace of the planning isn't fast enough for Mr. Kinnear. &quot;I'm not paid to be patient,&quot; he snaps.    Mr. DeCrane, on the other hand, according to someone familiar with the internal bargaining, has urged caution in evaluating which assets, if any, should be sold beyond the $3 billion in assets already announced as being on the block. The tension has trickled down the organization chart, with several legal and financial executives backing Mr. DeCrane's approach and some operations executives supporting the fast-moving Mr. Kinnear.    It is easy to see why such differences exist. Mr. Kinnear, freewheeling and unconcerned with minutiae, spends the day in his shirt sleeves. Mr. DeCrane, a detail man, spends the day in his jacket. Mr. Kinnear is an operations executive who climbed to the top as a skillful marketer. Mr. DeCrane is a lawyer who drew attention as a top-notch negotiator.    They reached the threshold of the chairman's suite simultaneously, shortly before the 1986 retirement of Chairman John K. McKinley. Texaco at the time was burdened with the biggest court judgment in history: the $11 billion award won by Pennzoil after a jury found that Texaco, in acquiring Getty Oil Co. in 1984, had improperly interfered with a Pennzoil agreement to buy an interest in Getty.    Last December, Texaco settled its four-year legal battle with Pennzoil by agreeing to pay the Houston-based company $3 billion. That payment, made to Pennzoil last Thursday, caused Texaco to give up about 20% of its net worth.    The involvement of Mr. Kinnear and Mr. DeCrane in the events leading to the judgment didn't diminish their standing in the eyes of the Texaco board, which considered the judgment a miscarriage of justice. But rather than install one man alone, the board divided the top job, giving Al DeCrane the superior title of chairman and Jim Kinnear the title of president -- but also giving Mr. Kinnear the tie-breaking CEO title.    &quot;There are moments when I think Al has come to grips with it and other times when it appears he still thinks he has a shot at it,&quot; says an individual who knows both well.    The tension is most evident when both are present in meetings: Mr. DeCrane occasionally acts like a chairman who, like many chairmen, carries the title of chief executive. &quot;Jim is tolerant for a time, but then suddenly he'll sit up a little straighter, the tone of his voice will change and he may brusquely make a decision,&quot; says one individual close to both men. &quot;It's all very subtle, but it's ever present.&quot;    In the 1986 annual report, Mr. Kinnear's picture was bigger than Mr. DeCrane's. In the recently published 1987 annual report, their pictures are the same size. But Mr. DeCrane strenuously denies that he has any problem with Mr. Kinnear's being No. 1. &quot;Jim is the CEO,&quot; he says. &quot;We've worked that out.&quot;    Nearly all outsiders judge both men well as individuals, even after all the costly controversies of recent years. But dissident shareholders and Wall Street critics judge Texaco harshly. The oil giant, plagued by the Pennzoil litigation and by operations that have lagged behind those of competitors in almost every aspect of the business, has reported shabby earnings through most of this decade.    But after taking a staggering $4.9 billion after-tax charge last year, which resulted in a huge loss of $4.4 billion, Texaco is expected to return to profitability this year, says Paul Mlotok, an analyst for Salomon Brothers Inc. He predicts that the company will earn $2.40 a share, or $585 million, this year and that its earnings will continue to creep higher for at least the next three years.    A little luck would help. An old Texaco jingle said, &quot;You can trust your car to the man who wears the star,&quot; but in recent years the company has seemed star-crossed:   --Five years ago a Texaco drilling barge was working in a Louisiana lake. Instead of striking oil, it hit a salt mine, draining the entire lake like a giant bathtub.    --Texaco traded its way to big profits in Saudi Arabian oil -- only to find itself dunned now by the Internal Revenue Service for $6.5 billion in back taxes on those transactions. (The company expects to settle for far less than that.)    --Texaco became the only major U.S. oil company to have a tanker hit a mine outside the Persian Gulf.    --With the only refinery in Panama, Texaco was dragged into a controversy with the Reagan administration over tax payments to the Noriega regime; it now has stopped making such payments.    Many of Texaco's problems, including the Getty fiasco, stem from Texaco's severe and longstanding shortage of oil and gas reserves. A recent study by PaineWebber Inc. labels any quest by the company to replace depleted oil reserves as &quot;hopeless.&quot; Long ranked the worst oil-finder among the majors, Texaco would have to lay out $40.3 billion to replace all the oil it produced in the past five years alone, according to the study by the brokerage concern. Although that calculation has been disputed, it is a fact that that oil -- about 2.7 billion barrels -- equals one-tenth of the nation's current supply of oil in the ground.    Texaco says it replaced 70% of its oil production last year, an improvement over past years, but George Friesen, an oil-industry analyst for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., notes that many major oil companies replaced more oil than they produced.    Mr. Kinnear is intent on stepping up the search for new &quot;elephant&quot; oil fields. But in his fast-turnaround mode, he expresses the heretical view that a major oil company shouldn't have to acquire a new barrel of oil reserves for every one it produces. To that end, he says, Texaco will move to feed its sprawling refinery network with somebody else's oil -- most likely the Saudis'.    Texaco advisers say the company remains on track in negotiations to sell the Saudis a half interest in three U.S. refineries and four U.S. gasoline marketing territories. So far, Texaco and the Saudis have agreed to create a separate company in the U.S. to own this joint venture. Discussions between Saudi and Texaco officials over the corporate structure and staffing of the company, as well as over crude-supply arrangements, are currently under way in New York and Houston, say Texaco advisers. The deal, however, could take weeks to consummate.    Senior Texaco executives are also locked in heated talks in Europe with two of four potential buyers of Deutsche Texaco A.G. The asking price for the German subsidiary is understood to be about $1.5 billion.    But shareholders aren't likely to wait long for the outcome of these and other pending restructuring moves. Although Texaco's stock price lately has risen to its highest level in more than four years -- it closed at $49.75 yesterday in New York composite trading -- even Mr. Kinnear admits, &quot;We haven't done enough for the shareholder.&quot;    And the clock is ticking. &quot;Shareholders are somewhat sympathetic to the position 'give 'em a chance,'&quot; says David Batchelder, chief adviser to raider Pickens. &quot;But they'll grow dissatisfied quickly.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>