<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871229-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Nuclear Power's Secret---By Petr Beckmann</HL><DD> 12/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)UTILITIES (UTI) </IN><TEXT>   The nuclear-power industry has been hiding a big secret: Power from the atom is very much safer than any other source of electricity. This secret is safe with the anti-nuke movement, which, by pandering to fears of modern technology, has nearly destroyed the nuclear-power industry.    But why hasn't the industry itself been shouting the truth from the rooftops? The short answer is that its biggest clients, the utilities, mostly use fossil fuels, especially coal, and the nuclear-power industry is loath to offend its potential customers. There is a well-kept truce between the nuclear and coal lobbies and neither wants to play up one against the other. Each has enough enemies as it is.    Until recently, the nuclear-power industry was represented by the Atomic Industrial Forum, which had a strict policy of concealing the nuclear-fossil comparison in matters of safety and health. The Forum was merged last summer with another organization into the U.S. Council of Energy Awareness and it can only be hoped that its new personnel will finally let the big secret out of the bag.    The ultimate reason for the superior safety of nuclear power lies not in its strict regulation or the cleverness of its gadgets but in its inherent properties.    First, when nuclear power does get out of control, its threat unfolds slowly, allowing time for containment and evacuation. How do you evacuate when a dam breaks or oil storage tanks blow up?    Second, nuclear power's only real threat is the release of radiation, a genuine threat to be sure. However, even if all precautions and countermeasures should fail, the consequences are still small compared with, say, a dam break, which can kill many thousands within minutes.    Third, nuclear power's greater concentration of energy results in far safer fuel transportation and disposal. The delivery of one gigawatt of power requires 38,000 rail cars of coal compared with six truckloads of uranium. Furthermore, nuclear wastes after about 500 years are less toxic than coal ash, some of whose ingredients are toxic forever and a lot of which is now disposed of in human lungs.    Even terrorists attacking nuclear plants are unlikely to inflict as much damage on people as they would by blowing up a hydroelectric dam or setting an oil tank farm on fire.    However, the real death toll doesn't come from such dramatic incidents but from the premature deaths inflicted by fossil fuels, especially on the elderly. These fatalities are individually unattributable and, therefore, undramatic, but their number is shockingly high. A comprehensive 1978 study by the Brookhaven National Lab indicates that some 37,000 people die prematurely in the U.S. every year because of pollution from coal-fired electric power. Similarly, Prof. B.L. Cohen at the University of Pittsburgh has concluded that even if the grossly inflated claims by the Union of Concerned Scientists about the dangers of nuclear power were true, they would still be many times safer than coal.    Now for everybody's favorite villains: Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. There were indeed deaths due to the incident at Three Mile Island. More than 300 people died in the first six years after the accident because of fossil-fuel power generated to replace the two nuclear reactors that were lost -- one to the accident, the other to the politicians. As for Chernobyl's Unit IV, it saved more lives from coal's ill effects during its short life of 27 months than it took by radiation or will take in the future. These conclusions are based on the finding that there are 74 premature deaths a year in the U.S. for every gigawatt of coal-fired power produced, a figure reached by Brookhaven and confirmed by other studies.    The nuclear-power industry's policy of keeping secret its superior health and safety qualities has allowed the anti-nuke movement to masquerade as moralists and to induce a public phobia against the very word &quot;nuclear.&quot; In the process, the anti-nukes have been able to suppress an even bigger secret: They aren't so much anti-nuclear as anti-energy. And a lack of energy is a bigger threat to life and health than either coal or nuclear power.    ---   Mr. Beckmann is professor emeritus of electrical engineering at the University of Colorado and publisher of Access to Energy, a newsletter. </TEXT></DOC>