<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870914-0015 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHEVARDNADZE ARRIVED in the U.S. for high-level consultations.    The Soviet foreign minister said an accord on medium-range and shorter-range nuclear arms was within reach but indicated differences remain over warheads and treaty verification. Shevardnadze, who is to attend a U.N. session, said a decision on another superpower summit depends on talks with Reagan and Shultz this week. Shultz earlier portrayed the verification issue as a technical one that can be worked out.    Reagan wants a treaty but would reject a superpower pact on medium-range weapons unless it met U.S. requirements, Chief of Staff Baker said in an NBC-TV interview.    ---   PEREZ DE CUELLAR TOOK his peace mission to Iraq after talks in Iran.    The U.N. secretary-general, who received support from six Arab states in seeking a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war, met with Iran's president, who reiterated Iran will keep fighting until Iraq is branded the aggressor, Tehran radio said. Iraq said Iran shelled the southern city of Basra as the U.N. official arrived in Baghdad. Earlier, Iraq threatened &quot;more severe war&quot; unless Iran accepts a U.N. resolution for a truce.    As Navy helicopters expand operations to search for more-sophisticated mines, Italy's Parliament cleared sending a naval force to the gulf after Perez de Cuellar concludes his visit.    ---   John Paul II lauded indirectly the sanctuary effort for illegal Latin refugees, before a heavily Hispanic crowd in San Antonio, Texas. In New Orleans, the pope praised blacks' nonviolent struggle for civil rights. In Miami talks Friday with a Jewish group, he defended Pius XII's actions during the holocaust. He backed a Palestinian state.    ---   Nicaragua's president announced steps to comply with a regional peace plan, criticized Saturday by Reagan as flawed. The proposals, unveiled after two anti-Sandinista priests returned from exile at Managua's invitation, include new talks with Sandinista opponents, withdrawal of U.S. plans for new Contra aid and a national dialogue Oct. 5.    ---   France is moving its air defense force north in Chad, France's defense minister told a French newspaper. He ruled out sending more troops to Chad in its border-strip conflict with Libya. Chances of a negotiated settlement of the dispute improved, despite Chad's saying a cease-fire was breached; neither side reported new bombing raids.    ---   The Reagan administration told U.S. oil companies that it is no longer &quot;inappropriate&quot; for them to do business with Syria. The announcement, following a decision to send the U.S. ambassador back to Damascus, marks a reversal of a get-tough policy toward Syria initiated last November after a terrorist incident.    ---   Delaware Sen. Biden was accused of modeling a campaign speech in Iowa on a British politician's rhetoric without crediting him. Aides to the Democratic presidential contender, who is to lead the hearings on Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court, branded the flap as bogus and as sabotage by an opponent.    ---   Vietnam is freeing 6,685 prisoners, including 480 former military and civilian officials of the South Vietnamese government that was toppled in 1975, Hanoi said. The amnesty, marking National Day, is believed to be one of the biggest mass pardons in history. Terms also were reduced for 5,320 other prisoners in re-education camps.    ---   New Caledonians rejected independence, with 98.3% of ballots cast for the Pacific island to remain part of France, officials said. About 41% of eligible voters, short of the goal, heeded a boycott call by pro-independence ethnic Melanesians, who claimed the referendum favored French settlers. France has controlled the island since 1853.    ---   South Korea's Roh Tae Woo began a trip to Washington and Japan. The ruling party leader, who is to meet with Reagan today, hopes to strengthen U.S. ties and boost his presidential candidacy. Top dissident Kim Dae Jung said he wouldn't force a showdown with rival Kim Young Sam to become the opposition's presidential candidate.    ---   Kohl's Christian Democrats sustained losses in crucial West German state elections in Schleswig-Holstein and Bremen, early returns indicated. Despite the Social Democrats' gains, TV computer projections showed the chancellor's party could remain in power with the help of the Free Democrats, his small, liberal partner in Bonn.    ---   Arianespace is to launch a rocket from French Guyana tomorrow, after being grounded for over 15 months. The European space agency's redesigned Ariane will carry two telecommunications satellites. The venture may determine the European space industry's success in competing in the high-stakes commercial-launch market.    ---   Martina Navratilova defeated Steffi Graf in two straight sets Saturday to win the U.S. Open women's tennis championship.    ---   Died: Mervyn LeRoy, 86, film director and producer, in Beverly Hills, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>