<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861212-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Science Follies:At CDC's AIDS LabEgos, Power, PoliticsAnd Lost Experiments---Staff Clashed Over PrioritiesAnd Credit; Some VirusesEnded Up in the Trash---The Flap Over a Spermicide---By Jonathan KwitnyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/12/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The AIDS laboratory of the Centers for Disease Control, set up with high hopes three years ago and staffed with leading scientists, has been crippled by ego clashes, professional jealousies and perhaps worse. For months it has been dogged by allegations of hampered research, political meddling and even sabotaged experiments.    Of the six senior scientists who started the lab, five have quit. Of five more who joined them in 1984, one is gone, one is leaving soon and two others say they are looking for other jobs. Though there are prospects for large increases in federal money for research on acquired immune deficiency syndrome, scientists say the lab has unfilled positions even at current financing levels.    &quot;They've lost their credibility almost completely,&quot; says Paul Luciw of the University of California at Davis, one of the scientists who helped detail the genetic structure of the AIDS virus. &quot;Now that there is a fair amount of support, the very effective scientists are really going to go elsewhere.&quot; The CDC, he fears, will get those who &quot;aren't the highest caliber.&quot;    Trouble at the AIDS lab was first reported in late August by the Miami Herald. A quick internal study by the CDC concluded that while there was turnover among scientists, it wasn't unusual, and that while experiments might have been tampered with, such instances weren't significant.    The Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences then investigated, at the behest of Connecticut Sen. Lowell Weicker. This week it reported that the AIDS lab has suffered from poor leadership, low morale, rivalries and distrust -- an atmosphere so bad that it apparently led to &quot;minor&quot; tampering with experiments. The investigators said a particular research finding hadn't been suppressed, as alleged in press accounts, but they questioned why the lab took so long to publish it.    This newspaper also has looked into the situation at the CDC's AIDS lab. It was told not just of staff infighting but of allegations of scientific decisions made to suit political ends. There are charges that work that was hampered might have helped thousands of people avoid exposure to AIDS.    And beyond the indications of tampering with laboratory cell cultures is the story of how a senior scientist, while colleagues were away, ordered a technician to throw out the AIDS viruses they were nurturing because he wanted the lab to do its research with a strain he had isolated. The valuable virus cultures, and the experiments being done on them, went into the garbage.    The other tampering reports are striking enough in themselves. For instance, Neile McGrath, a biologist at the AIDS lab, complained that viral cultures suffered unusual contamination several times in 1985. Over one weekend, &quot;my cultures appeared to have been moved around in my incubator,&quot; Ms. McGrath says. She told the CDC she installed a lock and had no more problems.    A senior scientist who has left said culture flasks were rearranged in his incubator at night and contaminated, perhaps by someone spitting into them. And other strange things happened. Carbon dioxide valves were turned off in cell-culture incubators, or opened wide. Shaking mechanisms were also switched off, and heaters turned up.    Such bizarre doings contrast starkly with the CDC's early success in identifying and tracking AIDS. As recognition of the seriousness of the problem grew, so did the organization's efforts, and in 1983 it set up the Laboratory Branch of its new AIDS program. (Many people in other branches of the CDC also work on AIDS and aren't involved in the lab's problems.) The lab was at first in a close race with the other major government AIDS laboratory, that at the National Institutes of Health in Washington, to find ways to combat the growing scourge.    But antagonisms and rivalries quickly developed at the CDC. &quot;AIDS {research} has attracted a certain type of personality,&quot; says one senior scientist who left the lab. &quot;There's power to be had. They {the CDC} control a lot of money. There are a lot of egos involved, and they are clashing.&quot;    There have been clashes among different research scientists, and also a clash between researchers and the administrators. The administrators are mostly epidemiologists -- doctors who investigate diseases and epidemics, partly with statistical methods, and whom some researchers don't regard as &quot;real&quot; scientists. Epidemiology is the CDC's forte, and early on an epidemiologist, James Curran, took control of the AIDS lab. He has become a focus of controversy.    In 1984 the prestigious magazine Science accepted a paper by four of the CDC lab's scientists describing a way to test blood for AIDS antibodies. Senior CDC scientists say they were stunned when Dr. Curran insisted that he and several others be listed as co-authors of this and another major paper in Science.    One senior scientist says Dr. Curran added the names of staff epidemiologists who had merely contributed two or three blood samples to the 600 that the four lab scientists analyzed. Cirilo Cabradilla, who was the director of virology and one of the researchers, says: &quot;There should have been only four or five authors, and there ended up 11.&quot;    Dr. Curran declined to discuss the situation at the AIDS lab.    As Prof. Luciw of the University of California at Davis sees it, &quot;The administrators would like to be part of the scientific process, and I think that's where the problem comes in. Jim {Curran} was trained as an M.D. Most M.D.s are trained to learn a lot of facts and don't have depth in any particular area unless they've really gone out of their way. Ph.D.s have spent five or six years on one research project.&quot;    So, he contends, at the CDC program &quot;you've got somebody at the top who knows a little bit about a lot of things but who really doesn't know what it takes to make major progress in a particular area.&quot;    For a program chief to add his name to research reports isn't uncommon, but the practice doesn't stir much resentment when the chief is a distinguished laboratory scientist, as in the case of Robert Gallo at the NIH. In its report this week, the Institute of Medicine recommended that the CDC put its basic research into a separate program and recruit &quot;an esteemed research scientist&quot; to head it. The CDC says it is moving to do both of those things.    If medical politics have been part of the AIDS lab's problem, so have national politics, some scientists say. They charge that &quot;pro-family,&quot; anti-homosexual views within the Reagan administration created pressure that biased the lab's work.    Donald Francis, a virologist and epidemiologist who headed the AIDS lab at the outset but soon became subordinate to Dr. Curran, states: &quot;Curran isn't homophobic, but he is certainly conscious of the administration's feelings and he wants to keep CDC alive. The CDC was being sandwiched between a very bad disease and a policy coming from above treating it with less aggressive action.&quot; Dr. Francis, an advocate of fighting AIDS with both science and education, now is with the CDC in California.    The issue surfaced in May 1984, when Bruce Voeller, a Los Angeles biologist and homosexual-rights activist, met Dr. Curran for dinner after an AIDS meeting at the NIH. Mr. Voeller had done work on the use of certain spermicides to kill sexually transmitted disease organisms, and he proposed testing a common one called nonoxynol-9 on the AIDS virus. Since the CDC lab was one of the few places possessing AIDS virus samples, he asked Dr. Curran to provide some for a study. Mr. Voeller says Dr. Curran refused, saying he was unimpressed with existing studies on the spermicide.    &quot;I was flabbergasted,&quot; Mr. Voeller says. &quot;All he had to lose was a couple of days' work of some technician.&quot;    Mr. Voeller got the help he wanted anyway, when Donald Hicks, a technician at the CDC lab, read of his work and approached him about testing nonoxynol-9 on the AIDS virus. Though warned of Dr. Curran's earlier objection, Mr. Hicks's superiors, Jane Getchell and Dr. Francis, approved the experiment. By December 1984, Messrs. Francis and Voeller thought the common spermicide had been proved so effective a killer of the AIDS virus (in a laboratory dish only) that they proposed announcing this and drafted a paper for publication.    According to scientists and technicians involved in the study, Dr. Curran balked. They say he objected, among other things, that an announcement might prompt homosexuals who had begun using condoms to abandon them for the spermicide, which had been found to kill virus only in laboratory conditions.    Some add, though, that Dr. Curran also said the work itself was inappropriate for the CDC. Janet Heath, a technician who was a co-author of the paper, believes that he &quot;was more interested in effecting a lifestyle change, the numbers of partners and things like that, rather than saying here's something you can get in the drugstore that might help.&quot;    Mr. Voeller told investigators for the Institute of Medicine that, in his opinion, Dr. Curran held up the spermicide paper because he was embarrassed at the success of the tests after having opposed them and because the administrator was &quot;extremely careful to stay on the right side of the administration's sex-phobic marching orders.&quot;    Mr. Voeller and other scientists involved refer to a February 1985 report by Congress's Office of Technology Assessment, which said: &quot;Efforts to prevent AIDS through education have received minimum funding. . . . One reason may be that providing advice on preventive practices may be viewed as condoning bisexuality, homosexuality or intravenous drug abuse.&quot;    Mr. Voeller's group issued an announcement of the results on its own. He says he also called congressmen to try to pressure the CDC to publish. About a year after Dr. Francis had first wanted to announce the results, Dr. Curran had the paper, much revised and truncated, published as a letter to the Lancet, the British medical journal. Mr. Voeller and some other scientists argue that early publication of the paper, with publicity about the spermicide's possible preventive value when used with condoms, might have kept tens of thousands of persons from being exposed to the AIDS virus.    The investigators for the Institute of Medicine found that the CDC hadn't suppressed any data, since it eventually published, and added that the paper did need revising to caution that the spermicide had been shown to kill viruses only in laboratory dishes. Still, they said, &quot;it is not clear why the revision required six months and clearance seven weeks.&quot;    As Mr. Voeller sees it, the final irony was that &quot;Curran put his name on the paper even though he had no part in it.&quot;    On other issues that divided the AIDS lab, the research scientists themselves have been sharply split. Among those at the center of the turmoil is a noted virologist, V.S. Kalyanaraman, who was part of a team at the NIH that found the first human cancer virus and led a team that discovered a second one. Mr. Kalyanaraman -- by everyone's account a skilled and hard-working scientist -- concedes he resented the layers of administration imposed on him, keeping him on a level with scientists he considered less accomplished. He particularly chafed at the leeway given Mr. Hicks, a mere technician, in the spermicide study.    Eventually, he seems to have staged a coup of sorts against his immediate superiors, Messrs. Cabradilla and Francis. The strain of AIDS virus being studied at the lab had originally been isolated by French scientists with whom Messrs. Cabradilla and Francis had worked from the beginning. Mr. Kalyanaraman wanted to substitute a sample he had isolated; other scientists note that using it would give the CDC a fuller claim on credit for any possible breakthrough.    In late summer of 1984, while the two colleagues were away, a technician who was growing cultures of the French virus says Mr. Kalyanaraman ordered her to discard them. &quot;All of Cy's (Mr. Cabradilla's) experiments were thrown in the garbage,&quot; one scientist says, adding, &quot;All of us had little projects we were working on that might or might not work&quot; and that were chucked out.    In a letter to a CDC investigator, the technician, Ms. Heath, said she assumed Mr. Kalyanaraman had cleared his decision with the other scientists. &quot;Costly cultures had been destroyed needlessly,&quot; she wrote.    The Institute of Medicine didn't discuss this incident. Mr. Kalyanaraman, asked about the case, says, &quot;I'm not going to say anything about what a technician says. I was the one who was doing all the work, essentially. I wanted to work with the American isolate, and CDC's patients are American.&quot;    He adds, &quot;If Dr. Cabradilla wanted to work with something different, no one prevented him from doing so. He was not the boss. All of us were working together.&quot;    Replies Mr. Cabradilla: &quot;I don't know what the hell he is talking about. I hired him. I had the title. I would have thought I was the boss.&quot;    But not for long. Dr. Curran took formal charge of the lab and made Mr. Kalyanaraman chief of molecular virology-and thus Mr. Cabradilla's superior. Mr. Cabradilla says he told Dr. Curran he would stay on &quot;if you realize that Kaly and I disagree with each other, and all I want is fair treatment. Curran said fine. I left within three months of that time. The situation was not tolerable.&quot;    Dennis Trent, the chief of molecular virology at a big CDC research center in Colorado, says he was asked to step in as lab manager and bring the situation under control. But, he says, &quot;There was a lot of secrecy, a lot of hush-hush, a lot of noncommunicating. They were unwilling to cooperate with each other. There wasn't a manager strong enough to pull them together. I declined because I'm not sure that I'm strong enough to do it, either.&quot;    Last December, Gerald Schochetman, a virologist who had been an executive at a science company, became the lab manager. The turnover has continued. Ms. Getchell and Ram Narayanan, key members of the team that developed the AIDS-antibody blood test, left. David Swan, a geneticist, got himself transferred within the CDC. The agency reassigned another senior scientist, A. (Srini) Srinivasan, who has done landmark work in characterizing AIDS viruses. He says he doesn't feel he can trust his bosses and is looking for another job.    Patricia Fultz is one of the few senior scientists who have remained. But she, too, is looking for a new job. &quot;It has not been an ideal atmosphere in which to work,&quot; she says.    The new lab manager, Mr. Schochetman, chose not to renew the contract of a visiting chemist, Rita Anand (she has offers from two prestigious New York institutions). And he also decided he wouldn't renew Mr. Kalyanaraman's contract. The CDC then asked Mr. Kalyanaraman to stay and reassigned him so he wouldn't be under Mr. Schochetman's supervision.    But last week Mr. Kalyanaraman left the CDC for a company called Bionetics Research Inc., which is doing work under contract to Dr. Gallo's AIDS laboratory at the NIH. He says he will be given $40,000 worth of blood serum to do an experiment for which he says Mr. Schochetman wouldn't let him buy $25 worth. Dr. Gallo says Mr. Kalyanaraman &quot;is an excellent research chemist. It's good to have him back right now.&quot;    Meanwhile, the AIDS lab has had yet another unsettling incident. Mr. Hicks, the technician who tested the spermicide, also helped isolate AIDS virus from a batch of blood samples collected in Zaire in 1976 -- the oldest AIDS virus ever found. Scientists from the lab say the early virus could yield important clues to the evolution of the disease and perhaps help with the design of a vaccine. But, they say, the virus needed to go to a different lab for genetic analysis, and Mr. Hicks's superiors barred him from sending it.    Moreover, Mr. Hicks's records seem to have mysteriously disappeared. Recently, the lab is said to have sent the virus out, but only after Mr. Hicks, bitterly discouraged, had left to work elsewhere. </TEXT></DOC>