<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871014-0076 </DOCNO><HL> House Plans VoteOn Bill for NoticeOf Work Hazards---By Albert R. KarrStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A House vote is scheduled today on a bill provoking tremendous debate in Congress that would require notification of workers if they have been exposed on the job to hazardous conditions linked to serious disease.    A close vote is expected on the House bill, and a similar measure is pending in the Senate. The Reagan administration, which opposes the bill, expects it to pass, but by a narrow enough margin to discourage thoughts of Congress overriding a presidential veto.    The measure has the support of unions and health groups, as well as some business groups and companies that split off earlier this year from what had been almost universal industry opposition to the bill. The proponents argue that the notices to current and former employees are vital to inform those workers that they may have been subject to a high level of chemical, radiation or other hazards, and should seek medical help.    But many insurance companies and other business interests are fiercely opposed to the proposal, arguing instead for expansion of an existing, and, they say, less alarmist federal program for telling current workers what possibly hazardous substances they've been exposed to.    Opponents say the notification bill, authored by Rep. Joseph Gaydos (D., Pa.), chairman of the House Labor Committee's health and safety subcommittee, would result in a large number of liability lawsuits against employers.    And, they contend, many suits would be unjustified -- based on fear or on worker claims of psychological stress induced by the notice itself. What's widely acclaimed as a worker &quot;right-to-know&quot; measure would turn into unwelcome &quot;right-to-sue&quot; legislation, says one insurance industry lobbyist.    The Gaydos bill would create a federal risk-assessment board within the Department of Health and Human Services. The board would establish the risk of disease caused by workplace exposure, based on existing scientific studies, and the government would notify current and former employees at companies where such hazards may exist. The employer, if he wished, could make the notification himself, in place of the federal notice.    The measure is at the forefront of labor unions' attempts to revive a spate of bills that are aimed at improving worker wages or conditions and that have been stagnant through most of the Reagan administration. Early this year, the Gaydos bill seemed certain to roll through Congress with great ease, because of its emphasis on worker health. It had been seen as a &quot;cancer bill,&quot; and therefore difficult to oppose, a Labor Department official says.    That prospect for easy approval was enhanced by the success of Howard Metzenbaum (D., Ohio), chairman of the Senate Labor subcommittee, in encouraging some chemical and electrical groups and companies to back his version of the bill, once some provisions were moderated. These included ones stiffening the scientific evidence required for the risk-assessment board to decide worker notification should be made, and disallowing use of the notification itself as legal evidence in any liability suit against employers.    The companies were faced with a bill that could have been more onerous than the scaled-down version they now favor. As for that bill, they say telling workers what disease-causing hazards they've been exposed to makes sense, partly because it will allow them to seek early medical monitoring and treatment, thereby reducing heavy medical and other costs involved in treating advanced cancer and other diseases.    But the margin of support has narrowed in recent weeks, and the opponents say their spotlighting of the liability issue was a major factor in the change. Opponents say that even some co-sponsors of the bill, in the House, seem less enthusiastic about it these days. The Senate Labor Committee approved the Metzenbaum bill in July, but a narrow House vote might dissuade Senate backers from taking their bill to the floor.    The opponents of the House bill, including the Reagan administration, back a substitute bill that is expected to be offered today by James Jeffords (R., Vt.), ranking House Labor panel minority member, and Paul Henry (R., Mich.), ranking minority member of the Gaydos subcommittee. That proposal would expand the current program of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, a Labor Department unit, for telling current workers about exposure to hazardous chemicals. That program distributes general information about materials that pose workplace hazards.    While the opponents of the Gaydos bill say the Jeffords-Henry measure deals better with disease prevention, the backers of the Gaydos bill say the substitute isn't hard-hitting or comprehensive enough. They also say that although OSHA itself has moved to expand the hazard communication program, that move came only after a recent court order requiring the expansion. </TEXT></DOC>