<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871019-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Japan's Policy Feuds Dwarfed by Historic Changes---By Claudia Rosett</HL><DD> 10/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan's emperor is suffering the first serious illness in his 61-year reign. The ruling Liberal Democratic Party is huddling to choose a new prime minister. The economy is twitching back to life, after its worst performance in 12 years. Stock and real estate prices are bouncing around at record heights, and some experts foretell a crash. Bankers are talking of an international role for the yen. The country is in a duel with the U.S. over trade policy.    Yet these dramas are being dwarfed by a larger spectacle. The bedrock of Japan's closed feudal society is sliding away -- rapidly in historical time. The modern world is moving in. This is less the product of policy than of market forces unleashed by the country's postwar growth. In dollar terms, the Japanese people today are richer on average than the Americans. The value of their stock market rivals that of America's, and Japan lends more abroad. Its economy is getting too big for state control. The choice is to shift to a more open system or to collapse.    So, Japan is changing. The old mercantilist model known as export-led growth is giving way to more open domestic markets, a freer financial system and more responsible behavior abroad. It would be a mistake to say that Japan is facing these changes with confidence. No political leaders are vigorously defending the free market. &quot;We are heading out into the sea without any map whatsoever,&quot; says one Japanese economist, Chiaki Nishiyama, a professor at Tokyo's Rikkyo University.    The danger now is that lawmakers in Washington and Europe won't wait for the Japanese. Trade legislation expected soon to come before President Reagan amounts to an ultimatum that Japan is not politically equipped to meet. Rather than smashing open Japanese markets, trade sanctions will more likely divert Japan back toward a statist, protectionist course -- for sanctions would cut off the market forces now bringing liberalization. A similar passage in the 1930s makes one wonder whether an economically isolated Japan would remain content with its nonmilitaristic approach to world politics.    Unlike America, Japan does not have a popularly elected chief executive. The most powerful official, the prime minister, is chosen by the parliament, or Diet. The Diet is in the hands of one party, the Liberal Democratic Party. It's difficult for a leader to enlist the electorate in fighting the more petty interests represented in the legislature. The result is an advanced version of the paralysis creeping through the American system, where Congress encroaches on the powers of the President.    Worse, voter representation in the Diet is chiefly proportional not to population but to land area. This favors farmers. So a relatively few cattle farmers have been able to restrict the import of beef, raising the price with their government-backed cartel. The welter of farm supports and cartels hurt Japan even more than they do its trading partners; they help keep Japan's standard of living far lower than the dollar figures for income would suggest. The damage goes beyond the higher price of goods. Land that could better be used by the 121 million Japanese for roads, housing and shops is given over to tiny, inefficient farm plots. They take up about half of the country's usable real estate.    This misallocation of land is a secret villain of the impenetrable Japanese distribution system. Near the port city of Niigata, for example, a traveler can observe the difficulties distributors face moving bulk merchandise on the narrow, one-lane roads. They are the only access to most small towns. Tiny delivery trucks find little storage space in the minuscule shops. &quot;We can't deliver by the case. They don't have room,&quot; says one foreign wholesaler. &quot;What Americans don't realize,&quot; says Mr. Nishiyama, the economist, &quot;is that Japan is closed even to the Japanese.&quot;    One reason the country's export sector has performed so well is that exporters don't have to cope with Japan's feudal distribution system. Exports have handed Japan so much purchasing power that it is willing to pay to import more consumer goods -- canned corn, say, or California wine. For years, new imports have been slowly trickling in. Now there are signs of a breach in the dike. Japan's swollen trade surplus has started to shrink -- thanks in good part to an increase in imports of consumer products.    Urbanization is also eroding the farmers' lobby. Only about 3% of all Japanese now work full time on farms. Most are aging parents. Their children have moved to cities. The growing number of Japanese who travel notice that the yen buys more bread and butter abroad. They are starting to fidget over the high price they pay for food at home. The political balance has tipped far enough so that this spring the Japanese government told rice farmers they had to take a 5.95% cut in the government support price. It was the first cut since the 1950s.    In the financial markets, Japan is being forced to deregulate. There's no other way to stay competitive abroad while handling the huge flows of export earnings. Interest rate controls on time deposits have been coming down. New financial instruments, such as yen-denominated foreign securities, have been allowed into the market. A futures exchange has been opened. Foreign firms -- though still severely restricted -- have become increasingly active in the stock market.    The strong yen may force Japan toward a role in the international monetary system. At a conference in Europe last month, the chairman of the leading private bank for foreign exchange transactions, Bank of Tokyo, made one of the strongest statements so far. Yusuke Kashiwagi urged that the yen become part of a basket of reserve currencies, to help protect the world financial system against a possible collapse of the dollar. In effect, this amounts to a call for deregulation of transactions denominated in yen. Though Mr. Kashiwagi downplays the significance, the change in attitude is startling to those who've watched Japan's government fight the internationalization of the yen during the postwar years.    In the political arena, the new needs of Japan have brought some promising signs. When Mr. Nakasone tried to force through a value-added-tax earlier this year, several opposition parties led a protest-in-the-streets type tax revolt. The passage last month of a much watered-down tax reform is no special triumph -- top marginal income tax rates come down only slightly, to 60% from 70%, offset by new taxes on small savings accounts. But the defeat of Mr. Nakasone's initial scheme to make his tax cuts revenue neutral suggests that Japanese consumers are starting to call their politicians to account.    Ironically, the sharper appetite of the Japanese economy could finally pop the national bubble in stocks and real estate. These two markets have soared over the past two years due largely to an increase in liquidity that the rest of the drip-filter economy has only recently begun to absorb. The hope, should a crash come, is that Japanese authorities will see that the basic problem is not too few rules in these volatile markets, but too many in the overall economy. That's far more likely to happen if the Japanese authorities are not at the same time facing trade sanctions from the West.    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>