<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880922-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Plugging In: A Former Trader Aims To Hook Wall Street On -- and to -- His Data --- Michael Bloomberg Dreams Of Making His Computers Global Bond-Market Hub --- Merrill Lynch Plays Key Role </HL><AUTHOR> Michael W. Miller and Matthew Winkler (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MER DJ TLR RTRSY BAX S CCI KRI JCP </CO><IN> TEL PUB SCR </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Michael Bloomberg, a breezy, profane former Salomon Brothers trader, runs a small company with a high-tech product he immodestly calls &quot;the Bloomberg.&quot; If Mr. Bloomberg has his way, he and his creation will transform the $4 trillion global bond market and give one big Wall Street firm a stunning advantage over its rivals.    His plan seems almost too audacious and may turn out to be just that. It requires, among other things, cheerful cooperation by the Wall Street rivals. And a long list of communications giants is bent on clobbering his upstart company.    At the plan's heart is a strategy that is quietly starting to change one industry after another: commandeering the flow of electronic information and putting a spin on it that favors one company.    It is the strategy that, in its most advanced example, has given American and United airlines a devastating weapon that other carriers have been struggling to blunt for years. American and United each designed an electronic reservations system and got thousands of travel agents hooked on using it. Then, they easily persuaded other airlines to sell tickets via the systems. Suddenly, a huge portion of airline-ticket sales was flowing through computers controlled by American or United.    And people began to notice the spin. On American's system, the AMR Corp. carrier kept popping up at the top of flight lists on travel agents' screens -- and agents often seize upon the first departure they find. United, a UAL Corp. subsidiary, used the same ploy. Some airlines were also worried for another reason: American and United had gained a window into industrywide booking patterns and, their rivals were convinced, used the data to make quick changes in their own fares and schedules.    Federal regulators have curbed some of these maneuvers, but the airline-ticket systems are still considered a brilliant investment. Now, companies in retailing, mortgage banking, hospital supplies and several other industries are rushing to build similar systems.    Their efforts strikingly resemble the 19th-century railroad tycoons' drive to build empires by laying down railroad tracks across America. And, like the early tycoons, the new electronic track-layers are inviting controversy over possible antitrust abuses. Just last week, a congressional study concluded that the leading airline-reservations systems are still unfairly stifling competition.    Nowhere are the electronic tracks more valuable than the terrain that Michael Bloomberg is staking out: Wall Street, where billions of dollars skitter from computer to computer in split seconds. And few people are as cagey about guiding the flow of information as Mr. Bloomberg, a 46-year-old with a puckish sense of humor and a prodigious temper. (&quot;I do tend to break phones all the time,&quot; he says.)    Look up the prices of Treasury issues in today's Wall Street Journal. Listed as the source is Mr. Bloomberg's company: Bloomberg Financial Markets. He delivers the data to every newspaper with complete price-lists of government securities. He spotted an opportunity to provide the data 18 months ago, and he became, in effect, the sole pipeline for perhaps the world's most important daily interest-rate information.    His seven-year-old firm's main business is a terminal that flashes up-to-date bond information. Investors have been snapping it up because it displays complex but easy-to-read graphs that help them figure out how bond investments will perform.    A bond's value can be altered by dozens of arcane factors, ranging from early redemptions to coupon-reinvestment rates to principal-repayment rates. The Bloomberg can calculate what a bond would be worth if any of these factors change. It also compares the values of different securities and shows historical data. Rival machines offer less data and cruder calculations.    &quot;If we wanted to sell seven-year bonds and buy two- and 10-year bonds in their place, it could tell us if the trade was worthwhile in a minute,&quot; says Robert Smith, who helps manage a $5.5 billion portfolio for Florida's retirement system. &quot;He's got a product nobody has.&quot;    Mr. Bloomberg has a 30% investor in his company: Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. The giant securities firm supplies its own price data for Bloomberg terminals, a pivotal role because bonds aren't traded on any central exchange, and prices vary from brokerage firm to brokerage firm. (It's also Merrill's prices, through the Bloomberg system, that appear in the Journal's government-securities listings.)    When Merrill agreed to back Mr. Bloomberg in 1984, it imposed an important covenant: He couldn't sell terminals to about a dozen of Merrill's biggest rivals for seven years. So, Merrill preserves any competitive edge the terminals give it. The forbidden-customers list includes First Boston, Salomon Brothers, Goldman Sachs, and the world's two biggest securities firms, Japan's Nomura and Daiwa.    Today, Mr. Bloomberg is begging Merrill to let him break the covenant. He is dying to sell his terminals to Merrill's rivals. Moreover, he knows that he could win more customers if his system carried all the other big Wall Street bond desks' prices along with Merrill's.    Mr. Bloomberg has a persuasive argument to offer Merrill: Think how sweet it would be if all over the world bond sellers and buyers were getting price data from a Merrill-controlled screen. Merrill could acquire the awesome influence wielded by American and United in the airline business. In fact, Mr. Bloomberg, playing on the name of American's reservations system, speaks of his ambition as &quot;Sabre-izing&quot; the Bloomberg terminal.    Over dinner at a Park Avenue steakhouse where he likes to mingle with international bankers, Mr. Bloomberg outlines the way Merrill could profit from an open Bloomberg system. Merrill's prices would be listed first. Its bond people would know more about the ins and outs of the complicated terminal than any competitors do.    As Mr. Bloomberg sees it, he is justified in offering Merrill an advantage: It would simply be a fair return for the risky decision Merrill made to buy his terminals and invest in his fledgling company.    &quot;Make no mistake about it, I owe Merrill a great debt,&quot; he says. &quot;It's a fine balancing act, but I will help Merrill up to the point where it becomes so unpalatable it hurts the system.&quot;    At Merrill, some executives love the sound of all this. &quot;It would be like running through a minefield after you laid the mines yourself,&quot; says Gerald Ely, a Merrill computer executive. &quot;The other guy's bound to trip and get blown up.&quot;    However, others at Merrill worry about diluting its advantage from having Bloombergs on its salesmen's desks. &quot;The Bloomberg is a great deal for our salesmen because it's a great benefit for our customers -- that's why I hate to give that up,&quot; says Joseph Petri, the president of Merrill Lynch Government Securities Inc.    Earlier this year, Merrill President Daniel Tully endorsed the concept of the Bloomberg plan, but Merrill and Mr. Bloomberg are still at odds over just how to carry it out, Mr. Ely says. &quot;I'd say by next week the thing will either completely fall apart or it'll be done,&quot; he adds.    Even if Merrill gives Mr. Bloomberg the green light, would the rest of Wall Street sign onto a plan blatantly favoring Merrill?    Astonishingly, the answer might be yes. Some people at other Wall Street firms are hungry for the Bloomberg terminals' analytic powers -- a bait that could persuade them to list their bond prices on the system. Mr. Bloomberg also argues that once enough bond buyers have Bloombergs on their desks, Wall Street firms will want their prices on his screen -- just as airlines wanted their flights on travel agents' terminals.    &quot;I'd have no aversion to buying his product if it was the best,&quot; admits John Gutfreund, the chairman of Salomon Brothers, where Mr. Bloomberg was ousted in a power struggle seven years ago. At Daiwa Securities America, William M. Brachfeld, executive vice president, says, &quot;So many of our customers have it that we must have it.&quot; At Nomura's U.S. affiliate, Robin Koskinen, a senior vice president, acknowledges &quot;the obvious marketing advantage for Merrill Lynch&quot; but says he is eager to get his hands on the Bloomberg, too. Bond executives at Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and Drexel Burnham Lambert privately agree.    At its most extreme, a widespread Wall Street embrace of a single bond-quotation system could bring sweeping changes to the world bond market, now a chaotic bazaar where prices and products vary depending on where you are shopping. The gaps among firms' prices would narrow if they were all listed side by side on one screen. So would spreads among the world's markets. Lucrative arbitrage would become harder to pull off. Securities firms' big fees for Bloomberg-type analysis could dwindle.    Ultimately, a common computer system could play the role of an international exchange, offering clients of all firms, in every country, the same instruments and the same prices. If Mr. Bloomberg's dream comes true, his terminals would become the hub of such a system -- and Merrill Lynch would own 30% of it.    But lurking on the horizon are forces that could crush the Bloomberg plan: the titans of the electronic financial information industry. Mr. Bloomberg wryly lists the three biggest threats: &quot;A small group of British publishers, a downtown Manhattan newspaper and a little bank on Lexington Avenue.&quot; Translation: Reuters Holdings PLC, Telerate Inc. (56%-owned by Dow Jones andamp; Co., The Wall Street Journal's publisher), and Citicorp's Quotron unit. Knight-Ridder Inc. is also hovering over Mr. Bloomberg's turf. All four are hungry for a bigger share of the explosive market for electronic information.    Reuters and Telerate loom as especially serious threats to the Bloomberg system. Their current market dwarfs his. Reuters, the biggest player in foreign-exchange data, sends information to 165,000 terminals around the world. Telerate, which dominates the electronic bond-data business, serves 67,000 terminals. The Bloomberg serves just 5,000, though that number could grow fast if Mr. Bloomberg is allowed to sell to Merrill's rivals. Already, some Bloomberg customers have been won over from competitors; Florida's Mr. Smith, for example, replaced his Telerate with the Bloomberg two years ago.    However, both Reuters and Telerate have watched Mr. Bloomberg's success and want a piece of it for themselves. And Mr. Bloomberg would have a hard time competing with them if they ever complemented their sheer size with his terminals' powers of analyzing and comparing information.    A Reuters spokesman says the London company has major plans, which he can't discuss, for the Bloomberg's area of the market. &quot;We're well aware of the need for analytical products,&quot; he says.    Telerate is more open about its campaign against the Bloomberg and about its skepticism about Mr. Bloomberg's grand plans. &quot;Bloomberg is considered to have an excellent analytical package, and we're trying to counter that,&quot; says Henry Becher, who heads Telerate's North American operations. &quot;It shows we haven't done as much as we could have,&quot; he concedes. Later this year, Telerate will start offering new versions of its terminals that will let users do more calculations with the data.    Mr. Becher thinks Telerate's and Reuters' vast range of information -- and their lack of alliances to any single investment bank -- will ultimately beat back Mr. Bloomberg. &quot;It's going to take many, many years for the Bloomberg to get the quality and quantity of the data&quot; Telerate and Reuters have, he says.    Mr. Bloomberg took a roundabout route to the battlefields of today's information wars. An engineer with a Harvard M.B.A., he is an obsessively driven competitor who used to fly helicopters in his spare time and once crash-landed in Long Island Sound. In the 1970s, he scrambled to a top job at Salomon Brothers, becoming one of its biggest block traders.    When a political battle among Salomon partners erupted over his department, he was banished to the obscure back-office area, and presumably his fast-track career at Salomon was over. Instead, he created its first computerized trading and information system. When the system went live, its first message proclaimed Mr. Bloomberg's promotion to partner.    By 1981, however, most other partners grew fed up with Mr. Bloomberg's blunt manner and complaints about inefficient management, and they voted to kick him out. Mr. Gutfreund, his sole defender on the executive committee, told him to wait a few months before leaving -- advice that let Mr. Bloomberg collect millions of dollars when the firm merged with Phibro Corp., a commodities-trading giant.    Today, Mr. Bloomberg's young company has 225 employees, a sleek office designed to look like a trading-room floor, and about 2,500 customers around the world. They include the Bank of England, the World Bank and a host of big commercial banks and institutional investors. With an average of two terminals per customer, each costing $1,000 a month, his annual revenue is about $60 million.    The company grew much more visible last year, when the Associated Press jumped at Mr. Bloomberg's offer to send daily government-security prices into its computers. At the time, an AP clerk was manually typing out the prices each day from a list at the Federal Reserve, which has long lagged on its promise to send the data electronically. Prices of Merrill and the other firms are usually, but not always, quite close.    Now, Mr. Bloomberg is anxiously awaiting Merrill Lynch's verdict on his plan to sell terminals to the forbidden-customer list. He jokes that he would love to see someone on the list successfully sue him on antitrust grounds, giving him a way out of his pledge to Merrill. Meanwhile, he has his eye on the calendar, counting the days until the pledge runs out. With or without Merrill's blessing, he says, he wants to &quot;Sabre-ize&quot; the bond market as soon as the seven years run out. &quot;Trust me,&quot; he says. &quot;On Jan. 1, 1991, I'm going to throw a switch, and I'll be there.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>