<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871123-0102 </DOCNO><HL> International Meeting on Currencies,Economic Policies Appears Weeks Away---This article is based on reportsFrom Walter S. Mossberg inWashingtonThomas F. O'Boyle and Victoria PopeIn BonnAnd Peter Torday in London.</HL><DD> 11/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT EUROP CANDA JAPANECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   The accord to shrink the U.S. budget deficit is likely to lead soon to an international meeting on economic issues, but preparations for such a meeting will take at least several weeks, U.S. officials said.    Ever since the Oct. 19 stock-market crash, Treasury Secretary James Baker has been aiming to gain a domestic budget agreement, and then parlay it into a new international agreement that might amend or replace last February's Louvre Accord for currency stabilization and economic coordination among the leading industrial democracies. The current U.S. thinking is that such a new agreement would contain broad economic and political trade-offs.    The idea would be to bind other nations -- especially West Germany and Japan -- far more firmly than in the past to stimulate their domestic economic demand in return for the U.S. budget pact, a pledge from President Reagan to veto the pending U.S. trade bill unless it was greatly watered down, and a carefully circumscribed U.S. pledge to help keep the weakened dollar from falling further.    Officials in Washington said the dollar-stabilization pledge that other countries hope to win from the U.S. likely would contain two conditions that weren't explicit in the currency portion of the Louvre Accord.    First, the U.S. would insist that dollar stabilization be pursued only if all countries adopt compatible macroeconomic policies that would tend to support the desired exchange rates. Economic measures now being discussed in West Germany, for instance, appear likely to fall short of U.S. expectations. But pressure for more economic stimulus in both Germany and Japan will increase if the dollar remains weak.    Second, the U.S. would reserve the right to refrain from raising interest rates to back the dollar at agreed-upon levels if it was believed higher rates might risk a recession.    Officials stressed, however, that the U.S. doesn't favor a further steep decline in the dollar and that if currency, stock or bond markets show any signs of a new crash, an international meeting could be called much more quickly than the U.S. now plans.    Britain and France are said to be anxious for a quick meeting, partly because they hope that can brake the dollar's recent fall. But U.S. officials said that, barring another market panic, they expect that it will take at least a few weeks to prepare the ground for a new meeting of the so-called Group of Seven, or G-7, nations: the U.S., Japan, Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada.    Analysts said the differences between the major powers over when to hold a meeting and what measures they should take could undermine the U.S. currency. And if there are any delays in congressional implementation of the budget accord, those pressures may be compounded.    On Friday, Mr. Baker said a G-7 meeting won't occur until the U.S. budget accord can be implemented. U.S. officials said American representatives aren't yet engaged in any of the detailed preparatory negotiations that precede such meetings, though some European governments are discussing the matter among themselves.    U.S. officials hope to take their time going into such a meeting for several reasons. First, they want to be sure other countries are ready to match the new U.S. budget agreement with real concessions. Mr. Baker believes it could be a disaster to hold a meeting and come up with no agreement, or a weak one. &quot;You shouldn't have a {G-7} meeting until you know you've got at least the potential for a successful meeting,&quot; he said in an interview earlier this month.    Second, as the administration's economic point man with Congress, Mr. Baker faces weeks of further work in getting lawmakers to enact the new budget agreement. In particular, he is expected personally to handle the delicate negotiations with the tax-writing committees on details of the tax increases called for in the pact.    Finally, U.S. officials believe that, at least for the next month or so, delay gives the U.S. a bargaining advantage. If the dollar keeps declining gradually in value, or even just stays where it is, pressure will be increased on Japan and especially Germany to make policy concessions in return for a U.S. willingness to help support the dollar. German and Japanese exports have suffered as the appreciation of the mark and yen has made those products more-expensive in terms of other currencies.    In the meantime, some monetary officials said there have been informal talks among central banks about enlarging their network of currency swaps -- lines of local currencies central banks make available to each other -- if a wave of pressure on the dollar does develop. Expanding these swap lines would allow the U.S. Federal Reserve Board to borrow more West German marks and Japanese yen for currency intervention if it chose to defend the dollar's value.    Both German and Japanese officials applauded the U.S. budget accord, and Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, Nigel Lawson, said: &quot;I believe that both Germany and Japan are prepared to take appropriate measures.&quot; But the degree of German and Japanese willingness to further stimulate their economies, thereby shoring up the world economy and reducing global trade imbalances, is still in question.    Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa welcomed the U.S. accord and said he hopes the necessary steps will be taken soon to implement it. But Japanese officials gave no indication that they plan any concrete new steps in response.    German Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg, meanwhile, praised the &quot;important and credible&quot; decision and said Western European governments would seek additional ways to help stabilize financial markets. However, the steps the German government is now ready to take appear likely to fall short of U.S. expectations.    Government sources said the centerpiece of the German reaction would be a willingness to allow German budget deficits to grow beyond current projections as a way to support the economy. But they said that bold new tax-cutting or government-spending initiatives weren't under serious discussion at present.    The more-restrained approach, as outlined by German officials at the end of last week, would include shelving plans to impose about four billion marks ($2.37 billion) in new consumer taxes next year on such items as gasoline and tobacco. Expanded government spending to spur the German economy, as some critics of Bonn's policy line have demanded, isn't planned.    &quot;That's not the belief of this government,&quot; said Ludolf von Wartenberg, the parliamentary state secretary at the Economics Ministry and a senior official responsible for fiscal affairs belonging to Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Party.    Mr. von Wartenberg said Bonn is prepared, as part of its response to a U.S. budget-deficit reduction, to soon introduce legislation for the deregulation of its postal and communications monopoly, the state-owned Bundespost. Such deregulation could give foreign telecommunications-equipment vendors access to the highly protected German market.    Other initiatives to increase German imports of U.S. goods, including agricultural products, are under serious review. &quot;Those are the two main products we can import,&quot; Mr. von Wartenberg said, referring to agricultural products and telecommunications equipment.    Besides these possible fiscal moves, it is expected that the German central bank would formally commit itself to lower interest rates and even a cut in its discount rate.    German government and private-sector economists said the measures being discussed, taken together, could be strong enough to spark an economic upswing. But they remain skeptical until the measures are actually implemented. </TEXT></DOC>