<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881101-0047 </DOCNO><HL> War in Europe: Thinking the Unthinkable </HL><AUTHOR> Mark Helprin </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   In 1908, long before he recrossed the floor to the Conservatives, Winston Churchill spoke as a Liberal intending to further the good will that had broken out between Britain and Germany. Though he would soon revise his position, he said then that the &quot;belief in this country that war between Great Britain and Germany is inevitable . . . is all nonsense.&quot;    &quot;There is no collision of primary interests . . . between Great Britain and Germany in any quarter of the globe.&quot; War was unthinkable because &quot;there is no result which could be expected from any struggle between the two countries except a destruction of a most appalling and idiotic character.&quot;    Even if Churchill pointedly refused to make this mistake twice, others had no such reservations, and others still are bucking for a third go-round. In this country and in Europe, left, right and center, each in its own way, embrace the conventional wisdom that a European war is so remote as to be nearly unthinkable.    But history has not been cauterized. After countless wars and upheavals, the system of blocs and alliances remains, with the Balkans and Eastern Europe, as ever, the engine of instability. The existence of nuclear weapons may unsettle the custodians of the international system, but the system itself, practiced survivor of holocausts, hardly blinks. Certain themes are stronger and deeper than wishful thinking would have them: War has been an integral part of history, and the elements of history have not changed.    Specifically, the elements of the great European conflicts -- economic rivalry, imperial unrest, religious, ideological and linguistic differences -- still are intact. Germany, ever the flashpoint, drifts further into the rage and indignation for which it is justly famous and justly feared. And why not? The integrity of its quarrel with Europe is such that no great treaty and no long decades can dilute it. Should Germany's infatuations prevail over its habits, it will exit the alliance. Confronted with this, the Soviet cat will be hard pressed not to eat the very bird to which it is now trying to sing.    In the U.S. and in Europe strong currents of opinion exist in favor of taking the Soviets at their word, interpreting their actions in the kindest light, ignoring their unreduced military capacities, extrapolating the present eye in the hurricane of Russian history into the indefinite future, and not thinking very much about the hard turn from Gorbachevism that most observers state becomes less and less possible each time it is barely avoided.    But the warm wind from Russia that drives so many policy windmills in the West is awakening the national aspirations of Eastern Europe. These, in conflict with the prestige, ferment and disintegration of great powers and empires similar to Russia today and including the Russia of yesterday, have put the lights out all over Europe, with stupefying ferocity, twice in this century alone. Those who rejoice at perestroika should remember first the laws of unintended consequences and second that Russia never fails to be a land of cyclical repression and reform, where Mensheviks are replaced by Bolsheviks, new economic plans by forced collectivizations, Khrushchevs by Brezhnevs, Andropovs by Gorbachevs, and Gorbachevs, eventually, by something else.    Each time Mr. Gorbachev consolidates his power, he doubles his bets, as in the gambling strategy called the martingale. Some misinterpret his momentum as evidence of stability rather than merely as a sign of political courage. To win a martingale, you have to be lucky or your assets have to be greater than those of the house. In this case, the house is the historical inertia of Russia, which has always arranged, however ponderously and slowly, for precisely the kind of governance that Mikhail Gorbachev does not represent.    It would be ironic if weakened European resolve presented nearly discredited factions in the U.S.S.R. with a powerful argument for abandoning Russia's new look to seize opportunities where they lie. It is astounding that perestroika and glasnost influence American and European military preparedness more than that of the Warsaw Pact, which remains steady, massive and free of mercurial shifts. If, despite their constant arsenal, the Soviets are seen by many as the light of world peace, can the West -- even if it receives lesser praise from liberals -- at least be free to guard its interests with the same caution and sobriety?    The utility of the left is that, in regard to the Soviets, it ensures that every hopeful chance is taken. Divided by its motivations but singular in its goal, the left comprises a small number of fifth columnists, some apolitical millennialists, those who are reflexively anti-military, those who will not willingly pay the cost of deterrence because it subtracts from the bankrolling of social causes, those who do not understand or will not credit the workings of deterrence, those for whom apportionment of the burden overshadows the purpose for which the burden is borne, and those -- like Michael Dukakis -- who are merely uncomfortable and confused.    Arising from this confusion is the governor's Conventional Defense Initiative, which is supposed to address the problem about which you are now reading. But it is a useless artifact on at least three counts. First, it is nothing more than an election ploy, alien to his record and his inclinations. He is no more likely to cut social spending to finance conventional forces than he is to finance the strategic forces for which he cannot hide his revulsion quite as well.    Second, though far stronger conventional forces are absolutely necessary for preserving the peace in Europe, they are almost irrelevant without the theater and strategic nuclear weapons with which they must be woven into a solid and inviolable braid. If nuclear parity were enough to unlink American strategic forces from Europe, Soviet policy would not stress as it does the issue of severance. Think tanks resound with the rhetorical question, &quot;Would an American president risk the U.S. for the sake of Europe?&quot; The same question is standard for the highest echelons of Soviet war planners, only, for them, it isn't rhetorical.    Third, a President Dukakis would renovate conventional forces with as much enthusiasm as Ronald Reagan protecting the snail-darter. He would find reassurance for his benign neglect in Harvard advisers who read, credit, edit and thereby encourage the classics of revisionism, such as &quot;Stalin's Postwar Army Reappraised&quot; in their journal International Security (Winter 1982-1983), or a more recent favorite from the same source, &quot;Is There a Tank Gap?&quot; (Summer 1988).    The first article, by Matthew Evangelista, confirms everyone's suspicions that NATO was a provocation mercilessly directed at the gentle and bewildered Red Army, which could not have invaded Europe because it was too busy as it &quot;repaired barracks, built dining halls, set up military posts, camps, and sports fields.&quot; In the second, which I call &quot;Tanks but No Tanks,&quot; Malcolm Chalmers and Lutz Unterseher set out to prove that the Warsaw Pact's 68,300 tanks (to NATO's 30,500) confer no advantage, because, among other things, they are fiercely anti-Soviet. They inflict &quot;cuts and bruises&quot; and &quot;spinal and kidney damage&quot; on operators who, because the tanks are so diminutive, must be less than 5 feet 3 inches tall. Their satanic lack of ventilation is such that during the 1973 War, &quot;numbers of Arab tankmen {in Soviet tanks} . . . were asphyxiated or went into shock.&quot; And, &quot;the automatic loader on the T-72 'grabs crew members and rams them into the gun's breach.'&quot; What a pleasure then, in World War III, to sit back and watch Soviet tanks wreaking havoc upon Russian midgets.    Nor is the right without folly. Traditional isolationists have joined with those who see little to save in a decadent accommodationist Europe other than the lifeboat that would bring Margaret Thatcher and some French intellectuals west with the night. Like the Russians, they want the U.S. out of Europe. They excuse the coincidence of view by claiming, despite the thousand years of European history that contradict them, that, left to itself, Europe would strengthen and unify. And if it didn't?    The flanks of the center are falling to both sides, and what remains are stately, plump Atlanticists who, though they do not have the courage to stake their careers on it, know that no political or economic benefit is worth the price of inadequately deterring a European war. And as a European war is deterred less and less adequately, during the Russian pause for refreshment, the problem shifts from the realm of politics to the realm of arms. To perceive the issues of European security as political is a luxury allowable only when the military foundation is minimally secure. That condition is fading as Western theorists and politicians factor hypotheses and illusions into the order of battle while their dull East Bloc counterparts accept only arms and men.    Looking back upon the First World War, Churchill reflected upon how easily fundamental warnings can be misinterpreted. Of the risk of war, he wrote: &quot;It is too foolish, too fantastic to be thought of in the twentieth century. . . . Civilization has climbed above such perils. The interdependence of nations in trade and traffic, the sense of public law, the Hague Convention, Liberal principles . . have rendered such nightmares impossible. Are you quite sure? It would be a pity to be wrong.&quot;    ---   Mr. Helprin is a novelist and political commentator. </TEXT></DOC>