<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870220-0130 </DOCNO><HL> SDI Could Lead a Reagan Revival---By Fred Barnes</HL><DD> 02/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Government and politics have no magic bullets, but President Reagan has happened upon an issue that is almost magic -- the early deployment of the Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars. If Mr. Reagan embraces it unhesitatingly, it has the potential for reviving his presidency.    The Iran-contra scandal notwithstanding, what Mr. Reagan lacks as he begins his last two years in office is an overarching idea, a purpose. In his first term, he had cutting taxes, building up the military and winning reelection as motivations. In 1985 and 1986, he had reforming the tax code and renewing aid to the Nicaraguan contras. Now, zilch. His State of the Union address last month was barren of big ideas and relied instead on conservative boilerplate or ideas like federal catastrophic health insurance that Mr. Reagan doesn't really relish. Small wonder the president is dispirited and aides are quitting the White House in droves. Would Patrick J. Buchanan, Mr. Reagan's communications director, be leaving March 1 if the president had a crucial program? Or would Mitch Daniels, the political director, be departing? Not a chance. But they need a cause. So does Mr. Reagan.    For some other president, reaching a new arms-control agreement with the Soviets might be cause enough. But Mr. Reagan doesn't believe in conventional arms control. He wants his legacy to be SDI, a space-based defense system that, in effect, disarms the Soviet arsenal of offensive missiles and shields all Americans from the threat of nuclear holocaust. It may be a grandiose scheme, but Mr. Reagan passionately believes it is true arms control. In politics, passion matters.    The trouble was, until a few months ago there was little the president could do to further SDI except plug for more research funds. Last August, he angrily rebuffed Republicans from Congress who urged him to order early deployment. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger agreed with Mr. Reagan. Their objection was that early deployment would consist of a land-based system designed to protect U.S. missile sites. But this system, while perhaps an effective nuclear deterrent, is hard to sell to the American people as critical to their health and safety. In any case, Messrs. Reagan and Weinberger have never been interested in such a mundane role for SDI. &quot;A total shield -- that's all we've ever been after,&quot; Mr. Weinberger says. &quot;We've never talked about site protection. . . . What the president is really talking about is protecting the people.&quot;    This means that SDI must be space-based and thus capable of destroying Soviet missiles as they leave their silos. Real Star Wars, in other words, that shields the American people. Last fall, Mr. Weinberger was convinced by Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, head of the Pentagon's SDI office, that research was proving so fruitful that a space-based system could be deployed years earlier than expected -- possibly by 1993 -- as the first phase of SDI. It would consist of 200 satellites equipped with &quot;kinetic kill vehicles&quot; to destroy Soviet missiles, and would be supplemented by a land-based system in the U.S. The initial phase could not be guaranteed to shoot down every missile, but proponents insist it would leave Soviet officials in such uncertainty that they would not risk a first strike. Soon the defense secretary was imploring Mr. Reagan to order rapid development of this option.    Development requires testing, which may violate the terms of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972. To skirt this, Mr. Reagan has to adopt a loose interpretation of ABM, which is Mr. Weinberger's approach, or abandon the treaty altogether, which is perfectly legal on six-months' notice. In either event, all hell would break loose. The Soviets would likely stalk out of arms talks in Geneva. European allies would be apoplectic. Democrats and some Republicans on Capitol Hill would attack Mr. Reagan for provoking the Soviets and conspiring to push SDI development beyond the point from which the next president, even if opposed to Star Wars, could retreat.    For Mr. Reagan, this is a no-lose situation politically. A fight over early deployment won't make the Iran-contra scandal go away, but it certainly will overshadow it for many months and galvanize the Reagan administration. What if Mr. Reagan loses? What if Congress votes to bar him from spending any funds toward early deployment? Then he's right back where he started with a lame-duck administration beset by scandal. No better off, but no worse off either.    But Mr. Reagan won't lose the fight. From the time he unveiled his Star Wars plan in March 1983, the president has understood why it is so attractive to the American people. Another SALT treaty would merely cap the nuclear balance of terror and make America marginally less vulnerable to nuclear attack. Americans are understandably tepid about this.    But SDI promises to make the entire country invulnerable. It offers protection from Soviet attack, which is what people want. That is why, while the press zinged Mr. Reagan for passing up a new arms pact at the Iceland summit last October, Americans cheered him for refusing to give up SDI.    In a Time magazine post-summit survey of 806 Americans, 69% said Mr. Reagan was right to reject a Soviet proposal that set large reductions in nuclear arsenals but also limited the SDI program to laboratory research. Sixty-four percent said they favor full development of Star Wars, and 54% said SDI should not be used as a bargaining chip, regardless of what happens in arms negotiations. But are the American people willing to pay for rapid deployment? They would be if the Pentagon shifts its spending and makes funds available from other systems -- the MX and Midgetman for example, both of which would be obsolete in a world of space defenses.    Imagine if Mr. Reagan were to go on national television with a full-blown argument for early deployment. We now have a chance to counter Soviet missiles far sooner than we thought, he would argue. Our research has progressed faster than we ever dreamed. Within a few years, we can put a defense system in space and make you and your children safe for all time from the threat of nuclear annihilation. But only if we act swiftly and boldly. To a Reagan appeal like that, the public response would be loud and one-sided: Go for it.    True, there would be tough fights with Congress on the new policy, bitter feuding with allies, and months of tension in Soviet-American affairs. But with broad public support, President Reagan would prevail. He and his administration would have a cause. And his moribund presidency would have new life.    ---   Mr. Barnes is a senior editor of The New Republic. </TEXT></DOC>