<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870109-0131 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Eastern and Western Rebels Hard to Unite in Nicaragua---By Marc Rangel</HL><DD> 01/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   One of the thorniest riddles of the Nicaraguan anti-Sandinista guerrilla war is the often asked question: Why are the contras and the Miskito Indians of the Atlantic Coast fighting separate wars instead of mounting a joint action?    This splintered approach is particularly distressing to those with an intimate knowledge of the area. What would really shake up the Managua regime would be an alliance between the Latino guerrillas of the main guerrilla force, the United Nicaraguan Opposition (UNO), and the Misurasata -- a rebel group consisting of Indians, as well as some Creoles, Latinos and English-speaking whites from the coastal region of East Nicaragua.    Significantly, the Miskitos were the first citizens to take up arms against the Sandinistas. This occurred in 1981, when they realized that the revolutionary regime was determined to destroy the sociocultural autonomy that was guaranteed to them by treaty after the 1894 annexation that ended the independence of their previous homeland, the Kingdom of Mosquitia, a British protectorate established in 1640. Since 1981, the Miskitos have waged a sporadic five-year guerrilla war against their oppressors. Although underarmed and underfunded by the Reagan administration because they have refused to join UNO on the latter's terms, they have forced the Sandinistas to the negotiating table on two occasions, in failed attempts to iron out their differences.    Historically and ethnologically, Nicaragua, both prior to and since its colonization by Europeans in the 16th century, has always had two distinct tribal groups: the Toltec/Chorotegans who originally migrated from Southern Mexico and populated the Pacific Coast and west-central highlands, and the Carib-related Miskitos who populated the eastern Atlantic region. The former evolved into Spanish-speaking West Nicaraguans, and the latter into Miskito/English-speaking East Nicaraguans through their centuries-long British connections. Today, these two Nicaraguas shape up roughly as follows: West Nicaragua, with a population of about 2.5 million, covers some 34,547 square miles, while East Nicaragua has an estimated population of about 300,000 and an area of about 22,062 square miles.    Unlike all previous governments -- including the various Somoza regimes, which were content with merely violating the economic aspects of Miskito autonomy -- the Sandinistas saw the Miskitos' autonomy as a threat to the total state control required by their Marxist system. Thus, the Sandinistas' need to destroy the sociocommunal structure of the Miskitos and their tribal brothers, the Sumo and Rama Indians, which they proceeded to do with singular brutality.    To the Sandinistas, steeped in the alien jargon of Marxist-Leninist ideology, the Miskitos and other Indians of East Nicaragua are a people without either a culture or a history. Therefore, they have no right to independence and must be forcibly &quot;educated.&quot; Contrary to Sandinista belief, however, the Miskitos do indeed have a rich heritage that has nurtured their people and guaranteed their cultural independence for nearly five centuries -- since their first contact with the Spanish conquistadors, whom they successfully resisted. They are the only native Americans who were never conquered by the European invaders.    Given their opposition to the Sandinistas, the Miskitos of East Nicaragua would seem to be the natural allies of the West Nicaraguan Latino guerrillas. Why, then, are they waging separate battles against the common enemy?    The answer is to be found in the divergent goals of the two movements: The contras are fighting to overthrow the Sandinistas whom they consider usurpers, while the Miskitos -- trusting neither side, considering them both unfriendly &quot;Spaniards&quot; -- are demanding only the freedom that was stolen from them by the Sandinistas.    As Misurasata's Brooklyn Rivera has explained to Prof. Bernard Nietschmann of UCLA, the Miskitos distrust all non-Indian authorities. &quot;Right-wing, left-wing, colonialist, capitalist, Marxist, all governments are anti-Indian,&quot; Mr. Rivera asserts. &quot;They want what is ours -- Indian land and resources. They want to make our nations part of their nation.&quot;    How, then, can the Miskitos and their Creole allies be lured into a wider alliance with the larger West Nicaraguan guerrilla forces? By offering the Miskitos what they have demanded of the Sandinistas: complete and unequivocal autonomy, with the right to govern themselves within the framework of a new Nicaraguan constitution.    In Bogota, Colombia, on Dec. 8, 1984, the Misurasata delegation led by Brooklyn Rivera stressed four major points in the &quot;Proposal for Peace&quot; it presented to Sandinista representatives. At a press briefing on March 25, 1985, prior to the Second Peace Treaty Negotiations, Mr. Rivera described these points as follows:    &quot;{T}he first part of our peace proposal is about rights to our identity through recognition of indigenous peoples as sovereign peoples with self-determination. The second point is recognition of the inalienable right to an indigenous territory, without which other rights would mean little. The third point is that we want autonomy for our Indian nations from the Nicaraguan state -- that is, with our own internal self-government, self-defense and self-determination. The fourth major point is that these agreements should be included as law in the Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua.&quot;    Predictably, the Sandinistas rejected Misurasata's conditions. But if the leaders of UNO are smart enough to accept the conditions, then the opportunity to regain lost freedoms in a new and democratic post-Sandinista Nicaragua would certainly appeal to the Miskito-Creole inhabitants of East Nicaragua.    Instead of confronting the Soviet-armed 120,000-man Sandinista army and militia forces in the familiar and well-fortified terrain of West Nicaragua, the goal of the combined guerrilla groups should be to take and hold a substantial portion of remote East Nicaragua -- which UNO cannot accomplish without Miskito-Creole support. Should this be accomplished, with a truly pluralistic provisional government of East Nicaragua as a primary aim, the frustrated Sandinistas might be forced to seriously negotiate a new, democratic national coalition as a first step toward reunification of the two de facto Nicaraguas.    ---   Mr. Rangel, author and former associate editor at United Feature Syndicate, was born and raised in East Nicaragua. </TEXT></DOC>