<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Senators Would Shoot the SEC Messengers---By Jonathan R. Macey</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)CONGRESS (CNG)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   Who would have thought that the Office of the Chief Economist at the Securities and Exchange Commission would ever become a center of controversy? Yet this handful of academics who study market phenomena recently was singled out for condemnation and threatened with extinction by a majority of the Senate Committee on Banking and Urban Affairs.    The committee, led by William Proxmire, has stipulated that none of its recently proposed funding increases for the SEC be used to increase the economists' budget. The panel further threatened to remove all funding for the office unless it begins to toe the line by (among other things) submitting its proposed studies for a &quot;notice and comment&quot; period during which the public could have a say on the relevance of the proposed studies, the quality of the data examined, and the nature of the experimental design of the studies.    The politicians' formal complaint is that the SEC economists' &quot;uniform philosophy in providing economic advice is to rely on the market as the best regulator.&quot; The staff economists are also faulted because they &quot;rely primarily on econometric approaches based on quantitative data&quot;; indeed, this is what the SEC hired these people to do in the first place. But the senators' real gripe is not with the economists' methodology, but with their results.    The studies are politically inconvenient for a banking committee determined to enact regulation to protect special interests from market forces. Those who want the government to intervene in financial markets are naturally distressed to encounter scientific methodology showing that governmental tinkering with the operation of the capital markets often imposes large costs on society.    The studies involved don't consistently support the views of either political party. Rather, the office's economists (some of whom I've worked with on non-SEC articles) are slaves to another constituency: the community of academic economists who evaluate their work product and the editors and referees of the scholarly journals who ultimately publish it.    An SEC study issued last fall shows that a particular takeover-defense tactic (the poison pill) causes a significant reduction in the share prices of those firms that adopt it. This study, which would provide valuable ammunition for those interested in intervening in the market in order to ban poison pills, cannot be said to reflect an uncritical bias toward the free market. Similarly, a study issued in summer 1986 shows that the nature of junk-bond financing is changing, such that these debt instruments are increasingly being used to finance large, hostile takeovers.    Other studies by the office have examined such diverse issues as the impact of greenmail on stock prices (the stock price of the firm paying the greenmail goes up an average 9.7% when the greenmailer announces its initial interest in the firm and then declines by an average 5.2% when the greenmail actually is paid); the interestrate relationships between the domestic bond market and the Eurodollar market; and savings from SEC Rule 415, which permits certain corporations to register bonds and put them &quot;on the shelf&quot; for a period of up to two years. Where's the political agenda there?    Critics also have charged that the SEC's economists have focused too much on the effects of takeovers. Slightly more than half of the SEC's studies of late have concerned this issue. As it happens, until the recent spate of insider-trading scandals, the market for corporate control had been the single most important item on the SEC's agenda, as well as the hottest topic among academics interested in corporate finance. Also, takeovers are discrete events whose effects are more susceptible to measurement than other events.    Of particular interest is a study this spring of an Ohio statute that increased the power of company boards there to deal with hostile takeovers. The law was passed in order to help Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co. avoid a hostile takeover. But Ohio politicians could insist they were helping stockholders protect their valuable stock from being commandeered at bargain-basement prices by pernicious outsiders.    To evaluate the statute's effect, the SEC's economists looked at stock prices of firms incorporated in Ohio. If share prices go up (after correcting for the overall influence of market trends) by an abnormally large amount, then the statute helps shareholders, and if the price declines, the statute harms shareholders. The study looked at 37 firms incorporated in Ohio and subject to a hostile takeover. In the three-day period encompassing the passage of the bill, the 37 Ohio-incorporated firms had a decline in share value of 1.68% net of market, which translates into a wealth loss to shareholders of $754 million.    Actually, this figure probably underestimates the losses to shareholders of the Ohio-incorporated firms because in all likelihood, rumors of the probable passage of the statute were circulating before the statute was actually passed. If one begins counting 10 days before the actual passage, to take account of shareholders' apprehensions, the wealth losses to shareholders total $1.45 billion. Goodyear shareholders in particular suffered -- the company's stock dropped 3.24% during that period.    The integrity of such a study makes it very difficult for politicians to defend some of their more outrageous policy decisions on grounds of shareholder welfare. Perhaps there are other reasons for passing the Ohio statute, such as the desire to benefit local incumbent management teams and workers. As good economists, the SEC staffers would be the first to concede that their studies are not intended to provide the solutions to all of the public-policy questions that arise in the debate about the policies that underlie corporate finance. All the Ohio study does is help to inform the debate, showing some of the costs associated with what the legislature did.    The attack on the Office of the Chief Economist is somehow promising at the same time that it is profoundly depressing. It testifies to the power of scientific method and informed debate over even the most biased and result-oriented policy making. Otherwise the office would not be the subject of so much controversy.    Keep in mind that those in Congress who dislike the results of the studies being done do not have any interest in generating a set of rival empirical results to challenge the SEC's conclusions. They want only the prescribed results regardless of what the data show.    ---   Mr. Macey is a professor of law at Cornell University. </TEXT></DOC>