<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871203-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Sawyer's Election Likely to Spark Chicago BrawlThat Could Spell Headache for Democratic Party---By Robert JohnsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With the election of Eugene Sawyer, it's Beirut on the Lake all over again.    Mr. Sawyer, a black alderman popular with enemies of the late Mayor Harold Washington, was named mayor by a mostly white coalition of his colleagues at 4:01 a.m. CST yesterday after one of the wildest days this politically raucous city has seen in years.    But Mr. Sawyer's election seems likely to plunge the city and especially its black community into 16 months of warfare that could weaken Democrats here and nationally, and make the infighting that gave Chicago its &quot;Beirut&quot; label seem mild. Mr. Sawyer was bitterly opposed by black activists, who fear he will yield power to the white-run, patronage-rich Democratic machine Mr. Washington had beaten. Twenty-three of the 29 aldermen who voted for Mr. Sawyer are remnants of the old machine. Some Democrats fear the fighting among Mr. Sawyer's supporters and critics could even trigger the election of a Republican when the overwhelmingly Democratic city next goes to the polls to vote for a mayor in April 1989.    All the maneuvering could have a big effect on the coming presidential election. Democrats had been counting on Mayor Washington to deliver the city and state in November 1988, much as the late Mayor Richard J. Daley did for John Kennedy in 1960. The infighting now seems likely to make that impossible, both because Chicago politicians will be distracted by local affairs and because there won't be a &quot;boss&quot; to organize efforts.    The warfare also makes Chicago a mine field for Democratic presidential hopefuls. Already, the Rev. Jesse Jackson has been a big loser; he didn't have enough influence in his hometown to elect his candidate, Alderman Timothy C. Evans. &quot;He can't control this rapacious group,&quot; says Don Rose, a Chicago political consultant.    For Chicago, preserving Washington's legacy is at the heart of the fight. The late mayor, who was first elected in 1983, was gradually but surely breaking down the old, white-ethnic machine that controlled Chicago city politics for the past 30 years. He devoted more city resources and services to minority neighborhoods, and he distributed city contracts more widely.    Though Mr. Sawyer is black and was part of Mr. Washington's coalition -- he was the first black alderman to endorse Mayor Washington in the 1983 race -- he isn't considered an idealist by his colleagues. The 54-year-old former city worker -- who couldn't be reached for comment yesterday -- was first elected in 1971 as part of the Daley machine, and his ties with its survivors are strong. His opponents charge that he was a behind-the-scenes critic of his popular predecessor. Moreover, he has numerous relatives on the city payroll, to the dismay of those who backed Mayor Washington's efforts to reduce patronage jobs.    That bothered activists, and the way he got elected bothered them even more. The days leading up to Mr. Sawyer's election were marked by political intrigue, intense lobbying, legal wrangling, neighborhood rallies and even death threats to some of the 50 Chicago city council members. At one point, black activists were so angered that they assembled thousands of chanting demonstrators in the streets around city hall and packed hundreds into the council chambers, stalling for several hours the decision on who will fill the mayor's post until the 1989 city election.    When aldermen finally gathered for a vote late Tuesday, Mr. Sawyer's knees buckled and he nearly fainted. The council recessed while Mr. Sawyer tried to collect himself, but even some of his supporters snickered behind his back, questioning whether he would have the courage to endure the hostile crowd gathered in the council gallery. At least one protester allowed inside had been dragged out by police after pelting Sawyer allies with quarters, yelling that his majority was built on bribery. At one point, opponents said he was on the verge of withdrawing his candidacy.    &quot;This was a Banana Republic-style succession; it's an obnoxious exercise in raw political clout of the sort we haven't had here lately,&quot; said Terrence Brunner, executive director of the Better Government Association, a legal watchdog group. The association filed suit in Cook County Circuit Court to void Mr. Sawyer's election.    Mr. Sawyer's opponents vow to continue the fight. Many black community leaders say they can't forgive his alliance with Mr. Washington's enemies, the white-ethnic aldermen who provided the bulk of his vote. &quot;They feel disenfranchised,&quot; said Lawrence Bloom, a white alderman with a 75% black constituency.    But the battle may prove as risky for them as for Mr. Sawyer. Mr. Washington became the city's first black mayor by unifying Chicago's black minority, which accounts for 41.5% of the population, with a sprinkling of Hispanics and affluent white &quot;lakefront liberals.&quot; He then won when two white candidates divided the white, ethnic vote in the Democratic primary. A similar split in the black vote could pave the way for the election of a white candidate in 1989.    Nationally, the infighting may be just as important. In March, when Illinois has its Democratic presidential primary, Chicago may be preoccupied with a mayoral race. Mr. Bloom plans to ask the Illinois Legislature to allow a special election for mayor as early as June 1988, which would mean that the city would hold its primaries in that spring.    The biggest loser is probably Mr. Jackson, who had been counting on Mr. Washington to support his candidacy and lead a unified block of Chicago delegates to the Democratic convention. Now Mr. Jackson is confronted with a Chicago mayor whose candidacy he didn't support. He will still win most of Chicago's black votes here but the organizing and fund-raising support he hoped for here is seriously eroded, political consultants say.    What's more, it probably scuttles any near-term ambitions Mr. Jackson might have had to be mayor. He repeatedly has denied any interest in the job, but he was until this week considered electable eventually.    Mr. Sawyer already faces a formidable array of people who want his new job. Among those considered to have a chance to unseat him are Mr. Evans, who was Mr. Washington's City Council floor leader; former mayor Jane Byrne; U.S. Rep. Dan Rostenkowski, and Edward Vrdolyak, a former city council foe of Mr. Washington who recently turned Republican.    Moreover, Mr. Sawyer isn't thought to possess a lot of clout. He doesn't fit the &quot;boss&quot; image that the late Mayor Daley made famous and that Mayor Washington was beginning to acquire. &quot;He's a weak guy,&quot; says Mr. Rose, the political consultant, &quot;subject to a lot of pressure and obviously not a crusader.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>