<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0012 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Crude Oil Joins Most Other Commodities In a Strong Industrywide Rally in Prices </HL><AUTHOR> William Power (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PET CMD PCS NDX FIN BON </IN><G> TRE </G><TEXT>   Oil prices soared along with prices of most other commodities, in an industrywide rally in which only precious metals didn't participate.    Because of bitter weather, a perceived supply tightness in Europe and other factors, crude-oil prices shot up almost $1, to $17.69 a barrel, on New York's Mercantile Exchange. The Commodity Research Bureau's closely watched index of 21 commodity prices rose a sharp 1.9 points, to 234.43. Stocks and bonds rose in an unusual tandem with commodities.    &quot;You have a traders' delight today,&quot; said Stuart Shinbein, senior technical analyst at the CRB, referring to the price surges. However, he cautioned that bonds and commodities &quot;will not be traveling companions for long.&quot; The CRB is a unit of Knight-Ridder Inc., Miami.    Crude-products price also soared. February-delivery heating oil rose 2.77 cents, to 52.76 cents a gallon; unleaded gasoline rose 2.29 cents, to 46.11 cents a gallon.    Richard D. Donovan, head of E.F. Hutton andamp; Co.'s international energy department, attributed the oil rally to continued tightness in the market for North Sea Brent, the benchmark European crude, as well as severe weather in the Northeast. Mr. Donovan and other analysts also said short covering --or the buying back of contracts by traders who had bet prices would fall --also fueled some of the rally.    The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries had some effect on the market as well. Nauman Barakat, oil analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., cited as bullish a statement in the United Arab Emirates state-run newspaper by the oil minister that he told customers he won't sell oil at any price other than the $18-a-barrel OPEC benchmark. The United Arab Emirates had been offering oil at as much as $2 below the benchmark recently.    Some analysts also cited a Petroleum Intelligence Weekly report that suggested there is aversion within OPEC to offering below-benchmark discounts, which might result in cutbacks of one million to two million barrels daily below last month's production of 18.6 million barrels.    In any case, though the oil market rallied, &quot;the question is what is fundamentally behind it that will keep it strong in the future,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director of Elders Futures Inc.'s energy group. &quot;If this weather develops some good demand and OPEC really does get serious about reducing production, maybe the market will have some basis on which to base this optimism.&quot;    Yesterday's biggest oil story --the huge Ashland Oil Inc. diesel-fuel spill near Pittsburgh --apparently didn't move oil markets. Diesel fuel is similar to heating oil and often can be used as such. However, the approximately three million gallons, or 80,000 barrels, of fuel involved is the equivalent of 80 heating-oil contracts, not enough to move the market, traders told Dow Jones andamp; Co.'s International Petroleum Report newswire.    On the spot, or non-contract, market, the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude traded $1 higher, at $17.70.    Mr. Barakat said that while price gains were clearly weather-related, the role of OPEC will dominate in the near future. If prices reach $18 a barrel, he said, &quot;there will be considerable jubilation in the cartel, with members thinking everything is rosy now,&quot; and therefore they don't have to adhere to production limits.    In such a case, prices will go down again as OPEC steps up production, Mr. Barakat predicts.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   STOCK INDEXES: A strong dollar, supported by central-bank dollar buying in Japan, West Germany and the U.S., sent stock-index futures prices soaring in active trading. The rally also gained support from arbitrage trading between stocks and stock-index futures, and from traders who bought futures contracts they had sold earlier on a bet the market would fall. &quot;The futures hardly pulled back a smidgen all day. It looks like everybody likes the New Year,&quot; said John Gustafson, a futures analyst for Discount Corp. of New York Futures, Chicago. Bellwether Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures for March settlement closed 10.65 points higher at 257.40. The stronger dollar sent stock prices higher. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 76.42 to close at 2015.25. But the rally in stock futures and stocks may be short-lived, said Alan Bush, a futures analyst with A.G. Edwards andamp; Sons Inc., Chicago. &quot;Once the central banks get tired of intervening, the strength in the dollar may not be there,&quot; and the stock and stock-futures markets could pull back by the end of the week, he said. Treasury-bond futures rallied, but gave up much of their gains by the close of trading as certain U.S. government securities dealers sold futures contracts to take profits and hedge holdings in preparation for tommorrow's Treasury-note auction, traders said. -   SUGAR: Prices rose for the third consecutive session, with the March contract advancing 0.26 cent a pound as it settled at 9.75 cents, a gain of more than three cents a pound since August. &quot;Traders are beginning to realize that burdensome oversupplies of sugar that pushed inventories up to 40% of annual consumption and more, no longer exist,&quot; said one analyst. A four-months supply is regarded as about normal and supplies are now slightly above 30% of annual usage, trade sources said. In part this has been due to crop problems in Eastern Europe --particularly the Soviet Union --and in India. As a result, the two producers are seen as significant potential buyers, which is boosting prices. The Soviet Union bought around 200,000 metric tons of sugar around year end and may buy more, trade sources said. India said that on Thursday it will come into the market to buy about 20,000 metric tons of refined sugar for shipment from January to April. One sugar dealer said this may represent only part of India's needs.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Futures prices rose across-the-board amid optimism fueled by the stock-market rally, among other things, said Victor Lespinasse, a floor broker with Dean Witter Reynolds, Chicago. Wheat prices were also supported by reports that the U.S. Agriculture Department is offering to subsidize the sale of one million tons of U.S. wheat to Algeria. The January-delivery soybean contract jumped 9.25 cents a bushel, the March wheat contract rose 3.5 cents a bushel and the March corn contract increased 2.75 cents a bushel. Some traders are wary that a sustained rally will spur farmers to sell crops to local elevators, which would in turn hedge positions by selling futures contracts. This would tend to depress prices. Traders are speculating that many farmers had been hoarding crops from the fall harvest until they could sell under this year's lower tax rates.    PRECIOUS METALS: Gold prices fell, leaving analysts groping for explanations beyond the fact that some investors decided to sell their contracts to take previously earned profits. Many analysts look to broad-based commodity rises, such as the one that occurred yesterday, as an inflation indicator, and gold is the prime inflation insurance. Gold's $8.10 fall on the Commodity Exchange in New York, to $478.10 an ounce, can only be explained as an &quot;aberration,&quot; said Jeffrey Christian, managing director of CPM Group Ltd., commodity consultants. Silver prices also fell. &quot;It's strange. There's a number of reasons for the price of gold to rise in the next couple of weeks,&quot; said Mr. Christian. He said part of the weakness was due to European central-bank efforts to support the dollar. He also cited &quot;that Robert Prechter thing in Barron's,&quot; referring to an aggressively bearish gold story in Barron's Weekly over the weekend by Mr. Prechter, a noted market technician. The story suggested that gold prices might be on the verge of a Black Monday-type crash. Bernard Savaiko, senior precious metals analyst at PaineWebber Inc., New York, agreed with Mr. Christian that gold fell for &quot;artificial reasons,&quot; and that &quot;no long-term technical damage was done.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>