<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881007-0089 </DOCNO><HL> International -- Voted Out: Rejecting Pinochet, Chile Faces a Period Of Promise and Peril --- Economy Thrives but Needs Stability, and That May Be Scarce for Many Months --- 'Now Comes the Hard Part' </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Cohen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> SANTIAGO, Chile  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Fifteen years after leading a military coup in which a democratically elected Marxist leader died, Chilean dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet has heard the death sentence of his own regime.    Chileans, tired of a president who has at times made their nation an international pariah, decisively rejected his bid for over eight more years in power. In a plebiscite the general had thought he could win comfortably, the &quot;No&quot; forces gained 54.7% against the regime's 43%.    But though the vote was clear, Chile's course now is anything but.    The first uncertainty is the central one of what this defeated autocrat will do now. Gen. Pinochet isn't constitutionally required to relinquish power for 18 more months. But Chile's Communists, representing as much as 10% of the populace, are insisting he leave at once. What will happen if they or others launch strikes and demonstrations that the military junta could use as pretext for a new clampdown?    Secondly, Chile in recent years has made market-oriented changes that have freed the business sector and given the country the most open and dynamic economy in South America. Will it be possible to find a smooth transition from dictatorial to democratic rule that can avoid the sort of economic disorder afflicting the newborn democracies of Brazil, Argentina and Peru?    First indications are that the course may be rocky. &quot;I accept the verdict of the majority&quot; and will &quot;ensure that it is respected,&quot; Gen. Pinochet said last night. But he warned that the 1980 constitution must be followed -- implying that he will try to hold on until March 1990. Opposition leader Jorge Schaulsohn, on the other hand, vowed to press for a presidential election as early as March 1989.    The fear of a backlash from a notoriously ruthless leader brought an eerie calm and uneasiness to the streets. There were no wild celebrations, and police with tear gas broke up the few crowds that did form. The evening brought another electrical blackout. Though there was an almost palpable sense of relief that the plebiscite was peaceful and clean and that the regime had promptly conceded defeat, the overriding concern was to avoid gloating or otherwise irking the heavily deployed military police.    Centrist Christian Democrat leader Patricio Aylwin, head of the largest of the 16 parties that united in opposition, invited followers to celebrate in their homes and avoid any provocation. Orlando Saenz, a leading businessman supporting the &quot;No&quot; campaign, said that &quot;the majority of the opposition favors no substantial change in economic policy.&quot; He added that Hernan Buchi, the young finance minister credited with much of Chile's recent economic success, &quot;would make an excellent minister in a democratic government.&quot;    Gen. Pinochet rejected resignations offered by his cabinet ministers, and showed no sign of budging. The constitution gives him until December 1989 to call elections. But this ponderous schedule for change is widely seen as untenable after what amounts to a crushing defeat for the junta, which has been in power since the 1973 overthrow of Salvador Allende.    The timetable is &quot;politically impossible,&quot; commented a French diplomat, predicting that Gen. Pinochet faces increasing isolation, both domestically and internationally. With most of Latin America already under democratic governments, it appeared pressure could be overwhelming for the general to leave soon and so avoid an 18-month political limbo.    Much will depend on how far, if at all, elements of the armed forces and the civilian right wing support the opposition's calls for accelerated elections. But the movement to hold the elections earlier will gain from the fact that Gen. Pinochet now is a humiliated man.    With overwhelming power over the media and public administration, he organized a plebiscite he never thought he could lose. The general had rejected earlier calls for an open election rather than a plebiscite, passing up a chance of winning by dividing the opposition. He also refused both domestic and U.S. calls to step aside for a compromise plebiscite candidate, who might have benefited from Chile's economic boom while escaping the stigma of the Pinochet regime's appalling humanrights record.    The 72-year-old general campaigned as a kind of aging father figure suddenly convinced of the merits of democracy. But few believed him, and he looked foolish. He opened new housing projects, cut taxes and promised prosperity for all. Nothing, however, could alter the fact that millions of Chileans were tired of him.    &quot;He suffered the disease of all dictators,&quot; said Mr. Saenz, the businessman. &quot;He started to live in a world of make-believe.&quot;    But even humiliated, Gen. Pinochet is a notoriously stubborn man. He is thought to command strict loyalty throughout much of an army of Prussian discipline, although the air force and navy may be less committed to his rule. And he knows he faces possible trial under a democratic government for the thousands of killings perpetrated by his regime, particularly in its early years. He is evidently determined to cling to power all the way to March 1990 -- and he may succeed. Conceivably he could even try to create an atmosphere of instability that might provide an excuse for staying beyond that.    Mr. Fernandez, the outgoing interior minister, claimed the president was in good spirits and said his achievement in gaining over 40% of the vote after 15 years in power was &quot;extraordinary.&quot; However, the president's room for maneuver is circumscribed.    The defeat -- even the fact that the plebiscite was held -- reflected the fact that two members of the junta had made an honest election a condition of their support for Gen. Pinochet. The two, air-force commander Gen. Fernando Matthei and Gen. Rodolfo Stange of the military police, will continue to rein him in. Sources close to the government suggested they might even prod him to seek a graceful exit if the country seemed to be in a governmental limbo. At the same time, diplomatic sources said a few ambitious army officers may now be eager to distance themselves from a defeated man.    Moreover, the civilian right is already indicating its readiness to work with the moderate opposition. Sergio Onofre Jarpa, former interior minister in the military government and leader of the right-wing National Renovation Party (the regime's main civilian prop), was the first prominent supporter of the junta to acknowledge defeat.    In a televised debate with Mr. Aylwin, the Christian Democrat, Mr. Onofre Jarpa agreed that Chileans should work together to preserve the economic progress of recent years and avoid a return to the food shortages, stagnation and strife under Mr. Allende's Marxist government. The implication was that this work of reconciliation and construction should begin soon -- before March 1990, at any rate.    For a trauma still haunts Chile. For years, and during the campaign itself, the junta has insisted that the only alternative to it is Marxism and a government like that of Mr. Allende. It has played insistently on fear and tried to convince everyone that no moderate center exists. The noncommunist opposition knows one of its main tasks now is to convince Chileans that democracy and further economic progress aren't incompatible.    Its leaders know that Chile is a changed country. Under Mr. Allende, the state budget deficit was about 25% of total output. It is now under 1%. Hundreds of businesses have been returned from the government to private control during the Pinochet era, and more than 200,000 people have left the public-administration payrolls. Triple-digit annual inflation has come down to an expected 10% this year.    Foreign investment is heavy. New export industries in sectors such as timber, salmon and kiwis have brought new prosperity to the Chilean provinces. The national economy no longer revolves around copper and metropolitan Santiago. Growth has averaged 5% a year for four years, and the potential for continuing at that rate is seen as strong if stability and market-oriented economic policy are maintained. People compare the country to Australia rather than its Latin American neighbors.    Sergio Bitar, a moderate socialist, insists there will be no reversal of economic course, though he sees an attempt to spread the country's new wealth more equitably. &quot;Chile needs a government of the center or center-right for the task of reconciliation,&quot; he says, adding that this is the kind of candidate he believes would win open elections.    The 43% gained by Gen. Pinochet and probable splits in the opposition following its victory suggest that a center-right candidate could indeed be the strongest force in an election. This could guarantee economic continuity. It would also gain the support of U.S. banks and the Treasury, which have applauded Chile's economic transformation. The country has a foreign debt of just over $18 billion, reduced in recent years through South America's most successful program of debt-equity swaps.    But all this is vulnerable to political instability and conflict. The Communists haven't yet made clear their tactics. The moderate opposition doesn't know who its candidate might be. And the brutality of a wounded regime can't be underestimated.    &quot;We have defeated an authoritarian system. Now comes the hard part -- that of rebuilding democracy,&quot; says Ricardo Lagos, a socialist. How quickly and peacefully that process occurs is among many questions that Wednesday's stunning plebiscite left unanswered. </TEXT></DOC>