<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0004 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Ed BeanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NHCI WNEWSPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Dr. Bruno Santa Rossa stopped by Elba General Hospital in Elba, Ala., to make his rounds one day in June 1985 and was surprised to find that he had six new patients, complete with names on their room doors and charts at the nurse's station.    When he asked about them, he says, the hospital's administrator told him the &quot;patients&quot; were actually employees who were ordered into hospital beds so that visiting &quot;investors from New York&quot; wouldn't see so many empty rooms. The administrator said he had &quot;orders from the top&quot; of the hospital's operator, National Healthcare Inc., Dr. Santa Rossa says.    That story comes amid a host of other charges of deception at Dothan, Ala.-based National Healthcare. If true, the success of what was once the nation's fastest-growing hospital company was as illusory as Dr. Santa Rossa's patients.    Yesterday, much of the illusion was stripped away. The company said it expects to report a $19.5 million loss for its fourth quarter ended June 30. The company is in noncompliance with bank credit agreements covering $118.6 million of debt and the banks are apparently unwilling to extend a waiver that expires Sept. 30. As a result, the company said yesterday that it will receive a qualified auditing opinion. The company also said its president and chief operating officer, L. Stanton Tuttle, resigned after the company gave him $600,000 to settle a trust fund promised in his employment contract. Stephen L. Phelps, chairman, chief executive officer and founder of the company, stepped down as chief executive.    National Healthcare's stock fell 75 cents to close at 62.5 cents in national over-the-counter trading yesterday. At its all-time peak of $17 a share last year, the company's total market capitalization was $177.9 million; at yesterday's market close, it was $6.5 million.    James T. McAfee Jr., who resigned without any announcement last week as executive vice president of Macon, Ga.-based Charter Medical Corp., was named president and chief executive.    Mr. McAfee left a position at Charter that paid him $521,000 in 1986. Both he and Mr. Phelps previously worked at Nashville, Tenn.-based Hospital Affiliates International Inc., where Mr. McAfee was a senior vice president and Mr. Phelps rose through a succession of administrator jobs. While Mr. Phelps learned the hospital business at Hospital Affiliates, his style was all his own.    After founding National Healthcare in 1981, Mr. Phelps, 37 years old, charmed investors with pep rallies where employees would sing the company &quot;anthem.&quot;    He once called his company &quot;a cross between Amway and Herbalife&quot; and the &quot;Wal-Mart&quot; of health care. While bigger hospital companies were shying away from rural hospitals, National Healthcare was on a buying spree, confidently stating in a 1986 prospectus that it usually could turn around an unprofitable facility in 30 to 60 days.    It seemed to be true. By 1986, the company owned or managed 33 hospitals and nine nursing homes and its revenue was $115.7 million -- soaring from $206,000 in 1982. That was good enough for No. 5 on Inc. magazine's 1987 list of the top 100 fastest-growing small public companies.    Analysts fawned over the company, as did a group of bankers led by Citicorp Inc., which extended a $150 million line of credit last fall to fuel an acquisition binge.    About the only disbelievers were some of the company's disgruntled former employees. They allege that the company altered the financial statements of its hospitals, played fast and loose with its bookkeeping and stiffed its creditors while home office executives had their own fleet of aircraft.    Some of the employees will be key witnesses in a class action shareholder lawsuit, filed earlier this year in federal court in Montgomery, Ala. The suit, which alleges violations of securities laws and the Racketeering Influenced Corruption Organizations Act, seeks $635 million in damages. The plaintiffs charge that the company's distorted financial reports inflated the value of its stock.    Mr. Tuttle made similar charges in a private letter to the company's board in January. Mr. Tuttle, who precipitated the decline of the company's stock last fall when he forced the first of several major write-offs, said in the letter: &quot;I have been subjected to extreme pressure to take action or support action by others with regard to financial reporting which would have been misleading and improper.&quot;    In another letter, Mr. Tuttle's attorney told Mr. Phelps: &quot;It is not constructive to pretend that the real problems can be solved by rearranging the numbers in the books . . .&quot;    Mr. Phelps declined to be interviewed for this story; some who know him paint a picture of an entrepreneurial and motivational genius who doesn't like to hear bad news.    &quot;His philosophy was not to look at the downside. There was never any acknowledgement that something could go wrong,&quot; recalls William R. Wayland, the company's general counsel until June 1985. Mr. Wayland emphasizes, however, that he never observed any wrongdoing while at the company.    Mr. Phelps was 24 when his small building firm in Chattanooga, Tenn., failed. He took a $9,500-a-year job as a medical clinic credit manager. At Hospital Affiliates, his ability to turn around deficit-ridden hospitals made him a star.    He was administrator of Hospital Affiliates -- managed Southeast Alabama Medical Center in Dothan when Hospital Corp. of America acquired Hospital Affiliates in 1981. County officials had such high regard for Mr. Phelps that they gave his newly formed company the contract to manage the hospital when Hospital Affiliates bowed out.    Venture capital and a flurry of acquisitions followed for National Healthcare. It made its first public offering in 1985.    Dothan had bigger employers but none more visible. The company began to dominate Dothan just as its modern six-story building towered above the flat downtown skyline.    Mr. Phelps became an investor in a new local newspaper and gave it National Healthcare's printing contract. An expanding cadre of high-paid executives lured from bigger companies was a boon to real-estate sales. Television news cameras recorded the company's &quot;celebrations.&quot;    At the company's hospitals in rural Southern towns, however, many employees didn't see much to celebrate. Administrators who had lived in their small communities for years suddenly found themselves embarrassed by a cash-management policy for vendors that one administrator explained as: &quot;Don't pay until they cut you off.&quot; Another administrator says he was told that if the hospital owed a refund to a patient, it shouldn't pay until the patient had called three times.    In the spring of 1986, at the same time hospital administrators say they were stonewalling creditors, the company hired Mr. Tuttle at a salary package worth as much as $540,000 a year. Mr. Phelps hoped that Mr. Tuttle's strong reputation in operations as a senior vice president at Hospital Corp. would buy credibility with bankers and investors.    But, sensing an ally in Mr. Tuttle, lower-ranking officers began telling him their suspicions. In his January letter to the board, Mr. Tuttle cited &quot;a horrible situation with the corporate books.&quot;    He said that when he told Mr. Phelps that the company had incurred a loss of $300,000 in October 1986, Mr. Phelps replied that he was going to report the amount as a profit.    The company has declined to comment on allegations or the suit, except to say that its outside directors made a &quot;comprehensive investigation&quot; of the issues raised by Mr. Tuttle and concluded that &quot;there was no improper conduct or wrongdoing by Mr. Phelps.&quot;    As discovery gets under way in the case, the company is likely to be haunted by memos that echo the charges in Mr. Tuttle's letter. Mike Brown, former administrator of the company's Sparta, Tenn., hospital, says he was warned by other administrators that he would be told to change numbers and to always ask for a memo.    In the eight months he was with the company, Mr. Brown says, a superior twice called him and said: &quot;This is what your numbers have to be.&quot; In both cases, the changes favorably distorted numbers.    By fall of 1986, Mr. Tuttle, on the job a little over six months, was vehemently insisting that the company take write-offs that it had postponed for years and &quot;let the chips fall.&quot;    About the same time, Forbes magazine wrote a glowing profile that called the company an &quot;up and comer&quot; and estimated earnings for its fiscal year ended June 30 of $4.3 million, or 53 cents a share. Soon after that, the company announced that an unexpected increase in its provision for contractual allowances would lower earnings to $3.1 million, or 38 cents a share. The stock swooned.    The news worsened in January, when the company first estimated an additional $7 million in second-quarter pretax charges, most of it for bad debt and contractual allowances, but predicted a profit for the year. A month later, the company changed its mind and said the charge would be $9.1 million and there would be a loss for the year.    Documents filed by the plaintiffs in the case allege that auditors from Arthur Young andamp; Co., recognizing their potential liability, &quot;pleaded&quot; with the company to take the hit to earnings &quot;gradually over several months time to give the appearance that the write-downs were due to ongoing operational losses . . .&quot; The auditing firm hasn't yet been named in the lawsuit; its attorney says there isn't &quot;a shred of truth&quot; to the allegations directed at it.    The company's modern tower, once a symbol of its prosperity, now has more empty desks than employees. Yesterday, there was yet another layoff, including a vice president whose final act was to release an announcement about the layoff. </TEXT></DOC>