<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Raising Costs:Dollar's Decline SpursRise in Producer PricesOf Industrial Products---More Demand, Less CapacityIn Some Lines Are Cited;Rebuilding Profit Margins---The Hunt for Cheap Suppliers---By Ralph E. WinterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)PETROLEUM (PET)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN><TEXT>   After three years of snapping up bargains, the folks who do the buying for U.S. businesses are discovering that they must pay higher prices.    &quot;The pricing initiative is going to the producer from the purchaser,&quot; says Douglas R. Cliggott, a senior economist with Merrill Lynch Economics, a unit of the brokerage concern.    For two years, balky buyers beat back most attempts to raise prices, but now many of the increases are sticking. The sudden change has affected major industrial products from plastics and paper goods to chemicals and components.    Eventually, the higher prices will be passed on to consumers. They aren't likely to lead to double-digit inflation any time soon, though. For the most part, the wholesale price increases have been selective and moderate, and they are fragile because of the world-wide surplus of many materials. Still, leading economists agree that consumer prices, paced by higher energy and imported-goods prices, will probably climb 3.3% this year, compared with last year's 1.9% increase, and will probably rise an additional 4.2% in 1988.    The price upswing reflects several factors. Some industries have added little new capacity in the past three years because of the prolonged price weakness, and mergers and restructurings have resulted in some scrapped capacity. By midyear, for instance, only 28 U.S. plants, or almost half the number a decade ago, will make car tires.    There is also a modest increase in U.S. demand. Factory production is rising after sluggish activity in the first nine months of 1986, and that is increasing the need for industrial commodities like plastic resins, paper, chemicals and shipping cartons. In addition, higher oil prices are pushing up the cost of petroleum products used to make chemicals, plastics, synthetic rubber and other products.    But the most important factor in the price increase is the weaker U.S. dollar. The dollar's decline -- reflected in increases of more than 30% in the value of the Japanese yen and the West German mark since the beginning of 1986 -- is finally making imported products and materials more expensive. It has also made demand for U.S. exports stronger, enabling American companies to hold out for higher prices at home.    &quot;Companies are taking advantage of that to rebuild profit margins,&quot; says Walter D. Fackler, a professor at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business.    Initially, shifting income into corporate profits and away from personal purchasing power will retard economic growth, says Lawrence Chimerine, the chairman and chief economist at Chase Econometrics Inc. He expects this year's inflation-adjusted gross national product to rise only 2% to 2.5%. He also maintains that consumer purchasing power will be hurt more this year than in other periods of moderate inflation because higher costs for petroleum and other imported products, rather than higher wages and salaries, are causing the price increases. By next year, though, he says, higher profits may spark increased capital spending, prolonging the current economic expansion.    The swing to higher prices is clear-cut. More than nine times as many purchasing agents reported price increases in February as reported lower prices, according to a National Association of Purchasing Management survey. In addition, the Labor Department says that wholesale prices rose at a 7.7% annual rate in January, partly in response to a spurt in gasoline prices, following a 2.5% drop for all of 1986.    Clearly, those who have to pay higher prices don't like the increases. But for manufacturers of many basic materials and parts used by industry, strengthening prices are very welcome. The Commerce Department's index of producer prices for steel, linerboard, machinery and other industrial products declined 4.7% during 1986, bringing the index to its lowest level since 1981. Managements cut payrolls, closed their least efficient plants and reduced other costs, but practically all the benefits went to customers in lower prices.    Some industries have benefited from the higher prices earlier than others. During the 1986 second half, price increases helped fatten profits at paper, forest-products and chemical companies.    At Weyerhaeuser Co., the huge forest-products concern, fourth-quarter earnings rose 51%, contributing to a 38% gain in net income for the year. &quot;For the first time in the 1980s, all the major domestic and international market trends are working in our favor,&quot; says George H. Weyerhaeuser, the company's president and chief executive officer.    With the weakened dollar, &quot;there's a lot better demand abroad for U.S. logs, lumber, pulp and paper products,&quot; notes Gary Palmero, a forest-products analyst with Oppenheimer andamp; Co. The stronger foreign sales sop up surplus material, allowing producers to raise domestic prices. A 15% lumber export duty imposed by Canada in response to U.S. pressure has also made it easier for U.S. lumber companies to raise prices at home. In addition, Weyerhaeuser is benefiting from a 20% wage rollback negotiated last year at its Western mills.    Producers of many other items expect to start profiting from price increases soon. But steel remains a question; much surplus capacity remains, and industry leader USX Corp. is trying to recover markets after a lengthy strike. Oil prices are also highly volatile, with the current higher prices dependent on oil-producing countries' abiding by production quotas.    Because of the dollar's decline, higher import prices have begun to surface on a wide range of products from bearings to the wire used in steel-belted tires. Raytheon Co.'s Amana Refrigeration Inc. unit says prices on an air-conditioner compressor made only in Japan have climbed 14%, and Huffy Corp., the bicycle maker, is paying 20% to 25% more for Japanese parts and is getting higher quotes from Taiwan as well.    Consequently, U.S. customers are looking for less expensive suppliers abroad and at home. Jervis B. Webb Co., a producer of conveyor systems, is seeking alternative suppliers of bearings and wheels in South Korea, Taiwan or China should its Italian supplier raise prices again after a recent 5% increase. And Household International Inc.'s Halsey Taylor-Thermos division has placed some orders for wire grates for barbecue grills with a Tennessee producer because of higher foreign quotes.    Amana's Japanese supplier, realizing that it could lose Amana's business, plans to start making the compressor in Malaysia and has promised to halve its price increase when the Malaysian units become available later this year, says Marvin Carney, Amana's vice president for materials.    The cheaper dollar is also largely responsible for a 10% to 15% price increase for corrugated boxes, which buyers get from domestic producers. Even at the dollar's peak there were no boatloads of empty containers pouring in from Japan or West Germany. Now, stronger foreign demand for U.S. paperboard has allowed U.S. producers to raise prices, forcing up the cost of boxes. &quot;They've become very aggressive after starving for a couple of years,&quot; says Raymond C. Howick, the director of corporate purchasing for Sara Lee Corp., the Chicago-based food concern.    Linerboard, which goes on the outside of the corrugated box sandwich, currently fetches $350 a ton, up from $320 a ton late last year. A year ago, some linerboard was available at a discounted price of $250 a ton. Because U.S. mills are already running at more than 90% of capacity to meet demand, both producers and users say further increases are far more likely than any drop.    The price impact is greatest when rising export orders collide with strong U.S. demand. Oak lumber costs furniture makers $900 a thousand board feet, up 15% from six months ago, and the price is expected to climb further. &quot;European and Japanese furniture makers are buying more American oak,&quot; says Herman Haley, the senior vice president of purchasing for Stanley Interiors Corp., a Stanleytown, Va., furniture maker, noting that the domestic furniture industry is &quot;in an up-tick right now.&quot;    Plastic resin prices are also rising, mainly because stronger U.S. demand is taxing the industry's reduced production capacity. Polystyrene resin, which cost Phillips Plastics Corp. 36 cents a pound a year ago, is now at 43 cents and will rise to 46 cents on April 1. &quot;Suppliers tell us there is a shortage,&quot; says William K. Bunke, the director of purchases for the Phillips, Wis., molder of parts for appliances, cars and computer equipment.    By contrast, just a few years ago &quot;there was world-wide overcapacity for many plastics,&quot; says a spokesman for Dow Chemical Co., of Midland, Mich., a major supplier. Prices plunged, ending a binge of plant building. &quot;And there have been a lot of mergers and restructuring; new owners looked at some of the capacity, decided it was obsolete and closed it down,&quot; he adds.    U.S. plants making paper, plastics and other nondurable goods ran at 85.4% of capacity in January, up from 84.5% a year earlier. Merrill Lynch's Mr. Cliggott thinks actual operating rates are higher than that because some obsolete facilities that will never be restarted are included in the capacity count. By contrast, durable-goods plants, which make machinery, steel, castings and other longer-lasting items, operated at only 76.9% of capacity in January, down from 78.4% a year earlier. Producers of these goods have generally found it more difficult to raise prices.    Purchasing agents, as usual, are resisting price increases, sometimes successfully. Buyers for TRW Inc.'s U.S. automotive-parts group are &quot;on the way to another year of price decreases exceeding increases,&quot; says George Harris, TRW's vice president for materiel. &quot;One thing we've learned from the Japanese is that you have to have a balanced attack on costs, going after greater efficiency from your suppliers as hard as you seek to improve the efficiency of your own plants.&quot;    But many other purchasers are finding that the price increases are sticking -- and that they can't pass all of them along. Profit margins at Worthington Industries Inc.'s steel-processing operations, for example, are below those of a year ago. Steel mills raised prices, but &quot;customers have been resisting higher prices on processed steel,&quot; says Joseph H. Stegmayer, the company's chief financial officer. Now, Worthington officials are hoping that increasing prices 3% on steel processed to user specifications will restore profit margins. </TEXT></DOC>