<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880609-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Utility Credit Ratings Now Weigh Safety --- Donaldson Lufkin Says Costs Can Be Affected </HL><AUTHOR> Bill Paul (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> BSE CWE ED DUK FPL PEG JYP+ GPU PE PPL NU SO </CO><IN> NUK UTI BON </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Securities Corp. has lowered credit ratings of eight electric utilities on the novel ground that they are vulnerable to safety problems at their nuclear power plants.    Similarly, the securities firm upgraded two utilities' ratings in recent months based on superior plant-operating performances. A third utility is poised to move up, the securities firm, a unit of Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S., added.    Downgrades went to: Boston Edison Co.; Commonwealth Edison Co., Chicago; Consolidated Edison Co. of New York; Duke Power Co., Charlotte, N.C.; the Florida Power andamp; Light Co. unit of FPL Group Inc., Miami; the Public Service Electric andamp; Gas Co. unit of Public Service Enterprise Group Inc., Newark, N.J.; the Jersey Central Power andamp; Light Co. unit of General Public Utilities Corp., Parsippany, N.J.; and Philadelphia Electric Co.    Meanwhile, upgrades went to Pennsylvania Power andamp; Light Co., Allentown, Pa., and the Connecticut Light and Power unit of Northeast Utilities, West Springfield, Mass. Poised to rise is Atlanta-based Southern Co.'s Alabama Power unit.    The Donaldson, Lufkin report marks the first time that an investment concern has tied electric utility bond ratings to safety performance at a nuclear power plant. Traditionally, bond ratings are determined strictly on financial criteria, such as a utility's earnings. The report also is the first private effort at grading nuclear-plant safety performance.    Donaldson, Lufkin bond analysts acknowledge that their report is a marketing tool intended to help carve a niche for the firm in an area dominated by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard andamp; Poor's Corp., both of whose ratings are based on financial criteria. But they maintain that there is a growing need for linking nuclear safety to utility creditworthiness. Pointing to the shutdown of Philadelphia Electric's Peach Bottom plant and Boston Edison's Pilgrim plant, which have generated financial fallout, the analysts say investors need to be warned about where the next costly nuclear shutdown may occur.    Donaldson, Lufkin utility-bond analyst James Asselstine, a former Nuclear Regulatory Commissioner who has built a reputation as a nuclear safety critic, explained that while the probability of a catastrophic accident at a U.S. nuclear power plant is very low, any safety problem can be costly. Each year, for example, at least one or two plants are forced out of service for up to a year or more by safety-related problems, such as safety-system failure and operator error. Mr. Asselstine said these forced outages are expensive and cause federal regulators and investors to lose confidence in the affected utility, impairing its creditworthiness.    &quot;We're trying to hoist the warning flags,&quot; said Paul Parshley, another Donaldson, Lufkin utility-bond analyst who is also known as a nuclear-safety critic.    Both Moody's and Standard andamp; Poor's expressed skepticism about the Donaldson Lufkin approach. While officials at both ratings agencies agreed that nuclear-plant safety is a critical element in determining a utility's bond rating, both questioned whether it's possible to predict with any certainty where the next plant shutdown may occur and both say they have never changed a rating in anticipation of a possible safety problem.    But in Newport Beach, Calif., Chris Dialynas, managing director of Pacific Investment Management Co., which manages $6 billion of bonds, said Donaldson Lufkin's ratings approach &quot;has made a difference in our investment perspective.&quot;    Mr. Dialynas said that while some investors tend to think that safety-related problems at nuclear plants are just a &quot;nuisance,&quot; they &quot;can hurt a utility's bonds.&quot; He added that while his firm hasn't yet bought or sold any bonds because of Donaldson Lufkin's rating changes, Pacific Investment is using the report to keep from buying into utilities which could have &quot;unexpected problems.&quot;    In New York, Elizabeth English, a money manager with the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association, the pension fund for many of the nation's college teachers, said the Donaldson Lufkin report has &quot;caused us to rethink our position&quot; on investing in utility bonds. She said she has either increased or decreased her purchases of various utility bonds based on the report. She declined to name specific utilities.    Probably the biggest surprise among the eight downgraded utilities is Duke Power, which Donaldson Lufkin downgraded to low-double-A from a mid-double-A. Donaldson Lufkin generally reviews its ratings at least once a year. In its report, Donaldson Lufkin concluded that while Duke's three-unit Oconee facility is a &quot;top performer,&quot; the highest of five rankings, Duke's Catawba and McGuire facilities are &quot;below average performers,&quot; the next-to-lowest ranking.    In Charlotte, N.C., a Duke Power spokesman took strong exception to the Donaldson Lufkin report. &quot;We operate safe plants. Period,&quot; he said. He added that the securities firm had &quot;overstated&quot; the safety significance of certain recent problems at its nuclear plants, including a couple that resulted in fines being levied by the NRC.    Florida Power andamp; Light's debt rating was dropped to a high-single-A from a low-double-A for such reasons as design problems, inadequate maintenance and &quot;a culture of poor work attitudes&quot; at the utility's two-unit Turkey Point nuclear facility, which ranked in the worst category. However, the utility's St. Lucie plant was in the top category.    In Miami, a spokesman for the utility said that Turkey Point has had some well-publicized problems and that &quot;much improvement&quot; is still needed. But he also said the plant is now operating &quot;extremely well.&quot;    In at least one case, Donaldson Lufkin's ratings fly in the face of such rating agencies as Moody's. In March, Donaldson Lufkin lowered its rating on GPU's Jersey Central Power andamp; Light unit to a high-triple-B, citing very poor performance at its Oyster Creek plant. But in January, Moody's raised its bond rating to single-A-2, citing strictly financial indicators. GPU strongly disagreed with the Donaldson Lufkin assessment, citing a much improved performance at Oyster Creek so far this year.    Another utility whose rating downgrade comes as a mild surprise is Consolidated Edison, which was dropped to a mid-double-A. The report cited a below-average operating record at its Indian Point 2 facility coupled with chronic problems in the plant's emergency evacuation plan. A Con Edison spokesman said that the emergency plan is in fact quite good and that the plant is showing steady operating improvement.    Some downgrades come as no surprise. Boston Edison, for example, was lowered to a high-triple-B because of problems that have forced the shutdown of its Pilgrim plant. A spokesman dismissed the Donaldson Lufkin report as &quot;old news.&quot;    Another well-known problem utility is Philadelphia Electric, whose Peach Bottom plant has been shut for more than a year because of operator problems. A spokesman said the regular rating agencies recently reviewed the company's ratings and didn't downgrade them. He further said the company is starting to come out of its difficulties at Peach Bottom.    Meanwhile, in Chicago, a Commonwealth Edison spokesman took issue with the report's finding that there are problems at its Dresden facility. Those problems &quot;are in the past,&quot; he said, noting that the number of reported personnel errors at the plant has declined from 56 in 1986 to just two so far this year.    Public Service Electric andamp; Gas's rating was lowered to a high-single-A because of its 42% stake in Peach Bottom, and &quot;below average&quot; performance at its Salem and Hope Creek nuclear facilities. The utility said that the performance of its nuclear units has been strong and steadily improving and that it strongly disagreed with the downgrade.    Of the upgraded utilities, Pennsylvania Power andamp; Light went to high-single-A for its performance at the two-unit Susquehanna nuclear plant, while Connecticut Light andamp; Power went to low-single-A because of its &quot;long history of strong nuclear operations,&quot; particularly at Haddam Neck and Millstone 1 facilities. Alabama Power was cited for a potential upgrade because of its Farley plant, which Donaldson Lufkin said is &quot;one of the best&quot; in the U.S. Alabama Power currently is rated a low-double-A. </TEXT></DOC>