<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0002 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Critique:Finding Greater Havana in Dade County, Florida---By Enrique Fernandez</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The most disappointing thing about the rest of the U.S. was that it did not look like Miami. Beginning with Tampa, where my family settled after emigrating from Cuba in 1956, those shabby cities to the north looked nothing like my notion of what this country should be. Like so many Latin Americans, I had picked up my notion of the U.S. at the movies, but I was only 13 and could not tell a set from a location, one period from another. Movie-made America was splendid and it was that Hollywood splendor that differentiated this country from mine, where except for the modern sectors of Havana nothing glittered like those American cities of the movies. Nothing glittered like that in the U.S. either. Except Miami.    It was this silver-screen-come-to-life quality that made Miami magical for me then, as it still does today, when with a veteran moviegoer's eye I survey a skyline that seems more painted on a backdrop than built out of glass and steel. In T.D. Allman's new book, &quot;Miami: City of the Future&quot; (Atlantic Monthly Press, 422pages, $22.50) I've learned that this reverse &quot;trompe l'oeil&quot; has cast its spell for almost half a century.    Mr. Allman quotes a 1939 WPA guide to Florida: &quot;To the first-time visitor its {Miami's} shining spires, its tropical foliage, the incredible blue of its water, the cloud formations that tower in the background -- all sharply edged under an intense, white sunlight -- appear as a motion-picture set.&quot; Miami is and has been an imaginary city, a Baroque city, all artifice and dream.    Today's Miami dream is &quot;Miami Vice.&quot; New restaurants and bars, including a perfectly postmodern one right in the middle of the airport terminal, look as if they were designed for the TV series. More and more fashionable Miamians dress like &quot;Miami Vice&quot; characters.    Mr. Allman calls his book &quot;Miami: City of the Future&quot; and he is right insofar as &quot;future&quot; means &quot;dream&quot; or &quot;desire.&quot; But, in fact, Miami is the city of the present, of our age of designer everything and the fast-food thrills of cocaine. The secret of Miami's success is its ability to vibrate with modernity's virtues -- progress and internationalism -- as well as with its vices. The Miami skyline is a symbol of this pastlessness. It's of a piece, with none of the layers of architectural history common to other cities.    In human terms, the new layer in Miami life is Cuban. Arriving here as exiles from Castro's government, and enticed by American prosperity, the Cubans put the massive machinery of assistance that had been deployed for their benefit as refugees from communism to good use. They rehabilitated Miami's blighted areas, reversing the tide of urban decay (they were yuppies before the word was coined). They applied their managerial and entrepreneurial skills to the development of inter-American commerce. They resettled only to return to Miami with new training and experience. They seized political power.    It's an American success story and Mr. Allman sets out to deconstruct some of its myths, including the one about Miami's Cubans representing Havana's pre-Castro elite. The most important myth he tackles is &quot;the Cuban takeover.&quot; Though I often agree with his analyses, I come to a somewhat different overall conclusion. Mr. Allman argues, correctly, that as Miami's Cubans have risen to economic and political power in the city, in the same measure they have become &quot;Americanized.&quot; Castrophobia has given way to concern with local issues, women can fulfill their ambitions as well as men, English becomes the primary language, more and more Cubans give up any thought of going back home -- even if Castro were defeated. But unlike some experts, Mr. Allman does not think that Cuban assimilation will lead to cultural suicide for Cubans. He believes that Cuban-Americans will continue to cherish Spanish as their second language and culture because of their self-appointed role as mediators between Anglo- and Latin America. He also points to the reinforcing pressure from the non-Cuban Latins streaming into Miami every day.    Where I differ from Mr. Allman is in his unconscious equating, as most Anglo-Americans do, of Latin with Old World, when we are actually all New World people. Cuba, like the U.S., has been a place where people migrated to pursue their dreams, from Spain, of course, as my own grandparents did, but from other countries as well. For example, the immensely successful musical group Miami Sound Machine is led by the children of Lebanese immigrants to Cuba. Mr. Allman also fails to notice how far under way &quot;Americanization&quot; had been before exile. More than half of the English words he cites as examples of Miami's Cuban-American Spanglish were in common usage in pre-Castro Havana.    Most of all, Mr. Allman does not take into account the full weight of Cuban and Latin American culture, which means more than black beans, &quot;guayabera&quot; leisure shirts, and traditional family values. Though as rational political animals we often have left much to be desired, when it comes to the arts Cubans have been particularly blessed. With the revolution and exile this rich cultural life has bifurcated -- with each side accusing the other of being worthless sellouts, of course. Miami has always been a rough-edged city, but things are changing, and, contrary to Mr. Allman's speculations, not wholly toward assimilation. Miami's Cuban-American artists and cultural administrators and entrepreneurs are bringing to the U.S. a Latin definition of the modern, through their work and through the growing number of Latin American and Spanish artists, writers, film makers and musicians who find Miami hospitable.    Three years ago, returning from my first trip to Cuba in more than two decades, I landed at Miami International Airport to be greeted by a cheerful Cuban-American immigration official: &quot;Welcome back to the United States.&quot; All the customs officers, the airline personnel, the taxi drivers, the hotel staff, everyone I saw was as Cuban as the people I had left behind in the heat, cigar smoke, and shaky timetables of Jose Marti Airport. Now everything hummed with that modern drone of smooth-running machinery, the bass notes of this civilization. This is the other Cuba, I thought, the one where everything works. I glided from computerized registrations to credit cards to courtesy van to airport motel to a Denny's cheeseburger that tasted -- Zen miracle! -- like nothingness. Not the other Cuba, this was the other Latin America, for it was Venezuelan, Colombian, Dominican, Puerto Rican, Salvadorean, Nicaraguan Spanish I was hearing alongside the bebopping Cuban accents. The Latin America that works, that drones. This was the first city where modernity was Latin American, the city of the future.    ---   Mr. Fernandez is a free-lance writer in New York. </TEXT></DOC>