<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0173 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Flying the Unfriendly Skies of Deregulation---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><TEXT>   The horrors of airline travel are overtaking crime and real estate on the small-talk agenda. Everyone has a war story.    Susan Nadler, weary from a tour to publicize her book and homeward bound from Los Angeles to Miami on an Eastern flight in mid-April, heard the public address system come on and then the captain announce that he wanted everyone to sit down, since this would be the appropriate posture in which to receive the news he was about to impart. Then amid profound silence he assured his audience, sedate and terrified, that while their personal safety was most dear to him he felt bound to confide that the plane's computer system was down, he had no idea how much fuel was left in the plane, and he was planning an unscheduled landing in Atlanta forthwith.    Such episodes are now the conversational loose change of airport bars and taxi lines. My own 10 days' worth of cross-country travel earlier this month are, I imagine, fairly representative. Eastern's Flight 20 out of Miami to LaGuardia was canceled and I was bundled onto an Eastern flight heading for Newark 90 minutes later. The 8 a.m. American Airlines flight leaving for Chicago the next day cleared Newark an hour late, thus making it likely that I would miss my connection to Lafayette, Ind. The next mistake was mine, and I freely admit it. Seeing initials on my ticket that seemed to indicate Continental, I asked the American Airlines agent at the gate where Continental was and he pointed to the far end of the terminal.    This is the famous O'Hare run, which I undertook in relatively good heart, since I had loaded my bags into the hold back in Newark. All around me business people panted along with their overstuffed suit bags and briefcases. Nearly a mile later the Continental agent told me that I wanted Continental Express, back by American. By early afternoon I was in the lush Indiana countryside. No bags, it's true; but then, that's the price you pay for not carrying them onto the plane. Any frequent flier can tell you that.    I'll draw a veil over the flights through Dallas-Fort Worth, to Los Angeles and on to San Francisco. These took place under conditions of normalcy as currently defined and admirably set forth in a story in this newspaper Monday. That is, the flights were on average 30 minutes late and endured amid conditions of grave discomfort. Crammed into tiny seats, unable to move and urged to keep safety belts on at all times, we were served the pitiful snacks that have replaced those unwholesome meals of yesteryear. Dispensing this sparse nutrition were flight attendants who have all my sympathy, since they are miserably paid, overworked, under relentless contractual assault by the owners and don't even reap the benefit of tips.    Mindful now of some essential rules -- don't fly if you are more than 5 feet 7 or of unsound physique; carry your bags at all times; leave at least three hours for each connection; schedule no business the same day as your flight -- I reached Minneapolis and learned another lesson: Don't fly on Sunday evening. That's when everyone else in North America flies. There were repeated calls for &quot;volunteers,&quot; people prepared to be bribed to stay off an overbooked flight. My Northwest flight slouched into Detroit hours late. Then came the run, rivaling O'Hare's in tense duration, from Gate F13 to Gate D5 (about halfway across the state of Michigan; locals call it the Ho Chi Minh trail) to catch another Northwest flight to Toronto.    Back in New York it was time for one last kick in the ribs from Eastern, with its cancellation of Flight 21 to Miami, which had been scheduled to depart LaGuardia at 2 p.m. Passengers were urged to go to JFK and catch the 3:30 flight to Fort Lauderdale. At JFK we waited for the first officer to get over from Newark by car, and finally arrived in Fort Lauderdale only half an hour late and only 50 miles from our original objective.    Politicians fly more than most people, and the crisis has not eluded them. The prototypical bill now before the House Aviation Subcommittee is one written by a former Pan Am pilot, Rep. Denny Smith (R., Ore.). Mr. Smith wants a law compelling the airlines to post their on-time performance on a quarterly basis, both on ticket jackets and at counters. He'd like similar disclosure of the percentage per 10,000 of canceled flights, of passengers bumped, of bags misrouted or lost and of complaints lodged with the consumer affairs office at the Department of Transportation in Washington (which is where indignant consumers should write).    It's likely that the subcommittee will get its teeth into this and kindred bills over the summer when consumer outrage mounts. But over at the Department of Transportation, cocking her sensitive political finger into the same winds is Elizabeth Dole. The transportation secretary could pre-empt Congress simply by proposing rules answering Mr. Smith's points and which, after appropriate consultation, could be imposed on the airlines. Mr. Smith would be happy to support Mrs. Dole if she did this.    There's a lot more Mrs. Dole could be doing. What about these Eastern cancellations? Is Texas Air, which owns Eastern, undermining the latter's schedules by switching Eastern's planes into the fleet of Continental, another unit? How much are Texas Air's anti-labor strategies returning to haunt it, with diminished flight and maintenance crews? Is it trying to save money by canceling lightly booked flights and transferring the long-suffering survivors to another plane headed toward the same general destination? According to one of Rep. Smith's aides, these &quot;economic cancellations&quot; are illegal under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, which forbids deceptive scheduling practices.    It's obvious that there has to be greater regulatory vigilance and accountability, both in terms of safety and elementary human rights. Air travel is now horrifyingly cruel to the old and the infirm. An elderly lady next to me on the Northwest flight out of Minneapolis told me that she had arrived in Portland the day before, to find that Northwest had canceled her flight at the last minute. In Detroit she faced a walk, with her suitcase, of several hundred yards, with no passenger conveyor belt and not even a dollar-per-trolley machine in sight. Appropriate people-movers should be mandatory at all sprawling terminals.    What we have seen over the past decade is a parable of capitalism: the shift from an industry heavily regulated in favor of oligopoly, through a Darwinian free-for-all favorable to &quot;consumers&quot; (and unfavorable to flight attendants, pilots and machinists), and now on to an industry unregulated in favor of oligopoly, increasingly indifferent to consumers and unaccountable to same. I shall always remember the optimistic glow of the young cabin crews on the early People Express flights. They had a slice of the business and they thought people's capitalism would work. They were heart and soul with Don Burr's enterprise. It was fun to fly with them, until, inevitably, people's capitalism failed.    Those arguing the virtues of marketplace medicine should look at what is happening in the skies right now, where unfettered capitalism is leading straight into chaos.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>