<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890807-0127 </DOCNO><DD> = 890807 </DD><AN> 890807-0127. </AN><HL> Manager's Journal:@  Taking the Risk Out of Leveraged Buyouts@  ----@  By B. Charles Ames </HL><DD> 08/07/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN><TEXT>   Leveraged buyouts are routinely criticized for being the product of financial engineers with sharp pencils but little appreciation for running and improving enterprises. There's little doubt that a number of transactions have been completed at exceptionally high purchase prices by investor groups just hoping to divest divisions at even higher prices. Worse still, some LBOs are so highly leveraged that investment funds for crucially important product, market and manufacturing improvements are simply unavailable; the burden of debt service takes priority.    But not all LBOs fall into these categories, and it is unfair to tar them all with the same brush. I am a partner in an LBO firm that invests only in friendly, management-involved situations and prefers businesses where we can see significant opportunities to improve performance and enhance value over the long haul.    How have we done this? By making sure that we have the right blend of operating and financial skills deeply involved in all phases of our LBO activities. Our financially oriented partners take the lead in structuring, negotiating and financing the deal. But once the LBO is an entity, our focus shifts and our operating partners move into the lead position.    Emphasizing operating insights in building new ownership ventures can take much of the risk out of leverage. That was certainly the case with Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co., an LBO we sponsored that would have seemed discouragingly risky to most financial buyers.    The tire industry is known as a dog-eat-dog business. Moreover, profits were declining at the time we invested in this company. Despite the bleak picture, two of our operating partners became convinced that performance could be improved dramatically if management were freed from a 5050 partnership structure that led to endless arguments and inaction. In late 1987, our firm began arranging the details for an LBO, and I was asked to take over as the CEO.    I had three initial objectives: 1) be sure we have the right team in place, and that it's functioning as a team; 2) make sure we have the right marketing strategy; and, 3) develop a production strategy that supports the marketing strategy.    Since Uniroyal and Goodrich had competing products, some said they could never be sold by the same company. But I was convinced we could support two brands if we clearly delineated their market positions and developed marketing programs to support their specific needs. Profit performance turned up the first quarter after the LBO was formed and has continued upward. More important, a market-driven business strategy has been developed that will ensure continued improvement over the long term.    The Oklahoma Division of Safeway Stores, now Homeland Stores, also improved through a management-led change in ownership structure. The company operates 106 supermarkets in Oklahoma, the Panhandle region of Texas and southern Kansas. About two years ago, we acquired Homeland, along with its managers from Safeway. We also gave our hourly employees an equity interest so they would be a part of ownership.    Pride of partial ownership among labor and management was a crucial factor in the complete transformation of the Homeland culture. One measure is the pilferage rate, which can be a big cost for grocery-chain operators. Since the buyout, pilferage has dropped to about half the industry average. At the same time, Homeland's earnings before interest and tax have more than doubled. The company has added 1,200 employees, and by year-end will have invested $50 million in new stores, remodelings and other capital projects.    Certainly the sense of proprietorship that management buyouts foster is a powerful motivation for successful restructuring. Call it self-interest, or American ambition, or magic: The fact is that managers who become owners are often capable of prodigious performances. And the further down the corporate ladder equity is pushed, the better. We make sure that the managers buy equity in the company the same way we investors do. What's important is for all managers to have a personal stake in the company's future.    The biggest risk is that the buyout sponsor snuffs out this spirit of proprietorship by unwittingly getting in the way of managers. Operating people usually have little patience for investment bankers, particularly young ones with beepers on their belts and lap-top computers in their briefcases. The six month to 12 month transition period is most successful when the investment firm that organized the buyout provides an entrepreneurial environment for the management team.    Without the total respect of the new owner/managers, the sponsor will have little success penetrating the information fortress to get accurate profit-and-loss forecasts, identify problems early, or persuade the managers to institute changes when they are necessary. As a former CEO and operational man, I was asked by management at Uniroyal Goodrich to take over as CEO to set the new structure in motion. But I am stepping into the background now, as operating management takes on a momentum of its own.    What is the role of the buyout sponsor beyond knowledgeable counselor? First, to nurture a strong profit consciousness. In some respects this is the easiest part of our job. In a tightly financed management buyout, managers quickly focus on cash coming in and out of the box.    To overcome some of the restrictive thinking of the past, we encourage managers to think differently about their businesses. Take the example of the manager who buys an industrial tool business that, as a division of a larger company, historically sold a wide range of commodity-type drills. After the buyout, should he shift into special-purpose drills for difficult applications or new materials? Or should he decide to help customers make holes in the most efficient way possible and consequently move into laser or fluid drilling systems? While he eventually may decide to choose neither option, the point is that they won't even be seen if the manager can't get beyond yesterday's strategy.    The ultimate challenge of the operationally astute LBO sponsor is to help the new owner/managers recognize that there are no benefits in defending past attitudes, habits and practices. I can't speak for all LBO sponsors, but we encourage the managers of the businesses in which we invest to turn their visions of the company upside down and to trust their intuition. As a matter of history, style and practice, nothing could be further from the values of most large public corporations today.    ---   Mr. Ames, CEO of Uniroyal Goodrich Tire, is a partner of a private investment firm specializing in management buyouts. He is co-author of &quot;Market Driven Management&quot; (Dow Jones/Irwin, 1989). </TEXT></DOC>