<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881116-0031 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ARAFAT SAID the next move toward peace in the Mideast is up to the U.S.    Speaking after the Palestinians declared an independent state and implicitly recognized Israel, the PLO leader said, &quot;The ball is now in the American court.&quot; The Reagan administration said the PLO's announcement in Algiers was a &quot;positive step&quot; toward peace, but rejected the concurrent declaration of an independent Palestinian state that apparently would include the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. The U.S. said changes in the status of areas must be negotiated.    Palestinian youths celebrated the PLO's announcement of an independent state despite tight security by Israeli troops in the occupied territories.    ---   NEGOTIATORS REACHED a tentative accord on peace in southwestern Africa.    According to U.S. officials, the agreement calls for Namibia's independence from South Africa early next year in exchange for a Cuban troop withdrawal from Angola over a 27-month period. The pact -- worked out during five days of negotiations in Geneva involving officials from South Africa, Cuba and Angola -- must be approved by the three governments. The talks were mediated by U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Crocker.    U.S. officials said current plans call for the formal agreement to be signed next month, with implementation of its provisions starting in February.    ---   Bush is almost certain to name New Hampshire Gov. Sununu his White House chief of staff, according to high-ranking sources on his transition team. Bush vowed to make his announcement &quot;fairly soon.&quot; Some aides cautioned that it mightn't come until next week.    ---   Reagan set limited goals for his meeting early next month with Soviet leader Gorbachev, saying the &quot;brief get-together&quot; wouldn't be in the nature of a summit. Gorbachev plans to address the U.N. in New York and to meet with Reagan and Bush. He also will visit Cuba and Britain on a tour aimed at strengthening world security.    ---   West German Chancellor Kohl bid farewell to Reagan in a White House meeting, praising the president for his &quot;commitment to improving East-West relations.&quot; Kohl also paid his respects to Bush, holding an hourlong talk with the president-elect. They were joined by Quayle. Reagan is to meet with Britain's Thatcher today.    ---   The Soviet Union ended the U.S. monopoly on reusable spacecraft, successfully launching an unmanned space shuttle on an orbital flight. State-run Moscow Radio said the three-hour mission of the shuttle Buran &quot;ushered in a new era in the history of Soviet space exploration.&quot; NASA congratulated the Soviets on the flight.    ---   Gorbachev issued a warning against nationalist extremism, which he said was &quot;especially unacceptable.&quot; The Soviet leader's remarks were viewed as a reaction to developments in the Baltic republics, where Estonia's leaders will consider proclaiming the republic's independence from Moscow, except on defense and foreign-policy issues.    ---   A study of heart patients suggests that the use of clot-dissolving drugs after a heart attack needn't be followed automatically by mechanical intervention to clean out blocked coronary arteries. The federally funded study could have important implications for the care of heart patients, as well as the cost of such care.    ---   Police and troops in Pakistan patrolled cities throughout the country to prevent &quot;an atmosphere of fear or danger&quot; during today's national elections, according to the president, who appealed for calm. The voting is expected to be close between populist leader Benazir Bhutto's left-leaning party and a nine-party conservative alliance.    ---   Millions of Brazilians voted in nationwide municipal elections that are considered a test of the popularity of President Sarney's government. Voters are expected to reject the ruling centrist party, which is blamed for the country's 700% inflation rate. Final results aren't expected until the weekend.    ---   A judge in India issued arrest warrants for former Union Carbide chairman Anderson and two other company officials in connection with the 1984 Bhopal poison-gas disaster. At least 2,000 people were killed in the gas leak. The warrants were issued after the three Carbide executives failed to honor summonses to appear in a Bhopal court.    ---   Solidarity leader Walesa said he doesn't believe any longer that stalled talks will take place between the Warsaw government and the opposition to discuss Poland's future. But Walesa accepted an offer to discuss the role of trade unions in a televised debate with a Politburo member who heads the country's official labor federation.    ---   Soviet and Afghan forces recaptured a strategic border post and road link with Pakistan from anti-communist guerrillas, who accused the government troops of using chemical weapons. The Soviet Union, which has agreed to withdraw its forces from Afghanistan, suspended the pullout last week because of increased military activity. </TEXT></DOC>