<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Hasten the Phone Revolution---By Andrea Coccia</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;Video browsing,&quot; whereby real-estate agents could show homes across the continent and retailers could catalog wares for customers watching high-definition images at their computer screens, is one of many telecommunications innovations due to move out of the laboratory and onto the political battleground.    Such business and consumer uses stand to become widely available once today's largely copper-wire telephone network is enhanced by the latest fiber-optic and electronics technology. Scientists see the fruits of this revolution being realized within five to 10 years. What they can't predict is whether regulation will thwart smaller enterprises -- which must rely on local telephone companies for most voice and data communication -- from being able to enjoy these benefits.    A big chapter in that regulatory story begins today and tomorrow with hearings before U.S. District Judge Harold Greene in Washington. It is Judge Greene, the man who issued the ATandamp;T break-up decree four years ago, who will rule on whether to let the now-independent Bell operating companies offer computerized and other information services.    At the same time, a somewhat related struggle is being fought in the nation's statehouses to free phone companies from rate regulations that act as a barrier to the introduction of simpler kinds of technology that in some cases could provide a foundation for the more exotic new systems.    In an economy of rapid change and ever greater information demands, the telephone industry's traditional business of providing basic dial service is no less essential but is relegated to less importance within the field. This is now leading legislatures to break down some very structured tariffs in order to make their states attractive for telecommunications investment and competition.    For now, new technologies are progressing rapidly on a separate track: Ultimately, big business could permanently sidestep the still largely regulated local phone companies, unless these operators are granted the freedom to lower commercial rates. Already, major corporations are bypassing the local loop to transmit video, voice and data through private microwave relays, fiber-optic cables, satellite transmission, and internal systems that use new digital technology.    Small business is left out today. The high cost of these new methods of communication keeps a typical company beholden to the local phone monopoly for whatever services are available. As more advanced and less costly fiber cables reach beyond cities, much could change.    Just as commercial rates are a key to local phone innovation, market access for the seven regional Bell holding companies is crucial. If Judge Greene doesn't lift the controls he earlier imposed on their activities, in-place networks and substantial capital poised for investment will not be fully applied to the development of low-cost, ubiquitous services.    The U.S. already has some catching up to do with what's available to phone customers in countries with fewer restrictions on the industry. In France, businesses can make hotel and airline reservations through a computerized information service offered over the phone network. Electronic yellow pages and other so-called videotext services are offered by the state-owned phone company and private entrepreneurs over the phone network.    Japan, Canada and parts of Western Europe make available over their telephone networks electronic banking and voice messaging, a type of answering service that doesn't require a separate machine. These and other services, including credit-card verification and electronic mail, are widely available.    The Bell companies are prohibited from providing such information services. This fall, Judge Greene will decide whether they and the next generation of services will be a regular phone call away.    The prohibition on entering the information business was designed to prevent the newly formed Bell companies, now with combined assets of more than $140 billion, from using their monopoly power to gain an unfair advantage in the marketplace.    But the prohibition has come under challenge, in part because of what's happening abroad. The Federal Communications Commission, apparently anticipating the entry of the Bell companies into information services, has adopted a policy to make sure they don't use their control of local telephone facilities to squeeze out competitors and then raise prices.    Under the FCC policy -- called &quot;open network architecture&quot; -- phone companies would be free to offer enhanced, or computerized, information services without having to set up a separate company, as previously contemplated. In exchange, the companies would be required to open their networks and provide connections to competitors that provide enhanced services. The companies also would be required to follow special accounting rules to prevent them from charging below-market prices for information services by subsidizing them with revenues from basic phone service.    Meanwhile, technological progress by competitors of the Bell companies in business services has prompted some state legislatures to begin phasing out formal regulation of local telephone companies while subjecting them to increased competition. This challenge in local markets will limit rate increases, forcing the Bell companies to price basic services low enough to keep businesses from dropping off the network, deregulators believe. But the Bell companies will be at a disadvantage in the battles for specialized customers if all the while they remain barred from offering information services.    Telephone deregulation at the state level, designed to let the market set local rates instead of public utility commissions, began in earnest last year with passage of a revolutionary deregulation measure by the nonpartisan, unicameral Nebraska legislature. The idea was the brainchild of then-Gov. Robert Kerrey, a neo-liberal Democrat who sought to rejuvenate Nebraska's depressed farm-based economy by promoting the state as a communications center for high-tech industries.    Nebraska's law decontrols local telephone service for both residences and businesses and phases out the authority of the Public Service Commission to set rates. Other states have approached telephone deregulation more cautiously. In Illinois, for example, telephone companies are free to set their own rates for services such as Centrex, a business switchboard service, but only if state regulators rule those services are subject to competition.    A total of 14 other states -- Iowa, Texas, Virginia, North Carolina, North Dakota, Michigan, Wisconsin, Indiana, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah and Washington -- have enacted similar deregulation laws based on whether competition to local phone monopolies exists. Legislation to deregulate local phone service based more on the Nebraska model is pending in nine states -- Colorado, Idaho, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, Missouri, South Dakota, Wyoming and Ohio. Vermont recently freed New England Telephone Co. from rate ceilings on certain services but limited basic residential and business rates for five years.    The telephone battle at the local level is the natural consequence of federal phone deregulation, which unleashed competition in interstate service when ATandamp;T on Jan. 1, 1984, spun off its local phone companies. The divestiture of ATandamp;T has resulted in more cost-based pricing of long-distance service, as long-distance subsidies to local rate payers have been curbed.    States will be slow to abandon rate regulation, because it traditionally has served as a politically popular way of keeping consumer rates down. State lawmakers, as in the case of Vermont, are likely to search for some type of &quot;social contract,&quot; such as a ceiling on phone prices that replaces traditional rate-of-return regulation but at the same time guarantees universal phone services.    In the meantime, technological advances will continue to erode the high revenue sectors of the phone companies. Cellular radio may evolve into a meaningful area of competition, while future redesign of cable systems -- which now reach 46% of all U.S. households -- will enable cable operators to offer voice, data and video services. Shared-tenant services, which give businesses or individuals in the same building better access to the phone company's central office and to long-distance firms, cut into local phone company profits.    The pace of phone innovation in the U.S. is a factor of competition in each of the interrelated components of the industry. It is within this mosaic that the ruling expected this fall from Judge Greene and the willingness of state officials to release operating companies from having to subsidize basic phone service come together to determine who can get what in a new information age.    ---   Ms. Coccia is a staff writer for the Daily Report for Executives, a Bureau of National Affairs publication. </TEXT></DOC>