<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870428-0035 </DOCNO><HL> World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   WALDHEIM WAS BARRED from entering the U.S. because of a Nazi past.    The Justice Department, in announcing the decision, said the Austrian president and former U.N. secretary general had aided in the deportation and execution of thousands of Jews and others as a German army officer in the Balkans during World War II. While the move only affects Waldheim's rights as a private citizen, he is the first head of state ever placed on an immigration list of 40,000 people considered undesirable aliens. Attorney General Meese's decision followed a recommendation made a year ago by the agency's Nazi-tracking unit.    Austria's foreign minister, citing &quot;great dismay&quot; over the U.S. action, immediately recalled Vienna's ambassador to Washington for consultations.    ---   The Soviet Union presented in Geneva a draft treaty on eliminating medium-range nuclear missiles from Europe and said the proposal was a basis for a U.S.-Soviet armscontrol agreement. Details weren't disclosed, but the Tass news agency said the draft takes &quot;into account corresponding elements&quot; of a U.S. pact proposed March 4.    ---   South African security forces fired tear gas and birdshot and used whips in running battles with hundreds of student protesters, both black and white, at the University of Cape Town. At least a dozen people were injured. The violence followed a rally by student groups protesting a weekend raid into Zambia by South African commandos.    ---   Independent counsel Walsh confirmed reports that his law firm had represented a Miami-based cargo airline that is under scrutiny in the Iran-Contra affair. Walsh, who said he learned of the connection within the past few days, said the law firm helped Southern Air Transport purchase aircraft in 1985 and 1986.    ---   Demonstrators staged a protest against administration policies in Central America and South Africa, blocking entry to the CIA's headquarters outside Washington. More than 500 people were arrested. There weren't any incidents of violence.    ---   Egypt closed all offices of the PLO to protest a decision by the Palestinian leadership linking relations with Egypt to the abrogation of the 1979 Camp David peace treaty with Israel. Egypt's president had said that any PLO discussion about the accords would be regarded as interference.    ---   Reagan has been told that it may be difficult to prosecute Marine guards accused of security breaches at U.S. diplomatic outposts, a White House spokesman said. The Washington Post reported that the sex-spy cases against the former guards may be jeopardized by lack of evidence and legally faulty interrogations of suspects.    ---   Prosecutors in New York opened the trial against Bernhard Goetz, who is charged with attempted murder in the December 1984 shooting of four youths on a subway train. The shootings were described by a prosecutor as &quot;vicious, even sadistic acts.&quot; Goetz has said he acted in self-defense.    ---   Salvage crews refloated the British ferry that capsized March 6 off the Belgian coast and towed the vessel to the Zeebrugge harbor. At least 180 of the 543 people aboard the boat were killed in the incident. In London, a maritime official said the seaman responsible for closing the ferry's bow doors had fallen asleep before the boat listed.    ---   The White House said the administration is studying a plea by El Salvador's Duarte to give temporary refuge to Salvadorans living illegally in the U.S. Separately, U.S. officials said private groups aren't prepared to help illegal aliens apply for amnesty, which is expected to delay the eligibility process. The program is scheduled to begin May 5.    ---   The Soviet news agency Tass said Karl Linnas, deported last week to Estonia from the U.S., can appeal the Soviet death sentence for Nazi war crimes or seek a pardon. The report was the first official Soviet statement on Linnas's legal options. It didn't say if he made such an appeal.    ---   Anatoly Koryagin called for an international tribunal to investigate the Kremlin's alleged misuses of psychiatry against its internal opponents. The Soviet dissident, who had been sent to a labor camp in 1981, was released last February and allowed to settle in Switzerland last week.    ---   Nicaraguan President Ortega said Managua was prepared to negotiate with the U.S. &quot;to reach firm and verifiable agreements on legitimate security interests&quot; and to normalize relations. Ortega, who spoke at the opening session of an 87-nation parley, also called on Washington to end its support of Nicaragua's anti-Sandinista rebels.    ---   Argentina charged the leader of an Easter week revolt at a military camp outside Buenos Aires with rebellion. Lt. Col. Aldo Rico is the first of 382 soldiers who revolted at three camps to be formally charged.    ---   China is planning to revive regulations requiring students to work in factories and on farms, the official China Daily newspaper reported. The rules follow December's pro-democracy student demonstrations that were held in more than a dozen Chinese cities. The report didn't say when the Cultural Revolution-style rules would take effect. </TEXT></DOC>