<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880223-0008 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Exports Become Hard to Contain --- Shipping Lines Cite Surge in Cargo Bookings </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Machalaba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON TRA AIR </IN><DATELINE> ELIZABETH, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A couple of years ago, crewmen aboard an Atlantic Container Line Ltd. freighter to Europe played volleyball in the empty cargo decks. But there's no room for that aboard the line's M/V Atlantic Cartier, in port here to load cargo.    Horns blare and headlights flash, as longshoremen drive a steady stream of Ford Tempos and Chevy Berettas up a ramp and into the hold of the 960-foot ship. The lower decks are already crammed with U.S.-made tractors, boats, recreational vehicles, machinery and steel.    Moreover, officials of this and a dozen other container shipping lines say in interviews, the export boom represented on the Atlantic Cartier's cargo decks looks set to continue. In their order books, these executives get an advance glimpse of the U.S. trade statistics released by the Commerce Department on the second Friday of each month. And they say bookings, aided by the weak dollar and the easing of trade barriers abroad, are surging. &quot;We're looking at an export boom of historic proportions,&quot; says Maureen Allyn, economist at Sea-Land Corp., the container shipping unit of CSX Corp. The pickup affects a variety of trade lanes but is especially strong across the Pacific to the Far East, the longtime root of the U.S. trade imbalance. Mrs. Allyn expects U.S. Pacific exports to grow 20% this year atop a similar gain last year.    That's good news for more than just the shipping companies. Improving U.S. trade patterns are soothing world financial markets that have been roiled recently by fears the U.S. couldn't correct its $171 billion annual trade gap. When the latest numbers, on Feb. 12, showed the trade deficit had narrowed in December, economists predicted a strengthening of the dollar in world currency markets. A stronger dollar, in turn, would ease pressure on the Federal Reserve Board to shore up the dollar with high interest rates, holding out hopes for easier credit and diminishing recession fears.    Few economists predict a swift end to the U.S. trade imbalance, of course. Imports of expensive consumer goods continue to pour into the U.S., though at a slackening rate. And the nation's rapidly rising exports still consist largely of low-value raw materials, such as cotton, chemicals, lumber, scrap metal and wastepaper. &quot;We need five, maybe 10 years, of rapid export growth to correct our trade imbalance,&quot; says C. Fred Bergsten, a Washington economist and a former assistant secretary of the Treasury.    Others doubt that U.S. manufacturers are willing or able to win back markets abroad for their high-value products. &quot;There is still the view that the U.S. market is the principal outlet for domestic production, and foreign markets aren't to be bothered with,&quot; says Lacy Hunt, chief economist of Carroll, McEnte andamp; McGinley Inc., a New York securities concern. Indeed, some companies already straining to meet brisk domestic demand are reluctant to invest in new facilities that could be idled by another abrupt shift in currency values.    Nonetheless, the export boom is picking up steam at the docks. John Maddox, a vice president of a stevedoring company at the Port of Los Angeles, recently watched yachts, crates of machinery and house trailers rush past his office window toward a ship bound for Japan. &quot;We're seeing a lot of crazy stuff we haven't seen move before,&quot; says Mr. Maddox, adding that export traffic handled by his company has grown 40% in the past year.    Not only are the quantities increasing, but shipping executives see an improving mix of export cargo with more of the higher-value goods that the U.S. must ship in volume if it is ever to reverse its trade imbalance. &quot;A year ago, overseas customers were calling only for base commodities,&quot; says Nicholas Hay, a sales manager at Orient Overseas Container Line, in Oakland, Calif. &quot;Now they're asking about automobiles, household appliances, apples and fresh asparagus.&quot; He says Orient Overseas is shipping container loads of log-cabin kits, increasingly popular as vacation homes in Japan.    During the U.S. export slump &quot;we were transporting air to Europe,&quot; says Raymond Miller, Atlantic Container's operations manager. &quot;We'd much rather transport this stuff,&quot; he says, pointing to ranks of Chrysler minivans in a football-field-sized cargo hold.    At Lykes Bros. Steamship Co., in New Orleans, Carl Horn, vice president, says the line's container ships to Europe lately are booked up three sailings in advance. &quot;We've had to turn away cargo,&quot; he says.    Air-freight companies, too, are sharing in the surge. The past four months have been &quot;the biggest turnaround in U.S. exports in my 30 years in air freight,&quot; says Jack Cella, an executive vice president of Seattle-based Airborne Freight Corp. The company's shipments from the U.S. are running 100% above a year ago, buoyed by exports of aircraft parts, cigarettes, pharmaceuticals, sea urchins and Mandamp;M candy to Japan.    Shipping executives say exports will increase further as their customers follow through with plans to boost foreign sales. The nation's auto companies expect to sell more than 100,000 cars abroad this year, double their 1987 foreign sales. General Motors Corp., for example, is modifying certain models for the European market and is studying right-hand drive for Japan. USX, the big steel and energy company, plans to resume major steel exports for the first time in years when some production capacity comes back on line or if domestic demand slackens. And foreign companies, notably Honda Motor Co., of Japan, have begun to ship goods made in their U.S. plants back to their home country.    &quot;Considering that all this stuff has been moving in our direction, it's nice to be sending something back,&quot; says Ronald Gottshall, managing director of a rate-setting cartel for trans-Pacific trade. Shipping rates for exported cargo to Asia are still half that for imports, he says, though the gap is narrowing.    The chief reason for this activity is the value of the U.S. dollar, which has declined more than 30% against the Japanese yen and West German mark since early 1985. That, coupled with U.S. pressure on foreign governments to ease some trade barriers, has made this &quot;the most fertile time for U.S. exports since the early 1950s,&quot; says Mr. Hunt, the Carroll McEnte economist.    Not everyone is as sanguine. Exports of U.S. autos, though growing, still represent only a small fraction of the 3.1 million foreign-made cars sold in the U.S. last year. U.S. auto shipments abroad are still &quot;rather symbolic,&quot; says Olaf Roed, a vice president of Nosac A/S, a Norwegian shipping company.    And for some shipping officials, the U.S. export boom remains disappointing. When the M/V Oriental Freedom stopped recently in New York to load cargo for the Far East, most of the containers going aboard were filled with low-rated materials, such as resins, scrap metal and wastepaper. &quot;What is wastepaper?&quot; Geoffrey Mitchell, the ship's captain, asks rhetorically. &quot;It's nothing, it's garbage.&quot;    Wastepaper, the nation's largest single containerized export to Asia, is a symptom of the U.S. trade imbalance. Companies ship wastepaper to the Far East and Europe, where it is converted into cardboard boxes to carry blouses, toys and electronic goods back to the U.S.    Shipping officials also worry about the slowdown they are starting to see in imported goods. &quot;That wouldn't be good for the lines, because we make our money on the import side where the rates are much greater,&quot; says one shipping executive.    But the Atlantic Container Line dock in Elizabeth tells another story. Hours before the Atlantic Cartier is to sail to Europe, dockworkers are filling her roll-on, roll-off decks with U.S. products. A tractor pulls a 35-foot yacht aboard; a road scraper makes a deafening roar as it moves under its own power onto the ship. Mr. Miller, the operations manager, says that by the time she leaves the harbor, the Atlantic Cartier will be carrying 800 cars and small trucks. A year ago, 200 would have been a lot, Mr. Miller adds.    In the containers loaded aboard the Atlantic Cartier are products that the line's executives haven't seen shipped from the U.S. in years. For example, there are containers laden with microwave ovens, dish washers, refrigerators, auto parts, breakfast cereal, vacuum cleaners and frozen pizza.    As floodlights illuminate the loading ramp like a stage set, the last of the cargo goes aboard and the Atlantic Cartier prepares to sail. Ilarion Chejlyk, ship superintendent, contemplates the parade of freight he has watched loading all day and says: &quot;We were waiting for this for a long time. When I see our products going over in quantities, I feel I'm doing something for the country.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>