<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Swapping Generals in the Great Chip War---By Mike Tharp</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN HWP TEK NIPNY WX AMD SNE INTCMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   When Yoshio Nishi walked into a Palo Alto, Calif., sushi restaurant recently, he addressed the Japanese waitress in their native tongue. H-P-no Nishi desu. Translation: &quot;I am Hewlett-Packard's Nishi.&quot; And, for three years, he is.    The Toshiba Corp. research engineer now works for Hewlett-Packard Co., ordinarily one of the Japanese electronics concern's chief global rivals. But now the two are among several high-technology companies from both countries engaged in a controversial managerial experiment to collaborate as well as compete.    Besides H-P and Toshiba, Tektronix Inc. of Portland, Ore., and NEC Corp. -- the world's largest chip producer -- are among the companies that have quietly exchanged engineers in ultra-sensitive parts of their semiconductor business. Westinghouse Electric Corp. and Mitsubishi Electric Corp. have also played the engineer-exchange game, and Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and Sony Corp. have announced they are exploring a swap program.    So far the companies and engineers are pleased with the results, suggesting their success could serve as a precedent for future exchanges of technical people. &quot;This is a big advance in human relations,&quot; says Koji Kobayashi, chairman and chief executive of NEC, &quot;and I hope there will be more in the future -- not only in printed circuits but in other areas.&quot;    Business benefits include such technical applications as the development of a new chip by Mr. Nishi and his H-P colleagues. But the main gains are in hard-to-quantify human relations, which the Japanese regard as the most important part of management and industrial competitiveness. &quot;Our company needs good engineers. But I think a good human being -- a world-wide thinker -- will be more important in future production,&quot; says Shinichi Koyanagi, president of NEC's Toyama unit.    Predictably, some Americans regard the exchanges as dancing with the devil. They wonder whether the exchanges let the fox into the henhouse. Robert B. Reich, a professor of public management and political economy at Harvard University, doesn't oppose personnel exchanges in principle. But, he adds, &quot;nine times out of 10, in an exchange of personnel or joint venture or a licensing agreement, the result is that the Japanese learns more than the American company.&quot;    Currently, Intel Corp. and NEC are locked in lawsuits over NEC's alleged copyright infringement of an Intel microprocessor code. The 1982 industrial-espionage case involving Hitachi Ltd. and a National Semiconductor Corp. unit charged with pirating trade secrets from International Business Machines Corp. still rankles the U.S. electronics industry.    Occasionally adding to the rancor, American and Japanese companies have hired away one another's engineers before. In a more positive vein, for the past three years, the American Electronics Association has sent a dozen U.S. graduate students to study in research labs of several Japanese electronics companies.    But the recent exchanges are unique. For one thing, the individuals are expected to return to their original company, though their salaries may be paid temporarily by the host corporation. For another, the exchanges provide untrammeled access to technical information that could be of great value to a competitor. This &quot;Trojan horse&quot; aspect worries some observers, but the participants insist that unprecedented trust -- and the programs' track record so far -- eliminate most of their concern.    &quot;I took some shots at cocktail parties about a mole in the treasure chest,&quot; recalls Chuck Tyler, director of H-P's technology research center and the driving force behind the company's exchange program. &quot;But integrity is contagious.&quot;    The H-P/Toshiba and Tektronix/NEC programs are broadly similar, with several differences. The former is confined to laboratory research, the latter to manufacturing. The H-P program has been under way four years, and eight engineers have crisscrossed the Pacific. Tektronix sent its first two people to Japan last year, and the first pair of NEC men came to Tektronix's Forest Grove, Ore., plant last January. Generally, the H-P/Toshiba swaps last a year or longer -- the Tektronix/NEC swaps six to eight months.    The star of the programs is Mr. Nishi. Regarded as one of the most inventive minds in the global semiconductor industry, the 46-year-old Yokohama native left Toshiba's large-scale integration research facility to become director of H-P's silicon process lab at Palo Alto in January.    Senior managers of both Tektronix and NEC inaugurated their exchange program. Gene Hendrickson, manager of Tek's Forest Grove plant, had spent a lot of time in Japan in the '70s developing Sperry Corp.'s computer-terminal business there. When he and NEC's Koyanagi-san met in 1985 and dined over a local cuisine called &quot;kappo,&quot; they discovered a remarkable mutual chemistry. That quickly grew into trust, which became the catalyst for the engineering exchanges.    To handle the sensitive issue of proprietary information, the principals in the programs rely on gentlemen's agreements. Says Mr. Nishi, &quot;I won't disclose Toshiba proprietary information to H-P, and when I come back to Toshiba, I won't disclose any proprietary information from H-P.&quot;    Adds Tek's Mr. Hendrickson: &quot;We are two companies operating in extremely competitive environments and we're not afraid of each other -- we both know we're good. What we're trying to do is set an international precedent.&quot;    One crucial part of the Tektronix/NEC program was that engineers from both countries live with families, rather than in hotels, to help their cultural assimilation. Makoto Aoki and Hidebumi Ohnuki, two young NEC engineers, came to like the freewheeling atmosphere of the Oregon circuit-board plant and are now trying to apply some of that flexibility back home.    Bret Tauscher and Don Parquet were sent by Tektronix for six months to the NEC Toyama facility. Their stay, because of language difficulties, was rougher than their Japanese colleagues' experience. But the two Americans now inject such Japanese notions as preoccupation with long-term perspective into their daily grind. &quot;Both plants realize the value of people,&quot; says Mr. Tauscher. &quot;Among money, machines and men, man is the big one.&quot;    That's the point of the programs. &quot;Human relations&quot; may sound hopelessly quixotic to American executives obsessed with quarterly results, daily stock prices and performance bonuses. But the Japanese, without benefit of either MBAs or MBO, have stressed human relations as the key ingredient in effective management and getting the most from their workers. Says H-P's John Moll, who taught Mr. Nishi when he was a Stanford University student: &quot;Every H-P engineer who has gone for a session in Japan comes back with the opinion that we need to coexist rather than compete to the point of figuratively killing each other.&quot;    ---   Mr. Tharp is a reporter in the Journal's San Francisco bureau and was the Journal's Tokyo bureau chief 1976-80. </TEXT></DOC>