<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. ABANDONED plans for a seven-nation anti-terrorism meeting.    France, which was supported by Britain and West Germany, declined to attend the meeting in Rome because of apprehension that the U.S. might launch a military strike against Lebanon. The parley was scheduled to open today and was to have focused on the recent spate of abductions in Beirut. State Department officials said military steps weren't on the agenda. Meanwhile, Pentagon officials said the U.S. had reduced the size of its naval force in the eastern Mediterranean, but noted that it was keeping more than a dozen warships on alert.    A West German newspaper said Waite was wounded trying to escape captors in Lebanon, but witnesses later reported seeing the Anglican envoy.    ---   Reagan will meet Wednesday with his special national security review board for further questioning on the Iran-Contra affair. The president had met with the commission last month. A White House spokesman said Reagan has agreed to turn over to the panel &quot;appropriate excerpts&quot; of his personal notes about the initiative.    ---   The Kremlin confirmed that it plans to resume nuclear testing after an 18-month pause, saying the decision was justified by security interests. Officials, however, said Moscow wouldn't attempt to match a U.S. space-based antimissile project. A Reagan aide said it was &quot;preposterous&quot; for Moscow to deny it was developing such a system.    ---   The Soviet Union launched two cosmonauts aboard a new Soyuz TM-2 spacecraft. The cosmonauts are bound for a stay of at least five months aboard the Mir space station. The Soviets' return to the orbital laboratory comes at a time when the U.S. space shuttle program remains grounded.    NASA's administrator told a House panel that construction of a manned space station with the cooperation of allies is essential for the U.S. space program. He also said an agreement had been reached with the Pentagon that prohibits the installation of arms systems on the space station.    ---   U.S. criticism has intensified over Mexico's commitment to combat narcotics trafficking because of delays in negotiating a comprehensive legal-assistance treaty. Senate Judiciary panel members faulted the delay and warned that sentiment is increasing in Congress to impose sanctions or cut off U.S. aid.    ---   A federal judge in Florida ordered a reputed Colombian drug trafficker to appear at a detention hearing Monday in Jacksonville. Carlos Lehder Rivas, suspected of being the leader of one of the largest drug rings in Latin America, was captured Wednesday in Colombia and extradited to the U.S. to face cocaine charges.    ---   The NRC staff is considering a proposal that would enable nuclear power plants to be licensed even if state and local authorities refuse to cooperate with emergency planning.    ---   Brazil's government lifted a year-old price freeze that has distorted the economy and has been increasingly ignored in the marketplace. The move amounts to Brazil's formal recognition of the collapse of its anti-inflation plan, which froze prices and wages in February 1986.    ---   The White House is pressing for less-restrictive export-control policies that will make it easier for U.S. high-technology producers to compete in world markets. The administration plans to propose legislation to shorten the time it takes to lift controls on exports of U.S. products when foreign equivalents are available.    ---   The Philippine government said that unless the country's communist guerrillas resume peace talks, it would take military action against the rebels after the expiration this weekend of a 60-day cease-fire. Manila's peace negotiators indirectly contacted their rebel counterparts in a bid to salvage the talks to end the 17-year-old insurgency.    ---   South Korea's national police banned a weekend rally in downtown Seoul to protest the death of a student tortured by police. Seoul's justice minister urged that other rallies planned around the country by dissident groups be canceled, claiming they could threaten the &quot;survival of the nation.&quot;    ---   HHS Secretary Bowen declined to reinstate a subordinate's order denying federal funds to Planned Parenthood family-planning programs because the organization also operates abortion clinics. Bowen ordered monitoring of birth-control clinics to ensure compliance with a law prohibiting use of federal funds for abortions.    ---   Iran fired a surface-to-surface missile at Baghdad, hours after threatening &quot;heavy attacks&quot; on the Iraqi capital and warning residents to evacuate. Tehran said the missile attack was in retaliation for recent Iraqi air raids on civilian targets in Iran.    ---   Peking sentenced the editor of a literature and art journal to seven years in prison for &quot;counterrevolutionary&quot; activities. Liu De, the first person convicted in China's recent campaign against Western influences, was accused of calling for the ouster of the Communist Party, the China Legal News reported. It didn't say when Liu was tried.    ---   Moslem guerrillas battled Soviet forces in eastern Afghanistan as warplanes and artillery bombarded the insurgents' positions, sources based in Pakistan said. The offensive, which began Wednesday, came despite a cease-fire called Jan. 15 by Afghanistan's Soviet-backed government.    ---   A bomb exploded in Cape Town near the official residences of South African President Botha and several cabinet members, injuring a woman, the government said. It wasn't known if any of the houses were damaged. There wasn't any immediate claim of responsibility for the blast.    ---   The State Department announced that the U.S. wouldn't sign the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty, saying it might establish a precedent for other such accords. The pact bars the manufacture, testing or storing of nuclear weapons in the region.    ---   Sweden's government assigned national officials to assume responsibility for the investigation into last February's assassination of Prime Minister Olof Palme. The Stockholm police chief who had led the inquiry was removed from the case following a dispute with prosecutors, officials said. </TEXT></DOC>