<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0142 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Why NATO Continues to Need American Troops---By Bernard W. Rogers</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTDEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   We have looked at the idea of American troop withdrawal from Europe time again and again whenever the U.S. has become annoyed with its allies, or has convinced itself that they are not bearing a fair share of the burden of collective defense, or has concluded that the defense burden weighs too heavily on the American taxpayer. Each time we have come to the same conclusion: to reduce our commitment reduces our own security.    Now some people, formerly in high places in government, are attempting to recast the old argument in a more seductive guise -- reductions would increase U.S. security; troops withdrawn from Europe could meet more likely contingencies elsewhere, particularly Southwest Asia. Proponents argue that a number of benefits would be realized by such a program to include: enhanced capability to fight in areas where the U.S. cannot permanently station troops; increased efforts by Europeans toward their own defense; improved opportunity for effective arms control.    In the first category, if our goal in the Persian Gulf is to protect the oil lanes from local threats, then 100,000 U.S. Army troops would be superfluous -- the task is better suited to naval and air forces. If the purpose is to respond to direct Soviet aggression in the region, 100,000 troops would be woefully inadequate. U.S. military intervention in Southwest Asia with ground forces, without the direct support of our allies, both in Europe and in the region, would be extremely hazardous, and would have a high probability of failure.    Some argue that withdrawing troops from Europe would allow the U.S. to develop a more capable, mobile reserve available for deployment anywhere in the world. Far more likely is that the high cost of relocating and maintaining these troops in the continental U.S. would result in their deactivation from the force. Even if they were retained and converted to light forces, the cost of strategic lift -- already in short supply -- would be great. To do more than create a &quot;tripwire&quot; would require a network of overseas operating bases that the U.S. is finding difficult to establish.    The real issue is not the Persian Gulf, but the capability of U.S. forces and the effects on Europe of a U.S. troop withdrawal. Withdrawal advocates argue that an increased European effort to strengthen the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is both an objective and an outcome of U.S. troop reductions. Rather than stimulating our allies to greater effort, a reduction would signal to them that either the threat to Europe has diminished or that the U.S. no longer shares a determination to resist that threat. The former would lull the Europeans into a false sense of security, resulting in less effort on defense. The latter would create a sense of hopelessness that would encourage accommodation and appeasement with the East.    While proponents of troop withdrawal dismiss this argument by saying that the Europeans will not commit political suicide, I believe that in the long run the loss of confidence in U.S. support would cause the Western European nations to view neutralism as the best hope of political survival.    U.S. troops are the most visible symbol of the U.S. commitment to Europe, a clear statement that Soviet attempts at intimidation and coercion will not succeed. Undermining European confidence in the U.S. by withdrawal of a large portion of the troops, coupled with European doubts about the implications for European security of the Reykjavik Summit and intermediate nuclear forces negotiations, would be a step in the wrong direction, in spite of reassuring U.S. rhetoric.    U.S. troop reductions also send the wrong message to the Soviets, weakening the military credibility of NATO deterrence. The withdrawal of 100,000 troops would have a much greater impact on NATO military posture than the numbers suggest. At a time when the U.S. is already short of units to support its Army combat forces currently deployed in Europe, when it cannot come close to meeting its reinforcement commitments to NATO, and when the conventional balance is more critical because America's theater nuclear deterrent will be weakened by probable arms agreements, a troop withdrawal would further reduce NATO's ability to maintain conventional deterrence or conduct a conventional defense long enough to allow reinforcement. Thus, under agreed NATO political guidance, the Alliance would need to resort to a nuclear response quickly.    The argument that U.S. troop withdrawals might pave the way for a new program of conventional arms control fails to consider the lessons of history. What incentive is there for the Soviets to negotiate if they can sit back and witness U.S. reductions without a quid pro quo? The West has learned over the past years that the Soviets will negotiate seriously only when we demonstrate the strength, capability and will to respond to Soviet threats to our security. For example, the Soviets were unwilling to negotiate longer-range INF reductions until NATO actually deployed Pershing IIs and ground-launched cruise missiles. While balanced and verifiable conventional-force reductions in Europe could enhance our mutual security, they cannot be achieved through unilateral concessions on our part. U.S. troop reductions from Europe can be justified only if done in response to a reduction of the threat or a reduction in U.S. interests.    Calls for unilateral American troop withdrawals ignore the political realities of Soviet objectives and the military reality of Soviet power. Some senior proponents of withdrawal have themselves agreed that the Kremlin's commitment to expelling America from Europe has not diminished over the past 40 years and that the domination (neutralization) of Western Europe continues to be an important Soviet objective. Further, they admit that the Soviets continue to have an enormous preponderance in main battle tanks and attack aircraft, the weapons most suitable for a conventional attack. This combination of Soviet intentions and capabilities adds up to an increasing rather than diminishing threat.    If the threat to Western Europe has not decreased then we must ask whether our interests there have diminished or whether interests elsewhere have assumed greater priority. The U.S. is a global power with global interests, the most important of which is the prevention of Soviet domination of Europe.    Since NATO was established 38 years ago, Europe has enjoyed an unprecedented period of peace and prosperity. One should not tinker lightly with such a record. Ironically, it is NATO's very success that causes some people to conclude that troops can be withdrawn because war is least likely in Europe. We should remember that war is unlikely because NATO serves as a sturdy bulwark against communist threats, and that our peace has been bought with strength, not weakness. U.S. troop reductions would undermine both the strength and cohesion of NATO, thus weakening deterrence and increasing the chance that the U.S. would have to shed the blood of its troops -- again -- to convince aggressors that our commitment to peace and freedom in Europe remains strong.    ---   Gen. Rogers recently retired as Supreme Allied Commander, Europe. </TEXT></DOC>