<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880526-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Bilzerian Takes On Another Big Fish: The Little League --- Raider Sues Over Allegation He Reneged on Donation To the Local T-Ball Teams </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Allen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Everyone on Wall Street knows Paul Bilzerian plays hardball. Now the Northeast Little League of St. Petersburg, Fla., is learning it, too.    Mr. Bilzerian is the Tampa investor who recently won a bitter fight for control of Singer Co. and installed himself as chairman. Both the Securities and Exchange Commission and a federal grand jury are looking into whether he used illegal takeover tactics in previous corporate raids. He has a reputation as a man who is ready to call in the lawyers when things aren't going his way.    And in the world of post-toddler T-ball in northeastern St. Petersburg, evidently they aren't. As coach of a team of five- to seven-year-olds, Mr. Bilzerian did post a winning record last season. But competition wasn't well organized, he complains. Rules were fuzzy. Teams weren't balanced. Schedules were undependable.    And now, Mr. Bilzerian's honor has been challenged. The multimillionaire corporate raider has been accused in print of reneging on a promise to make a $5,000 donation to help the kids play. Well, a man's gotta do what he's gotta do. Mr. Bilzerian is suing.    In a complaint filed in Pinellas County, Fla., circuit court, Mr. Bilzerian charges that Richard Brannelly, first vice president of the local Little League, committed &quot;slander per se&quot; against him. Mr. Brannelly was quoted in the St. Petersburg Times as saying Mr. Bilzerian had &quot;welched&quot; on the donation pledge. Not only is this false, Mr. Bilzerian's suit complains, but the league wouldn't play by his rules.    The cash infusion, it is agreed, was conditioned on the league's raising an equivalent amount of capital, in the form of matching funds. Specifically, little kids were supposed to sell kitchenware door to door. But, the Bilzerian suit asserts, citing its Exhibit B: &quot;As shown by the computer print out, the fund raising campaign resulted in the sale of sufficient products to raise a total of $4,947.75, assuming all products which were ordered were received and paid for.&quot;    Mr. Brannelly, who describes himself as a pipefitter and financial consultant, doesn't deny saying what the St. Petersburg paper says he said. Disputes with parents aren't all that uncommon, he says, though this parent &quot;just happens to have more money than most.&quot; He contends the league wasn't obliged to get all its matching funds from the kids' sales but merely to raise $5,000, which he says it did.    At stake is the future of T-ball, at least as played in this neighborhood. T-ball is that rudimentary form of baseball in which kids flail away at a ball on a tee instead of one being pitched. Mr. Bilzerian says in the suit that if only the league would have changed a few things about it, he would have contributed regardless of the matching-funds issue. His suit proposes some &quot;simple, common-sense&quot; changes: that rules be written, schedules be formal, and players be &quot;better distributed (some teams fielded only 6 players, while others fielded as many as 15).&quot;    But local league president Ben Bartlett contends Mr. Bilzerian wants to change the very essence of the sport -- which, as he describes it, is that little kids &quot;basically walk out there and look cute doing handstands in the outfield.&quot; The game just isn't competitive enough for Mr. Bilzerian's taste, Mr. Bartlett charges, saying the corporate raider offered to buy a scoreboard even though the program de-emphasizes scores to avoid childhood trauma.    According to Mr. Bartlett, who is maintenance director at the private school Mr. Bilzerian's children attend, Mr. Bilzerian indicated interest in a seat on the league's board of directors, but many T-ball parents opposed it. By the time of the vote, he says, Mr. Bilzerian had withdrawn his name.    Mr. Bilzerian wasn't available for comment on any of this. Singer's vice president for corporate relations, Thomas Elliott, says he doesn't think there was any Little League proxy fight. He denies that Mr. Bilzerian offered to buy a scoreboard or tried to make T-ball more competitive.    Mr. Elliott contends that Mr. Brannelly is the one playing hardball, because he made his &quot;welching&quot; comment shortly after The Wall Street Journal reported on investigations into the possibility that Mr. Bilzerian, among other things, may have illegally &quot;parked&quot; stock with shopping-center developer Edward DeBartolo Sr. The article also told how Mr. Bilzerian had got into squabbles over money with business associates. &quot;We see it as taking advantage of the situation,&quot; Mr. Elliott says.    Mr. Brannelly follows up on that theme. At one point he says he told a Bilzerian representative that &quot;maybe we should just call T. Boone Pickens or DeBartolo or someone else your boss deals with, maybe they'll pay it off.&quot; (Mr. Pickens helped finance Mr. Bilzerian's Singer takeover, but his name hasn't come up in accounts of Bilzerian investigations.)    For all the friction, many parents defend Mr. Bilzerian's tenure as coach of the team, on which one of his own boys played. He sometimes interrupted business in farflung cities to return in time for games, they say, showing up in a suit and tie and ducking into a restroom to change into shorts. And while most teams were celebrating the season's end at a pizza joint or back-yard barbecue, his team -- sponsored by his Bicoastal Financial Corp. -- dined in style in Peter's Place Cafe International, one of St. Petersburg's swankier eateries. The kids watched season highlights videotaped by Mrs. Bilzerian.    Things are a bit duller this year. Mr. Bilzerian has sent his boy to a Little League team in faraway Minnesota, where the family spends its summers, and isn't coaching a team this year. All the action, apparently, will be in the courtroom. </TEXT></DOC>