<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881116-0048 </DOCNO><HL> A Teacher's Pet That's a Porker </HL><AUTHOR> Chester E. Finn Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   This is the story of a good idea gone sour.    Back in mid-1986 a panel supported by the Carnegie Corporation issued a thoughtful report on teachers. Seeking to boost teachers' quality and professionalism, panelists urged creation of a permanent national board to examine teacher prowess and to stamp its approval on teachers it finds well-qualified. Just as you now can insist on having your baby delivered by a board-certified obstetrician, you would be able to demand that your child be instructed by a board-certified teacher. Though teachers wouldn't have to seek this certification, presumably the good ones would want it. In time, some bold school systems would refuse to consider candidates lacking board endorsements.    The panel stipulated that the board not be a governmental entity, any more than medical specialty boards or bar associations are. Nary a word was uttered about federal funds.    This idea won many plaudits. Teaching today is a heavily unionized occupation without much quality control, sense of professionalism, or rewards for excellence. When such rewards have been proposed (merit pay, career ladders and the like), the unions usually have shot them down, arguing that there is no reliable basis by which to distinguish superb teachers from mediocrities. The new national board might finally furnish such a mechanism.    The big question, of course, was whether it would impose sufficiently lofty standards of performance and insist that these be met by any teacher seeking certification. It could easily be too lax, too deferential to college transcripts, seniority or popularity. The proof of this pudding would be in the tasting.    Two and a half years later, no pudding is in sight. The National Board for Professional Teaching Standards itself exists, 64 members strong. Two-thirds of them are teachers -- and all but one of these are union members, including Mary Futrell, president of the National Education Association; Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers; and other senior NEA and AFT officials. The Carnegie Corporation has been generous with start-up funds, and the board now has two offices and a sizable staff. But not a single teacher has been certified, nor has the board said when any will be.    Instead, it has declared that more research must first be done -- 10 major categories of it, according to a list board chairman Jim Hunt, former Democratic governor of North Carolina, furnished the Senate. Years of research. Fifty million dollars of research. And the lobbying is intense for half that tab to be paid by the federal government.    Additional research is always welcome. But few topics in education have been studied more extensively over the decades than teaching. Good teaching is part art, part science, but it is no great mystery. Good teaching leads to children learning.    Start with 50 super classroom practitioners -- the latest crop of state &quot;teachers of the year,&quot; for example -- and send them out to observe and interview other teachers; check the students' test scores; quiz the principals. In short order the board would be doing exactly what it was set up to do: certifying excellent teachers. And the schools would have board-certified teachers to hire, promote and reward.    But the board is doing no such thing. Instead it is pressing Congress to subsidize its elaborate research agenda over the next half decade.    In August, Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.) and five colleagues sponsored a bill that would do just that. When it was introduced, co-sponsor Claiborne Pell (D., R.I.) quoted Luther, Cardinal Newman and FDR, as well as Providence high school teacher Susan Kaplan. Sen. Dodd said the enterprise to be aided is &quot;revolutionary.&quot; The bill is the pet not only of the teacher-union chiefs, but also of Republican Govs. Tom Kean and Bob Orr, and of such business heavies as Xerox's David Kearns and Du Pont's Richard Heckert. While Congress didn't enact the bill in the past session, observers on Capitol Hill expect it to pass next year.    Then the interminable research process would commence. This probably means no teachers would be certified until the mid-1990s, raising the question of whether the board, dominated by the teacher unions, finds it convenient to delay actual appraisals while giving the appearance of activity. What is more, the board wants exclusive control over the federal money.    Assuming that a big new federal investment in research into teacher evaluation is defensible -- and it's certainly not an outrageous notion -- under standard protocols all interested scholars and institutions could compete. But Sen. Dodd's bill in effect orders the secretary of education to put $25 million into a bucket and hand it to the board. Sure, there are certain disclosure and reporting requirements. But no public official will have any say about who gets the money or what they do with it. And nobody but the board is eligible.    That's the definition of a pork barrel project. Dozens slide through Congress every year. But this one also sets a precedent: federal aid to a professional standards board. If the bill passes, we can expect other professions and trades to then demand their due.    That the teaching occupation needs high professional standards is indisputable -- and the board created for that purpose should get on with the task. For its part, Congress should think twice before erasing yet another line of demarcation between public and private.    ---   Mr. Finn, until recently an assistant secretary of education, is a professor of education and public policy at Vanderbilt University's Washington office. </TEXT></DOC>