<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0074 </DOCNO><HL> 'Brutus': An Anti-Federalist Hero---By William B. Irvine</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   As the bicentennial of the Constitutional Convention draws near, we will be deluged with praise for the authors of the document that resulted. It is likely that those who opposed the Constitution -- the so-called Anti-Federalists -- will be ignored or, worse, cast as villains.    Yet, modern critics of big government would find that many of their sentiments date back to the Anti-Federalists. In particular, the one who wrote under the pseudonym &quot;Brutus&quot; was a kindred spirit.    Historians are not certain who Brutus was, but the received view is that he was Robert Yates, a lawyer from Albany, N.Y. He had resigned as a delegate when it became clear that the convention was moving toward acceptance of a strong national government.    Brutus's essays, like those that became The Federalist Papers, appeared in New York newspapers in late 1787 and early 1788. Whoever he may have been, his writings show as much insight as those of James Madison and Alexander Hamilton -- and in many respects, a better understanding of political power and the way it can be abused than the authors of the Constitution.    To understand Brutus's views and why they should be attractive today, consider the following points:    --Some Americans complain that their congressmen do not truly represent them. Brutus expected as much and noted two root causes. First, the Constitution does not limit the number of terms senators and representatives can remain in office. Brutus reminded us, &quot;Men long in office are very apt to feel themselves independent; to form and pursue interests separate from those who appointed them.&quot; Second, those who represent us will spend their time not with us, but off in Washington. Our senators, said Brutus, &quot;will for the most part of the time be absent from the state they represent, and associate with such company as will posess very little of the feelings of the middling class of people. For it is to be remembered that there is to be a federal city, and the inhabitants of it will be the great and the mighty of the earth.&quot;    --Some Americans fear the consequences of a soaring national debt. So did Brutus. The Constitution, he complained, gives the federal government the ability to create a national debt &quot;so large, as to exceed the ability of the country to sink.&quot; He added that &quot;I can scarcely contemplate a greater calamity that could befall this country, than to be loaded with a debt exceeding their ability ever to discharge. If this be a just remark, it is unwise and improvident to vest in the general government a power to borrow at discretion, without any limitation or restriction.&quot;    --Some Americans complain about the high taxes levied by the federal government. So did Brutus: &quot;This power {to tax}, exercised without limitation, will introduce itself into every corner of the city, and country -- it will enter the house of every gentleman, watch over his cellar, wait upon his cook in the kitchen, follow the servants into the parlor, preside over the table, and note down all he eats or drinks; . . . it will take cognizance of the professional man in his office, or his study; it will watch the merchant in the countinghouse, or in his store; it will follow the mechanic to his shop, and in his work, and will haunt him in his family, and in his bed; it will be a constant companion of the industrious farmer in all his labor . . . ; it will penetrate into the most obscure cottage; and finally, it will light upon the head of every person in the United States. To all these different classes of people, and in all these circumstances, in which it will attend them, the language in which it will address them, will be GIVE! GIVE!&quot;    --Some Americans complain that the Supreme Court has overstepped its proper bounds. The problem, according to Brutus, is that under the Constitution, the Supreme Court can interpret the Constitution &quot;not only according to the natural and obvious meaning of the words, but also according to the spirit and intention of it.&quot;    Brutus also objected to the life tenure granted Supreme Court justices.    --Like many Anti-Federalists, Brutus was concerned about the general-welfare clause of the Constitution. He observed, &quot;To provide for the general welfare, is an abstract proposition, which mankind differ in the explanation of, as much as they do on any political or moral proposition that can be proposed; the most opposite measures may be pursued by different parties, and both may profess, that they have in view the general welfare.&quot; Needless to say, congressmen have not been slow to pick up on this point.    How did the Federalists respond to this last concern? Madison argued that in the text of the Constitution, the general-welfare clause is immediately followed by a list of specific powers, e.g., the power to borrow money, coin money, establish post offices and post roads, etc. His position (stated in no. 41 of The Federalist Papers) was that this list places limits on the powers of Congress, and that to suppose otherwise is &quot;an absurdity.&quot;    Even those who do not share Brutus's misgivings about federal government owe him and the other Anti-Federalists a debt of gratitude. The Anti-Federalists are, after all, in large part responsible for the fact that the Constitution has a bill of rights. The Federalists saw no need for such a bill. Indeed, Hamilton (in No. 84 of The Federalist Papers) characterized a bill of rights as not only unnecessary, but dangerous. The Anti-Federalists knew better. They realized that those in power generally take steps to expand their power, and that a bill of rights is one way to curb -- or rather, to slow down -- these tendencies.    The Anti-Federalists, then, were not unpatriotic. They were, by and large, people with a more thorough understanding than many of the gap that exists between political theory and politics itself.    ---   Mr. Irvine teaches philosophy at Wright State University in Ohio. </TEXT></DOC>