<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870320-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Let Moderates Have a Say in 1988---By Felix G. Rohatyn</HL><DD> 03/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN </IN><TEXT>   We have witnessed startling events in U.S. foreign policy during the past year. The Reykjavik summit produced what appeared to be a total repudiation of America's basic security posture by proposing the total abolition of ballistic missiles by 1996. The Iran-contra affair repudiated America's basic position of not dealing with terrorist governments and not paying ransom for hostages.    These abrupt foreign-policy shifts followed less noticed but equally abrupt shifts in economic policy. From 1980 to 1984, the U.S. followed a deliberate policy of driving up the value of the dollar and interpreting its 50% rise as a reflection of American strength; in 1985, the U.S. shifted gears and proceeded to drive the dollar down at least as much in order to regain American competitiveness. To resolve the Third World debt problem, it supported an austerity policy sponsored by the International Monetary Fund from 1980 to 1984, and then switched to a growth-oriented policy in 1985.    Consistency, in and of itself, is not necessarily a virtue. But when the world's leading economic and military power shifts gears as brutally and dramatically as the U.S. has done in areas vital to its allies as well as its adversaries, the result is an inevitable loss of America's ability to provide leadership. To this we must add the dynamics created by a presidential election in 1988.    There is no purely American solution to any of our major economic problems. The U.S. cannot afford a recession that would drive its deficits to more than $300 billion and possibly cause a crash in the value of the dollar as well as in the stock and bond markets. The result could be massive domestic and international banking defaults, a world recession and political instability in large parts of the globe. Avoiding such a catastrophe will involve a delicate combination of coordinated domestic and international efforts:    --The U.S. must cut its budget deficit with new taxes and reductions in expenditures.    --To counteract the risk of recession, it must reduce interest rates and run an easier monetary policy.    --To avoid a collapse of the dollar, Japan and Europe will have to stimulate growth, cut taxes and interest rates.    --And to promote growth in the Third World, the U.S., Japan and Western Europe will have to agree on an aggressive plan of debt restructuring and new capital for the debtor countries.    It is hard to see how any of this could happen in a traditional U.S. presidential election year. Under normal circumstances, even if the next president were willing to embrace such an agenda it probably would not see the light of day until 1990. That may well be too late.    In the foreign-policy field, events are similarly crowding the U.S. Developments in the Soviet Union suggest a desire on the part of General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev for a massive effort to modernize the Soviet economy, which can happen only with the West's cooperation. For the first time since World War II, it is possible that arms-control negotiations, tied to economic and trade negotiations, could change the internal dynamics of the Soviet Union and, possibly, the overall relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. The volatile stituation in the Middle East requires firm and steady leadership from the U.S. together with Europe, both for international security reasons and for America's coming dependence on Mideastern oil.    How is all this affected by next year's presidential election? Politicians have a tendency to re-create the last election just as generals have a tendency to fight the last war. By that wisdom, on the domestic front, the Democratic presidential candidates will refuse to discuss any increase in taxes and the Republican candidates will duck the issue of possible cutbacks in Social Security and other entitlements. That will clearly doom any serious action on the budget deficit until 1990.    On the international front, neither Democrats nor Republicans will want to deal with Third World debt restructuring while the farm sector, the energy sector and other parts of the U.S. economy are in difficulty. As for American ties with the Soviets, Republicans will outdo each other as to hawkishness and Democrats will fear to be perceived as &quot;soft on communism.&quot;    The presidential candidates in 1988 will have to decide whether to be realistic and truthful about what the U.S. is facing, thereby running the risk of political suicide. Or, they will have to make promises they cannot possibly keep and, therefore, be unable to govern if elected.    One way to avoid these alternatives would be to try to create a consensus among moderate Republican and Democratic leaders on certain aspects of an agenda for the next president. This could be done by establishing a bipartisan congressional commission modeled on the Temporary National Economic Commission set up by Franklin Roosevelt in 1938 to study the country's economic problems.    The commission could consist of, say, four members of Congress, four businessmen and four academicians. They would be evenly split between Republicans and Democrats and would represent ideologically moderate wings of their parties. Their task would be to identify the main issues and to establish the next president's priorities. Even if the commission did not reach a consensus on how to solve the major economic problems, it could lay out options that could influence the campaign debate.    With respect to the deficit, the alternatives of higher income taxes or new types of consumption taxes would leave a great deal of room for argument -- as would mechanisms to make certain that new taxes do not translate into new spending. When it comes to trade, the options would probably include a further lowering of the dollar, temporary tariffs, or some forms of limited industrial policies. As for interest rates and the Federal Reserve, the commission could debate monetary policy and, one would hope, come up with an unanimous recommendation to continue Paul Volcker for another term.    With respect to entitlements, the alternative of means testings or taxing affluent recipients should be examined. And as for Third World debt, the options could include government involvement as part of a major restructuring program of the type recommended by Sen. Bill Bradley (D., N.J.) or the continuation of rollovers together with some version of the current Baker Plan.    While a commission would provide a reasonable framework for debate of the economic alternatives and allow the candidates to present their vision of America within such a framework, it would also provide the domestic framework within which Americans could debate the critical foreign-policy issue of the 1988 campaign -- namely, America's long-term relationship with the Soviet Union.    In the final analysis, the next president will be elected on the voters' belief in his character and his competence. If the country wishes to elect a radical of the right or of the left, so be it. But if the country wishes to elect a moderate, at least let us provide him with some of the tools to do the job: a realistic program for his election and bipartisan support for his governance.    ---   Mr. Rohatyn is a senior partner in Lazard Freres andamp; Co. and chairman of New York's Municipal Assistance Corp. </TEXT></DOC>