<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880323-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   CONGRESS VOTED to override Reagan's veto of a major civil-rights measure.    By a vote of 73-24, the Senate voted to enact the Civil Rights Restoration Act. Later, the House also voted to override the veto, 292-133. The act is intended to reverse the effects of a 1984 Supreme Court decision, which narrowed the reach of anti-bias statutes by limiting the sanctions of federal civil-rights laws to specific programs that receive federal aid. The measure restores protections to entire institutions that receive federal funding.    Reagan had characterized the legislation as a &quot;dangerous bill.&quot; The override was the ninth of the president's 63 vetoes to be reversed by Congress.    ---   NICARAGUA EXCHANGED proposals with the Contras for an extended truce.    Sandinista and rebel negotiators said the plans included a cease-fire accompanied by amnesty and media freedoms. Managua's defense minister, speaking at the talks in the Nicaraguan border town of Sapoa, said he expected a &quot;concrete agreement&quot; today. In Washington, Reagan sought to revive efforts to win renewed aid for the Contras, accusing Managua of trying to deliver a &quot;knockout blow&quot; to the insurgents in recent fighting near the Honduran border.    The U.S., which said troops would remain in Honduras to complete maneuvers, faulted a U.N. decision to send a fact-finding team to the region.    ---   Shultz and Shevardnadze directed U.S. and Soviet experts to work on a superpower arms pact aimed at reducing long-range nuclear arsenals by 30% to 50%. Meanwhile, the Senate Intelligence panel said Soviet compliance with a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles can be monitored against cheating with &quot;great certainty.&quot;    ---   Panama's opposition rejected Noriega's offer to resign before May 1989 presidential elections. As a general strike continued to disrupt commerce, the opposition umbrella group also said it wouldn't agree to talks with the military chief's regime. The U.S. denounced Noriega's offer, calling it a &quot;transparent ploy&quot; to retain power.    A federal judge in Miami ruled that Noriega's lawyers can formally protest the &quot;legality and sufficiency&quot; of racketeering and drug-trafficking charges against the Panamanian, even though he hasn't appeared in court to answer the indictment.    ---   Brazil's Congress voted to maintain the presidential system of government as part of the country's new constitution and to allow the president a single term of five years. The decision boosted President Jose Sarney as well as his appointees. Some lawmakers had threatened to impose a prime minister.    ---   French President Mitterrand said he will seek a second term, ending months of speculation on whether the 71-year-old Socialist would enter the presidential race. Elections are to be held April 24 and May 8. In a nationwide TV appearance, Mitterrand said he decided to seek re-election to end &quot;quarrels and divisions&quot; threatening France.    ---   Israel's Rabin announced new measures to quell Palestinian rioting in the occupied areas, including allowing Israeli civilians to shoot Arabs who hurl firebombs. The defense minister also said that the army held over 3,000 Arab suspects. Separately, Shamir returned to Jerusalem and was cheered for his opposition to a U.S. peace plan.    ---   South Africa's government banned publication of the New Nation for 12 weeks. The prohibition against the church-backed antiapartheid weekly newspaper is expected to usher in a new era of censorship against the so-called alternative press, which the government views as a &quot;threat to public safety.&quot;    ---   The U.S. unveiled a policy barring discrimination against federal government workers who have AIDS. The guidelines, which are to take effect tomorrow, also authorize disciplining those who refuse to work with AIDS patients.    ---   The Justice Department filed suit to close the PLO's observer mission to the U.N. The PLO defied Monday's deadline to vacate the mission under a U.S. anti-terrorism law ordering its closure. The U.N. General Assembly, meanwhile, has hired a New York law firm to help keep the PLO offices open.    ---   A fire raged through the northern Burmese city of Lashio, killing as many as 113 people and leaving about 20,000 homeless, Rangoon's government said. The Sunday blaze, considered the worst ever in Burma, damaged more than 2,000 buildings.    ---   Iranian forces launched an attack on a Norwegian-operated tanker laden with Saudi Arabian chemicals, killing two seamen and injuring nine others. A Greek supertanker also was attacked by Iran and set ablaze in the Persian Gulf. U.S. and British warships aided the crews of both vessels.    ---   Street protests flared in the Soviet Armenian capital of Yerevan, the third consecutive day of demonstrations demanding the return of a disputed area from neighboring Azerbaijan. The newspaper Izvestia reported that organizers had scheduled Saturday as &quot;the most explosive day,&quot; and that &quot;catastrophic events&quot; were planned.    ---   A Vatican delegation was invited by the Soviet Union to participate in celebrations marking the 1,000th anniversary of Christianity in Russia. Pope John Paul II said he won't be a member of the group. The pope had said he wouldn't travel to Moscow unless he was allowed to visit Catholic areas such as the Ukraine and Lithuania.    ---   Died: Patrick Steptoe, 74, British physician who helped pioneer the in-vitro fertilization technique, Monday, in Canterbury, England, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>