<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861212-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Prices Rise on Rumors That SaudisAt OPEC Meeting Agreed to Cut Output---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/12/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)PETROLEUM (PET)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   Oil prices spurted on domestic spot and futures markets amid rumors that Saudi Arabia had agreed to cut production at yesterday's initial session of the oil cartel's ministerial meeting in Geneva.    Official statements from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries on the meeting didn't refer to any such agreement. And acting Saudi Oil Minister Hisham Nazer declined to comment on the rumors.    Nevertheless, some analysts and traders said they expect the cartel will soon arrive at a plan to restrain output.    Before Monday, OPEC &quot;likely will approve an agreement that has been tied up between the Saudis and Iranians to cut production,&quot; predicted Ian Gibson, assistant vice president at Kleinwort Grieveson Securities, a New York-based unit of Kleinwort, Benson Inc. Kleinwort's World Oil Report expects the cut will total about one million barrels a day, bringing OPEC's output to about 15.8 million barrels.    Many analysts remain skeptical, however. &quot;Although it's possible, the odds are heavily against&quot; a Saudi production cut, said Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc., New York. &quot;I don't believe (the Saudis) believe they need to cut production,&quot; he added.    A Saudi agreement to cut output would appear to represent a policy reversal for Saudi King Fahd, who recently said the kingdom had &quot;sacrificed enough&quot; and wasn't willing to further restrain output. The king has repeatedly indicated a willingness to set an OPEC fixed price of at least $18 a barrel without any output cuts.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil contracts for January delivery rose 37 cents, to $15.50 a barrel. January heating oil contracts soared 1.61 cents, to 45.15 cents a gallon; unleaded gasoline prices for January delivery rose 1.29 cents a gallon, to 42.47 cents. The gains were the largest one-day jumps since Oct. 30.    Meanwhile, on the spot, or noncontract, market, the price of West Texas Intermediate, the barometer of U.S. crude oil prices, rose 35 cents, to $15.50 a barrel.    Analysts and brokers said that aggressive trade buying for the first time in nearly a month helped prompt yesterday's rally. Short covering, or buying contracts to offset those sold earlier, also boosted prices, traders said.    Market participants are &quot;wary of staying short&quot; as the weekend approaches, said Jayne Ball, assistant vice president at E.F. Hutton andamp; Co., New York.    Moreover, wintry weather in the Northeast, the prime energy-consuming area of the nation, helped support heating-oil prices, analysts said. Traders at the Merc &quot;looked out the window, saw it was snowing and cold, and decided they'd rather have long,&quot; or buying, positions, said John Hill, a vice president at Merrill Lynch Futures Inc., New York.    But traders said the prime factor in the market remains speculation over what the cartel will do, with many feeling that unlike earlier OPEC conferences, the current meeting won't last long. In the meantime, said Nauman Barakat, oil analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., New York: &quot;The rumor mill will be working overtime.&quot;    In other commodity markets yesterday:    COFFEE: Futures prices rose modestly in lackluster trading. Wire services reported that the scheduled two-day meeting of the executive board of the International Coffee Organization in London ended a day early as the board decided not to call a full meeting of the ICO's council to reimpose global export quotas for green coffee. The quotas are sought by some coffee-producing nations to help arrest this year's latest prolonged price decline, which began in early October. The quotas were suspended in February when prices rose sharply. The board will meet again Jan. 16-28 to review the situation, wire services reported. There were also reports yesterday that the U.S. representative to the ICO meeting, Abraham Van Oberbeke, said that the U.S. is questioning its continued membership in the organization and that it could not take part in discussions on either prices or quotas. Mr. Van Oberbeke was reacting to the recent, previously reported decision by Latin American coffee producers to support prices and limit coffee exports. At the moment the main questions in the coffee industry center on when Brazil will announce its 1987 marketing program and when Colombia will open its registrations of coffee for January shipment, trade sources said. &quot;Until we know what prices and contractual conditions are going to be in the new year, we can't do business,&quot; one dealer said.    INTEREST RATES: Bond futures prices dropped sharply on the same rumors that affected oil prices. Stock-index futures also plunged in price, but recovered some of their intraday losses after the initial drop, noted J.R. Fredericks, an analyst with E. David Stephens Commodity Corp. in Chicago. &quot;We may be seeing a divergence between the interest rate and stock markets based on a possible increase in inflationary expectations,&quot; he said. Bonds tend to be hurt more than stocks by an increase in inflation because many corporations are able to pass along price increases to their customers, while inflation erodes the value of a bond's fixed-income payments. If inflation does rebound it would be more difficult for the Federal Reserve Board to justify cutting the discount rate to stimulate the economy, he added. Rumors of a discount rate cut early next year have helped support bond futures prices, analysts said. Slightly stronger than expected auto sales figures released yesterday also depressed bond futures prices somewhat, added Frederick Leiner, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in Chicago.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Corn futures prices fell following the Agriculture Department's reduced estimate of U.S. corn exports for the year ending Aug. 30, 1987. In a report released Wednesday afternoon, the department dropped its export forecast 13% to 1.1 billion bushels, reflecting sharply lower imports by the Soviet Union. Heavy farmer selling of corn and soybean futures also depressed cash market prices, torpedoing futures prices on both commodities. Wheat futures followed corn and soybean futures lower. </TEXT></DOC>