<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0045 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SELECTED Douglas Ginsburg as his new Supreme Court nominee.    The nomination of the 41-year-old conservative judge is likely to be controversial because of his youth and limited judicial experience. He has sat for less than a year on the U.S. Appeals Court in Washington. A former Harvard Law School professor and former chief of the Justice Department's antitrust division, he would be the youngest justice in almost 50 years if he is confirmed by the Senate to fill the vacancy left by Justice Powell's resignation.    The nomination is considered a victory for Attorney General Meese, who pushed for Ginsburg over Chief of Staff Baker's choice of Anthony Kennedy.    ---   MOSCOW SAID a summit date has been &quot;fixed for the end of the year.&quot;    A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman didn't give a date in making the announcement, but a Soviet official said the Kremlin proposes the first week in December. Soviet leader Gorbachev told Shultz last week that he wouldn't set a summit date without U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative concessions, touching off a week of confused back-and-forth signals. Reagan, when asked about the announcement, said he hasn't yet received any official word on a summit date.    Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, carrying a letter from Gorbachev, is due to meet with Reagan at the White House this afternoon.    ---   A federal agency made a $375,000 loan in 1984 to a manufacturing project in Costa Rica formed by an important figure in the White House's covert Contra supply network. Officials say the Justice Department is investigating the loan, made by an agency that helps Americans start businesses in developing countries.    Salvadoran rebels called off Mexico City peace talks with Duarte's government over the killing this week of a human rights leader in San Salvador. The talks were part of the five-nation Central American peace plan. In Nicaragua, the government again rejected talks with Contra leaders and said it would not lift a state of emergency.    ---   Nuclear plants could receive permission to open even if state and local authorities refuse to help draw up emergency evacuation plans, a revised Nuclear Regulatory Commission rule says. The change permits the NRC to consider allowing New Hampshire's Seabrook plant and New York's Shoreham plant to operate.    ---   Iran said its warplanes attacked military and industrial targets in southern Iraq in retaliation for recent Iraqi raids on Persian Gulf tankers and Iranian oil facilities. Meanwhile, the first two U.S. mine sweepers arrived in the gulf for convoy duty. Two Navy frigates and a tank-landing vessel accompanied the mine sweepers.    ---   Communist rebels are planning to kill seven more Americans in the Philippines, according to a man who called a Western news organization in Manila and claimed to represent a rebel group. The U.S. moved to discourage travel to the Philippines following Wednesday's killing of three Americans and a Filipino near Clark Air Base.    ---   The Reagan administration told Congress it wants to sell Saudi Arabia $997 million of F-15 jet fighters and other military gear. Opposition isn't expected, because of a compromise between the White House and Senate leaders restricting the scope of the weaponry. The compromise deleted 1,600 anti-tank missiles from the sale.    ---   China's Communist Party is due to wind up its 13th congress Sunday, and diplomats and Chinese sources said 69-year-old Zhao Ziyang is likely to be confirmed as party leader. Senior leader Deng Xiaoping, while relinquishing political posts to his protege, is likely to retain control of China's 3.2 million-strong armed forces, the sources said.    ---   Indian helicopters strafed Tamil rebel positions in northern Sri Lanka, and an Indian official said 27 rebels were killed. An Indian newspaper reporter in the area said, however, that most of the dead were civilians. Meanwhile, President Jayewardene met with a New Delhi official on the resumption of civilian rule in northern Sri Lanka.    ---   An anti-apartheid group broke off contacts with London, accusing Prime Minister Thatcher's government of collusion with Pretoria. The United Democratic Front, South Africa's largest anti-apartheid group, made the decision after a British court freed three men accused of conspiring to kidnap African National Congress members.    ---   Chun approved South Korea's new constitution, paving the way for the first direct presidential election in 16 years. The constitution, which was overwhelmingly approved in a national referendum this week, is to go into effect Feb. 25.    ---   Died: Woody Herman, 74, jazz clarinetist and big band leader, in Los Angeles. </TEXT></DOC>