<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880311-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DOLE TRIMMED his staff, possibly signaling an end to his GOP campaign.    The Kansas senator laid off more than half of his campaign staff and canceled all advertising scheduled to run in Illinois. Although Dole campaign officials wouldn't say whether the Republican presidential candidate intended to withdraw from the race, the actions probably eliminate any hope of his winning next Tuesday's primary. And even his supporters acknowledge that a loss in Illinois on the heels of Bush's near sweep of Super Tuesday primaries would doom the Dole candidacy.    Kemp, as expected, withdrew from the race for the GOP presidential nomination following poor showings in the early primaries and caucuses.    ---   U.S. officials said Reagan probably will order sanctions against Panama in the next few days in an effort to force Noriega's ouster. On Capitol Hill, the House approved a resolution demanding that the Panamanian military chief relinquish power, and calling on Reagan to impose &quot;economic and political&quot; curbs against Panama.    Noriega's government paid the country's soldiers, and banks defied an order to reopen for limited business, exacerbating Panama's financial crisis. Meanwhile, the Roman Catholic Church said it would distribute food to Panamanians cut off from cash.    ---   Palestinians rioted near Jewish enclaves in the occupied West Bank, and Jews drove down Arab streets, firing at houses and savaging vehicles, the army and witnesses said. Israeli troops wounded five Arabs in the continuing unrest. Meanwhile, a PLO faction urged Arabs to take revenge on Jewish settlers and Palestinians who aid Israel.    Reagan said that &quot;a great element&quot; of Israel's coalition government supports a U.S. peace plan for the Mideast, and that he would attempt to persuade Israeli Prime Minister Shamir to drop his objections to the proposal. Shamir is to visit Washington next week. Reagan made his remarks in an interview with foreign journalists.    ---   Waldheim apologized for &quot;the Nazi crimes committed by Austrians&quot; after Hitler's 1938 annexation of Austria. In an address marking the 50th anniversary of the Anschluss, the Austrian president -- who has been accused of facilitating atrocities while serving in Hitler's army -- didn't mention his wartime past.    ---   Moscow said that an agreement on the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan wasn't a commitment to end military aid to Kabul. The Soviet ambassador-at-large, rejecting a U.S. demand for the cessation of such aid, also said Pakistan's insistence for an interim Kabul government was for &quot;the Afghans to decide.&quot;    ---   An elite Soviet police team has been sent to the republic of Azerbaijan to track down participants in recent ethnic rioting, which left 32 people dead in the city of Sumgait, according to an official Communist Party report. The unrest last month was prompted by a dispute over an area of the republic claimed by neighboring Soviet Armenians.    ---   The Soviet media reported that a family of musicians from Siberia had hijacked an Aeroflot jet bound for Leningrad, hiding weapons inside their instruments. The hijackers, seeking to go to London, opened fire when an army assault team stormed the plane Wednesday during a fueling stop. Five of the hijackers died in the incident.    ---   Thousands of Chinese police patrolled Tibet's capital on the anniversary of the 1959 uprising against Chinese rule. While there weren't any reports of violence, foreigners in Lhasa said at least 600 people had been arrested since a clash Saturday between police and pro-independence protesters.    ---   Nicaraguan rebels released an American peace activist kidnapped last week along with a dozen Nicaraguans, the church-backed Witness for Peace organization said. Richard Boren, 30, was reported unharmed. There wasn't any immediate word on the whereabouts of the abducted Nicaraguans.    Contra leaders said they were prepared to meet with Sandinista negotiators next Tuesday for talks aimed at ending the country's civil war. The rebels had rejected an earlier proposal by Managua to hold direct talks this week inside Nicaragua.    ---   Surgeon General Koop said he supports testing a hypodermic needle-exchange program for drug addicts in the U.S. in an attempt to slow the spread of AIDS. Speaking at an international AIDS forum in London, he also called on developed countries to help the Third World maintain safe blood supplies through AIDS screening programs.    ---   Iran and Iraq each announced a willingness to end air and missile raids on civilian targets if the other agreed to halt such attacks. The statements came as Iraq fired more missiles into Tehran and the holy city of Qom, and sent its jets on sorties against other Iranian centers. Iran launched rockets at Iraqi towns along the warfront.    ---   Researchers concluded that a woman who undergoes an X-ray breast exam every year during her 40s would cut her risk of dying of breast cancer by 26%. But the scientists said annual mammographs for all women between ages 40 and 50 years would boost medical costs by more than $400 million for the year 2000. </TEXT></DOC>