<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871001-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Fate of Rancho Seco Nuclear Plant May Hinge on Sale---PGandamp;E, Duke Power Plans DifferSharply for Sacramento Utility Unit---By Frederick RoseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DUK PCGUTILITIES (UTI)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON) </IN><DATELINE> SACRAMENTO, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A little past 4 a.m. the day after Christmas two years ago, alarms blared at the Rancho Seco nuclear generating station near here, signalling a power failure in the plant's central control system.    The reactor shut down automatically, but operators struggled to control its temperature, turning valves and checking circuits. The structure was cooling too quickly, subjecting its steel core to unusual stress. Before things went gravely wrong, a supervisor flipped two overlooked switches, bringing the situation under control.    Nuclear Regulatory Commission investigators later cataloged more than a dozen failures in design, maintenance and operation at Rancho Seco, where a litany of mishaps already had occurred. The repercussions of the morning incident still are felt at the Sacramento Municipal Utility District, also known as SMUD, the plant owner and operator.    The outage plunged the utility district into a financial crunch and sent rates soaring. It has also led the district to hang a &quot;For Sale&quot; sign on Rancho Seco even while it is spending hundreds of millions of dollars on repairs and safety improvements for the still-shuttered plant.    The proposal to sell the plant has, in turn, enticed two of the nation's largest investor-owned utilities to propose radically different futures for the district, setting the stage for an unprecedented battle which was inconceivable before the industry's recent trend toward deregulation.    Duke Power Co., Charlotte, N.C., considered one of the nation's most efficient nuclear operators, says it's interested in restarting and running Rancho Seco. This would be the first time one utility acquired operating responsibility for an entire nuclear plant long run by another utility. It opens the possibility that more such moves could occur in the future.    Industry insiders say Duke's plan may in part be an astute defense. Three of its seven nuclear units share the same Babcock andamp; Wilcox Co. design as the Rancho Seco plant.    There are eight such working units licensed around the country. A ninth, Three Mile Island Unit 2, owned by General Public Utilities Corp., Parsippany, N.J., nearly melted in 1979, in one of the most serious nuclear accidents ever. Public and private groups have asked the NRC to ban operations of all Babcock andamp; Wilcox reactors.    While Duke apparently wants Rancho Seco to continue operating, the Sacramento district's trouble-prone operation of the plant is a risk Duke would prefer to avoid, say observers.    In contrast, giant Pacific Gas andamp; Electric Co., based in nearby San Francisco, wants to close Rancho Seco forever. The nation's largest investor-owned utility proposes to do that with a startling and unsolicited multibillion-dollar takeover of the entire Sacramento system, which in turn is one of the largest voter-controlled electric-utility districts in the U.S.    PGandamp;E's concern is an excess of generating capacity in northern California prompted in large part by the start-up of its Diablo Canyon nuclear facility not long ago. Industry officials estimate it might cost PGandamp;E about $2 billion to buy the Sacramento utility and close Rancho Seco.    The Sacramento utility has told PGandamp;E it wants to hear more about its purchase plan. Today, PGandamp;E's chairman and chief executive officer, Richard A. Clarke, will explain his company's plan to a public board meeting of the Sacramento utility. It isn't likely to be a quiet gathering. Sacramento utility insiders oppose PGandamp;E's offer. &quot;It would be a $2 billion rip-off,&quot; claims one.    Mr. Clarke is expected to suggest that the two utilities appoint outside financial advisors to jointly come up with a valuation of the Sacramento utility's assets.    PGandamp;E's proposed takeover would add enormously to the power of an already mighty utility and do away with a pesky competitor. The Sacramento utility's fast-growing territory is fertile ground for new sales. Moreover the voter-owned utility is the kingpin in a proposed transmission network that would bypass PGandamp;E's almost-unchallenged control over electrical transmission in northern California.    PGandamp;E's proposal has sparked interest in a community worried about recurring problems at Rancho Seco and tired of repeated increases in electric rates. PGandamp;E would close Rancho Seco, freeze rates and guarantee job security for the utility's employees.&quot;They pushed all the right buttons,&quot; said Judith Tebbutt, director of municipal affairs at the Sacramento Chamber of Commerce.    Also under consideration is a possibility that Duke may team up with Portland General Electric Co., creating a holding company that would operate all of the Sacramento utility's generating facilities. Duke would run Rancho Seco. Portland General Electric would operate the other generating stations. The Sacramento district would buy power from the holding company and distribute it to customers.    An acquisition by PGandamp;E would be the ultimate irony for the Sacramento utility, which was spawned by a revolt against the investor-owned utility and which took over PGandamp;E service territory in 1947 after a long, bitter battle. SMUD soon became a model voter-owned utility.    Cheap hydroelectric power from the nearby Sierra Nevada mountains made its rates among California's lowest. A growing population led to rapid expansion, and its reputation in financial markets was secure.&quot;It was considered one of the premier public power issuers,&quot; said Alan Spen, director of municipal research at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.    But in little more than a year, Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. lowered ratings on the district's $1.2 billion of long-term debt on three occasions. The utility -- which needs cash to continue work at Rancho Seco -- is planning to market $150 million of bonds tomorrow or early next week.    Observers believe much of the district's decline can be traced to its elected directors -- community leaders whose experience in small businesses, law, and education hardly prepared them to run a major electric utility with a nuclear generating station. Among other things, directors in the past were inattentive.    &quot;Nobody asked a lot of hard questions,&quot; said Clifford Wilcox, the board's president, leaning back in the office of the animal-feed plant he manages.    Directors say they relied too heavily on managers -- particularly on work at &quot;the Ranch,&quot; as employees called Rancho Seco. &quot;We had a lot of people out there who didn't know what the hell they were doing,&quot; said Mr. Wilcox. &quot;Three Mile Island could have happened at Rancho Seco.&quot;    Edward A. Smeloff, a director, added, &quot;There was an attitude of complacency; and a very sensitive reactor with a complacent attitude is a volatile mixture.&quot;    The list of problems at Rancho Seco, as cataloged by the NRC, has been extensive. Emergency generators have been disabled while the reactor was running. Valves have been put in the wrong positions. Safety equipment the NRC thought had been installed wasn't.    In addition, a Sacramento County grand jury found evidence of drug and alcohol use at Rancho Seco. In a report published last year, the panel said dangerous errors might be committed by workers under the influence. Arrests have been made, and the utility says it has addressed the problem with anti-drug programs.    Current and former managers of the utility complain that members of the board were under political pressure to keep rates down. One result: maintenance work needed at Rancho Seco wasn't done.    Since its 1974 start-up, the nuclear plant has suffered dozens of incidents and outages, standing idle more days than it has run. By the end of last year, that performance put it 78th out of the 86 licensed nuclear reactors in the country, according to Komanoff Energy Associates, a New York-based consulting firm.    Not until 1984, when the NRC and district consultants blasted almost every facet of Rancho Seco's operation, did directors move forcefully. But the awakening was still too late to forestall the 1985 accident.    Struggling to get matters in hand, the district has hired consultants to help the restart effort. New safety equipment is being installed and operator training is being emphasized. Management of Rancho Seco has been separated from the rest of the utility district's operations and now reports directly to the board.    Still, NRC officials complained last fall that overall performance at the still-inoperable facility had fallen in seven of 12 functions from a year earlier.    According to a current preliminary bond prospectus, of 10 top management positions, one is vacant, two -- including the general manager's position -- are filled by &quot;acting&quot; incumbents, and one manager has resigned, effective Oct. 31.    In a waggish effort to help out, a utility employee recently put an ad in a local paper offering Rancho Seco for sale. It read in part, &quot;Unique fixer upper. Spacious. Custom built. 4 stories.&quot;    The district's board was thinking along similar lines. It hopes to get the plant running and then sell or lease it to an outside operator such as Duke Power. The district's future depends almost entirely on whether regulators will permit Rancho Seco to restart. But the utility has repeatedly had to delay the start-up date -- now proposing to restart in January and to build slowly to full power in June 1988.    The importance of the start-up is increased by the utility's use of deferred accounting for more than $60 million in various charges related to Rancho Seco outage. If the plant is shut permanently, the district will have to absorb those charges immediately.    Mr. Wilcox says Rancho Seco will reopen on schedule. &quot;I think the chances of the plant not restarting are about one in 10,000,&quot; he said. However, should Rancho Seco not be permitted to restart, he said, &quot;we definitely are in trouble.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>