<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880428-0167 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Does Bad Regulation Breed Bad Bankers? </HL><SO> </SO><IN> BNK </IN><TEXT>   Perhaps the title of your March 30 editorial &quot;Bad Banking Deserves Penalties&quot; should have been &quot;Bad Bankers Deserve Penalties.&quot;    You are correct in laying blame for the Texas financial crisis on changes in the law in 1982 that allowed banks and savings and loans to &quot;operate on a level playing field.&quot; One can only guess how many times that phrase was bandied about in the media during that period.    As one who closely followed the Texas banking and savings-and-loan situation at the time (as business editor for the Tyler Morning Telegraph), I found it amazing how quickly home-grown financial institutions' boards of directors rushed to align with major holding companies. One would have to wonder what the Texas economy would be like if only half of the banks that joined holding companies had the foresight to follow their charters and serve their local communities.    One would have to wonder also what our elected officials have done to see that those responsible for the financial situation in Texas never repeat their dirty deeds. One also would have to wonder what regulators have done to prohibit those same individuals from tampering with other institutions.    Where is the judicial system in criminally prosecuting those who obviously violated the law and created the savings-and-loan crisis? One only need look at the list of those involved in the Interstate 30 and related condominium and development deals to see that only a handful have been punished. And while some have faced prison and financial penalties, no one has been barred from dealings with financial institutions in the future.    Those who caused this crisis should be punished severely and swiftly, and then maybe our Texas economy can grow, prosper and get off the front pages of newspapers across the country.    Texas is still a great state.    Charles J. Saul   Tyler, Texas   ---   Your editorial points to the very significant problem regarding the obvious inadequacy of the government safety net, commonly referred to as &quot;deposit insurance,&quot; for the financial institutions of the nation. There is growing concern over the hopelessness of the situation and painful awareness of the consequences -- that a very costly taxpayer bailout well may be in the making.    Your suggestion for more aggressive supervision is certainly well directed and your observations are keen indeed regarding current events in the world of insolvent Texas Sandamp;Ls and infusions of cash by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. into Houston and Dallas banking institutions.    The editorial, while well directed, can be likened to tapping at a railroad spike with a tack hammer. Your paper is replete with recent articles discussing the growing severity of the problem. Jeff Bailey and Christian Hill pointed out in their March 25 front-page article that 345 already insolvent Sandamp;Ls collectively lost $9.5 billion in 1987. The article fails to consider the total cost of closing these institutions, but it's obviously $9.5 billion more now than one year ago.    For regulators, or anyone else, to argue that the continued operation of already insolvent thrifts is cheaper for the government than to do as the editorial suggests, i.e., to simply close the institutions, is insane at best.    Perhaps the greatest travesty regarding this growing scandal is that our federal legislative process moves forward with its agenda to repeal partially the Glass-Steagall Act and merge the investment and commercial institutions of the nation through common ownership and create even greater concentration of financial resources, and create a new entity -- the Diversified Financial Services Holding Company -- as the vehicle for such ownership that will be immune from the direct regulation of the Federal Reserve System that now regulates all registered bank holding companies.    While more powers are sought by the banking industry, more deregulation and commingling of two separate industries are in the offing. The timing seems highly suspect given the current circumstances, if some much needed safety and soundness are to be given any heed at all.    O. J. Tomson   Chairman and CEO   Citizens National Bank   Charles City, Iowa   ---   While I found the editorial interesting in content, I think it started from a false premise that the regulators have been tough in dealing with banks in the past.    If you recall the collapse of New York City in the mid-1970s, you also may recall that New York banks were not required to write down New York City bonds to market value -- an act that would have destroyed the net worth of New York banks, caused them to be wiped out, caused their officers to be fired and the public to incur great losses. Such an act also might have disrupted the entire U.S. financial system. Be that as it may, there was certainly nothing done to reprimand the New York banks for imprudent lending to the city, even though people should have foreseen the problems of the city and been wise enough not to buy its bonds.    If you then go to 1982 when we first had the less-developed countries' crisis, prudent regulation would have called for the U.S. banks, primarily the money-center banks, to take enormous losses on their LDC loans. They did not even begin to take these losses until 1987, after they had five years to build capital.    Had there been 25% reserves in 1982 for the LDC loans, every bank in New York would have had negative net worth. I do not know why your editorial page was not crying for blood at that point. There is no question that there are problems in the banking system and there is no question that there are bad real-estate and oil loans in the state of Texas. On the other hand, it certainly is inequitable to bail out New York banks on two separate occasions, to keep Bank of America afloat at a time when it has major problems, and to continue to preferentially help those who are in favor while drowning others.    While you may be right in thesis, you are certainly late in getting there. It is hoped you will be taking the same strong stand when other major banks get into trouble in the future, including those in New York City.    Jenard M. Gross   Chairman and CEO   United Savings Association of Texas   Houston</TEXT></DOC>