<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870417-0142 </DOCNO><HL> Fear and Crumbling in Rawlings's Ghana---By Kathleen Kouril</HL><DD> 04/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> IN EASTERN GHANA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;Why're you hidin' in this place!&quot; the soldier screamed at me, shoving his rifle in my face for good measure. During my travels in Africa I have been hassled, searched, attacked and robbed. This was the first time I'd been raided.    &quot;I shoot you!&quot; another soldier offered. He apparently thought he had uncovered a nest of spies aiding the &quot;dissidents&quot; in his nation.    It was only then that I realized how my companions and I must have looked to the soldiers -- white faces in front of pitched tents in the woods, peering by candlelight at a map of Ghana and Togo. As the soldiers crept up on us, we had been quietly discussing the feasibility of sneaking across the closed Ghana-Togo border. We were just three travelers on an adventure across West Africa, though I was also a free-lance journalist without official sanction.    The soldiers made us pack up our campsite and drive through the night to a military roadblock near a village some distance away. (They rode with us, indicating the route with their guns.) We were made to explain ourselves to a circle of old men, one of whom was said to be the local chief and none of whom could speak English.    We must have looked suitably apologetic, for we were forgiven for &quot;sneaking about like dissidents.&quot; The local Provisional National Defense Council (PNDC) party hack, who unfortunately could speak English, shouted about &quot;defending the revolution from dissidents&quot; and people &quot;like you&quot; who ruin Ghana's tourism potential by telling people at home that Ghana is not a friendly place.    We were kept in custody at the military roadblock all night, though it was difficult to sleep. Every truck driver who was stopped by the soldiers to produce his documents came over to peer in at &quot;the dissidents&quot; and ask if we had any cassettes to sell. In the morning the soldiers were all smiles. They asked us to become their pen pals.    Ghana, at its 30th birthday, is nowhere near grown up. Flight Lt. Jerry Rawlings gave a rousing speech at the Independence Day celebrations in Accra on March 6, quoting from Kwame Nkrumah's original independence speech and calling on Ghanaians to solve their country's problems. But, despite the tone of that speech and five years in power, Flight Lt. Rawlings seems to spend much of his time preoccupied with fears of dissidents and spies and things that go bump in the night. Several weeks ago, when three empty rubber dinghies washed up on the beach near Tema, a coastal town near Accra, the entire country was exhorted to report any other signs of dissidents coming ashore.    The roots of Flight Lt. Rawlings's paranoia are twofold. First was the discovery in late 1985 of a Central Intelligence Agency network in Ghana. Four U.S. diplomats were expelled at the time. Second is the sad state of Ghana-Togo relations, which deteriorated more than a year ago when about 10,000 Ghanaians fled into Togo to escape the fighting between the Kokomba and Moba tribes near the border. Each country accuses the other of harboring dissidents intent on overthrowing its government. The coup attempt in Togo in October did not help matters.    Information percolates up in Ghana through a hierarchy of fear. Everyone must report anyone who seems suspicious or he himself becomes suspect. The farmer who spotted our tourist campsite reported us to his chief because he was afraid not to; the chief reported us to the soldiers because he was afraid; the soldiers reported us to the PNDC ideologue, and so on.    Ghana, after 30 years of independence, and Flight Lt. Rawlings, after five years in power, ought to be occupying themselves with more pressing problems. The country is a mess; it's filthy and falling apart. Everywhere are hideous reminders of the promise and the profligacy of the Nkrumah days when modern Ghana was born.    At that time, a sort of &quot;Jetsons&quot; architecture was in vogue. In Ghana there are hundreds of ugly buildings, often uncompleted, that look like they were built to be launched into space but now are crumbling to the ground. Development-agency tractors stand rusting in the very places where they broke down a decade or more ago. The education system set up by the British in colonial times has deteriorated.    The economy is still a shambles. One needs friends in high places to gain a license to import or export goods, and there are few incentives for people who want to get ahead to work within the system. Ghana's fortunes remain very closely tied to world cocoa prices, factories operate at less than 20% of capacity, the trade gap is rising, and the foreign debt-service ratio hovers at more than 60%. Foreign aid provides more than 40% of core capital spending.    Decades of government waste have set a bad example for Ghanaians. No one saves and despite devaluations of the cedi, confidence in the national currency and in the banking system remains low. A sign over the teller's window in the Barclays Bank in Accra warns patrons: &quot;Any customer who gives his or her money to a member of staff who is not a cashier does so at his/her own risk.&quot; Better to deal with the black-market currency traders who loiter near Accra's main post office and get a higher rate for the risk.    Ghanaians say Flight Lt. Rawlings is good but Ghana isn't. In other parts of Africa, people ask Western visitors for presents. In Ghana they ask for a passport, a visa and a plane ticket. &quot;Take me home with you,&quot; they plead.    It is impossible to know what they really think of Flight Lt. Rawlings. Many Ghanaians want a return to democracy, but opposition leaders are frequently jailed and the independent papers in Ghana, the Catholic Standard and the Free Press, have been banned. I asked a newspaper vendor with three stacks on his stall to sell me the paper that told the nearest to the truth. He passed over the officially approved Ghanaian Times and Daily Graphic and handed me a copy of the Sporting Times.    It didn't have to be like this. Ghana, at independence, was one of the richest countries in the developing world, with an efficient civil service, a prosperous middle class, and a system of government rooted in the British democratic tradition. It was the world's leading producer of cocoa, foreign-currency reserves stood at nearly 170 million pounds, and per-capita income was high relative to other parts of Africa. It's been mostly downhill since.    Perhaps Flight Lt. Rawlings and Ghana can reverse the slide. Cocoa production is creeping up again after declining until 1983. The PNDC's 1986-88 Economic Recovery Program must seem a positive step to the international financial community. It emphasizes increases in industrial and agricultural productivity and food self-sufficiency. A huge billboard in Accra advises Ghanaians, &quot;We must eat what we grow and grow what we eat.&quot; That's also a good sign.    There is another billboard opposite. It reads, &quot;Do not waste time on gossip and rumors, but concentrate on events.&quot; Flight Lt. Rawlings would do well to heed that advice.    ---   Ms. Kouril last wrote for the Journal on Algeria in February. </TEXT></DOC>