<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880718-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DEMOCRATS PREPARED to open their convention with the focus on Jackson.    With the party's national gathering to begin today in Atlanta, the demands of the civil-rights leader, rather than the presidential nomination of Dukakis, threatened to dominate the week's proceedings. Talks between the staffs of Jackson and the Massachusetts governor have involved how much representation Jackson's forces would have on the Democratic National Committee, in a presidential transition and in the administration if Dukakis wins the fall election. The Jackson forces have suggested that he be designated a &quot;crisis negotiator&quot; in foreign-policy emergencies.    Dukakis, who dismissed the last-minute controversies as &quot;the stuff of politics,&quot; arrived in Atlanta and vowed to &quot;launch a winning campaign.&quot;    ---   South Africa banned all activities marking the 70th birthday today of jailed black nationalist Nelson Mandela. Pretoria also ignored international appeals to free Mandela, who was imprisoned for life in 1964 for seeking to overthrow the government. In Cape Town, riot police broke up a pro-Mandela music festival.    ---   Nicaraguan rebel leaders opened a three-day meeting in the Dominican Republic to elect directors and review peace talks with the Sandinistas. Contra military commander Bermudez said he would seek a post on the five-member directorate. In Managua, Ambassador Tunnerman arrived Saturday after his expulsion by the U.S.    ---   NASA officials decided to delay a decision on whether to take the space shuttle Discovery off the launch pad to repair a gas leak until after a test-firing next week of the spacecraft's engines. Discovery's launch, scheduled for September, could be delayed for as long as two months if the shuttle is returned to a hangar for repair work.    ---   Independent counsel McKay is to release today a report criticizing some of Meese's contacts with business ventures benefiting his friend Robert Wallach. The report caps a 14-month inquiry that didn't result in criminal charges against the attorney general but has prompted a preliminary internal Justice Department review.    ---   The Teamsters union elected William J. McCarthy as president. The unionist is to fill out the remaining three years of the term of Jackie Presser, who died July 9. The move by the union's executive board reflected displeasure with the Presser regime. McCarthy was named in a recent U.S. racketeering suit.    ---   Gunmen in Honduras hurled bombs and fired on a group of U.S. soldiers leaving a discotheque in the northern city of San Pedro Sula, wounding four of the servicemen, the U.S. Embassy said. The off-duty soldiers were wearing civilian clothes. There wasn't any immediate claim of responsibility.    ---   An Israeli soldier killed a Palestinian in a Tel Aviv suburb in the first fatal shooting of an Arab inside Israel since the uprising in the occupied territories began seven months ago. In Jerusalem, Foreign Minister Peres said he was willing to negotiate separately with Palestinians. He has sought talks with a Palestinian-Jordanian delegation.    ---   Mexico's Cardenas launched a drive in an effort to mobilize those supporting claims of widespread fraud in the July 6 presidential election. On Saturday, the populist presidential candidate held a rally attended by about 175,000 people, and experts said he has a chance to mold the leftist coalition into a lasting political force.    ---   South Korean protesters clashed with police in Seoul during demonstrations demanding an end to U.S. trade pressures. The violence erupted on the eve of talks between President Roh and Shultz. Separately, Seoul proposed student and sports exchanges with North Korea, a move aimed at averting Olympic protests.    ---   Warsaw Pact leaders proposed new East-West disarmament talks but failed to specifically endorse Soviet leader Gorbachev's plan for a pan-European summit to launch such negotiations. The proposals were made at a two-day meeting of the military alliance. The talks in Poland ended Saturday.    ---   Iraq's President Hussein said that a recent string of battlefield victories by Baghdad's forces should persuade Iran to accept an &quot;honorable&quot; peace and end the Persian Gulf war. Iraq also said its jets bombed industrial targets in southern Iran.    ---   Saudi Arabia placed its security forces on full alert as thousands of Moslems began arriving for the annual pilgrimage to Mecca. Authorities hope to avoid a repeat of riots that killed more than 400 people, most of them Iranians, during last year's hajj. </TEXT></DOC>