<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871127-0134 </DOCNO><HL> The Mystery of the Texaco Case---By Robert H. Mnookin</HL><DD> 11/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PZL TXPETROLEUM (PET)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Most lawsuits settle. It's through negotiation, not adjudication, that legal conflict is typically resolved. This is not to say law is unimportant. Disputants bargain in the shadow of the law with the knowledge that if a deal can't be struck, a court ultimately will impose a resolution.    The interesting questions are why some cases do not settle and why negotiations sometimes fail. Pennzoil v. Texaco is a conspicuous case that has not yet been settled that should have been. If it had been settled for any amount between $2 billion (Texaco's last reported offer before it went into bankruptcy) and $4.1 billion (Pennzoil's last reported offer), both companies' share value would be substantially higher than they are currently.    The basis for this conclusion is easily explained. The consensus among analysts is that if there were no recovery in the lawsuit, given current conditions in the oil industry and the companies' circumstances, Pennzoil would be worth about $55 a share and Texaco about $75. While such valuations are only estimates, it's easy to calculate the amount per share that any given recovery will cost Texaco and will add to Pennzoil's value. Each billion dollars Pennzoil recovers will add $20 a share to its stock and subtract about $4 from Texaco's.    There is an important message in these numbers, one that takeover strategist Carl Icahn evidently understands. On Wednesday, Trans World Airlines, controlled by Mr. Icahn, agreed to buy 12 million Texaco shares and the voting rights to an equal block for $348 million, making TWA the most powerful Texaco shareholder.    If somehow the parties could have been persuaded to settle for $2.5 billion, Texaco stock probably would be worth about $65 a share (it is trading today at about $30) and Pennzoil would be about $105 (it is trading at about $73). Indeed, based on these numbers, any settlement between $1 billion and $7 billion might well increase the value of both companies' stock. Given this huge bargaining range, why haven't the parties been able to settle?    One possible explanation is that the parties and their lawyers had radically different assessments of the odds of what is likely to happen on appeal. This is possible but unlikely. My hunch is that lawyers on both sides told their clients there was a good chance the Texas Supreme Court would hear the case and modify the judgment, and both were surprised when the Texas court refused to review the case. I also suspect that the lawyers have told their clients that the odds of the Supreme Court somehow overturning the judgment are less than 50/50, notwithstanding the fact that most impartial observers agree the amount awarded Pennzoil by the jury has no substantial relation to the amount it was actually damaged.    The Supreme Court has no jurisdiction to consider whether the Texas court has misapplied state law -- instead it grants certiorari only to consider substantial federal questions. Texaco will no doubt claim it was denied due process by the Texas courts because, among other things, the lower-court judges who presided over the trial had accepted substantial political contributions from Pennzoil's lawyer. While the practice is offensive, this is unlikely to be a winning argument. Lawyers have long been the primary contributors to judicial election campaigns; accepting Texaco's argument would seem to imply that any state judicial system with elected judges risks offending due process.    Texaco's better argument is that Pennzoil could have had no binding contract with Getty under the SEC's rules because Pennzoil still had an outstanding tender offer while it was dealing with the Getty board and certain Getty shareholders. This is a good, technical argument, but the problem is that the underlying federal securities law questions would not normally be thought of as substantial -- no important precedent has been established by the Texas courts that will in any way jeopardize administration of federal securities law. If $10 million were at stake, it would be 100 to 1 against the Supreme Court taking this case. A wildly excessive $10 billion judgment makes certiorari more likely, even though as a matter of legal doctrine the amount of damages erroneously ordered isn't supposed to affect the importance of the question of federal law.    Assuming the parties' assessments of the odds are roughly comparable, a second explanation for the failure to settle may be that one or both of the parties simply likes to gamble. If offered a choice between a 50% chance of winning $1,000 in a lottery, or instead accepting a certain amount before, most individuals are usually &quot;risk adverse&quot; -- they would settle for less than $500. There is a good theoretical argument that shareholders, because they can hold a diversified portfolio, should be risk neutral: that is, they should prefer the lottery to accepting less than $500, jump at the chance to settle for anything more than $500, and be indifferent or in equipoise at $500, which is what economists call the &quot;expected value.&quot; There is no plausible argument, however, that shareholders of either company would prefer the lottery of further litigation to a fair settlement.    J. Hugh Liedke, Pennzoil chairman, has a reputation as a hard bargainer and gambler. Nonetheless, $5 billion in hand would strike most people as better than a $10 billion judgment against a bankrupt company in the bush.    A third explanation may be that both parties expected and hoped to settle, but were locked into a bargaining game over how to divide a pie. In such circumstances the public posture of both sides may be primarily a strategic play for better position in private negotiations. Like teen-age drivers playing chicken, those controlling the litigation may be betting that the other side will lose its nerve first.    The final possible explanation for why the case hasn't been settled may be the potential personal liability of Texaco directors in shareholder derivative suits directed at the directors' roles in the original Getty acquisition. (Pennzoil directors face no comparable risk.) I believe the possibility of personal liability for Texaco directors is remote. But it isn't inconceivable, even in Delaware, where Smith v. Van Gorkum teaches us that courts occasionally do surprising things.    The only sure way for the Texaco directors to avoid personal-liability risk is to defeat Pennzoil on appeal. From a director's personal perspective, a $5 billion settlement (which substantially exceeds Texaco's insurance limits for its directors) may be scarcely preferable to a $10 billion courtroom loss if somehow the personal liability of Texaco's directors is later determined to be equal to the amount Texaco pays Pennzoil. How ironic if the threat of derivative suits -- which are supposed to protect shareholders -- leads Texaco directors to reject a reasonable settlement that would far better serve the interests of Texaco shareholders than continued litigation in the hope of complete vindication. One suspects Mr. Icahn will want to assure himself Texaco's hard line isn't the result of self-interest on the directors' part.    Even though settlement would make both companies' shareholders better off, there can be no doubt time is running out. One forum for settlement discussions is the bankruptcy court, where the judge has an opportunity to play a constructive role. Texaco has a Dec. 8 deadline for submitting its own reorganization plan. The bankruptcy judge should not extend that deadline. Thereafter, creditors of Texaco, including Pennzoil, could submit their own plans. By suggesting he might seriously consider approving a reoganization plan that places a reasonable value on Pennzoil's claim -- something more than $2 billion and less than $8 billion -- the bankruptcy judge could encourage both sides to get serious about settlement.    A bankruptcy judge has the power to approve a plan even over the objections of a company's board. Normally, bankruptcy is thought to protect creditors -- not common stockholders. Ironically, this is a case where the threat of a reorganization plan incorporating a reasonable settlement of Pennzoil's claims would protect Texaco holders from the risk that Texaco's directors might prefer, for their own reasons, to gamble again on further litigation.    Meantime, if analysts are correct about the value of the underlying assets, it would appear there is an opportunity for legal arbitrage -- an opportunity that Mr. Icahn is perhaps exploiting. If an investor buys 100 shares of Pennzoil and 500 of Texaco, he probably will come out ahead, no matter what the final result.    ---   Mr. Mnookin is A.H. Sweet professor of law at Stanford University. An editorial on this topic appears today. </TEXT></DOC>