<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870911-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Don't Expect New Abortion Drugs in U.S.---By Phyllis Gapen</HL><DD> 09/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> UPJPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Last December, a French pharmaceutical firm announced a birth-control breakthrough as important as the introduction of the Pill. Roussel-UCLAF, based in Paris, reported development of a tablet that induces abortion when taken within 10 days of a missed period.    The drug, called RU486, is expected to be available in France next year, but in the U.S. there are signs that the anti-abortion lobby and the liability crunch have combined to keep this new-generation abortion drug and others like it off the market -- perhaps indefinitely.    Roussel-UCLAF scientist Andre Ulmann says the new pill is 93% effective in stimulating abortion when taken up to the fifth week of pregnancy, although women often bleed excessively. Daniel Mishell Jr., who is testing RU486 at the University of Southern California under the auspices of the nonprofit Population Council, has found that RU486 triggers abortion in 90% of women who take the drug within six weeks of becoming pregnant. In Sweden, researchers at the Karolinska Institute report they are overcoming bleeding problems by injecting an analogue of prostaglandin a few days after RU486 is taken.    But whatever the exact effectiveness rate may be, the two companies with access to the new generation of abortion drugs (Sterling Drug and Hoechst Roussel, the U.S. arm of Roussel-UCLAF) say they will not test or market the powerful drugs in the U.S. A third (Upjohn Co.) has given up research on new abortion drugs and has quietly shifted the way it sells one of the three U.S.-approved abortifacients it already controls, removing it from the U.S. market.    Among those who advise drug companies, the message is clear: Drug companies should be cautious about testing or marketing abortion drugs in the U.S. &quot;An abortifacient is not just another drug,&quot; explains New York pharmaceutical adviser Ted Klein. &quot;I would tell a company to consider carefully the political and social aspects of the product.&quot;    The history of a group of abortifacients sold by Upjohn since the late 1970s illustrates the tension that surrounds the marketing of abortifacients in the U.S. and may help to explain why Roussell-UCLAF plans to sell RU486 only in Europe and why Sterling Drug, the manufacturer of Epostane, another drug that induces first-trimester abortion, will not test its drug here.    The Upjohn prostaglandin products -- Prostin E-2, Prostin F-2-alpha, and Prostin 15-M -- induce second-trimester abortions by stimulating contractions of the uterus. The release of the first Upjohn product in the U.S. in 1977 raised hope that a safe, simple, nonsurgical method of midterm abortion had arrived. But the product's side effects -- nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fever and sometimes violent contractions of the uterus -- caused Upjohn to tightly control sales and distribution.    Only selected hospitals obtained the drug and its two successors, according to Upjohn officials. Not one clinic that performed inexpensive abortions ever gained access to the drugs. So careful was Upjohn about who got the abortifacients, the company refused to send its prostaglandin products through the U.S. mails.    In the marketplace, sales of Upjohn's FDA-approved second-trimester prostaglandin abortifacients never met the company's expectations and use of the drugs peaked and began to fall in 1977. Only 2% of the 1.5 million abortions performed in America each year are induced with prostaglandins.    One reason for low use of the drugs is that about 90% of all abortions performed in the U.S. are now completed in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy; during the first trimester, surgical techniques are safer than prostaglandins now on the market, according to studies performed at Sweden's Karolinska Institute. But the development of newer, safer prostaglandins could change the outlook for drug-induced abortion in the first trimester, some medical observers say.    David Grimes, a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Southern California School of Medicine in Los Angeles who participated in the largest abortion safety study ever conducted, thinks there is a large potential market for RU486. &quot;Women would prefer taking a pill to having instruments inserted into their uterus that carry certain risks of scarring,&quot; Dr. Grimes says. The obstetrician adds that in his university's hospital tests of RU486, women seek out the drug because they can undergo early abortion far from the clinics right-to-life groups frequently picket. If RU486 is ever approved in the U.S., Dr. Grimes predicts that women would obtain it from their own physicians and use it at home. They may, however, never get the chance.    Each of the three Upjohn products had obtained Food and Drug Administration approval within 18 to 24 months, despite objections from the growing right-to-life movement. But soon after Upjohn's introduction of the abortifacients, &quot;the company came to be known as a death peddler,&quot; says John Willke, a family practitioner who heads the National Right to Life Committee, an umbrella organization of anti-abortion groups claiming millions of members in all 50 states.    From 1983 to 1985, Dr. Willke says, committee members boycotted major over-the-counter products sold by Upjohn in an attempt to curb the use of the drug firm's abortifacients. &quot;The boycott impacted on their earnings,&quot; Dr. Willke says. &quot;We have information from inside the company, good intelligence,&quot; that &quot;over-the-counter sales&quot; of Kaopectate and other Upjohn products declined in the Midwest by 1986 and &quot;the company lost money.&quot; Drug-industry analysts do not attribute any sales drop to the boycott.    Until 1985, Upjohn was not deterred from selling its abortifacients or from developing new ones, including meteneprost, an untested product that Upjohn says right-to-life groups erroneously labeled as an over-the-counter home abortion drug. Then, citing low sales of its abortifacients and the increasing reliance on surgical techniques to perform abortions in the U.S., Upjohn in 1985 announced the closure of its reproductive research lab and discontinued development of meteneprost. Last year, the company withdrew one of its prostaglandin products (Prostin F-2-alpha) from the U.S. market. The National Right to Life Committee claimed victory, noting Dr. Willke's 1985 letter to an Upjohn executive calling on the company to stop marketing its prostaglandin products for &quot;lethal purposes,&quot; and to halt research on abortifacients.    &quot;In a series of three years Upjohn made three major moves,&quot; Dr. Willke says. &quot;First it closed the research center, second it announced it would not license the new suppository (eteneproste, and third it chose to withdraw Prostin F-2-alpha from the U.S. market.&quot; (Meteneprost softens the cervix. Dr. Willke says that when used in a sequence of three or four suppositories, the chemical induces abortion.)    Asked how the Right-to-Life Committee would react if a company attempted to market another abortifacient in the U.S., Dr. Willke says, &quot;It is a foregone conclusion that they would be hit with an instant, massive national boycott of every product they made, except those where there were no other alternative drugs.&quot;    Louise Tyrer, vice president for medical affairs of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, representing 183 family-planning organizations with a clientele of three million women nationwide, disputes any suggestion that right-to-life organizations discouraged abortifacients from being tested and marketed in the U.S.    A better explanation for Upjohn's actions, she says, may be its concern over the litigation crisis. Right-to-life organizations, she explains, are also taking credit for &quot;getting the intrauterine device off the market {when in fact} the companies took it off because of financial losses they were experiencing in litigation and the difficulty getting insurance coverage.&quot; Because of suits against IUD manufacturers, only one IUD is still available in the U.S.    All new birth-control techniques are difficult to test in the U.S. in the 1980s, explains Jacqueline Forrest, a sociologist who directs research for the Alan Guttmacher Institute, a nonprofit group specializing in family-planning issues. &quot;Most organizations can no longer get insurance for clinical trials for contraceptives,&quot; Ms. Forrest says.    But David Paisley, a biochemist who teaches at the University of Illinois in Chicago and advises drug conglomerates, thinks the boycott had a chilling effect on Upjohn. Political pressure by &quot;self-appointed consumer advocates&quot; had to enter Upjohn's thinking when it closed its reproductive research center and removed a prostaglandin product from the market, he says.    Whatever the effect of the boycott on Upjohn, Dr. Willke is making good his threats to bring pressure on any other company that proposes to test or market a new abortifacient. Already, he has written to Hoechst Roussel, the American arm of the French firm that makes RU486, to dissuade the company from testing the drug. Dr. Willke says the U.S. subsidiary replied that it would never market the abortifacient in the U.S. &quot;for any reasons,&quot; including its potential use against breast cancer.    &quot;What kind of product is really worth being known as the abortion company?&quot; asks Mr. Paisley. &quot;Even though a product may sell $50 million, that's not enough.&quot;    ---   Ms. Gapen is a free-lance medical writer based in Washington and Houston. </TEXT></DOC>