<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880829-0066 </DOCNO><HL> In Rangoon, Fear Tempers the Euphoria </HL><AUTHOR> Kathleen Kouril </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> RANGOON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A number of senior government officials slipped out of Burma Saturday on the first commercial flight out of this troubled country in three days. Chance had put me on the same flight, but when I tried to interview them, Burmese guards quietly pushed me back into my seat. Many Rangoon residents believe the airport had been closed to regular air traffic to allow even bigger fish to flee the country unobserved.    I spent five days in Rangoon last week, where the atmosphere is a mixture of euphoria and fear. Most Burmese I spoke with believe they're moving closer to the establishment of democracy, but they can't believe it could have been so easy. Many fear the Burmese Socialist Program Party, which has controlled the country for the past 26 years, is playing for time. A student echoed what many people said: &quot;We don't know what will happen next. This government is very tricky.&quot;    A general strike was held last week to protest the continued rule of the Burmese Socialist Program Party and Burma's president since Aug. 19, U Maung Maung. Each day protesters marched past the U.S. Embassy, Rangoon General Hospital and Suli Pagoda -- places important in the brief history of this struggle because protesters were shot there. Western diplomats here estimate that the demonstrations brought one million people onto the streets last week -- and the protesters were marching defiantly -- almost triumphantly.    The atmosphere at night, however, is very different: People are tense, edgy, scared.    On Friday night, I was on my way back to the Strand Hotel downtown, when a monk brandishing an ax threatening to smash it through our windshield if my American driver and I didn't slow down to identify ourselves. At every corner we were challenged by neighborhood guards carrying clubs and homemade slingshots. We were politely waved on once we were seen to be foreigners.    Thousands of Burmese are patrolling the capital in such hastily organized &quot;street protection groups.&quot; At night the streets are a maze of barricades -- erected by civilians fearful of a recurrence of the violence of Wednesday and Thursday nights, when men believed to be government agents attacked people in shops and torched some shanties. President Maung Maung may have lifted martial law Wednesday and called the soldiers off the streets, but someone apparently is sending them out in hit squads to terrorize the population.    One interpretation -- expressed by many of the Burmese I spoke to -- is that the remaining government officials, who still appear to have the support of most of the armed forces, are trying to erode support for the democracy movement by generating a fear of anarchy and lawlessness among the general population. Many Rangoon residents fear the government is trying to create an excuse to bring the soldiers back onto the streets, perhaps even to justify a new military coup.    Most civil servants have joined the strike and government administration has broken down completely. The strike has crippled finance, communication and transport. The banking and postal systems are shut down, most phone lines don't work, and gasoline hasn't been available since Thursday. Student groups and neighborhood groups are springing up not only to maintain order but also to provide basic services such as carting away garbage and taking food to the elderly. So far the unrest doesn't seem to have affected food supplies in Rangoon, though shortages are feared if there's no gasoline with which to truck produce into the capital. Last week shops and markets were opening for only one hour in the early morning and closing around 10, when the demonstrations began.    Around noon on Wednesday, President Maung Maung yielded to the pressure of the general strike and announced the lifting of martial law and an emergency party conference on Sept. 12 for the party to vote on a multiparty system for Burma. By 1 o'clock, the soldiers had disappeared from the city center and the streets were jammed with jubilant people shouting in English &quot;We've won! Democracy now!&quot;    Excitement mounted Thursday morning when dissident U Aung Gyi and 1,700 others arrested during the disturbances earlier this month were released. U Aung Gyi, the country's best-known dissident and considered likely to serve in a new government, had been detained with nine others more than three weeks ago. Late Thursday afternoon U Aung Gyi addressed 200,000 people in Rangoon and called for President Maung Maung and U Tin Aung Hein, chairman of the Council of People's Justice (set up Aug. 19 to investigate people's demands for democracy) to establish a caretaker government to administer the country until democracy. He asked that the army and the public respect each other, avoid violence and work together for democracy.    U Aung Gyi's demands were echoed Friday morning by Aung San Suu Kyi, daughter of Burma's late, beloved independence leader, U Aung San. An estimated half million people rallied around Rangoon's landmark Shwedagon Pagoda to listen to her speak.    The huge crowd at Shwedagon Pagoda was excited and emotional. People were in high spirits and delighted to see a foreign journalist there to witness the event. I was passed through the crowd like a baton, and later raised up onto the top of a truck to have a better spot from which to photograph the rally. The crowd cheered when I lifted my camera. Someone called to me: &quot;This is our history.&quot;    ---   Ms. Kouril is a free-lance journalist who specializes in developing countries. </TEXT></DOC>