<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870626-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Pacific Glitches:A Computer TycoonAnd Saipan DiscoverThey Are Incompatible---ComputerLand Founder HasTax Break Nearly Vanish;Bribery Tale Upsets Island---Want Some Used Generators?---By Ken WellsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST TAXESJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> SAIPAN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When William H. Millard, the U.S. computer-store tycoon, agreed to deliver the keynote address at the annual Saipan Chamber of Commerce banquet, islanders were curious. By the time he finished speaking, many were outraged.    Mr. Millard, in the midst of dessert, asserted that certain officials here had marred his stay by pestering him for bribes. With virtually all of Saipan's leaders in the audience, even those who thought Mr. Millard might be telling the truth found his manners questionable.    &quot;He was a guest,&quot; says Carmen Gaskins, a chamber member who attended the dinner last January. &quot;It was an insult.&quot;    Mr. Millard (pronounced muh-LARD) had moved to this speck of America near Guam in March 1986 in quest of a tax haven and fresh business opportunities. But he has found -- once again -- trouble.    In the 1970s, the visionary college dropout cobbled together ComputerLand Corp., the U.S.'s biggest computer-store chain, at a time when few believed in the future of retailing computers. One secret of his success was a management style marked by impetuosity, pit-bull determination and a disdain for compromise. The same traits have led to big problems ever since.    In 1985, a revolt of ComputerLand's franchisees, upset with Mr. Millard's autocratic style, forced him from the company's chairmanship. Earlier that year, a California jury, believing that he had willfully reneged on provisions of a $250,000 loan that had helped him begin his fledgling business, sent him reeling by awarding the note's holders 20% of his ComputerLand stake and $125 million in punitive damages. Mr. Millard, who is appealing the verdict, had once been offered a chance to buy back the note for a mere $300,000 but refused. He cited principle.    Three weeks ago, the 55-year-old Mr. Millard agreed to sell his undisputed stake in ComputerLand to an investor group led by the Wall Street firm of E.M. Warburg, Pincus andamp; Co., for an estimated $200 million. Investment bankers valued ComputerLand at $1 billion just three years ago, but the company has been hurt since then by competition and a computer slump.    Mr. Millard's stay on this Pacific island, the capital of the 14-island Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, has been costly as well. Though urged by public-relations and business advisers to keep a low profile, he made an ostentatious splash. He quickly bought a huge amount of land that he envisioned as a resort. He proposed to take over the island's creaky electricity company. And he staged a press conference to announce the intended sale of his ComputerLand holdings.    His plan to sell ComputerLand, based in Hayward, Calif., after he had moved here brought attention to the commonwealth's income-tax arrangement with the U.S. government. The commonwealth collects taxes at the U.S. rate, keeps 5% and rebates the remainder to taxpayers. Washington gets nothing.    That never bothered anyone before because Saipan's population of 20,000, which makes up 95% of the commonwealth's total, is composed largely of working-class people. But the idea of a newly arrived tycoon's taking advantage of the same benefit, to the tune of millions of dollars, raised eyebrows in Washington. So the commonwealth legislature, saying that it feared interference from Congress, slashed its rebate rate to 25% for income categories that applied to Mr. Millard alone, thus stripping him of potentially tens of millions of dollars in tax savings. Officials also have spurned his utility offer, leaving him stuck with $8 million of second-hand generators.    Commonwealth leaders suggest that Mr. Millard's January allegations of corruption are nothing more than baseless retaliation for his problems here. But Mr. Millard insists, &quot;I found myself saying no 10 times a week&quot; to extortion attempts. His reply, he says, was &quot;No. None. Zero. Zip.&quot;    Rumors of public corruption on Saipan were being investigated by the region's U.S. attorney's office long before Mr. Millard arrived on the island, and the investigation is still going on. Mr. Millard says he has told what he knows to the federal investigators. Among other things, he is said to have alleged an attempt by five commonwealth officials to extort $1 million from him to &quot;fix&quot; his problems.    The commonwealth government plans to open its own corruption investigation as a result of Mr. Millard's January speech. It has subpoenaed him, but rather than name names before a legislative committee, he has sued to block the subpoena, claiming that the commonwealth investigation is an attempt to intimidate witnesses in the federal inquiry. A federal judge here has upheld the subpoena, and local leaders say that Mr. Millard, who is appealing the judge's decision, will be cited for contempt and possibly jailed if he refuses to testify.    How did Mr. Millard get into so much hot water? &quot;Principle,&quot; he says emphatically. &quot;Arrogance,&quot; says Joe Lifoifoi, the speaker of the commonwealth House of Representatives. They may both be right. During his meteoric career, Mr. Millard has habitually angered important customers, investors and colleagues. His critics consider it management by hubris; he considers it management according to high principle.    The son of a railroad clerk, Mr. Millard had trouble figuring out what he wanted to do with his life. He grew up in modest circumstances and later dropped out of college. He drove trucks and dug ditches before landing a data-processing job for a finance company in 1958.    Extremely bright and energetic, he had his own software company by 1969. The company quickly collapsed, but Mr. Millard remained undaunted. He became a devotee of est, a pop-psychology self-improvement movement, and he tried unsuccessfully to make and market a microcomputer, well before Steven Jobs came out with the Apple.    In 1976, he became intrigued with computer retailing, buying the ComputerLand franchise concept from an acquaintance, John Martin-Musumeci, for $30,000. The first ComputerLand store opened later that year. Sales shot from about $1 million to $1.4 billion in just nine years, making ComputerLand one of the fastest-growing franchises ever.    Timing and luck helped Mr. Millard, for he had very little competition then and he hit the crest of the personal-computer explosion. But he also had a knack for selling his vision of things to come, and for attracting talented help such as Edward Faber, a youthful former manager at International Business Machines Corp.    Mr. Faber is credited with attracting ComputerLand's strongest franchisees and with negotiating a key contract that allowed ComputerLand to be one of the first two store chains authorized to sell the IBM personal computer when it was introduced in 1981. Mr. Faber's success eventually appeared to rankle Mr. Millard.    &quot;It was as if Bill woke up one day and said, 'My God, we're a big company. We've got to start acting like one,'&quot; recalls one former aide. In Mr. Millard's mind, that also meant it was time to begin running his own show. In 1983, he kicked Mr. Faber upstairs into a nonoperating position, paid himself $1 million in yearly consulting fees, embarked on a far-flung overseas expansion and acquired all the accouterments of a Fortune 500 company, including jets, a fleet of limousines and bodyguards.    Mr. Millard also doubled the size of the headquarters staff, filling key positions with recruits from the est movement pioneered by his friend Werner Erhard. Mr. Millard pressured his non-est executives to &quot;take the training,&quot; which is designed to teach individuals to &quot;take sole control&quot; over their lives.    He installed his 27-year-old daughter, Barbara, an est graduate with no business training, as ComputerLand's president and chief operating officer. He also spent $1 million on a company-sponsored plan designed to end hunger on earth through est thinking.    All the spending and expansion were ill-timed. The personal-computer business went into a swoon in 1984, and ComputerLand's franchisees -- already angered by what they considered waste and nepotism -- were furious when Mr. Millard declined to reduce the company's high franchise fees, which ranged up to 9% of sales.    Mr. Millard's response to their complaints seemed pure est. One ComputerLand executive recalls a particularly raucous meeting: &quot;There were the franchisees screaming that they were being squeezed unmercifully and might not survive and telling Bill Millard they needed some relief, and there was Bill Millard telling them to take control of their lives. Those guys wanted his head.&quot;    The franchisees obtained the resignations of Mr. Millard and his daughter in September 1985 by threatening to bolt the company. Yet Mr. Millard might have held out against the revolt but for the disastrous court judgment.    Mr. Millard had borrowed $250,000 in 1976 from Marriner andamp; Co., a Boston venture-capital company, to finance a microcomputer project. Marriner's principals said they later discovered he was using some of the money to finance the nascent ComputerLand venture. Under pressure from Marriner, he agreed to a revised note in 1977 that included, in writing, an option allowing the holder to convert it to 20% of the stock of Mr. Millard's private holding company and 20% of the stock of any related company.    Marriner twice tried to sell the note back to Mr. Millard. Marriner's board decided it would accept offers of $400,000 and then $300,000, but each time Mr. Millard changed his mind, saying the note wasn't worth more than face value because it was nontransferable and convertible only into the nearly worthless stock of the holding company, not ComputerLand's stock. Mr. Millard later said he had an oral agreement with Marriner to this effect, an assertion that Marriner denied in court affidavits.    In 1981, the note was purchased by Mr. Martin-Musumeci, the man who had sold Mr. Millard the ComputerLand concept in 1976 and who had briefly worked as a ComputerLand executive before quitting in a bitter dispute with Mr. Millard. The action turned negotiations over the note into a personal grudge match. Mr. Martin-Musumeci says that he made an offer to sell the note to Mr. Millard for $500,000 but that it was refused.    He then sued Mr. Millard, partly financing his litigation by selling units in the note, forming a unit purchasers' investor group called Micro/Vest. Because of ComputerLand's new IBM contract, he was able to get a good price -- $10,000 for each 1% interest. Buyers included William Agee, Bendix Corp.'s former chairman, and his wife, Mary Cunningham. Mr. Martin-Musumeci says he and his investment group offered to settle with Mr. Millard at least six more times.    The units turned into a bonanza in March 1985 when a California Superior Court jury in Alameda County rejected Mr. Millard's position. Its verdict in favor of Micro/Vest left ComputerLand strapped for credit, and Mr. Millard briefly threatened to file for bankruptcy for the company. Instead, he reached an agreement allowing him to appeal without posting a bond, in exchange for surrendering 8.5% of the company shares -- in addition to the 20% set by the jury -- should the verdict be upheld. Although the outcome is uncertain, the Micro/Vest units have been resold for as much as $375,000 each.    Mr. Martin-Musumeci doesn't expect Mr. Millard to give up easily. &quot;The word 'settle' isn't in Millard's vocabulary,&quot; he says. &quot;He could have been one of the big winners in the computer industry, but he's the biggest loser.&quot; Says Mr. Millard: &quot;People have asked me why didn't you just cut your losses. Because, hell, it's wrong. The suit is wrong.&quot;    From his living room in a rambling compound high above this island's Lau-Lau Bay, Mr. Millard insists that he won't give up on Saipan, either. &quot;I need to live by my own rating system,&quot; he says in true est fashion. &quot;If I dealt with this situation by putting my tail between my legs, that's not OK with me.&quot;    Yet Mr. Millard's envisioned resort land on Saipan has reportedly been sold and he has dismissed three former ComputerLand staffers who accompanied him here, an indication to many that he intends to leave.    If he does leave, Mr. Millard will once again have been victimized by his own impetuosity. He decided to move to Saipan without ever having seen the island, choosing his place to live by sticking a pin in a Saipan map, then flying to the island to find property near the pinprick. His plans to become Saipan's utility king by replacing an antique World War II system that fails a dozen times a week seemed just as hasty. Based on an enthusiastic conversation with the commonwealth's governor -- but without sounding out the legislature -- he bought four giant generators from an abandoned Arizona copper mine.    Some people in the government saw the power plan as nothing more than a ruse by Mr. Millard to ease residents' suspicions that he was here only to take advantage of Saipan's tax benefits. To others, he was simply a rich &quot;haole,&quot; or Anglo, flashing his wealth and perhaps threatening the public jobs provided by the present utility.    &quot;You can't come here and play the Great White Father and expect to be liked,&quot; observes Phil Swett, a commonwealth government employee.    But Mr. Millard believes that his actions here, including his bribery allegations, have &quot;struck a blow for the common man&quot; on Saipan.    Many Saipan businessmen say that bribery is a way of life on the island. &quot;If Bill would have just paid the bribes and played the game,&quot; says Tony Guerrero, a past Chamber of Commerce president who sold Mr. Millard his property here, &quot;he could have cornered the whole damn island.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>