<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:West Germany Gets Ready to Welcome a Murderer---By Enno von Loewenstern</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The West German government has announced that the president of East Germany's state council, Erich Honecker, will pay a visit in September. This will be the first time that an East German chief of state enters West Germany. Mr. Honecker is also chief of the East German Communist Party. The Bonn government is immensely pleased with itself for having thus proved that the conservatives too can have good relations with the East. This explains why the West German government receives Mr. Honecker at all -- why, in fact, it so desperately has striven to entertain the Soviet puppet who embodies East Germany's oppression.    How would Norway celebrate Quisling, were he still alive? West Germany, it seems, is different. The prevailing opinion in the West German press is that thou must not anger those who control the roads to Berlin and the destinies of 17 million Germans behind the Iron Curtain, that &quot;dialogue&quot; is good for its own sake, and that the Western politician who gets the most attention from communist dictators is best for peace and should get the most votes.    There used to be a time when West German politicians would say: If Mr. Honecker comes, he will &quot;have to bring something substantial along.&quot; Some even would demand that he rescind the Schiessbefehl, the order to shoot all East Germans who try to escape to the West. But the things that Mr. Honecker now is expected to &quot;bring along&quot; could have been settled at a lower level -- agreements on ecological questions or cultural exchange or the like. West Germany is to pay for the cleaning up of East German rivers, which will benefit West Germans since socialist dirt is flowing westward.    There is hope that Mr. Honecker will widen the &quot;family visits&quot; program so that East Germans who have no relatives in the West may take trips to briefly sniff the air of freedom (under current rules East Germans traveling to West Germany to see close relatives for three to 10 days leave their own families in East Germany as hostages). But East Germans first would have to find somebody to invite them and pay the bill, as East Germany just has cut down foreign exchange for travelers to the West; each traveler gets only 15 West German marks (a little more than $8) for the entire trip.    Mr. Honecker did announce an &quot;amnesty.&quot; How many of the estimated 4,500 political prisoners in East Germany will benefit no one knows, since details will not be announced until September or October when Mr. Honecker is safely back in East Germany. He also announced abolition of the death penalty. But he stopped short of declaring that the death penalty for refugees, the Schiessbefehl, would be abolished or that the Berlin Wall would be torn down.    Thus, instead of having to make significant concessions, Mr. Honecker forced them upon his too-willing hosts. The oppressor of 17 million Germans will be received in Bonn, the West German capital, with (almost) full honors befitting a chief of state. This will make it extremely difficult for the West German chancellor, when returning the visit, not to go to East Berlin, which the East German government calls its capital city. A West German chancellor or federal president visiting the East German chief of state there would go far to undercut the Berlin status, the foundation of West Berlin's freedom. When former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, a Social Democrat, visited Mr. Honecker in 1980, they met in a lodge on Lake Werbellin, outside Berlin's borders. The conservative Christian Democrats seem to have become less careful.    Chancellor Helmut Kohl will not remove his sofa as he did before receiving President Pieter Botha of South Africa. The idea was that he didn't want to be seen sitting down with Mr. Botha, a symbol of apartheid. The fact that Mr. Honecker embodies apartheid in Germany is not to be considered. But there is an even more embarrassing aspect to the matter: Mr. Honecker is, of course, a murderer, and so are his associates. They personally are guilty of the shootings at the Wall and elsewhere. There is a prosecutor's office in Salzgitter that collects data on crimes committed against East Germans. By rights, Mr. Honecker should be arrested the instant he steps on West German soil.    To avoid this, West Germany passed a law in 1966 to offer amnesty to East German leaders should they visit the West; at the time an &quot;exchange of speakers&quot; was envisioned. The East Germans protested against what they curiously called the &quot;handcuffs law&quot;; it was the opposite. It was dropped before East German Prime Minister Willi Stoph visited West Germany in 1970. Later the Supreme Federal Court ruled that chiefs of state have immunity anyway. So Mr. Honecker cannot be arrested if during his visit somebody is shot at the Wall, but the soldier who fires at Mr. Honecker's order could be arrested and tried here.    Mr. Honecker comes nevertheless because he wishes to impress the East Germans with the respect West Germans pay him. He does not feel compelled to pay an entrance fee in humanitarian coin, for his are loftier aims: furthering the cause of peace. He actually appealed to Chancellor Kohl &quot;in the name of the German people&quot; not to block nuclear disarmament by demanding some nuclear protection against Soviet conventional superiority. The fact that French newspapers upon announcement of the visit promptly speculated whether it means that &quot;Germany is drifting off to the East&quot; -- a subject dear to the French press and many French politicians -- must gratify Mr. Honecker. The Kremlin marked the recent visit to Moscow by the president of West Germany, Richard von Weizsaecker, with solemn assurances that the Soviet Union of course does not aim to lure West Germany out of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.    Tension in East Germany still is high, despite seeming normalcy. Several hundred thousand people openly demand permission to leave the &quot;second German Republic&quot; for good. Were they successful, innumerable others would seek to leave. People still risk their lives in spectacular escapes, climbing the Wall, braving mine fields on the borders elsewhere, sailing or even swimming the Baltic Sea, or hopping the Wall in flying machines. What if a refugee is shot at the Berlin Wall while Mr. Honecker steps on Bonn's red carpet? Or what happens if a new riot explodes such as the unrest of June 7 and 8, when thousands of young people were driven back from the Wall after they had pressed close to hear a David Bowie concert on the Western side?    There is even fear that many might descend simultaneously on the Wall, hoping that Mr. Honecker has ordered his border guards not to shoot during those three sensitive days. What if they do not shoot and there is a mass escape? What if they do shoot?    ---   Mr. von Loewenstern is editorial-page editor of the West German daily, Die Welt, in Bonn. </TEXT></DOC>