<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870730-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Endurance Test:Energy Firm ExpandsEven in Chapter 11,Wears Out Creditors---The Tactics of Jack Stanley,Owner of TransAmerican,Are Remarkably Effective---Six Miles in the Morning Help---By Charles F. McCoy and Matt MoffettStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG) </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Jack Stanley says he has been so preoccupied with business lately that his time in the marathon has risen to four hours. But while his roadwork may be suffering, Mr. Stanley has compiled a notable track record as the marathon man of bankruptcy court.    The 48-year-old Mr. Stanley has been running his large, personally owned energy company under court protection for the last 4 1/2 years -- and for nine of the last 12. With the endurance and tenacity of a long-distance runner, he has managed to outlast and outmaneuver his creditors.    In January 1983 his company filed for Chapter 11 reorganization for the second time in a decade. It owed the staggering sum of $1.2 billion. Now, after some of the most furious legal wrangling ever seen in a Chapter 11 case, Mr. Stanley's TransAmerican Natural Gas Corp. is poised to emerge from the protection of a bankruptcy court here, perhaps as soon as late summer. Through it all, Mr. Stanley has not only maintained control of the company but has actually expanded it, making it second only to Exxon Corp. among Texas natural-gas producers.    His strategy -- since imitated by other troubled debtors such as the Hunt brothers of Dallas -- has been to make bankruptcy proceedings as contentious as possible, exhausting the will and financial wherewithal of his creditors. He has bombarded them with lawsuits and motions, some of which have been thrown out as frivolous. He has skipped out on depositions and defied court orders. Creditors claim in court filings that he has shuffled assets beyond their reach.    Certainly, TransAmerican isn't the only company to have shown nerve in bankruptcy proceedings. Texaco Inc. has used them to stave off a life-threatening damage award won by Pennzoil Co. Continental Airlines wiped out high-cost union contracts. Manville Corp. won breathing room from thousands of asbestos-related lawsuits.    But seldom have the burdens of a Chapter 11 case fallen so heavily on the creditors -- and so lightly on the debtor. The company will probably wind up paying most of its 1,200 creditors only 25 cents on the dollar. Mr. Stanley has maintained 100% ownership, and he actually got a raise during the proceedings -- to $300,000, higher than the sums paid to most executives running profitable oil companies of similar size. He has kept his wife, daughter, son and two sons-in-law on the payroll to boot.    And in the end, Mr. Stanley will have imposed heavy losses on those who trusted him most. His 14 banks, led by Continental Illinois Corp. and France's Banque Paribas, will lose an estimated $200 million because of forgone interest and other concessions -- more if energy prices fall again. Worse, by not paying its bills promptly, TransAmerican has sucked the life out of so many small oil-field companies that it is known in South Texas as &quot;Transylvania,&quot; after Dracula's stamping ground.    Mr. Stanley has turned bankruptcy proceedings into a war of attrition against his creditors. When Texas Drilling Co. of Abilene, Texas, sought to collect on a $70 million debt a few years ago, Mr. Stanley sued that company for $500 million, accusing it of conspiring to put him out of business. Later, according to a finding by Judge Paul Glennon in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Worcester, Mass., Mr. Stanley reneged on an agreement to let Texas Drilling see his ledgers -- after he had taken the opportunity to examine its books.    Not long after sitting down for a deposition by Texas Drilling lawyers, Mr. Stanley abruptly got up to leave, claiming he was about to miss the last plane out. That wasn't true. Texas Drilling made him a reservation on a later flight, but Mr. Stanley left anyway.    Judge Glennon finally called the behavior of Mr. Stanley and his attorneys in that case &quot;inexcusable&quot; and &quot;contumacious&quot; and threw out his lawsuit. &quot;Trial by ambush is a thing of the past,&quot; Judge Glennon said. (After three years of suits and countersuits, Texas Drilling and Mr. Stanley settled out of court.)    Mr. Stanley, a lanky man with thinning brown hair, says that tough business predicaments have dictated his tough tactics. &quot;When you're backed up against the wall,&quot; he says, &quot;you're desperate.&quot;    He also maintains that growing aggressively during the bankruptcy period was the only way he could generate the cash needed to repay creditors. Both enemies and supporters are equally astonished that he was able to expand his operations on a shoestring, structuring innovative drilling deals in which contractors agreed to work for a percentage of their findings rather than for a fee.    As a result, Mr. Stanley boasts, TransAmerican has built one of the nation's most successful exploration-and-production operations. &quot;The last four years speak for themselves,&quot; he says. Adds his chief attorney, John C. Nabors: &quot;What he did borders on genius.&quot;    Mr. Stanley insists that he has made more than his share of sacrifices along the way. For example, in 1985 TransAmerican installed its first independent board of directors to placate creditors, who were reluctant to negotiate a reorganization plan if Mr. Stanley had complete control of the company.    Even in creating the board, however, Mr. Stanley seems to have hedged his bets. Each of the nine outside directors receives $75,000 a year -- roughly triple the pay of directors of most Fortune 500 companies. TransAmerican says the high salaries ensure high-caliber directors, but some creditors believe they ensure compliant ones. More significantly, for the first year of its existence, the board was prohibited by Mr. Stanley from interfering with suits he had filed against his banks or with any other matters involving the reorganization.    Mr. Stanley's style has made him many enemies -- and apparently given him little peace of mind. He refuses, for instance, to be photographed. And former employees say his security men use everything from telephoto lenses to infrared binoculars to keep a constant eye on workers. &quot;He trusts no one,&quot; says George Wagner, a former production superintendent.    Born in Springfield, Mass., Mr. Stanley worked as a gasoline-pump jockey after dropping out of Western New England College. At 19, he figured out he could make more money if he leased the station himself. Within years, he had assembled a network of about 250 gas stations in New England. He was a millionaire before his 33rd birthday.    In the early 1970s, his ambitions rising with his fortunes, he pursued a vision of forming one of the largest energy companies in the country. He gobbled up oil and gas properties in Louisiana and Texas, but an ill-fated attempt to build an ammonia plant in South Texas landed his company in the bankruptcy court in Worcester in 1975.    His approach to bankruptcy proceedings was novel from the start: Instead of streamlining to pay creditors, he tripled the assets of his company, then called Good Hope Industries Inc., to $579 million, buying petroleum acreage and pouring funds into another pet project, a refinery alongside the Mississippi River in Good Hope, La.    Barred by the bankruptcy filing from collecting what they were owed, Mr. Stanley's creditors found another way off the hook. They introduced him to the head energy lender at Continental Illinois, which was then on a wild oil-patch lending spree that eventually led to the bank's bailout by the federal government. By obtaining credit from Continental and its lending partners, Mr. Stanley was able to emerge from Chapter 11 in 1980 and eventually to pay back almost all of his creditors, with interest.    Free of the bankruptcy court, Mr. Stanley rechristened the company GHR Energy Corp., moved his headquarters to Louisiana and turned his attention to the refinery -- with disastrous results. He envisioned a technological showcase that could process huge volumes of cheap, sludgelike oil spurned by other refiners. Even though the industry was beginning to sour, he poured some $800 million of mostly borrowed money into expanding the refinery and building his oil and gas holdings.    While some creditors were still awaiting repayment from the first bankruptcy case, banks and oil-service companies lined up to do business with him again. &quot;The deals Stanley offered were so good,&quot; says C.N. Millican, a member of a creditors' committee, &quot;you would lose your ordinary business sense.&quot;    With ready access to credit, Mr. Stanley bulled ahead until horrendous environmental problems, mechanical breakdowns and cost overruns swamped GHR with more than $500 million of losses between July 1981 and July 1983. The refinery hasn't operated since.    Hounded by his lenders and behind on payments, Mr. Stanley filed his second Chapter 11 petition in January 1983, on his home turf of Worcester. (In 1984, creditors obtained a change of venue to Houston, where Mr. Stanley had set up new headquarters.) GHR listed $1.2 billion of debts and 1,200 creditors.    Mr. Stanley stated publicly that he thought the bankruptcy proceedings would be &quot;short-lived,&quot; but he began gearing up for a protracted struggle. &quot;The most critical period is in the first month or two of a Chapter 11,&quot; Mr. Stanley says. &quot;If you don't go in with a war chest to help you survive, you're finished in 60 or 90 days.&quot;    Almost from the start, Mr. Stanley took steps to make sure he would remain comfortable even if his creditors weren't. He sold his $500,000 house in Louisiana to one of his companies and leased it back for $1,000 a month -- $4,000 less than the mortgage payments. Mr. Stanley says he doesn't recall the transaction, which was revealed in a disclosure statement filed by TransAmerican in bankruptcy court in Houston.    Creditors also claim that Mr. Stanley illegally hid assets to keep them out of their hands. The same disclosure statement shows that shortly before filing for protection under Chapter 11, Mr. Stanley instructed Marc Rich, the fugitive oil trader, to pay some $5 million owed to TransAmerican into accounts of another Stanley affiliate that didn't file for bankruptcy protection. In all, the statement shows, Mr. Stanley shuttled at least $12 million from the companies that sought court protection to other affiliates.    In another disputed maneuver, a few weeks after the Chapter 11 filing, Mr. Stanley spent more than $500,000 of corporate funds to set up a new company -- outside of the bankruptcy court's reach -- in the name of his wife. The company, Southwest Texas Services Inc., then began acquiring petroleum leases and later provided oil-field services on all of Mr. Stanley's wells -- charging roughly one-third more than going rates, former employees say. In the fiscal year ended July 31, 1986, the TransAmerican disclosure statement shows, Southwest drew almost 60% of its $28.8 million in revenue from work done for TransAmerican and its affiliates.    TransAmerican says that creating the service unit allowed it &quot;to eliminate many indirect inefficiencies and time delays,&quot; but even its own workers had their doubts. &quot;I knew I could have let bids and got the jobs done cheaper,&quot; says William Gibbens, who formerly ran Mr. Stanley's South Texas drilling operations and now is employed by a subsidiary of Coastal Corp., a creditor of TransAmerican. In the disclosure statement filed in the bankruptcy court in Houston, TransAmerican stated that its transactions with Southwest have been conducted on an &quot;arm's-length basis&quot; at competitive prices. Eventually, the court forced Mr. Stanley to include Southwest in the bankruptcy proceedings.    Although Mr. Stanley insists he kept creditors informed about all these moves, creditors allege he didn't own up to many of them until years after they occurred.    In early 1984, Judge Glennon of the Worcester court chided Mr. Stanley from the bench for trying to &quot;circumvent&quot; court orders by acquiring petroleum leases through companies that weren't in Chapter 11. Mr. Stanley says that he couldn't have survived otherwise and that the orders didn't apply.    Mr. Stanley also never obtained clearance for thousands of dollars in contributions to Louisiana politicians -- which, many bankruptcy lawyers say, count as transactions that are &quot;outside the normal course of business&quot; and hence must be reported to the court. Mr. Stanley quips that in Louisiana, political contributions &quot;are not outside the normal course of business.&quot; He says that, in any case, he received no favors in return. &quot;I'm really a bit player in politics,&quot; he says.    But in 1984, shortly after Mr. Stanley had pitched in $32,000 for the re-election campaign of Louisiana Gov. Edwin Edwards, a phone call, from a man purporting to be from Gov. Edwards's office, came in to an oil-field-services concern that was opposing Mr. Stanley on one of the bankruptcy proceedings' major issues. The concern's credit manager, Michael Teer, has said in depositions that the man threatened to revoke permits that the company needed to stay in business in Louisiana unless Mr. Teer sided with Mr. Stanley.    Neither Mr. Teer nor the governor's office will comment. Asked about the episode, Mr. Stanley chuckles and says that he only vaguely remembers Mr. Teer.    While Mr. Stanley has played hardball with small suppliers, he also hasn't hesitated to take on opponents who are even bigger than he is, such as Oscar Wyatt, the brash chairman of Houston-based Coastal Corp. Coastal, a company also noted for tough business tactics, presented creditors with a competing reorganization plan earlier this year under which Coastal itself would wind up owning TransAmerican's prolific natural-gas fields.    TransAmerican immediately slapped Coastal with a $2 billion lawsuit and a public-relations campaign that may have been unrivaled for its lack of subtlety. &quot;Being accused of having an 'unsavory business reputation' by the Coastal Corp. and Mr. Wyatt,&quot; TransAmerican said in a press release, &quot;is like being called ugly by a frog.&quot;    Mr. Wyatt, for his part, has few words of praise for Mr. Stanley: &quot;He's the master of borrowing money and figuring every way in the world not to pay it back until he wants to pay it back and on the terms he wants to pay it back.&quot;    Many of TransAmerican's creditors have just withered away. When Hugh Ray, an attorney for one unsecured creditor, Medallion Oil Co., distributed a notice to all other creditors a few months ago, about 500 letters were returned as undeliverable. &quot;They may have died or moved or gone out of business. I don't know,&quot; Mr. Ray says. &quot;But that's 500 people who will never get a penny out of this.&quot;    The relationship between Mr. Stanley and South Texas landowners has often been rocky. Mr. Stanley has had to do a great deal of drilling to keep the company afloat -- and by most accounts the environment has been far from his highest priority. Charles Martens, a former Stanley employee, says that when he first took control of the drilling operations in the early 1980s, landowners were almost in a state of rebellion because the drilling had made &quot;a complete disaster&quot; of some local ranch land.    Mr. Stanley says his operations are environmentally sound. In Louisiana, however, his refinery still holds the record for most fires or explosions in a single year -- 76, or one every 4 1/2 days. Its sludge and smoke led many residents of the nearby town of Good Hope to sell their property to Mr. Stanley and move away.    Through the long court struggle, Mr. Stanley hasn't abandoned a habit that he says has helped him preserve his equanimity. &quot;I run six miles every morning,&quot; he says, &quot;just to get in the right frame of mind.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>