<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Poison Produce:As Food Imports Rise,Consumers Face PerilFrom Use of Pesticides---Lax Third World Regulation,Weak Controls at BorderMake Detection Difficult---The Case of Tainted Mangoes---By Barry MeierStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN LATAMCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) </IN><DATELINE> CULIACAN, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As morning mists rise from the foothills of the Sierra Madre, brightly dressed Mixtec Indians shower chemicals over lush fields of tomatoes, cucumbers, eggplants and green peppers.    Within the next few days, the vegetables -- some still coated with pesticides, including a suspected cancer-causing compound -- will be harvested and loaded into 500 tractor-trailers that leave here daily for the U.S. Some of the pesticide-laced produce will be spotted by U.S. border inspectors, but the rest will reach tables in American homes.    As food imports to the U.S. rise, so does concern about the safety of Americans' diets. &quot;Of all the chemical hazards the public faces from polluted air, water and food, pesticides in food pose the greatest risk,&quot; says Richard Jackson, the incoming chairman of the committee on environmental hazards of the American Academy of Pediatrics.    Pesticides are used on U.S. crops as well as on foreign ones. But detecting chemically tainted food among the imports is tougher than monitoring it domestically. One problem is that pesticide use is poorly regulated in the Third World, where American chemical producers are pushing pesticide sales. In addition, Mexico, a major U.S. food supplier, has a poor safety record handling pesticides. And U.S. border controls are lax.    Food imports, meanwhile, are soaring. Last year, Americans bought a record $24.1 billion of imported food, a 40% rise from 1982, the International Trade Commission estimates. Fruit and vegetable imports led the increase, driven by U.S. consumer demand for fresh produce year round. Fresh fruit imports reached $1.2 billion last year, more than double 1979 levels, according to the commission.    Federal agents who watch U.S. borders say that 6.1% of all food imports tested violate U.S. safety laws, double the rate for domestic produce. Yet a mere 1% of the estimated one million food shipments entering the U.S. annually are ever checked for dangerous pesticide residues, according to a September 1986 study by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress.    In the last year alone, a number of pesticides banned by U.S. officials as public health threats have been found on imported produce. The compounds are suspected of producing cancer, neurological problems and other ills. More commonly, the pesticides found on foreign produce are legal but exceed U.S.-approved levels or were sprayed on crops for which the U.S. hasn't approved their use. &quot;People think the system {for catching pesticide-tainted food} is working, but it isn't,&quot; says Jack Musselman, a California food inspector.    At the major U.S. border crossing for Mexican exports in Nogales, Ariz., food may enter the U.S. every weekday evening and on Fridays and Saturdays without pesticide checks. The reason: Pesticide inspectors of the federal Food and Drug Administration aren't on duty. Even when the FDA does test the produce, its slow procedures prevent it from stopping 45% of the pesticide-tainted shipments headed for U.S. consumers, the GAO's study found.    Importers handling pesticide-tainted produce need fear little punishment. Between 1979 and 1985, according to the GAO, the FDA levied fines in only 15% of the cases in which importers repeatedly violated U.S. food-safety standards. Some 75% of those fines hadn't been collected by the FDA more than a year later. &quot;FDA processes the paper work, but then they let everything drop,&quot; says Ralph Dominick, a GAO investigator who helped study FDA monitoring of pesticide levels in food imports.    Politics compound border problems. Take the example of tainted mangoes, which are still being eaten by U.S. consumers. In 1983, the federal Environmental Protection Agency banned domestic use of the pesticide ethylene dibromide, known as EDB, because of concern that it might cause cancer. But it allowed foreign mango growers to continue using the pesticide until 1985 while they tried to find alternatives. (The pesticide, which is used to kill fruit flies, penetrates the mango's skin and contaminates the flesh.)    According to documents filed in a Washington, D.C., federal appeals court, State Department pressure caused the EPA to cancel its planned ban, which would have affected 80% of the mangoes eaten by U.S. consumers. In two letters to the EPA in 1985, State Department officials argued that the ban might be economically harmful to Mexico and Haiti, two major mango-exporting nations, as well as damaging to U.S-financed mango-growing projects that relied on EDB in Belize and Guatemala. &quot;In addition to its economic impact, this decision also has political importance because of what it symbolizes to {food} supplier nations,&quot; James H. Michel, a State Department official, wrote the EPA in October 1985.    In January, the appeals court ruled that the EPA's failure to enforce the EDB import ban was &quot;arbitrary and capricious.&quot; In a sharply worded decision, the three-judge panel also accused the EPA of placing concern for &quot;foreign well-being&quot; above the interests of U.S. consumers. The court acted on a lawsuit brought against the EPA by Florida mango growers and U.S. environmentalists.    An EPA spokesman says that the agency has asked the court to allow continued imports of EDB-tainted mangoes until September, when several producers are expected to have non-chemical ways of killing the pests. A court decision on the EPA's request is pending.    Meanwhile, U.S. pesticide producers, faced with flat domestic demand, are trying to sell more of their products to foreign growers. &quot;The industry is going to where the crops are being grown,&quot; says Jack Early, the president of the National Agricultural Chemicals Association, a trade group.    The industry's exports of banned pesticides are waning, many pesticide experts say. But many of these compounds are still produced by government-subsidized pesticide manufacturers in the Third World. Moreover, poorly trained Third World farmers often use U.S.-approved pesticides at the wrong time, on the wrong crops or in excessive amounts. &quot;Many Third World growers don't know {pesticide} residues are even an issue,&quot; says Agi Kiss, a World Bank pesticides expert.    Mexico, which supplies more than half the vegetables eaten by Americans between December and March, is a special focus of concern. While federal officials say that Mexican pesticide practices are improving, problems persist. During one week in January, federal food inspectors identified 15 shipments of tainted Mexican sugar peas, squash, eggplants and other produce. They were contaminated by pesticides that hadn't been approved by U.S. officials for those crops or that tested at levels exceeding federal health standards. Mexican bell peppers were coated with benzene hexachloride, a suspected cancer-causing pesticide banned by U.S. regulators.    By midday in the Culiacan Valley, the air is thick with the sweet, heavy smell of pesticides. Crop-dusters repeatedly buzz growing fields, their chemical mist raining down on crops and farm workers alike. A recent University of California study called Mexican pesticide use &quot;heavy&quot; and added that area growers sprayed chemicals regularly, rather than limiting their use to times of high insect infestation.    For their part, Mexican growers say that they abide by U.S. pesticide laws. &quot;We use pesticides as safely as American farmers,&quot; says Hector Miguel Gonzalez, the head of Mexico's national growers' union. Driving through Culiacan's hectic streets, Mr. Gonzalez points to a new laboratory built by local growers to test vegetables for pesticide residues before the produce is shipped to the U.S.    In the lab, two high-speed blenders are grinding eggplants into mush. Pedro Bastidas, the lab's chemist, explains that he is running tests to convince U.S. officials that Mexican eggplant growers are, in fact, using a U.S.-approved pesticide. For reasons yet unknown, Mr. Bastidas says, the approved chemical is breaking down into an illegal one before the eggplants reach U.S. borders.    Some U.S. chemists question the claim. &quot;From what I know about those {pesticides} that kind of breakdown is impossible,&quot; says K.C. Ting, the supervisor of California's pesticide residue laboratory.    Whatever the case, federal efforts to increase import scrutiny are only beginning. In a bid to focus federal testing efforts, FDA officials recently paid $285,000 for access to a data base compiled by the Battelle Institute, based in Columbus, Ohio. It tracks international pesticide use on a country-by-country basis. Agency officials are also preparing responses to the problems highlighted by the GAO report, an FDA spokesman says.    Some states, such as California and Florida, aren't waiting. In Los Angeles's teeming central produce market, Mr. Musselman, the food inspector, takes out a pocket crowbar and pries open a crate of Mexican string beans bearing a familiar label. &quot;The last time this stuff came in, it was dirty&quot; with pesticides, he says.    The shipment is impounded four hours later, after state lab tests detect the pesticide methamidophos, which isn't approved by U.S. officials for string-bean use. The episode marks the second time in two months that pesticide-tainted string beans from the same importer have turned up in Los Angeles wholesale markets, Mr. Musselman says. &quot;By the time {the FDA} starts moving on a problem,&quot; he says, &quot;our people are already eating it.&quot; As a result, California officials plan to test 1,500 import shipments this year for pesticide problems, double the number tested in 1986.    Several developing countries are reducing pesticide use. Indonesia recently banned 57 widely used pesticides, including several U.S.-produced compounds, after chemical overuse led to insect resistance to some chemicals and the ruin of the country's rice crop. Growers in Grenada, Costa Rica and several other Central American countries are working with U.S. scientists to develop farming practices that minimize chemical use, says Allen Steinhauer, the chairman of the entomology department at the University of Maryland in College Park.    Meanwhile, controversy in the U.S. over pesticide residues -- on both imported and domestic food -- is expected to intensify soon. A recent EPA report called food pesticide residues a leading U.S. public-health threat. Later this spring, the National Research Council, based in Washington, D.C., expects to release an EPA-sponsored report pinpointing foods posing the highest pesticide-related cancer risks.    One preliminary finding: Nearly 50% of U.S. dietary exposure to suspected cancer-causing pesticides comes from fresh and processed tomatoes. </TEXT></DOC>