<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870917-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Coal Industry Lobby Pits Pet 'Clean Coal' ProjectAgainst Pending Rewrite of Acid-Rain Legislation---By Rick WartzmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)UTILITIES (UTI)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) </IN><TEXT>   The coal industry says it's worried that its much-touted pet project -- &quot;clean coal&quot; -- will get scrubbed if new acid-rain laws are enacted.    For years, coal interests opposed to stricter acid-rain legislation have gone to Capitol Hill to bemoan the tremendous cost of complying with tougher air-emission standards.    But now, in rhetoric tinged with concern about the environment, coal industry spokesmen claim that their efforts to develop high-tech methods for burning coal more cleanly would be placed on the back burner by enactment of a revised Clean Air Act. Such lobbying illustrates how a special interest group can put new sheen on an old argument.    The Clean Air Act rewrite is being considered by the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, where passage this fall is considered likely. The House is working on its own acid-rain package. Clearance through Congress is uncertain.    Clean-coal proponents argue that every dollar they must spend in the short term to comply with more stringent acid-rain standards represents one less dollar for clean-coal technology, which, they say, is years away from practical use. &quot;If we have to comply with new standards, it doesn't appear that any money will be left for clean coal,&quot; contends Robert Flagg, the National Coal Association's manager of legislative affairs. &quot;There is only so much to go around.&quot;    Environmentalists, for their part, view clean-coal technology as a big-business stall tactic. &quot;I would apply one word to it: bunk,&quot; says Richard Ayres, a Washington-based attorney with the Natural Resources Defense Council.    He adds that clean coal is at least as costly as pollution-reduction techniques currently available. &quot;Why not use what we have today?&quot; Mr. Ayres asks. &quot;The argument is always that there's something better on the horizon.&quot;    But clean-coal votaries disagree, maintaining that within a decade, their advances will ensure that coal burns more efficiently as well as more cleanly than even the Clean Air revision would mandate. Ultimately, they promise, Americans will see a reduction in their electric bills.    The utilities industry -- the nation's biggest consumer of coal -- quickly points out it already spends $10 billion annually to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions, widely considered the primary cause of acid rain. Senate testimony indicates that if the Clean Air Act revision clears Congress in its current form, it could add $3 billion to $15 billion annually to that tab. The extra burden, says a federal official who endorses clean coal, &quot;could stop our cause dead in its tracks.&quot;    Actually, the Senate measure includes its own provision earmarking money for clean-coal development. However, the coal industry believes the acid-rain portions of the Senate measure undercut all of those appropriations. Sen. George Mitchell, the Maine Democrat who heads the environmental protection subcommittee and the bill's architect, must forge a compromise between proponents of acid-rain legislation and proponents of clean-coal research. It won't be easy.    Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd, who has proposed his own $3.5 billion clean-coal program, is waging a truculent campaign against more strenuous acid-rain laws. &quot;The current acid-rain proposals are lose-lose propositions,&quot; declares the West Virginia Democrat, whose state is the third-largest coal producer. &quot;In all of them, the deadlines are so tight and the (emission) reductions required are so massive that they would lock out any chance of clean coal being developed.&quot;    The potential setback for clean coal -- of which there are more than two dozen means of production -- comes shortly after the White House has embraced development of the technology, making the issue even more explosive on Capitol Hill. President Reagan has proposed spending $2.5 billion for clean coal beginning in fiscal 1988, which starts Oct. 1. That's in addition to $750 million already authorized by Congress for clean-coal research through 1988.    Yet, the private sector must match the government monies project by project before these federal funds are released. Lee Thomas, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, has said that asking companies to support clean coal as well as to accept new acid-rain standards is &quot;inconsistent.&quot;    Utilities claim they've but two choices to cut sulfur dioxide emissions by the amount specified in the proposed Clean Air Act measure. One is to use smokestack scrubbers, which cost about $100 million each. &quot;We're talking big money,&quot; says a spokesman for an industry trade group.    Moreover, utilities officials say scrubbers, in use since 1968, only help regulate sulfur dioxide, whereas clean coal promises to help reduce nitrogen oxide pollutants, too. &quot;What you're asking people to do is make a capital investment on old facilities,&quot; says Ronald McMahan, a Denver-based economist and veteran observer of the coal industry. &quot;It's like having a 1940 Chevy and somebody telling you to put mag wheels on it. Forget it. You're ready to move on to a new Mercedes.&quot;    The other option is for the utilities, which use about 1,300 coal-firing boilers nationwide, to switch to low-sulfur coal from high-sulfur coal. That, however, often involves breaking long-term contracts with colliers.    In addition, it could play havoc with coal markets and exacerbate unemployment problems; that's because the majority of low-sulfur mines are in the West, and most high-sulfur mines are in the East, an area long bedeviled by a high jobless rate in the coal fields. &quot;You can't just click your heels and switch,&quot; says Robert Beck, manager of environmental programs for Edison Electric Institute in Washington.    The clean-coal issue is further complicated because the Clean Air Act pertains to much more than acid rain. The law, enacted in 1970, also regulates toxins and ozone levels, and industry officials worry that no matter how strong a case they make against tougher acid-rain laws, they might have to swallow them as part of a larger bill.    In fact, although the Clean Air Act hasn't been overhauled since 1977, a rewrite is possible this year because dozens of urban areas need legislation to avert 1987 sanctions for failing to meet air quality goals. Washington sources expect a Dec. 31 deadline to meet these standards -- mainly regulating ozone -- to be extended under Clean Air Act auspices. Legislation pertaining to ozone &quot;is something that could drag acid rain (legislation) along,&quot; says Mr. Flagg of the National Coal Association. He suggests separating the two issues and evaluating each on its own merits. That, however, is unlikely.    And, according to environmentalists, it also is unnecessary. Mr. Ayres, for instance, contends pollutants must be cut without delay or North American lakes will be damaged irrevocably.    He acknowleges industry claims that sulfur dioxide emissions have fallen nearly 30% in the past decade, but says it's too little, too late. &quot;What you should talk about is not how much you did this year, but how much you've done over the years,&quot; he says.    Indeed, at the heart of the clean-coal debate is a most basic question: How damaging is acid rain?    Environmentalists say very damaging. Coal lobbyists insist that the scientific evidence is inconclusive, and that there's no urgency in combating sulfur emissions. This position is expected to be supported by a long-awaited report from the National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program, a government-sponsored research group. The study probably will be issued today, about the time the full Senate committee considers marking up the Clean Air Act rewrite.    In the meantime, clean-coal advocates are attempting to advance their cause, hoping their latest concerns will alter their image of being irresponsible about the environment. After all, says Theresa Pugh, a spokeswoman for the National Association of Manufacturers, industry supporters and environmentalists share many views.    &quot;We just have a different notion of what clean is,&quot; she says. </TEXT></DOC>