<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880923-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): The Players --- Funny Money: A Worthless Ruble Hampers Soviet Trade; Moscow Struggles to Give It More Value </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Gumbel </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Soviet officials have been bewitching Western audiences lately with smooth talk about how the U.S.S.R. will soon be playing a bigger role in the world economy.    Don't hold your breath.    Moscow is still far from being able to take the one step absolutely essential to its full membership in the world economic community: making the ruble convertible into other currencies. Before that can happen to any good effect, the clunky Soviet economy will have to be put through a whole series of wrenching -- and politically hazardous -- reforms needed to make it competitive by world standards.    Right now the ruble is barely worth the paper it's printed on. You can't use it to buy anything outside the Soviet Union (it isn't allowed out of the country) and there's precious little available to buy inside the nation. Money like that can barely be called money at all, and neither Soviet-bloc allies nor western firms are much interested in taking it in trade.    A ruble convertible into dollars would change this. But before that would be feasible the ruble will somehow have to be made convertible at home, into plentiful goods available on now-empty Soviet shelves. The Soviet people have banks full of money, mattresses full of money, but because production is so inefficient there is little to spend it on. That's the rub.    Mikhail Gorbachev's advisers agree that creating a supply to offset the potential demand represented by all this cash -- and thereby giving the ruble some real value -- will be the Soviet leader's toughest economic challenge. It will take years to achieve, if it can be achieved at all. Along the way, the country will likely have to wrestle with problems it has long viewed as afflicting only capitalist nations: inflation, deficits, insolvencies.    &quot;Currency convertibility is the cardinal question of 'perestroika,'&quot; says a Moscow-based European banker, referring to Mr. Gorbachev's economic restructuring program. &quot;Will they have the stomach to go through with it?&quot;    Yes, vows Ivan Ivanov, a senior foreign-trade official who helped draw up the blueprint for change. But he warns that it may take until the end of the century.    A visit to the Ural Mountains, on the edge of Siberia, shows what kind of fix the Soviets are in. Here, the ruble won't buy meat, sausage, sugar or butter; supplies are so short that these staples are rationed throughout the region.    In an echoing, deserted department store in downtown Magnitogorsk, a grimy steel town, customers place their orders at a special meat counter and pay for them with oblong slips of paper. The slips, issued by local authorities, have the month and the word &quot;meat&quot; printed on them in red ink. They are the region's true currency. &quot;If we didn't have rationing, we wouldn't have meat,&quot; says Mikhail Lysenko, Magnitogorsk's mayor.    Facing up to the tremendous imbalances in their economy, Soviet officals have stopped sneering at Western capitalist notions of supply and demand and are desperately trying to find ways to fill their empty shelves. The usual official exhortations to produce more haven't worked, so Mr. Gorbachev is proposing a frontal attack on what his economists believe is the central problem: a system of completely artificial administered and subsidized prices that bear no relation to real values.    It is here that the Soviet leader's troubles could start. Big troubles.    Prices for basic goods and services here have been held at very low levels for decades. A loaf of bread costs around 30 cents, a subway ride in Moscow 8 cents. The Kremlin has to cough up about $110 billion annually in subsidies to cover the difference between the real cost of providing consumer goods and services, and what is actually charged for them. Mr. Gorbachev has complained that children play soccer with loaves of bread because they're so cheap.    Industry operates without knowledge of its real costs. Officials at the giant steel works in Magnitogorsk, for example, boast that the plant made a profit of about $1.5 billion last year -- but if it had to pay the actual costs of its energy, iron ore and transport instead of just having them allocated by central planners, the chances are the plant would have operated at a loss.    Nobody really knows, though, because nobody has tried this way of doing business. And that is the difficulty, says Leonid Abalkin, one of the Soviet Union's leading reform economists. &quot;We must reintroduce the law of economic value as an active part of socialism,&quot; he declares.    The price reform is supposed to do just that. In theory, it would bring about a huge boost in efficiency and production by ending administered and subsidized pricing. At the wholesale level Soviet enterprises would, like western companies, negotiate prices with their suppliers and customers. At the retail level subsidies would disappear, eliminating distortions -- and invariably raising the prices of consumer items.    The reform at the wholesale level would be a death blow to central planners, who have in the past arbitrarily set millions of prices, allocated all raw materials to factories, and taken away the finished products. They are not fans of Mr. Gorbachev. At the retail level, the end of subsidies and the attendant leaps in retail prices could lead to social unrest, as happened in Poland. The Soviets would also have to suffer business failures, which weren't allowed to happen in their noncompetitive economy. The reforms are supposed to make factories much more productive and efficient by allowing them to make more of their own decisions; those that make best ones will prosper but those that make the worst ones must be allowed to fail if the reforms are to have any meaning, economists say.    Knowing the risks, Mr. Gorbachev is moving cautiously. Many details of the price reform have yet to be announced. It's supposed to be implemented by 1991, but the exact date is treated almost as a military secret.    But come it must. &quot;Without a price reform, we shall not be able to create normal relations in the economy,&quot; Mr. Gorbachev told the landmark Communist Party conference this summer. &quot;How can we have economical production when the prices of raw materials and fuel are too low? This simply cannot be done.&quot;    If all goes according to plan and Soviet stores do start stocking more than old sardines and vile toothpaste, authorities then would have another hurdle to leap -- the possibility of a wild surge of inflation as pent-up savings pour into the marketplace.    The overhang of cash is immense. Deposits in the state-owned savings bank have swollen to $500 billion, the equivalent of six months average salary per person. Combine that and the cash stored elsewhere with what one foreign ministry official calls &quot;the Soviet hoarding mania -- people will buy, buy, buy because they won't believe it'll still be there tomorrow,&quot; and the U.S.S.R. could quickly go the way of Yugoslavia, which is struggling with a 150% annual inflation rate, growing debt and a rapidly devaluing currency.    The Soviets are already trying to drain off some of the surplus cash into productive investment. For instance, several enterprises now are following the example of a Ukrainian machinery manufacturer that started selling a type of interest-bearing security to its employees and using the capital to upgrade equipment. But such small-scale efforts aren't likely to sop up enough surplus cash, and reform economists believe careful regulation of the financial system will have to accompany price reform.    Meanwhile, the Soviets are putting out feelers to the West. The U.S.S.R. hopes to get trade and other agreements that will bring it some of the things it needs to modernize its economy and thus speed the day when the convertible ruble is possible: Western credits, technology and expertise. Though rebuffed in trying to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (the U.S. and other nations felt its economy needed reform first, not afterward), the Soviets recently agreed to diplomatic ties with the 12-nation Common Market and are trying to negotiate a trade agreement with it.    Closer to home, they are trying to introduce full currency convertibility into the Alice-in-Wonderland trade structure they share with their East European allies. Currently, the value of exports and imports are supposed to balance each other among East Bloc nations. But since none of these countries has a hard currency of accepted worth, figuring out the value of products for balancing purposes has been left to negotiators armed with tables of theoretical prices.    Moscow wants a more realistic system. East Germany and Romania remain unconvinced, but the Soviets have signed agreements with several other allies allowing enterprises in the signatory countries to deal with each other directly, using market forces rather than theoretical tables to set prices.    If the U.S.S.R. can achieve its ultimate goal and make the ruble convertible around the world, its trade would benefit enormously. Hampered by nonconvertibility, its trade has been minute for a country so populous, and in some ways it resembles that of Third World nations: It relies mainly on exports of commodities, mainly oil, and uses barter or countertrade agreements to pay for its imports.    Increasingly, the unconvertible ruble is also hampering Soviet efforts to bring in Western capital and management techniques through joint ventures with Western firms, arrangements permissible since January 1987. But foreign firms want profits in dollars, marks or pounds, not rubles that can't be used outside the Soviet Union.    Mr. Ivanov, the Soviet trade official, is acutely aware of the difficulties and impatient to solve them. &quot;It's idealistic to believe that joint ventures are a way to import foreign products and pay nothing,&quot; he says.    ---   Mr. Gumbel is chief of The Wall Street Journal's Moscow bureau. </TEXT></DOC>