<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880317-0175 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: My Confusion Over Hypocrisy, Bureaucracy and Analysts </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Gartner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA ECO MON </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> Three things  </DATELINE><TEXT>    among many -- that I don't understand:   No. 1. I don't understand the American Medical Association. Last April, a doctor from the AMA went up to Congress and said we must outlaw the advertising of cigarets and other tobacco products.    This &quot;was not a decision which the AMA took lightly,&quot; Dr. James S. Todd told the Subcommittee on Transportation, Tourism and Hazardous Materials of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. &quot;We certainly appreciate the First Amendment freedoms that we enjoy in this nation.&quot;    Certainly. But, of course, some things are more important than liberty, and we must, the doctor said, restrict our freedoms -- ban the right to tout perfectly legal products -- in order to stop people from smoking themselves to death.    And then, this year, the journal of that very same American Medical Association ran an anonymous letter to the editor in which a young doctor told how he, or maybe she, injected a dying 20-year-old woman with enough morphine to kill her. (&quot;With clocklike certainty, within four minutes the breathing rate slowed even more, then became irregular, then ceased. . . . It's over, Debbie.&quot;)    The dramatic letter raised all kinds of issues of medicine, journalism and law. Authorities in Chicago have subpoenaed the journal to disclose the name of the doctor. There is talk of a murder charge. But the American Medical Association suddenly remembered the First Amendment, and it is objecting to the subpoena on the ground that it interferes with a free press.    So this seems to be the position of the American Medical Association: The First Amendment protects those who anonymously want to tell you how they killed somebody. But it doesn't protect those who want to tell you to buy a legal product that might cause you to kill yourself.    It seems to me that you can't have it both ways. You can't call up freedoms when it's to your convenience and then ignore them when they're inconvenient.    Another thought: If the American Medical Association is so concerned about the hazards of smoking, why doesn't it urge state medical boards to lift the license of any doctor who smokes? They do that to doctors who drink too much or who get caught using drugs. Why not smokers? After all, as Dr. Todd testified, &quot;The health consequences of tobacco use have proven to be so serious and so difficult to correct that we cannot afford to overlook any preventive measure . . .&quot;    Dr. Todd is &quot;senior deputy executive vice president&quot; of the AMA. That says a lot. Any organization that has a senior deputy executive vice president is bound to be confused. Isn't it wonderful, though? A senior deputy executive vice president appearing before a subcommittee on transportation, tourism and hazardous materials.    The problem with the AMA is that it's too much like the government.    ---   No. 2. I don't understand the government, either.    We elect presidents and legislators to run this country and solve our problems. Our top problem right now is the deficit, yet everyone is afraid to deal with it. So when the pressure from the people to do something becomes intense -- there's much evidence that the people are more concerned about this than legislators are -- what do legislators and the president do?    They name a commission to look into the problem.    So now we have something called the National Economic Commission. The 12 members are all men, all white and almost all rich. They've been given $1 million and one year to do their work. That means the president and Congress can get away with doing nothing about the deficit for yet another year. They can look you in the eye and say, &quot;The NEC is studying that.&quot;    You can be sure the NEC is not going to propose anything that will pinch labor, for Lane Kirkland is a member. Or big business, for Lee Iacocca and Donald Rumsfeld and Drew Lewis are members. Or farming, for my fellow Iowan Dean Kleckner of the Farm Bureau Federation is a member. Or Wall Street, for Felix Rohatyn is, of course, a member.    With all due respect to the National Economic Commission, I can round up a dozen ordinary people -- including women and minorities and persons of modest incomes -- and it won't take us a year or a million dollars to suggest ways to reduce the budget deficit. As starters, we'd propose increases in taxes. As finishers, we'd propose decreases in defense spending.    That would do it.    You don't need a whole new bureaucracy to figure that out.    The problem with the government is that it's too much like the AMA.    ---   No. 3. I don't understand the people who analyze politics. At first, they said Albert Gore would flop because he ignored Iowa. And they said that right up to Super Tuesday Eve. But it was Richard Gephardt, the Iowa winner, who faded and then disappeared while Mr. Gore prospered.    Now the analysts are saying Iowa is through.    Huh?    The role of Iowa and of New Hampshire was not to pick a winner but rather was to show off the candidates -- primarily to the reporters and the TV folks -- in a more-or-less human and humane and manageable setting.    The news people could see how the various candidates behaved in a real situation, not just at an airport. Are they good on their feet? Do they relate to people? What do they say about the issues? Do they tire easily? Are they photogenic? How do they do on TV? Do they get irascible after a long day? Iowans were just supernumeraries -- folks cast to walk around in the crowd and occasionally shout a question or serve up a meal. What the Iowans thought was secondary to how the candidates acted and what the press perceived.    In any national campaign there has to be someplace where the candidates early on can be seen and felt and touched and heard. Iowa and New Hampshire have been serving that function. It isn't a question of how the people vote in those early states. It's a question of how the candidates behave -- and of what the press sees.    No. Super Tuesday didn't show that Iowa was wrong. It showed that the analysts were.    ---   Mr. Gartner is editor and co-owner of the Daily Tribune in Ames, Iowa. </TEXT></DOC>