<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Develop Their Agriculture to Save Ours---By Randall B. Purcell</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The U.S., which once was the world's breadbasket, probably can never regain that position. Improved technology and greater production incentives have caused global food production to increase nearly 30% over the past 10 years, creating a food glut that has made it difficult for America to sell its ever-larger harvests abroad.    Last summer, for the first time in its history, the U.S. imported more food than it exported despite its position as the world's largest food producer. And at the end of last year the value of U.S. agricultural exports fell to about $26 billion from a peak of $44 billion in 1981. This year has already begun badly with the Soviets' refusal earlier this month to purchase the U.S. wheat it had promised to buy.    The drop in exports has contributed to a decline in farm incomes, which have reached their lowest levels since the Great Depression. It has also reinforced the crisis in U.S. agriculture that forced the federal government to spend $25 billion on its farm program last year even as thousands of family farms were foreclosed.    Although the recent decline in the dollar's value has strengthened the volume of U.S. agricultural exports, no one believes the exchange rate alone can stimulate much trade. Now, influential voices in Congress are promising they will try new approaches to increase farm sales abroad.    But what Congress has in mind isn't new. It's a continuation of a trend against freer international trade that began more than two years ago. Congress's solution is to apply export subsidies more aggressively in order to increase sales in markets once dominated by the U.S. and since challenged by or lost to competitors.    America's chief competitor is the European Community, which is bankrupting its treasury trying to expand markets to prop up its own ailing farm economy. A subsidy war with the Europeans would cost the American taxpayer dearly. It also would destroy the hope that agriculture will figure prominently in the new round of trade negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Furthermore, an expansion of subsidies would set a bad example for newcomers to the farm-export game such as Brazil, China and India -- countries whose adherence to free-trade rules will become more important as their economies grow and their trade expands.    It is these newcomers and other potential exporters and importers in the developing world that hold the key to the future of U.S. agriculture. Their populations, which are often big and getting bigger, are desperately poor; 60% of the people in the Third World have caloric intakes below the standards established by the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization. These people need better food but cannot afford to buy it. The challenge for the U.S. is to find ways to translate this need into effective market demand.    Contrary to conventional wisdom, the best way to achieve this is through the development of local agriculture in the developing countries themselves. Because most Third World workers are employed in agriculture, the development of this sector achieves a more even distribution of income than does the development of other sectors. And in the early and middle stages of economic development, as people have more money, the first thing they spend it on is increasing and diversifying their consumption of food.    The U.S. benefits because as developing countries grow richer, they can't meet their citizens' demands for food and must turn to imports. The paradoxical result is that successful farm development in developing countries often creates a demand for more imports.    This positive relationship between U.S. and developing-country agriculture doesn't hold together in every case. It is important to emphasize, however, that the benefits to U.S. agriculture are usually long-term, as there is a time lag between income growth and the demand for food imports.    Developing such a positive relationship hinges on the developing countries' policies toward local agriculture. After disastrous experiences with quick, capital-fed attempts at growth, developing countries are slowly realizing that agricultural development offers the best opportunity for facilitating the kind of labor-intensive, capital-stretching employment growth that is so crucial in creating and sustaining demand. It is this demand-led growth that transforms poor, rural societies into modern, industrial economies.    U.S. policy can help influence the economic choices that developing-country leaders make. A carrot-and-stick approach to economic assistance and debt relief, for instance, is already helping force a dialogue that emphasizes the adoption of policies that favor agriculture.    Once the transformation to an agricultural strategy is made, other more direct U.S. policies can have a tremendous impact on those leaders' success. U.S. farm and farm-trade policies are especially important, as they often determine how much developing countries can afford to buy and sell on world markets.    U.S. monetary and fiscal policies also act as a curse or a blessing. High real interest rates, for example, continue to compound the Third World debt problem, forcing many countries to restrict imports and limit the export-generating investments that might otherwise help pay off foreign debt. The 18 developing countries that make up the largest markets for U.S. farm products hold more than 60% of all problem debt. It is estimated that an easing of the debt problem could increase U.S. agricultural exports by as much as 20%.    Congress could take the following steps to promote broad-based economic development in the Third World and ensure the long-term health of U.S. agriculture:    --Institute trade policies, developing-country debt policies and domestic macroeconomic policies designed to produce an expansion of world trade, including expansion of developing-country exports.    --Institute market-oriented domestic-commodity policies.    --Enter into trade-liberalizing agreements with developing countries.    --Relax quotas and import restrictions on tropical farm products, and adjust farm structures to reduce domestic products that are not competitive.    --Increase bilateral and multilateral farm and non-farm development aid.    --Enact foreign policies that promote more-rapid social and institutional reform in developing countries.    It is time that actions that promote a partnership between the U.S. and the developing world became the currency of policy -- not just for the sake of American agriculture but also for the welfare of Third World people and for the continued health of international trade and economic growth world-wide.    ---   Mr. Purcell is director of the Curry Foundation, a public-policy institute in Washington, D.C., that specializes in agriculture and developing countries. </TEXT></DOC>