<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Budget Deficits: Only a Minor Crisis---By Robert J. Barro</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   My wife was watching C-Span on television a few weeks ago, and one of the chief economists at the Congressional Budget Office was talking about budget deficits. He said they were a major crisis, but people were being misled about their severity because most of the usual indicators -- such as prices of financial assets, inflation and real economic activity -- were giving off reasonably rosy, but false, signals.    My wife was skeptical. Couldn't it be that all of these indicators were right, and that the budget deficit was just not a big deal? Anyhow, where did this CBO economist get his information if not from all the data that gave different answers? Probably he was just a slave of some outmoded economic theory that predicted effects that hadn't shown up. Moreover, didn't David Ricardo have a theory that said that budget deficits were roughly equivalent to taxation, and didn't this theory conform pretty well with the evidence that this CBO fellow said we should ignore? I agreed with my wife and assured her that a growing number of economists were coming to that viewpoint, but that we still numbered only 22% of the membership of the American Economic Association.    I admit that federal budget deficits since 1984 have been higher than I would have predicted, based on a model that views deficits as a device to smooth out tax collections over time. For example, the budget deficit for the current fiscal year, when measured as the change in the privately held public debt, is about $210 billion. I would have predicted a deficit of between $110 billion and $170 billion: $60 billion associated with the federal net interest payments of $130 billion, $50 billion for the persistent failure to reach full employment, and as much as $60 billion to offset the surplus of the state and local sector. That leaves an excess deficit of $40 billion to $100 billion. Smaller but still significantly positive values apply for 1984 and 1985.    I see three possible explanations for the large budget deficits of recent years. First, they may simply be mistakes. In this case they are also good experiments, which economists can use to figure out the effects of budget deficits on the economy.    Second, people may believe that the &quot;Reagan Revolution&quot; portends a declining share of federal spending in gross national product. In that case current spending is temporarily high, and it makes sense to run a budget deficit rather than to enact a temporary increase in tax rates. But I find this forecast of declining federal spending doubtful, and there is no sign of it yet in the data.    Third, it has been argued that the buildup of debt, and hence of federal interest payments, is a device to make it harder for subsequent administrations -- maybe even Democrats -- to raise spending on other programs. While this argument is cute, it is unclear why the device was first discovered in 1984.    In any event, as the Ricardian approach suggests, there is no evidence that the excessive budget deficits after 1983 have had any serious consequences for the economy. Until recently, economists who thought that deficits were harmful stressed two effects: real interest rates would rise and private investment spending would be crowded out. Numerous empirical studies have shown that this prediction about interest rates doesn't accord with the long-term U.S. data.    Moreover, the proposition has been spectacularly wrong in recent years. Nominal interest rates have declined dramatically from their peak in 1981. More important, expected real interest rates (based on nominal yields of short-term Treasury bills and the Livingston survey of inflationary expectations) have declined to 2 1/2% in 1986 from about 4 1/2% in 1982, which is the period in which budget deficits were excessive. (These are short-term rates. Unfortunately, nobody knows how to get reasonable estimates of long-term expected real interest rates in the U.S. However, long-term real interest rates on British indexed bonds have declined since 1984.) Given this evidence, I find it remarkable that most economists, not to mention journalists and government officials, still believe budget deficits raise interest rates.    Real private investment expenditures, when measured in the appropriately broad manner to include purchases of consumer durables, were at the post-World War II high of 28% of real GNP from 1984 to 1986. Instead of demonstrating crowding out, these figures indicate a robust economy with a favorable climate for investment. This perspective accords with the performance of real GNP, which has grown at an average annual rate of 4.2% since the fourth quarter of 1982. Similarly, the total annual rate of return on the stock market in that period has been a remarkable 21%.    Unfortunately, gross investment expenditures can be measured more accurately than net investment or net national saving, which are more relevant economic variables. Conceptually, net national saving is the change over time in residents' claims on economic resources. Hence the best approach for measuring saving is to look at movements in the market value of wealth, which include the capital gains and losses on stocks, housing and other assets.    Using this concept for the household sector, economists Jim Poterba of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Larry Summers of Harvard calculated that the ratio of saving to GNP averaged 13% from 1983 to 1985 -- values that are somewhat above the average since World War II. (The numbers would have to be adjusted to subtract the changes in government bonds in order to measure net national saving.) When viewed in conjunction with investment expenditures, the suggestion is that the boom in investment spending coincided with roughly normal values of saving, and thereby generated substantial deficits in the current account. This other popular deficit reached 3% of GNP in 1985 and 1986 -- values that haven't been seen in the U.S. since the late 19th century.    Today's popular notion is that budget deficits didn't raise real interest rates or crowd out investment expenditures in the U.S. because the deficit led to a strong inflow of funds from abroad. One puzzle about this view is why the link between budget and current-account deficits failed to show up before 1984. Earlier periods in the U.S. don't exhibit a significant association between budget and current-account deficits.    In fact, unlike the budget deficit, the current-account deficit isn't significantly correlated with the business cycle. Economists are supposed to be scientific enough not to infer a causal relation between two variables -- here budget and current-account deficits -- from three years of data.    This is especially the case since another respectable theory explains the recent data in a very different manner: Namely, the boom in U.S. investment -- caused perhaps by favorable changes in taxes and regulations relative to those in other countries -- generated the inflow of funds from abroad. According to this story, the current-account deficit has nothing to do with the budget deficit. This viewpoint is appealing because the alternative analysis, which explains the current-account deficit as a response to U.S. budget deficits, doesn't explain the boom in U.S. investment expenditures.    For the economy as a whole, it is clear that the main fiscal decision that affects private resources is the size of government, not whether the government's expenditures are financed by current taxes or a budget deficit, which means future taxes. The Ricardian view says that what is true for the economy as a whole is also true as a first-order approximation for the representative individual. The choice between taxes and debt -- that is, between taxing now and taxing later -- matters in much the same way as the choice among alternative methods of distorting taxation. The proper analysis of these choices involves the usual tools of public finance. The standard macroeconomic discussion of such matters has been a mistake and hence a diversion from a clear understanding of fiscal policy.    ---   Mr. Barro is a professor of economics at the University of Rochester. This is adapted from remarks last month to the American Economic Association. </TEXT></DOC>