<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880505-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Irangate Pardons Hinge on a State of Mind </HL><AUTHOR> Bretton G. Sciaroni </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST LATAM </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Twice in recent weeks, to the apparent dismay of his staff, President Reagan has hinted at the possibility of issuing pardons for two former White House aides, Rear Adm. John Poindexter and Lt. Col. Oliver North. Since the inception of the Iran-Contra crisis, pardons for the indicted National Security Council officials have been a recurring topic. In that context, a previously overlooked White House meeting in September 1985 may loom large.    The prospect of pardons received an unexpected boost from former President Richard Nixon, who recently opined that whether pardons should be granted depends on the &quot;state of mind&quot; of the former NSC aides. That standard, when applied to evidence developed during last summer's congressional testimony by Messrs. Poindexter and North, as well as to previously unrevealed facts about legal counsel proferred in the inner chambers of the White House, should result in pardons for the two officers.    President Reagan got the current round of pardon speculation going in late March, when, in response to a plea to issue pardons, he told a group of Republican lawmakers that he liked the sound of it. A few days later he mentioned to a group of high-school students that he still thought that Col. North was a hero and that both of his former aides were innocent.    Mr. Nixon, in a subsequent appearance on &quot;Meet the Press,&quot; saw this standard for pardoning Messrs. North and Poindexter: &quot;Did these two men do what they did believing, whether mistakenly or not, that they had the approval of the president or were acting in order to serve his interests and would get that approval?&quot; If so, Mr. Nixon contends, Mr. Reagan &quot;would have a good case to pardon them, because the so-called crime would lack an intent.&quot;    The issue, then, according to Mr. Nixon, has to do with the state of mind of the two former NSC officials. Mr. Nixon's view is based on a general proposition, long accepted in criminal jurisprudence, that no one should be convicted of a criminal offense if he lacks the requisite criminal intent, the so-called mens rea. Of the two, Adm. Poindexter's intent is more important, since Col. North acted with the approval of his superior and believed his activities were authorized.    The key question here is, what did Adm. Poindexter believe about the legality and propriety of his actions? The actions that primarily need to be examined are those in support of the Contras, and not the arms sales to Iran, since the Iranian initiative had explicit presidential approval.    There are two issues to consider. First, what was Adm. Poindexter's belief about the president's policy of helping the Nicaraguan democratic resistance? Second, did Adm. Poindexter believe what he and Col. North were doing was legal?    Concerning the issue of support for the Contras, Adm. Poindexter clearly believed that his actions were consonant with administration policy. He testified repeatedly last summer that he and Col. North acted in accordance with the president's oft-stated desire to assist the Contras. And although Mr. Reagan did not know the specifics of the NSC's activities, Adm. Poindexter evidently believed both that he had the requisite authority to make those decisions, and that the president would have approved the actions had he been apprised of them. Adm. Poindexter further testified that Mr. Reagan knew that, because of the congressional restrictions imposed on members of the intelligence community, the NSC had become the focal point in the U.S. government for dealing with the Nicaraguan resistance.    But how about Adm. Poindexter's state of mind concerning the legality of his actions? After all, theoretically, he could have believed that the president wanted him to pursue a particular course of action, while realizing that the specific means chosen for the policy's implementation were illegal. This, however, does not appear to be the case. When the Iran-Contra committee asked Adm. Poindexter why he thought the Boland Amendment, prohibiting aid to the Nicaraguan resistance, did not apply to the NSC, he cited a particular legal memorandum as his authority. That opinion, which I drafted and which was issued by the President's Intelligence Oversight Board on Sept. 12, 1985, properly concluded that the NSC was not subject to the Boland strictures. But was Adm. Poindexter really influenced by the opinion?    Since the Iran-Contra affair was exposed in 1986, the common view has been that it was only in 1987, in reaction to the revelations of the NSC's operations, that the White House embraced the Intelligence Oversight Board's position that Boland did not apply to the NSC. However, the president and members of the White House senior staff were certainly aware of this legal analysis much earlier. The day after the board's legal opinion was sent to National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, the president was briefed on this matter in the presence of then Chief of Staff Donald Regan and others, including Adm. Poindexter, then deputy NSC adviser. (Mr. McFarlane, who does not recall the board's memorandum, may not remember it, in part, because he was absent during the board's meeting with Mr. Reagan. The president had just met with the U.S. arms-control negotiators, and Mr. McFarlane left with them, re-entering the Oval Office only at the conclusion of our meeting.)    The board's conclusion was not challenged by anyone present at the meeting. And, apparently, the finding was so self-evident that it did not prompt any of the principals at the meeting to get a second opinion. Perhaps this explains why the Intelligence Oversight Board opinion was the only legal analysis done in the executive branch on this important issue. Finally, as the White House meeting took place during the time of the first of two congressional inquiries into Col. North's activities, there can be no doubt that the import of the board's opinion was well understood by all concerned.    These facts are certainly crucial in ascertaining Adm. Poindexter's state of mind. According to the recently released depositions of the Iran-Contra committee, the former NSC adviser testified that, while he does not recall having actually seen the memorandum, he was aware of its contents. And Col. North likely was also aware of the opinion since a copy of the memorandum was found in his office.    Having attended a meeting at which the president was informed by the highest legal body in the executive branch overseeing intelligence activities that the NSC was not subject to the Boland prohibitions, Adm. Poindexter could have concluded not only that Mr. Reagan wanted the Contras aided, but that he also understood the NSC could act legally to accomplish this objective where the other relevant agencies of the government could not.    None of this is meant to suggest that mistakes were not made. As a matter of good management and sound political judgment, activities such as NSC operations in support of the Contras should have had the explicit approval of the president. But that is far different than saying, as Iran-Contra committee member Sen. George Mitchell recently did, that Mr. Reagan failed &quot;to communicate a sense of importance of the rule of law.&quot; The president never countenanced any illegalities, and Sen. Mitchell's comment is yet another attempt by opponents of Mr. Reagan's Nicaraguan policy to turn something that was largely an executive branch management problem into a criminal issue.    No one can know for sure whether President Reagan will issue pardons before he leaves office. Those who have bet against it on the grounds that the action will not serve Mr. Reagan's interest in securing a favorable &quot;place in history&quot; now have to account for his recent comments about Messrs. North and Poindexter. Contrary to the common image of Mr. Reagan as an intransigent conservative, throughout his political career he has proven to be malleable on a number of issues. But every now and again a particular issue will come along to which Mr. Reagan becomes greatly attached. The cause of freedom in Central America and the fate of the hostages in Lebanon are but two such issues. We have yet to see if his recent comments on his former NSC aides means that their fate also deeply touches him. But if a presidential pardon turns on whether Adm. Poindexter believed that he was acting in accordance with presidential policy and with law, then a meeting in September 1985 may be particularly significant.    ---   Mr. Sciaroni, a Washington lawyer, was counsel to the President's Intelligence Oversight Board, 1984-87. </TEXT></DOC>