<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0123 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Jack's All Right, Ripping in Fact, at Age 100 </HL><AUTHOR> Terry Trucco </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> London  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It was pouring rain. That didn't daunt our tour guide, who swiftly traversed a network of charmless East End streets and, choosing the ugliest one, stopped before a heap of garbage dumped against a corrugated metal fence. This, he announced triumphantly, was the spot where Mary Anne Nichols became the first victim of Jack the Ripper on the night of Aug. 31, 1888.    Our little group edged closer, a few inspecting the ground for century-old bloodstains. There wasn't a 19th-century building or anything vaguely Victorian in sight, but most of those who had coughed up $5.50 for this guided Jack the Ripper tour apparently had vivid imaginations. &quot;I just have to take a picture,&quot; exclaimed a young woman from Texas, who whipped out an Instamatic and eagerly photographed the garbage.    This may not be everybody's favorite centennial, but plenty of folks are getting seriously geared up to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the rampage of Jack the Ripper. For the record, during three months in 1888, a psychopathic knifesman terrorized east London's White-chapel slums, killing five prostitutes and carving up their bodies in the brutally distinctive fashion that earned him his epithet. Unfortunately, the East End slasher's identity was never learned, which opened the way for a century of speculation as well as making it possible for various small-scale entrepreneurs to flourish in the Ripper business.    Here in the great man's hometown, his centennial has turned into an unofficial Festival of the Ripper, complete with commemorative activities, from the serious and historical to the silly and sensational. In some circles 1988 has in fact been dubbed the Year of the Rip-off. But so far, the public seems far from sated.    Nearly 25 Ripper buffs turn up almost nightly for those guided tours of the Ripper's London, which often better capture the aura of 20th-century public housing than Victorian London. And the Jack the Ripper pub, a tired old Victorian frequented by construction workers, hailed its namesake's centenary with $9 commemorative T-shirts and a blood red brew called the Ripper Tipple.    Meanwhile, six new Ripper books have appeared, each confidently fingering a different suspect. This year's lineup ranges from Roslyn D'Onston, a nefarious journalist who dabbled in drink, drugs and black magic, to the drunken barrister Montague J. Druitt, a suspect long familiar to Ripperologists. An impoverished Jewish immigrant named David Cohen makes his debut along with an Australian, who in 1961, at age 77, wrote a noted English Ripperologist that his father, a long-dead drunkard, had privately confessed to the crimes.    None of these new claims to Ripperian rights is as scintillating as the royal conspiracy theory. This oldie but goodie identifies the Ripper as an aristocratic gang of Freemasons, led by Sir William Gull, Queen Victoria's physician, who ritualistically silenced a group of prostitutes threatening to blackmail the queen's feckless grandson, the Duke of Clarence (the Duke is himself a popular suspect). But the new books already are quite popular. &quot;What is surprising is that all of these new Ripper books are selling so well,&quot; marvels David Farnsworth of Hatchards, the large London bookseller.    The most rip-roaring moment of the whole anniversary is still to come. Sometime this fall, Thames Television in Britain and CBS in the U.S. will simultaneously air a lavish new four-hour television film on Jack the Ripper, with a starry, starry cast headed by Michael Caine (as a Scotland Yard inspector, not his quarry). Not only that, the film will solve the Ripper mystery once and for all, its backers boast.    According to an early press release, the film's director and producer, David Wickes, gained access to official Home Office and Metropolitan Police records embargoed for 100 years. As reported in The Sunday People, a popular tabloid, Mr. Wickes, who was Mrs. Thatcher's media adviser during the last election, used his political connections to see the files.    Veteran Ripperologists say the notion of secret stuff is balderdash, and the Home Office, which has denied that there were secret Ripper files, seems to concur. &quot;You or anyone else can see the Ripper files,&quot; says Martin Fido, who picks David Cohen as the Ripper in his book, &quot;The Crimes, Detection and Death of Jack the Ripper.&quot;    Thames Television recently softened its claims a bit, though Mr. Wickes stands staunchly behind his Ripper.    What is Jack the Ripper's enduring fascination? And why are so many seemingly normal people still obsessed with his blood-soaked legacy?    The Ripperologists weigh in with nearly as many theories as suspects. The case meets every criterion for a famous murder, according to Mr. Fido. These include a long search, multiple killings and mutilation (&quot;always exciting,&quot; he says). Best of all, the Ripper was never found, making the case the crime buff's Everest, irresistible because it's big, famous and there.    Countless volumes have been devoted exclusively to the Ripper, beginning in 1908 with &quot;Hvem Var Jack the Ripper?&quot; a Danish effort identifying Jack as Alois Szemeredy, a mad sausage maker.    Author Colin Wilson, who believes the Ripper may have been that aging Australian's alcoholic father, thinks old Jack owes his enduring popularity to the Victorian era and its backdrop of respectability, harmony and middle-class virtues; these made his characteristic brand of butchery particularly shocking and unforgettable. &quot;The Victorian era didn't really have sex crimes until Jack the Ripper,&quot; he says.    At the same time, the Ripper has been an odd beneficiary of the romanticization of the Victorians and in particular Victorian London, with its images of fog, gaslights and Sherlock Holmes. Somewhere along the line, he's been swept into the international ranks of domesticated folk monsters, with Loch Ness and Dracula. Drama and literature have embraced him, He rears his ugly head in G.W. Pabst's silent film, &quot;Pandora's Box,&quot; and in Alban Berg's opera, &quot;Lulu.&quot; (Both works are based on plays written around the turn of the century by the German expressionist Frank Wedekind.)    But even the Ripper's high-cultural side is not enough to charm the small but definitely vocal band of British Ripper-haters. Indeed, the Ripper Year was rung in by a protest group called the Campaign Against the Glorification of Crimes Against Women, which picketed the Jack the Ripper pub, demanding it change its name. &quot;This pub is celebrating murder, and not just murder but specifically the very brutal murders of women,&quot; declared a picketer.    Recently, the pub changed its name to The Ten Bells, the same name it had on the night of Nov. 9, 1888, when a young prostitute named Mary Jane Kelly tossed back a few drinks before heading home to become the fifth and final victim of Jack the Ripper. And the Ripper Tipple cocktail? It's now the Ten Bells Tipple. But it's still red.    ---   Ms. Trucco is a free-lance writer in London. </TEXT></DOC>