<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870925-0084 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN EUROPBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   The Western world's financial potentates are gathering in Washington for this weekend's IMF-World Bank meeting, and if anything is clear it is that too little has changed since the last time they gathered. The world's currency and financial markets remain highly unstable, roiled by fears of growing protectionism and renewed inflation, and buffeted by any stray comment from a finance minister.    Following its spring turmoil, the dollar remained stable against the yen and deutsche mark for much of the summer, then plunged by nearly 10% in August, only to recover a bit since. Gold has sometimes looked ready to break out of its $450-to-$460 range, as fears of inflation have risen, but has recently settled back down. Bond and stock prices took a beating as the dollar fell, but then stocks this week had a one-day record gain of 75 points. Meanwhile, the U.S. economic expansion and trade deficit continue to provide most of the world's growth, while growth sputters in Japan and especially in Germany.    If the ministers and central bankers hope to make sense of these signals, they might start by recalling that the U.S. produces perhaps 40% of the goods and services of OECD countries. In an integrated world economy, what do we mean by a &quot;stable&quot; dollar? Stable against 40% of output, but because of volatile exchange rates, unstable against much of the other 60%. In such a situation, how can prices efficiently direct efforts and allocate resources?    Investors ranging from U.S. corporations to Japanese buyers of U.S. T-bills must factor in a risk premium for dollar volatility. Thus it is at least plausible, if not likely, that dollar volatility is one reason real interest rates have stayed high in the U.S. It is certainly true that no plan to restore stability to world markets can succeed without addressing dollar volatility.    The U.S. Fed, we should add, did not help in this regard when it pointedly failed to mention the dollar in raising its discount rate a half point last month. Instead, the Fed said it was raising rates &quot;to deal effectively and in a timely way with potential inflationary pressures&quot; in the U.S. The Fed also saw fit to turn down a U.S. Treasury request to coordinate its rate increase with rate cuts in slow-growing, non-inflating Japan and Germany. In other words, the discount-rate boost was carefully divorced from any policy of international coordination.    Even so, there is movement toward consensus that volatile, floating rates are a problem and that international coordination is the solution. Fed Governor Robert Heller has proposed a monetary regime tied in some way to commodity prices. Perhaps more significant, the Japanese suddenly seem interested in monetary reform. Japan's vice minister of finance for international affairs, Toyoo Gyohten, told a monetary conference in June that he recognized the problem of &quot;recurrent overshootings of exchange rates, and as a result the terms of trade were distorted, investments were risky and world economic growth faltered.&quot; Mr. Gyohten also floated the idea of a huge international pool to stabilize currencies by open market operations to change the supply of various currencies -- in effect a world central bank.    What's needed now is leadership, and in a world so dominated by the dollar that means U.S. leadership. Paul Volcker and the Reagan administration have done a great deal to restore the world to better economic health since 1979, but the job is incomplete. Leadership is still required to fix what the U.S. broke when it contributed so much to the collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed-rate regime in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The U.S. Treasury's efforts to promote policy coordination have been a good step forward, but we are still a long way from the ultimate in coordination -- a system of fixed exchange rates anchored to something real.    Which brings us back to this weekend's meetings. Whether or not any sweeping initiatives result, we hope that the direction of movement will be clear. The IMF could do an enormous service, for example, simply by compiling and publishing a purchasing-power-parity index -- an index of whether exchange rates reflect the same purchasing power in different currencies. As Stanford's Ronald McKinnon has described on these pages, it is the deviation from purchasing power parity that destabilizes national economies. Markets will act to arbitrage differences in real prices, causing inflationary pressures when a currency is below PPP (as in the U.S.) and recessionary pressures when a currency is above PPP (as in Japan and Germany).    Just knowing what similar goods cost in different countries would throw light on the problem of floating rates and a volatile dollar. It would at least give us an image of where exchange rates ought to be if we want an efficient international price mechanism and calmer financial markets. </TEXT></DOC>