<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880808-0162 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Responsible Waste Disposal </HL><SO> </SO><IN> PHA ENV </IN><TEXT>   Viewpoint by Alexander Cockburn (&quot;Pollution in New Jersey: The Way the World Really Is,&quot; op-ed page, July 28) presents an attack on Ciba-Geigy and our Toms River, N.J., operations. It presents our company, our employees and our plants in a light that is both unfair and without basis in reality.    For example, contrary to what Mr. Cockburn indicates, our ocean discharge contains no detectable level of any &quot;carcinogen&quot; or chlorinated hydrocarbon; it contains no PCBs, and any metals present are below the normal levels in sea water. It is the product of a sophisticated biological and activated-carbon treatment process, described by many experts as the best waste-water treatment plant in New Jersey. This treated waste water contains more than 99.5% water, less than 0.5% salts, metals levels well within drinking-water standards, only trace levels of organics, and meets what has been repeatedly characterized as the toughest discharge permit in New Jersey.    This performance is the result of tens of millions of dollars of investments in technology and facilities to ensure our waste water is non-toxic to highly sensitive test organisms. Our discharge more than 2,500 feet offshore has never threatened closure of any beaches and has been proved by numerous independent studies to be harmless to people and the environment. In fact, if municipal waste treatment could meet the standards we have achieved, beach closures from these sources would have been avoided.    Again, contrary to Mr. Cockburn's statement, no homeowners are using bottled water as a result of ground-water contamination at our Toms River plant. While in fact ground-water contamination does exist at the site, all residents of the area involved are served by municipal water supplies, and no potable-water sources are affected. Ciba-Geigy not only has funded the extensive studies of the site conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency and ourselves, it also has voluntarily provided funds to support independent consultants for a local environmental group. In addition, we stand ready to implement the EPA's proposed remedial action, currently undergoing public comment.    Mr. Cockburn goes on to attribute the problems of Rhode Island's Pawtuxet River to Ciba-Geigy. While Ciba-Geigy operated a plant on the Pawtuxet for many years, there have been many public and private waste-water discharges there. Ciba-Geigy had extensive, innovative waste treatment at our Rhode Island plant for many years and always operated in full compliance with applicable waste-discharge regulations. In the late 1970s and early 1980s we were a major participant in a highly successful joint industrial/municipal treatment project there. In 1986, the plant, located in a confined area in a residential community, closed as part of an economic consolidation of our facilities.    As to the pending legal action against the company and its employees in New Jersey, which we are vigorously contesting, we acknowledge that errors were made in disposal of some drums handled at Toms River. The situation involves the complex interpretation of environmental regulations, and the materials have posed no threat to health or the environment.    In sum, we find ourselves in the position of many other responsible companies -- saddled with problems of the past (some admittedly of our own making), impeded in both corrective actions and improved technologies by critics from many sides, and working to comply with an ever more complex regulatory structure. At Toms River, we have proposed to move ahead with the cleanup of contaminated ground water, to eliminate production of high-volume industrial chemicals, and replace this production with a highly sophisticated facility for manufacture of small-volume pharmaceutical active ingredients, generating minimal waste. Our plan is intended to maintain employment to the extent possible, and support the corrective actions needed, while operating in a manner compatible with the residential and recreational nature of Ocean County.    Joseph T. Sullivan   Senior Vice President   Production andamp; Technical Services   Ciba-Geigy Corp.    Ardsley, N.Y. </TEXT></DOC>