<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880115-0031 </DOCNO><HL> If You Can't Trust The BBB, to Whom Do You Turn Then? --- The Better Business Bureau Is Fending Off Complaints About Its Own Practices </HL><AUTHOR> John R. Emshwiller (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PUB MKT </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's one thing to be fleeced by fast-talking con artists selling beach property south of Tierra del Fuego. But to be bamboozled by the Better Business Bureau?    Some irate California business people claim that they were swindled in a BBB-sponsored directory-publishing project that has taken in millions of dollars. &quot;I always thought the BBB was an elite group,&quot; says Elyse Rothstein, who runs a small locksmith shop in nearby El Segundo. &quot;Now I feel completely ripped off.&quot; She says she is out more than $2,500.    The affair has produced two lawsuits and an investigation by California's attorney general. It has raised questions about the conduct of nationally known consumer-affairs commentator David Horowitz, who was a paid consultant on the project. It led, last November, to the closing of the Los Angeles BBB. &quot;This is our Bureau-gate,&quot; says Terry Hilliard, a former executive vice president of the bureau in Bakersfield.    Bureau officials say many of the complaints are overblown. But they are embarrassing nonetheless to an organization that for 75 years has espoused consumer protection and business ethics. &quot;There were some problems,&quot; concedes Stephen Jones, a vice president of the Council of Better Business Bureaus Inc., the national umbrella organization. &quot;But I don't think there was any fraud by the Better Business Bureau.&quot;    The storm concerns a bunch of innocuous-looking directories that resemble the telephone Yellow Pages. Distributed free, the books list local BBB members and contain paid ads, as well as consumer tips on everything from buying a car to choosing a vocational school.    The directories were conceived as a way to build bureau membership and to raise money for the local, largely autonomous bureaus. About 30 BBB chapters have published directories, and some saw their membership double in the process.    But the directories' impact on membership and revenue may have blinded bureau officials to certain problems. &quot;It was like a dose of heroin,&quot; says Robert H. Morgan, an attorney for the BBB in the San Jose area.    The directory idea was controversial from the start. In 1982, the council sent a memo to local chapters urging them to delay signing any contracts with companies that might publish the books for them. The council said it feared &quot;outright misrepresentation&quot; by outside advertising-sales people because local bureaus &quot;couldn't exercise adequate control&quot; over selling practices.    But individual bureaus pushed ahead anyway. The council wasn't happy, but it didn't use its ultimate weapon: its power to deny a local chapter the use of the Better Business Bureau's good name.    Most of the controversy has involved Better Book Inc., a now-defunct San Francisco company that contracted with a dozen bureau chapters -- most of them in California -- to publish directories. Better Book was to print and distribute the directories and keep all the advertising revenue. Its sales people also were to sell BBB memberships. Revenue from that, minus sales commissions, was to go to the individual bureaus.    Critics contend that Better Book promised much more than it delivered. Directories came out months late, they say. Far fewer directories were distributed than promised. Media campaigns to promote the books fell short. Businessmen also say they were told they had to join the local Bureau in order to advertise. That practice would violate a 1983 national Council policy.    Donald G. Wolff, Better Book's chairman and founder, says that until his company ran into financial difficulties in 1986, it did a good job of meeting its commitments. &quot;We certainly tried, and when a problem was brought to our attention, we tried to do better,&quot; he says.    Albert Shelden, the supervising deputy attorney general in charge of the current directory investigation, says it appears Better Book generally met written commitments to bureaus on the number of directories to be distributed.    &quot;The problem is that advertisers were told a book would be distributed to every home and business in their area. That might require 300,000 directories. But Better Book's contract with the local would only call for producing 200,000,&quot; says Mr. Shelden.    Mr. Shelden says his office has received &quot;many complaints from advertisers&quot; about unkept promises. &quot;We are looking at the BBB's responsibility for what Better Book sales people said to advertisers.&quot;    Mr. Wolff concedes the company was telling advertisers that directories would go to every home until &quot;we found out that was an impossible task.&quot; He says the company then directed salesmen to scale down the promises.    In its first directory, in San Jose, Better Book was contractually obligated to reach just 30% of households, but Mr. Wolff says his company was telling advertisers it would reach 100%. Surveys indicated that the company fell far short of that promise.    Leroy Dupre, the local bureau president at the time, says his bureau got hundreds of complaints, mostly about sales pitches to advertisers. For instance, he heard of promises that an advertiser would be the only business of its type to appear in the directory, Mr. Dupre says. &quot;Because the BBB was behind it, some people succumbed to that baloney,&quot; he adds.    The Bakersfield-area bureau canceled its contract with Better Book in late 1983. A survey it commissioned concluded that only about 44% of the promised 166,000 directories were distributed, says Mr. Hilliard, who was in charge of the bureau. He says that Better Book also promised to &quot;blanket&quot; local media with a promotional campaign but that all he ever saw of it was one small ad in the sports section of the local newspaper.    Better Book's Mr. Wolff says his company met its Bakersfield distribution promises, and he challenges the bureau's survey on the grounds that it was done several months after the directories were distributed. All the survey accomplished, he says, &quot;was testing people's memories.&quot;    He says he doesn't recall what promotional efforts were actually made in Bakersfield. But he says Mr. Hilliard's statements are &quot;tainted&quot; because bureau executives wanted to break Better Book's contract and give the business instead to a local publishing firm. Mr. Hilliard denies having had any such motive.    Better Book also ran into problems with the Bakersfield district attorney, who, in early 1984, filed a civil complaint in Kern County Superior Court charging the company with making &quot;untrue or misleading&quot; statements to advertisers, including a promise that the directory would go to every home and business in the county.    It settled the case in January 1985, by agreeing to pay the state $12,500 and agreeing to refrain from future misrepresentations. It denied any wrongdoing, however.    When Better Book later began putting out directories in the Los Angeles and San Diego areas, complaints again were heard from advertisers.    John Sevier, a San Diego tree trimmer, says he was clipped for $444. He has spent much of the past three years on a personal crusade trying to prove that businesses were regularly misled by Better Book salesmen and that bureau officials knew about it and did nothing. &quot;It's one thing to get cheated. But its another thing to get cheated by a consumer-protection agency,&quot; Mr. Sevier says.    Mr. Sevier helped organize a breach-of-contract lawsuit, which was filed in San Diego County Superior Court by about two dozen San Diego advertisers against the local bureau, Better Book and their officials.    The defendants have denied any wrongdoing.    Not all the bureaus using Better Book had many complaints. The San Francisco bureau, for instance, minimized problems by keeping &quot;tough&quot; controls on the publisher and on what its salesmen were telling potential advertisers, says bureau president Owen Proctor. He says he himself helped train Better Book employees and attended sales meetings.    In 1986, Better Book filed for bankruptcy protection in San Francisco, listing liabilities of $10.8 million and assets of $3.1 million. It currently is in liquidation proceedings.    Last July, nine Better Business Bureaus filed a damage suit in state court in Sacramento against Mr. Wolff and others associated with Better Book. The suit alleges that the defendants misrepresented the financial condition of Better Book and took money due the bureaus. They had gone so far as to forge endorsement signatures on checks made out to the BBBs, the suit claims.    Mr. Wolff denies there was any misrepresentation and says he doesn't know anything about any forgery. The only other defendant to respond so far also denies any wrongdoing.    The abrupt closing of Better Book left bureaus with unfinished books in the works. Trying to complete its undone directories proved to be the undoing of the Los Angeles bureau, which had already been weakened by the defection of more than 2,000 members unhappy about previous directories, says Galen Perrett, an advertising executive and the bureau's chairman.    Mr. Perrett acknowledges that there is a lesson in all this, one the BBB should have known from the start: &quot;Don't get involved in businesses you don't know anything about.&quot;    The same advice might apply to Mr. Horowitz, the award-winning consumer reporter for KNBC-TV here. The 50-year-old Mr. Horowitz, for a fee he won't disclose, reviewed the consumer tips in the Better Book directories. His picture is on the back cover of the books, and though he claims not to have endorsed the project, Better Book salesmen invoked his name in their sales pitches, advertisers claim.    During his year as a consultant, Mr. Horowitz was apprised of the company's problems, including the charges filed in court by the Bakersfield district attorney. Mr. Horowitz concedes that, for him, the district attorney's action was a &quot;red flag,&quot; but he says he was then assured by Mr. Wolff that the company was trying to do an honest job.    In a November TV news commentary, Mr. Horowitz blamed the Los Angeles bureau's closing on the supposed unwillingness of businesses to support consumer-protection work; he didn't mention the directory mess and his association with the ill-fated project. He says he hadn't been aware that the directories had anything to do with the local BBB's demise, and he feels no current obligation as a reporter to investigate. &quot;What does that have to do with me?&quot; he asks. </TEXT></DOC>