<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870416-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:When Childlessness Is Unbearable</HL><DD> 04/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Your April 2 editorial &quot;Beyond Baby M&quot; summarized the wider issue -- problems facing people unable to have children naturally. Thank you for specifically addressing adoption. My wife and I have been attempting it for more than four years. We have traveled both the private and the agency adoption routes; six heartbreaking close calls have resulted in the four long years. We have been subjected to years of embarrassing and sometimes painful infertility testing at great personal expense, asked repeatedly to examine our competency as parents, and numerous times been second-guessed on our desire to raise children at all.    Surrogate motherhood, adoptions and infertility are all part of the same issue -- people unable to have children naturally and the painful, risky, expensive ways being used to rectify the problem. As you pointed out, Baby M, if nothing else, will highlight this issue and, hopefully, improve the situation.    Marc Devlin   Littleton, Colo.   ---   Judge Sorkow assumed the power to proclaim the fitness of the Sterns and the unfitness of the Whiteheads to be parents of Baby M. This in itself is not extraordinary. Judges have frequently played the role of parental evaluator in custody disputes. Judge Sorkow, however, also arrogated to himself the authority to decide the public policy of the state, to enact judicial legislation, to amend existing laws and to alter the U.S. Constitution.    New Jersey law does not sanction surrogate-motherhood contracts. In fact, it prohibits several activities -- adultery, prostitution and baby-selling -- that differ from surrogate mothering only through the use of technical intermediaries (lawyers, lab technicans and test tubes).    Yet the judge wanted the Sterns to have the child born of the contractual intercourse between Mr. Stern and Mrs. Whitehead. His solution was to rewrite the law in favor of the Sterns.    Public policy against the exploitation of women's bodies and the marketing of children did not hamper Judge Sorkow. Agreeing to bear another's child, he declared, is a contract no less valid than any other. Does this mean a man who objects to his wife's abortion can sue her for breach of contract?    Nor did the lack of legislation approving surrogate arrangements and the existence of apparently contrary laws pose an obstacle. The judge boldly directed that the state &quot;should and must regulate the circumstances under which parties enter into reproductive contracts.&quot; In the meantime, however, he would himself define the law of the state. (Why should legislators address this politically messy issue when judges are happy to write the laws for them?)    Finally, the judge's momentum led him to alter the Constitution. That document protects not only the right to marry and bring up children, he explained, but also &quot;the means of reproduction.&quot; Moreover, he announced, the &quot;value and interests underlying the creation of family are the same by whatever means obtained.&quot; Thus, people now have a constitutional right to hire a third party to conceive and bear children for them. Can laws against consensual adultery, prostitution and baby-selling possibly stand after this ruling?    Hard cases make bad law. This is particularly true when judges are willing to reshape the law to accommodate their prejudices. The law of New Jersey is now more tangled than Baby M's family tree.    Walter M. Weber   Associate General Counsel   Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights    Milwaukee   ---   Although we cannot allow all human interactions to utilize the market mechanism, each case should be judged by a broad consideration of all the benefits and costs. Your editorial is long on the costs in terms of the pitfalls facing the surrogate mother and the risk to the general morals of society, but you fail to mention the welfare of a very large and important group that is dependent on the enforceability of the surrogate-mother contracts. These are all the as yet unborn children whose realization of a life with loving parents depends on these contracts.    Two loving and caring parents are not that easy to come by, and a valid surrogate-mother contract is one way of increasing the number of happy children and families.    Dave M. O'Neill   Washington   ---   Your editorial states, &quot;Judge Sorkow . . . had very little precedent to work with on the subject of surrogate motherhood.&quot;    Maybe it's because the TV preachers have been so busy with other things that we didn't hear any of them throw the following his way:    &quot;When Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no children . . . she said to Jacob, 'give me children, or I shall die!' . . . Then she said, 'Here is my maid Bilhah; go in to her, that she may bear upon my knees, and even I may have children through her.' . . . and Bilhah conceived and bore Jacob a son. Then Rachel said, 'God has judged me, and has . . . given me a son. . . .'&quot; -- Genesis 30:1.    Technology notwithstanding, &quot;What has been is what will be, and what has been done is what will be done; and there is nothing new under the sun.&quot; -- Eccles. 1:9.    Marian C. Young   Cincinnati</TEXT></DOC>