<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870422-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Turkey's Common Market Bid Puts West to a Test---By Peter Keresztes</HL><DD> 04/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The big story in the capital of Western Europe this week is the formal application by Turkey to join the Common Market. Though Turkey is already a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and sits on a strategic Soviet flank, Ankara's application is sure to trigger one of the hottest and most protracted struggles in the history of the EC. The question won't be resolved for years. During that period Turkey's bid will test just how committed France, Britain, West Germany, Italy and their partners really are to the principles of European unity and economic liberty.    Turkey's minister for European Community affairs, Ali Bozer, last week presented the long-expected proposal to the Belgian president of the EC Foreign Affairs Council, Leo Tindemans. This Monday Mr. Bozer kicked off his campaign, which may last for more than a decade, with scheduled visits to Spain, Ireland, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. Next Monday Common Market foreign ministers will review Turkey's request at a regularly scheduled meeting in Luxembourg. A simple majority of the members can send the application to the EC Executive Commission to seek its recommendation.    Meanwhile in Ankara, Prime Minister Turgut Ozal sought to widen domestic support for the proposal. It is opposed by various parties. Moslem extremists, for example, talk of setting up an Islamic common market instead. Various left- and right-wing extremists don't like the government's free-market approach. Some private industrialists fear that increased imports will drive them out of business. Mr. Ozal will bring to the domestic debate the same mandate under which he is seeking to lead his secular republic economically toward the West.    Among the 12 countries already in the Common Market, Greece can be counted on to fight any Ankara initiative, particularly since the socialist prime minister, Andreas Papandreou, seems to need an adversarial Turkey to keep his own domestic opposition preoccupied. Objections among the other 11 EC members include a variety of political canards and economic irrelevancies -- a representative sampling of which could be gained last week from the remarks of Luxembourg's foreign minister, Jacques Poos. He worried about Turkey's human-rights record, why it hasn't yet returned to full democracy, its occupation of Northern Cyprus and its still not fully developed economy. He fretted about the EC's problems digesting Spain's and Portugal's entry into the Community and generally labeled Turkey's application &quot;premature.&quot;    No one is saying that these issues are totally without merit. Human rights, in particular, are a serious question. But for some time Europeans have had a diplomatic procedure for monitoring human rights in Turkey, where the military suspended civil law in 1980 after the Soviet Union sponsored what amounted to a terrorist war in Turkey, complete with killings, bombings and near-anarchic conditions that brought the country close to civil war. Many of the fresh torture allegations go back to the junta days of 1980-83. A number of West European countries, the U.S. State Department and Amnesty International have stated that Turkey has made substantial progress in eliminating human-rights abuses.    For the most part, though, the stated objections to Turkey's admission are red herrings. The real problem is that the European Community is riddled with protectionist and racist sentiments. When you hear a European statesman talking against Turkey's early admission to the Common Market, that's what to look for. Opponents of Turkey's admission know that its unfolding strategy at home means it would be an ever-stronger competitor in Europe.    The Turks know this, too. &quot;We could bring dynamism into Europe,&quot; Turkey's undersecretary for planning, Yusuf Ozal, tells this interviewer. He argues that an economically saturated and stagnating EC, inhibited by high taxes, layers of bureaucracy, environmental problems and lack of cheap commercial land, needs markets and investment opportunities. Turkey's population of more than 51 million -- it may reach 70 million by the turn of the century -- is developing a taste for Western-style consumerism. Furthermore, it is ideally situated to serve as a commercial &quot;bridgehead to the economies of developing Arab countries,&quot; argues Mr. Ozal, who is the prime minister's brother. Turkish businessmen can perform better at lower costs in these markets than Europeans. Turkey's Islamic Development Bank has already established lines of communication in sub-Saharan countries, providing assistance for technology, irrigation, road projects and the like.    Turkey's economy under the Ozal administration expanded 8% last year in real terms, &quot;phenomenally better than the OECD average,&quot; the undersecretary says. That gain to a gross national product of more than $55 billion was achieved despite three major economic shocks -- the accident at the Soviet Union's Chernobyl atomic-power plant, which cut farm income; the U.S.-Libyan conflict, which cut tourism; and the slump in oil prices, which cut export income.    Turkey is starting to get the hyperinflation of its lire under control. After a 38% rise in 1985, inflation slowed to 25% last year and will be under 20% this year, Mr. Ozal says. The current account deficit narrowed to $1.5 billion in 1986 from $1.8 billion in 1983, when the Ozal government acceded. The moderately narrower deficit in 1986 was, of course, on a much bigger GNP and on a less favorable dollar-exchange rate.    These gains result from the economic liberalization measures such as privatization, elimination of import barriers and development of capital markets. The expanding economy should begin to alleviate the still persistent problems of unemployment and low standard of living. These two problems are often mentioned as impediments to Turkey's full membership because the EC is having some difficulty absorbing the economies of Spain and Portugal. It's argued that farm subsidies for those states entail additional costs, and that Turkey is also looking for a handout. Similarly, it's argued that the 11.5% unemployment in the EC would be compounded by the addition of four million impoverished Turkish unemployed.    The freedom Turkish workers would have to be given to sell their labor anywhere in Europe is one of the features of EC membership other Europeans are wariest of giving. This freedom was supposed to come into effect last Dec. 1, in fact, under an association agreement Turkey signed with the EC back in 1963. But in a stunning turnaround, the EC reneged on the deal. One of the great ironies of the European scene at the moment is that West Germany, where 1.4 million of the EC's 1.8 million Turks now live, is resisting pressure from the U.S. to speed up growth. Not only is it trying to keep new guest workers from coming, it is also trying to get those it once welcomed to go home. The growth-oriented Turkish prime minister, Turgut Ozal, sees it differently, however: &quot;Given the present downward trend in job opportunities in the Community and the high prospect of new jobs in Turkey,&quot; he said on the day of the application, &quot;we expect no exodus, with its illusive consequences.&quot;    ---   Mr. Keresztes is deputy editorial-page editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>