<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881017-0109 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): The Issues </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   With the debates over and the election three weeks away, it's time to focus squarely on the central issues of this campaign. Despite the complaints that Vice President Bush and Governor Dukakis have consciously avoided significant issues, they differ clearly and profoundly on the major issues of any election. In a way, the issues needed little elaboration because they were so clear from the start.    Thursday evening's debate resolved what may have been the campaign's most complex question -- the political character of George Bush. With his performance, Mr. Bush earned personal credibility as the heir to Ronald Reagan's political legacy. He aligned himself unapologetically with the President's politics, while leaving sufficient openings to shape a future consistent with his own personal beliefs, building a personal rapport with the American citizenry.    Governor Dukakis, perhaps to his credit at this late stage, declined to alter or soften his personality to suit the political technicians. If Mr. Dukakis fails, his failure will not be one of personality, but of substance. He will have been bested on the three broad issues that define all Presidential races:   Values   Discussions of the ACLU, liberals, the Pledge of Allegiance and furloughs for murderers have served as a long-overdue opportunity to face fundamental differences over which values should inform America's civil and political life. These arguments have involved the most basic questions about the community's right to exercise prudent, legitimate authority over its members, and about the responsibility individuals must assume to ensure civilizing habits of life within the community.    Mr. Bush, in his various attacks, has repeatedly asserted this argument on behalf of the community's sustaining values. Governor Dukakis and his supporters offer no more serious answer than to wave away these issues as irrelevant or unacceptably negative. This refusal to concede any legitimacy to these widely shared concerns has crippled the Dukakis campaign, and is likely to ensure that the word &quot;liberal&quot; remains a political albatross. But on values, it cannot be said the voters have no choice. -   National Security   On foreign affairs, Mr. Bush strikes the Reagan touchstone of &quot;peace through strength.&quot; He supports the Reagan Doctrine of aiding freedom fighters, invoking its successes in Afghanistan and perhaps in Angola, as well as its failure through congressional inaction in Nicaragua. As he said Thursday, &quot;You've got to understand that it is only the United States that can stand for freedom and democracy around the world.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis would &quot;challenge Mr. Gorbachev&quot; to sue for peace, but with no mention of the crucial leverage of U.S. military power. In Central America, he stresses &quot;working with&quot; Latin American leaders, as if this will persuade the Sandinistas to become democrats. Asked Thursday about a new land-based nuclear deterrent, Mr. Dukakis cited our 13,000 existing missiles -- the old we-have-enough-weapons-to-blow-the-world-up-100-times cliche. &quot;I don't rule out modernization,&quot; he said, though he implied we don't have the money for it, and certainly not for strategic defense. George Bush said, &quot;The Soviets are modernizing. They continue to modernize. And we can't simply say, 'We've got enough nuclear weapons.'&quot;    No issue? The differences are so profound they appear at a scratch.    The Economy   The complaints about an issueless election particularly cite the deficit and the economy. Yet in fact, the great economic issue was framed and debated. The current prosperity either is or is not the result of nothing more than, in Senator Bentsen's phrase, $200 billion in hot checks.    The complaint about a no-issues debate merely means that neither candidate has endorsed the pet proposal of the American public-policy elite, closing the deficit with a tax increase and cuts in Social Security benefits. The candidates listened to the voters, in our view sounder advisers. While we have no objection to applying a means test to Social Security, with the system in actuarial balance this is certainly not the first place we would look for spending cuts. Mr. Dukakis gave his budget priorities, cutting defense and suspending disbelief on the fanciful projections of uncollected taxes the IRS uses in lobbying for more bureaucrats. Mr. Bush proposes a &quot;flexible freeze,&quot; an idiotic piece of rhetoric but not so idiotic a policy. In fact, the moderate degree of spending restraint embodied in Gramm-Rudman has already helped cut the deficit by almost half as a percent of GNP.    Despite the deficit preoccupation of Keynesians, the financial analysts and congenital critics of President Reagan, there are many more important economic statistics than how much of federal spending is covered by borrowing instead of taxing. To name a few: economic growth, inflation, interest rates, unemployment, job creation, the spending level itself. Most of these numbers have moved in a positive direction under the Reagan policy mix, and Mr. Bush and Mr. Dukakis differ enormously on the lessons of that experience.    In Thursday's debate, Mr. Bush certainly sounded like a convert to what he once christened voodoo economics. While tax rates have been cut, tax revenues have grown 25% over three years; &quot;The way you kill expansions is to raise taxes.&quot; Mr. Bush would cut capital-gains taxes and expect to gain revenues. Mr. Dukakis calls this a $40 billion, five-year tax break for the wealthiest one percent of the population-old-fashioned static analysis tax rhetoric. The difference here is not merely one proposal, but a whole mind-set. Mr. Dukakis has learned nothing from the Reagan economic experience; Mr. Bush proposes to extend its lessons into the future.    This difference is crystallized in the tax pledge. In some formal sense Mr. Dukakis is of course right that it's not realistic to promise no new taxes under any circumstances ever. If Congress put a line-item veto squarely on the table, we ourselves would be glad to strike a bargain on a gasoline tax. But if you rely on empty congressional promises of spending restraint, a new tax increase would merely open the spending floodgates, reducing the deficit temporarily if at all. The Reagan experience shows that, under current constitutional arrangements, a firm tax stand is the only reliable handle to constrain the size of the government and allow the private sector to grow. Mr. Dukakis would give up this lever and &quot;work with Congress.&quot; Mr. Bush says, &quot;Read my lips.&quot;    On the grand theme of the economy, the choice is before the voters.    The Mandate   Despite these clear differences, the post-election conventional wisdom will say there were no issues and there is no mandate, at least if the Bush campaign merely coasts to the victory many now predict. Yet with his Thursday night debate performance, Vice President Bush occupies a particularly strong position; at last, he truly has the Big Mo'.    The Vice President's next task is to spend three weeks laying the foundation for a four-year presidency. It's become an axiom of our politics that a new President essentially has a year to force his agenda through a hostile Congress. To prepare, Mr. Bush needs to make the differences more explicit, to make the election a national referendum on the programs and proposals he would take to Congress. Mr. Bush should now seek to claim in victory that he represents not the politics of one man, but the will of the electorate. </TEXT></DOC>