<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0103 </DOCNO><HL> End of an Era---By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The president's tribulations should not come as a great surprise. As I wrote in this space after Mr. Reagan's triumphant reelection in 1984: &quot;Every president in modern times who won election with more than 60% of the popular vote has found himself in bad political trouble soon after. . . . The euphoria induced by overwhelming support evidently loosens the presidential grasp on reality.&quot;    So Warren G. Harding (60.4% in 1920) moved on from triumph to Teapot Dome; Franklin D. Roosevelt (60.8% in 1936) to court-packing; Lyndon B. Johnson (61.1% in 1964) to Vietnam; Richard M. Nixon (60.7% in 1972) to the Watergate cover-up. Since Mr. Reagan fell a little short of 60% in 1984, he might have been exempt from the general rule, but his luck at last has failed him. Having misread a gratifying electoral victory as a grant of immunity for the rest of his term in office, he overreached, like his eminent predecessors, and is now reaping the whirlwind.    The president and his White House staff evidently supposed that the election sweep gave them the license to do whatever they thought necessary for the safety of the republic without regard to obligations imposed by the Constitution or by the statute book. They considered secrecy an all-embracing presidential protection and entitlement, even when its purpose was to escape the accountability that is the essence of the constitutional system.    So Mr. Reagan converted the National Security Council, hitherto a policy-coordination body, into an operational agency, a personal CIA, and did so in order to evade the law that requires the CIA to report its dark deeds to congressional oversight committees.    Then the NSC's Lt. Col. Oliver North placed the integrity and credibility of the U.S. in the hands of Iranian confidence men and, with a vision worthy of Inspector Clouseau, contrived a scheme by which the Ayatollah Khomeini would subsidize the contras in Central America. In the best Clouseau fashion, most of the money seems to have disappeared along the way. And the scheme very likely violated the Export Administration Act, the Arms Export Control Act, the Omnibus Anti-Terrorism Act, the National Security Act, the Boland Amendment and the Neutrality Act. Then the attorney general claims that no one in authority at the White House knew what Col. North was up to. As Sen. Robert Dole concisely observed, &quot;I don't think Ripley would believe that.&quot;    It is not necessary to impugn motives. These are patriotic men according to their lights. But their lights, alas, are dim. For the Constitution envisages an equipoise between power and accountability. Presidential attempts to escape accountability threaten the balance of the constitutional system. Such attempts are bound to provoke congressional and public wrath. When the exposure of these actions leads the executive branch into a morass of deceptions and lies, and when the president himself lays down a smoke screen of blather and duplicity, wrath may become uncontrollable. As in the past, the cover-up may cause more trouble than the initial offense.    Mr. Reagan, having made the mistake of letting James Baker move on to the Treasury, is surrounded in his second term by an abysmally weak White House staff -- a disastrous situation for a president who is himself exceptionally dependent on his staff. In his first term, the president heard a diversity of voices, and his associates were prepared to check and circumvent his more wayward impulses. Now his White House staff is dominated by businessmen unqualified to deal with political issues and by military men unqualified to deal with diplomatic issues. Both types suffer an invincible compulsion to oversimplification and share a guileless faith in a unitary chain of command.    Donald Regan is under the delusion that the chief of staff in the White House is the equivalent of a chief executive officer in a corporation. Col. McFarlane and Vice Adm. Poindexter tackled intricate international problems with the naive certitude that such problems have quick and tidy solutions. &quot;The businessman dealing with a large political question,&quot; as the elder Henry Cabot Lodge once said, &quot;is really a painful sight. It does seem to me that businessmen, with a few exceptions, are worse when they come to deal with politics than men of any other class.&quot; The same comment applies to military men, with a few exceptions, when they come to deal with diplomacy. For politics and diplomacy are far more complex than business or soldiering and require a much firmer grasp of issues, a much subtler understanding of people and a much deeper knowledge of history.    Mr. Reagan has never distinguished himself by his mastery of detail. His forte lies in the expression of broad principle. For a season he found competent subordinates to translate principles into policy. But carrying 49 states appears to have given him a perilous illusion of infallibility, an illusion nourished by the sycophantic White House staff of his second term.    The president's sense of reality has never been strong. Life, one feels, unreels before him in terms of the movies. America is the land of the Norman Rockwell small towns of his Hollywood youth. Doubtless Ollie North's deeds remind the president of his own intrepid exploits in films like &quot;Desperate Journey,&quot; where he helped Errol Flynn escape from a Nazi POW camp; the famous last line was, &quot;now for Australia and a crack at those Japs!&quot; The New York Times reports that when Mr. Reagan made &quot;a telephone call of gratitude&quot; to thank Col. North for his services on behalf of the imperial presidency, he began the conversation &quot;by suggesting that the revelations of recent days would make a great movie.&quot;    His Hollywood vision of America as a small town writ large is compounded by the free-enterprise mythology Mr. Reagan dispensed on behalf of General Electric after his movie career went into decline. The doctrine of his administration is that every person in pursuing his own self-interest best promotes the general welfare. The inside-trader scandals on Wall Street may well be as fatal as the Iran-Nicaragua flimflam to presidential dreams of a permanent Reaganite America.    Self-interest is, within limits, a socially beneficial motive. Tocqueville saw self-interest rightly understood as one of the great secrets of American democracy. But he also warned against the consequences of what he called a &quot;crude&quot; interpretation of self-interest -- self-interest wrongly understood. He feared that Americans might begin &quot;to think exclusively of their own interests, to become self-seekers practicing a narrow individualism and caring nothing for the public good.&quot;    The logic of Reaganism leads ineluctably to self-interest wrongly understood. Reaganism has meant a righteous assault on public regulation, a righteous sanctification of the unbridled profit motive, a worship of the fast buck. It has unleashed an orgy of financial chicanery unmatched since the 1920s. The Reaganite ethos is at bottom the ethos of greed, and Ivan Boesky is the predictable result.    Newsweek has dug up the commencement speech Mr. Boesky gave last year at the University of California School of Business Administration. &quot;Greed is all right,&quot; the great moralist said. &quot;. . . Greed is healthy. You can be greedy and still feel good about yourself.&quot; These bracing thoughts were greeted, Newsweek notes, with laughter and applause. Naturally enough: The audience consisted of the yuppies who had flocked to the polls the year before to vote for Ronald Reagan.    The convergence of Ollie North and Ivan Boesky has a certain melancholy felicity. Both men flouted the law in the name of the twin principles of Reaganism -- one in the cause of nationalism, the other in the cause of greed. Reaganism is running its course in any event. The political cycle is due to turn at the end of the 1980s, and private interest is scheduled to give way to public purpose as the guiding principle of our politics. The revival of the imperial presidency and the scandals on Wall Street will only hasten an inevitable end. Hasten it they certainly will, unless the president undertakes a drastic housecleaning within the next few days.    President Reagan's personal popularity will doubtless survive the collapse of his dream. Since Mr. Reagan almost forces the commentator to think in terms of the movies, some have been reminded of the climactic scene in &quot;The Wizard of Oz.&quot; Dorothy, you will remember, finally reaches the Emerald City and approaches the fearsome Wizard in a blaze of light and smoke. Then her little dog, Toto, pulls back the curtain to reveal Frank Morgan manipulating special effects behind the scene. Dorothy says to him accusingly, &quot;You are a very bad man.&quot; &quot;No, my dear,&quot; the Wizard replies. &quot;I am a very good man. I am just a very bad wizard.&quot; That seems an appropriate epitaph for Ronald Reagan.    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>