<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871001-0002 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The latest twist in the Democratic presidential race has cost Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis his most important political lieutenant, soiled his chaste political image and undermined much of his campaign message.    Gov. Dukakis acknowledged yesterday that his campaign manager provided news organizations with videotapes that helped to force Sen. Joseph Biden out of the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.    The episode was the newest development in a campaign season in which the sort of character and honesty questions that Mr. Dukakis sought to exploit have become preeminent issues. By first denying his campaign was involved in the Biden affair and then, two days later, admitting responsibility, Mr. Dukakis's campaign, too, has been tainted by the heightened attention to character, conduct and comportment that have marked the campaign season.    The Dukakis campaign was transformed into a top-tier contender by the imbroglio that forced former Sen. Gary Hart from the Democratic race. The revelation that John Sasso, a longtime Dukakis aide and confidant, had distributed copies of tapes illustrating similarities between a speech given by British Labor Party leader Neil Kinnock and unattributed remarks made by Mr. Biden threatens to tarnish the very elements of the Dukakis appeal.    &quot;His biggest asset was management, and here's an unmanaged situation; and his appeal was innocence, and his campaign was guilty,&quot; said Robert Squier, a Democratic political consultant.    In the wake of the affair, both Mr. Sasso and Paul Tully, the political director of the Dukakis campaign and a refugee from the Hart campaign, have resigned. Mr. Dukakis first refused to accept the resignation of Mr. Sasso, often described as the governor's alter ego, saying Mr. Sasso would take a leave of absence for &quot;a couple of weeks.&quot; But he later did accept the Sasso resignation -- a pattern that runs counter to his image as a manager able to execute crisp decisions.    The disclosure diminishes one of the Dukakis campaign's chief assets, the sense of competence and integrity that the candidate has sought to foster in campaign appearances. The episode forced Mr. Dukakis, who takes pride in his direct involvement in political questions and his mastery of details, to &quot;assume full responsibility&quot; but to add: &quot;Any chief executive knows . . . you don't necessarily know at any one time what's going on around you.&quot;    The Massachusetts Democrat, who initially had denied a Time magazine report that his campaign was involved in the affair, said yesterday that he &quot;had no knowledge,&quot; at the time, about the distribution of the videotapes.    This incident occurs, moreover, only two months after Mr. Dukakis, who is attentive to details of running his own household, said he had been unaware of his wife's 26-year mild drug dependence.    The Dukakis campaign is being faulted for its willingness to let Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri take the blame for the distribution of the videotape. Gephardt aides from the start denied allegations their campaign was responsible. Yesterday, Rep. Gephardt himself released only a one-sentence statement: &quot;I hope we can now close the book on this incident and get on with the campaign.&quot;    Political professionals emphasized that the deed itself -- distributing the videotape to the Des Moines Register, the New York Times and NBC News -- isn't unprecedented in presidential campaigns. They said, however, that the Dukakis campaign was wounded by denying its involvement. Mr. Tully conceded yesterday that he had known about Mr. Sasso's role in the affair even though he denied in Time that the Dukakis camp was involved.    Former and current White House officials also had a hand in some of the negative leaks, however. A senior White House official acknowledged last week that a leak about Mr. Biden's use of Robert Kennedy's words without attribution came out of the White House political affairs office. One former White House official, who says he helped do &quot;opposition research&quot; on Mr. Biden's law school background as part of the effort to win Robert Bork's confirmation to the Supreme Court, said of the various Biden disclosures: &quot;It was a piling-on effect and the White House was part of it.&quot;    The challenge for Mr. Dukakis is to move quickly to place this incident behind him by reorganizing his campaign, shoring up his support in Iowa and neighboring New Hampshire and stepping up his efforts to carve his political identity.    &quot;This means that this is a more difficult race for Dukakis, particularly where people don't know him,&quot; says Joseph Grandmaison, chairman of the Democratic Party in New Hampshire, site of the first presidential primary.    No political maneuver, however, can compensate Mr. Dukakis for the loss of Mr. Sasso, who helped him recover from an upset defeat in his 1978 effort to win reelection as Massachusetts governor. It was Mr. Sasso, above all, who blazed the trail that Mr. Dukakis followed to win election as governor in 1982, emerge as a national political figure and then become a leading Democratic presidential contender.    The aide said he didn't tell the governor he made the Biden tapes &quot;because I knew it would hurt him.&quot; But he said he realized that &quot;I was going to have to tell him&quot; after he saw reports of Mr. Dukakis denying any connection with the tapes.    Leslie Dach, a 34-year-old former special assistant to Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont on the Agriculture Committee and director of scheduling and advance for the Geraldine Ferraro campaign, will be Gov. Dukakis's new campaign director. Mr. Dach is a political unknown who joined the Dukakis campaign as communications coordinator only last month and is unlikely to have the easy relationship with the governor that Mr. Sasso earned over the past decade.    Mr. Tully conceded yesterday that he had known about Mr. Sasso's role in the affair even though he denied in Time that the Dukakis camp was involved. But he sought to play down the impact on the campaign.    &quot;I think the thing that matters is the individual voter's understanding and perception of Michael Dukakis and how he conducts himself,&quot; he said. &quot;That remains the same.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>