<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0015 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Whose Baby M?</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Humans are a strange species, driven by eons of emotion and instinct but also by rationality and scientific progress. These opposing forces are clashing head-on in Room 217 of the Bergen County, N.J., courthouse. At stake are concepts as complex as motherhood, bloodlines and the sanctity of contract.    Most directly at stake is a nine-month-old baby. The court calls her Baby M, her biological father calls her Melissa and her biological mother calls her Sara. She is the product of the first surrogate-motherhood agreement to break down and wind up in court. The case will determine who gets custody, and, consequently, whether there is any future for the burgeoning surrogate industry.    William and Elizabeth Stern didn't have a child because Mrs. Stern, a pediatrician, has a mild form of multiple sclerosis that she feared could flare up if she became pregnant. Mr. Stern, a biochemist, has a special desire to pass on his bloodline: Most of his family was killed in the Holocaust. The Sterns were willing to pay the $30,000 cost, which covered expenses plus a $10,000 fee to the surrogate mother.    Mary Beth Whitehead's offer seemed like the ideal solution. In applying to be a surrogate, she eloquently described the frustrations of her infertile sister and said that &quot;giving the gift of a child would be more rewarding than working at a conventional job.&quot; She and her husband, a garbage collector, already had two children. The money would be useful, and her work would be appreciated. In a six-page contract, Mrs. Whitehead agreed to give the baby to the Sterns in exchange for the fee, and the Sterns agreed to accept the child, even if it were born with defects.    All went well until the moment Baby M was born. Mrs. Whitehead says that at this point, &quot;It overpowered me. I had no control. I had to keep her.&quot; She refused to give the baby to the Sterns. The day after a family-court judge awarded temporary custody to the Sterns, the Whiteheads fled with the baby. Three months later, the Sterns' private investigator found the Whiteheads in Florida. An FBI agent delivered the baby to the Sterns.    Judge Harvey R. Sorkow can't get much guidance from Solomon's precedent. Neither set of parents is villainous or obviously at fault. No other court has had to rule on custody in a surrogate case. Indeed, this is just the sort of question that judges are uniquely unqualified to answer. Judge Sorkow will want to hew to common law principles. But these include both sanctity of contract and frowning on &quot;baby selling.&quot; In battles between divorcing couples, custody depends on what's best for the child, but this isn't very helpful here.    There is a precedent from one of the laws of economics, however. If the contract is invalidated, this will be the end of the surrogate business. If biological fathers can't rely on such agreements, they probably won't be willing to take the risk that they won't get to keep the baby.    The question boils down to whether surrogate motherhood is a technology worth having. Opinion is split. There have been hundreds of successful surrogate arrangements. Most are like the Stern-Whitehead arrangement, where sperm is implanted in the surrogate mother. Others use the husband's sperm and the wife's ovum, which is then tranferred to what's called the surrogate gestator. Many women have found this a rewarding activity, and it has been a miracle for barren couples. The freedom to engage in this activity would be threatened by a ruling that courts won't enforce the agreements. But some people, including some religious groups, worry that this is treating babies as commodities, devaluing human life.    We offer one thought. Let's all agree that this is a controversial issue. Like the abortion question, emotions are going to run high. Neither side will be satisfied by Judge Sorkow's ruling, or even by a ruling of the Supreme Court. Let's also recall that this country has an excellent method for resolving such issues -- politics. There should be a public debate, after which each state should make its own decision one way or the other. An advisory group in the New York State Senate suggests a statute upholding surrogate agreements. Other states may disagree. Federalism means that we can agree to disagree.    Surrogate motherhood is another feat of medical technology that outdistances our certainty on how to use it. The task now is for our ability to forge a consensus on tough social issues to match the scientists' ability to pose the questions. </TEXT></DOC>