<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880518-0032 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN EXPRESSED complete confidence in Attorney General Meese.    In an impromptu 20-minute news conference, the president reiterated his support for his embattled aide and said he would &quot;live for the rest of his life under this cloud&quot; if he were to leave his job now. Separately, another Meese aide quit in protest over the firing of press spokesman Terry Eastland.    The president acknowledged that his policy of encouraging Panamanians to oust Gen. Noriega has failed. He confirmed that the U.S. is negotiating to persuade Noriega to step down, but refused to confirm he has approved a deal involving the dropping of U.S. drug charges.    The Senate voted, 86-10, for a resolution urging the administration not to drop the U.S. drug indictments against the Panamanian strongman.    ---   A Soviet rocket-fuel plant exploded, setting back the production of SS-24 intercontinental nuclear missiles by as much as six months, administration officials said. Intelligence reports said the explosion last Thursday created raging fires and left a large crater in the ground near Pavlograd in the southern Ukraine.    ---   The Senate began work on the U.S.-Soviet treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles, and Armed Forces panel Chairman Nunn predicted it would be ratified before a superpower summit starting May 29. Separately, U.S. officials said Gorbachev may announce at the summit that he will pull as many as 100,000 troops out of Europe.    ---   Congressional conferees approved a bill that would ban most employers' use of lie detectors to test workers. The Labor Department, which backs the bill, said the legislation now satisfies administration objections to earlier versions. The bill exempts testing by pharmaceutical companies and those with security guards.    ---   An Amal counterattack gained ground against Hezbollah in the 12th day of the battle between rival militias for control of Beirut's Shiite Moslem slums. The militias defied another cease-fire arranged by Syria, which backs Amal and has massed troops near the area, and Iran, which backs Hezbollah. Fifteen people were killed.    ---   Israeli troops stopped a guerrilla squad attempting to enter the country from Jordan, and one guerrilla was wounded in the firefight. Separately, the army reprimanded two soldiers for disregarding orders in firing weapons in a West Bank village where a Palestinian was killed Monday. One was given a 35-day suspended jail sentence.    Israeli Foreign Minister Peres met with Reagan in Washington, and the White House issued a statement containing veiled criticism of Peres's rival, Prime Minister Shamir, for failing to back a U.S. peace plan.    ---   Indian commandos routed Sikh separatists from a fortified basement at the Golden Temple complex in Amritsar, but about 30 rebels fled into the shrine's inner sanctum. Police officials said they are reluctant to follow the rebels into that area. Elsewhere in the Punjab, attacks by Sikh extremists have taken 54 lives in the past three days.    ---   A Spanish supertanker exploded after burning for four days following a weekend Iraqi air attack on five ships at an Iranian oil terminal in the Persian Gulf. Nine crewmen on a nearby Norwegian-flag tugboat were missing and feared dead in the blast. An estimated 22 seamen were killed or remain missing after the weekend attack.    ---   South Korean students fought with riot police in Seoul and five other cities in protests marking the eighth anniversary of an uprising in the southern city of Kwangju in which 200 people were killed. A South Korean news agency estimated that about 22,000 students took part in the anti-government and anti-U.S. demonstrations.    ---   Pope John Paul II disputed President Stroessner's claims of a problem-free Paraguay, saying its people suffered poverty and injustice. The pope, on the last leg of a South American tour, also denounced the exploitation of peasant farmers. He was to attend a meeting with an opposition group last night that Stroessner had tried to cancel.    ---   A Soviet official said a Communist Party conference next month will consider setting limits on the length of time Gorbachev and future general secretaries can stay in power. Dmitri Lisovolik, a Central Committee deputy, said proposals have been introduced to limit the party leader to two or three terms of eight years each.    ---   A federal appeals court reinstated a ruling that requires the EPA to adjust its fuel-economy estimates for vehicles. The action may lead to increased federal penalties against auto makers for falling short of the standards.    ---   A House subcommittee chairman said he has evidence the Reagan administration used drug dealers in efforts to arm the Contras. Rep. Hughes, a Democrat, said he will hold hearings in June on the allegations, which he acknowledged are unproven. </TEXT></DOC>