<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870305-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Gray Areas:An Older Work ForceBurdens Big ProducersIn the Basic Industries---High Medical and Other CostsAnd Lowered FlexibilityDull a Competitive Edge---Contrasts at Ford and Honda---By John BusseyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)RUBBER (RUB)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><DATELINE> FLINT, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Victor Voris thought he had it made. After 21 years at General Motors Corp., the 43-year-old auto worker finally had earned a comfortable job in the repair shop at the company's truck and bus plant here, far from the relentless pace of the assembly line.    But then the big layoffs and production cuts of the 1980s swept away younger, low-seniority workers, changing Mr. Voris's world. &quot;Now my good job's gone, I'm back on the line,&quot; he says bitterly. Mr. Voris now fills in for absent workers at the &quot;pit,&quot; where workers strain to build trucks passing overhead. His back is hurting and his doctor bills are up. &quot;You're so dog-tired,&quot; he says.    An older man doing a younger man's job is an increasingly common sight -- and an increasing worry -- in basic industry. Layoffs and shrinking businesses have eviscerated the ranks of younger hourly employees because the last hired were the first fired. The average age in many steel, rubber, auto and other plants has surged, presenting another big hurdle in U.S. industry's quest for competitiveness.    For one thing, older factory workers cost much more than younger employees, although they may often be more productive. But a bigger concern to some personnel managers is whether older workers are flexible enough to make the long-term changes that industry desperately needs.    The pace of aging in the plants is headlong. At Ford Motor Co. the average age of hourly employees has jumped to 44 from 37 in 1978. Donald Petersen, Ford's chairman, says new Japanese auto plants in the U.S., with their &quot;young, healthy, able workers,&quot; have a labor-cost advantage of $6 an hour over the Big Three because of costs, such as doctor bills, associated with the age difference.    During a shift change at one of Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co.'s remaining Akron operations, a sea of gray hair emerging into the cold morning air graphically underlines the age of the workers. The lowest seniority for an electrician in the complex is now 14 years. In the iron and steel industry, where the work force has shrunk by more than half since 1979, the average age edged up to 43 by 1984 from 40.6 in 1979. And in the depressed coal fields, which hired many young workers during the mid-1970s energy crisis, the average age is already about 40 and is increasing about one year each year.    The baby-boom bulge in the general work force exaggerates the problem, and Congress's Joint Economic Committee has been holding hearings on the potential longer-term fallout for the economy at large. But William Johnston, a senior research fellow at the Hudson Institute, who is helping the Labor Department forecast demographic changes, says manufacturers are already experiencing &quot;the problems of aging that we are speculating about for the year 2000.&quot;    Cost is the main drawback to employers. Men age 50 to 64 submit an average of $1,897 a year in medical expenses -- more than triple that of men age 20 to 35, according to a sample study by Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. Women 50 to 64 submit $1,867 in expenses, 51% more than their younger counterparts. Older workers are also more likely to have dependents covered under a company plan. And while older workers have fewer on-the-job injuries than younger ones, traumatic injuries tend to be more severe for older employees -- and cost more to treat -- a Bureau of Labor Statistics study says.    Uniroyal Goodrich Tire, jointly owned by Uniroyal Inc. and B.F. Goodrich Co. has &quot;been hammered by rapidly spiraling medical costs&quot; brought on in part by its aging workers, says James Sullivan, vice president for human resources. &quot;We're asking people to shop more carefully for medical services.&quot;    At Ford, health-care costs just for the company's hourly retirees and their spouses are expected to jump to $300 million in 1990 from $160 million in 1984. Ford is pressing hospitals to help trim expenses; it has even issued press releases on its progress in cutting unneeded hospital stays by employees and their families.    Companies are also struggling to control ballooning pension costs. At GM, for example, the ratio of active to retired hourly workers dropped to 2.3 to one in 1985 from 4.8 to one in 1970; it continues to decline as retirement ranks swell. At Ford, the ratio is down to 1.6 to one. That contrasts with Nissan Motor Co.'s plant in Smyrna, Tenn. Of the 3,300 workers there, whose average age is in the mid-30s, only one person is eligible for retirement -- and he has decided to stay on. &quot;I like the atmosphere and the people,&quot; says 66-year-old Edward Moosekian, who delayed his pension to keep working in the plant's trim and chassis department.    Benefits and pension programs that were developed with just 5% to 10% of an employee group in mind &quot;must now handle two, three and four times the anticipated utilization,&quot; Ernest J. Savoie, Ford's director of employee development, told a group of labor specialists in Alabama last year. &quot;No wonder collective bargaining is under strain.&quot; LTV Corp.'s recent temporary termination of retirees' health and life-insurance benefits under the company's bankruptcy proceedings highlighted that strain.    Training costs at Ford are also up, partly because the company retrains so many workers who have seniority but may have outdated skills. Ford as a result counts itself among the largest single providers of adult education.    Companies with older workers also have generally had more layoffs than newer concerns, which increases their required payments to state unemploymentinsurance funds. In Michigan in 1985, for example, GM was required to pay in $954 per employee, while new companies paid only $243 per worker.    Then there is the matter of compensation. Although wages in heavily unionized industries tend not to depend on length of service, other benefits such as vacations do. A five-year veteran in the coal mines covered under the union contract can earn an additional vacation day each of the following 13 years. But Cecil Roberts, vice president of the United Mine Workers, argues that &quot;whatever problems management sees with an older work force, they're more than offset by productivity and efficiency.&quot;    Most labor experts agree that older workers tend to be at least as productive as younger ones. &quot;A more mature work force implies greater experience, stability, reliability and productivity,&quot; William E. Brock, the secretary of labor, told Congress last year.    One of the more mature workers at GM's antiquated Clark Street assembly plant in Detroit, for example, is 53-year-old Vic Minoletti, who, with 34 years at GM, has one of the more skilled jobs in the plant. He operates the &quot;body drop,&quot; a huge orange crane, with which he grasps a car body on the second floor of the plant. Then, as the machinery emits a loud hydraulic hiss, he quickly lowers the body to the first floor and onto a chassis moving along the assembly line. No guides here: Mr. Minoletti eyeballs it.    Older workers &quot;know how to do it the easiest way,&quot; says Donald Ephlin, a vice president of the UAW. &quot;They don't fight the line like a new hire does.&quot;    Whether because they are creatures of habit or they have more responsibilities, most older workers also show up for work more regularly than younger employees. Seven percent of full-time, nonfarm workers age 16 to 19 had an absence in a given week, according to a Labor Department study in 1985, compared with 4.6% of those age 25 to 54.    &quot;The job's been good to me, so I've got to be good to my job,&quot; says auto worker Ivo Liggons, 62, who likes to brag about his attendance record.    GM's Clark Street plant also demonstrates that youthful stamina isn't necessarily a substitute for know-how. In 1985, many older Clark workers transferred to a new GM plant nearby, and the company hired many younger, inexperienced replacements. That October, quality at Clark dropped so steeply that GM cut back production.    On the whole, though, some forces work against older unskilled workers. To avoid the most rigorous manual labor, some older workers seek easier jobs in the plant, such as janitor work. But streamlining has eliminated many of those jobs, making it tougher for older workers to find comfortable slots.    And while automation at Honda Motor Co. has made many exerting jobs easier at its Marysville, Ohio, plant, where the average age is 29, youthful energy still helps. One assembly-line worker building Honda instrument panels literally runs to get parts from a supply bin. Another worker, Mike Dechicco, 30, rapidly and agilely swings in and out of passing car bodies, installing cables, bolting parts, and mounting fuse boxes. &quot;It's called economy of motion,&quot; he shouts from inside one car.    Some personnel experts, meanwhile, worry about whether older workers will embrace changes to help make heavy industry competitive again. Team concepts, reductions in work rules, pay-for-knowledge plans -- all ingredients of the new &quot;competitive&quot; labor agreement -- can sound threatening to workers who fought for decades to make things the way they are and who are close to getting their pensions.    &quot;Younger people are more reconciled to the fact that they're in a world-competitive economy,&quot; says an official of the United Steelworkers. &quot;I think older workers' life experiences leave them in less of a position to regard change as part of the landscape.&quot; Concludes Frederick Sommer, vice president for human resources and systems at Nissan's Tennessee plant: &quot;It's a lot like, Do you teach an old dog new tricks?&quot;    The Conference Board in New York found that 69% of the personnel managers at 338 companies it surveyed in 1984 believed that older blue-collar workers tend to be less flexible and more resistant to change than younger ones. But a majority also believed that older workers are more loyal to the company, are more conscientious and have better job morale.    Clearly, several locals have already embraced labor agreements that involve radically new ways of operating. &quot;In all probability, an older work force -- having seen all the cutbacks -- they're a lot more adaptable than the younger workers,&quot; contends Bill Breslin, president of Local 2 of the United Rubber Workers in Akron.    He says his local, like many others in industry, recently overwhelmingly ratified a new concessionary labor agreement. Having been 17,000-strong in the postwar era, Local 2 now has only 2,400 active members; at an average age of about 42, they aren't eager to be forced into the job market again.    Other union leaders hope Mr. Breslin is right, as they try to maneuver workers toward change. Resignation and skepticism abound within the rank and file. Traditional notions of seniority appear undermined when workers are bumped back to jobs they had 10 years ago or when they find, as employees at American Motors Corp.'s Kenosha, Wis., plant did, that it now takes 15 years of seniority just to qualify for a junior job.    &quot;We just don't have the confidence of our membership that we did 20, 30 years ago,&quot; says Mr. Breslin.    Resignation also can lead to rebellion, as the United Auto Workers found in Trenton, Mich., last year. There, a contentious older local turned down an agreement backed by the leadership. Although the contract was ultimately ratified, many older workers felt alienated.    The shift in age may also one day leave industrial unions scrambling to find the next generation of leadership. For now, though, they are busy advocating the new agenda set by their aging memberships, emphasizing job security and retirement programs over wages. One group of UAW locals preparing for this year's national contract talks, for example, set 10 top priorities; five of them deal with retirement issues. That compares with three of 10 in the 1984 talks.    Some unionists say a shortened workweek would increase job opportunities for younger workers, while others argue for sweetened early-retirement programs and pension benefits to spur older employees to retire and make room for new hires. Managements, of course, blanch at the idea of more costly retirement programs. Yet they also worry about the need for new employees. &quot;You've got to be dragging in new blood so that 15 years down the road you have a skills transfer,&quot; says Ford's Mr. Savoie.    Ford, at least, may find solace in one development last year: The company finally hired back the last of its laid-off workers who were willing to pack up and move to another Ford plant. That meant Ford could start adding new faces to its hourly work force of 108,200. And it did -- 3,000 by the end of the year. </TEXT></DOC>