<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880331-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Getting the Postal Service to Deliver --- Privatization Would Work </HL><AUTHOR> Douglas K. Adie </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> TNM </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   With cuts in some post-office hours now in effect and increases in postal rates set for Sunday, news that the President's Commission on Privatization is recommending deregulation of the Postal Service is welcome. But it is not just deregulation, but also divestiture and privatization that would be able to introduce the benefits of competition across the spectrum of mail services, including first-class delivery.    Consumers already have reaped benefits from private parcel and overnight delivery services in competition with the Postal Service. Private firms now also deliver magazines in head-on competition with the Postal Service's second-class mail service.    In the early 1970s, after the Post Office was reorganized as a government corporation, first- and second-class rates increased at practically the same pace. The rapid rise in second-class rates spurred some publishers to turn to private delivery. Private companies now make more than one million magazine deliveries a month, providing service for approximately 15 publications.    Industry officials credit this private-sector competition with keeping second-class mail rates down beginning in the late 1970s. First-class mail rates, where the Postal Service has a monopoly, rose 60% more than second-class rates between 1980 and the last increase. In 1980 alone, first-class rates rose 33% while second-class rates rose an average 1.9%.    The Postal Service apparently was using increases in first-class rates to keep second-class rates below costs and maintain volume in the face of competition. It is hard to know for sure, because the Postal Service is not the best recordkeeper. Under the new increases, however, second-class mail rates will rise 18%, compared with a 14% rise in first-class rates. The Postal Rate Commission, after years of inaction, argued this time that the first-class mail monopoly should not be used to subsidize second-class mail.    The Postal Service should be deregulated, primarily through repeal of the Private Express Statutes, which currently prohibit private-sector companies from delivering first-class and some third-class categories of mail. Repeal of these statutes would enable private firms to compete head-on with the Postal Service. But this form of simple deregulation, now the chief method proposed by the President's Commission, does not go far enough.    The Postal Service would have an enormous advantage over fledgling competitors because of its large size and existing infrastructure, much as new telecommunications firms in Britain have had difficulty competing effectively against the privatized British Telecom. Hence, following the model of the ATandamp;T breakup, the Postal Service should be spun off into five regional companies, plus a parcel-post company and a support-services company.    Divestiture offers a means of allaying public fears of an ATandamp;T-style private postal monopoly and ensuring that some competition emerges at the outset of privatization. The divested companies would then be sold via stock offerings to the public, private postal contractors currently used by the Postal Service, and postal employees. Employees should be offered stock at a 15% to 20% discount. Without such an incentive, the employees, who are the highest-paid semi-skilled workforce in the world, probably would block any privatization move.    Sale of the Postal Service, rather than simple repeal of the Private Express Statutes, offers additional benefits:   Taxpayers would be big winners. The stock offering could yield more than $10 billion for the federal treasury. And corporate tax revenues raised from the profitable privately run postal companies could be as high as $500 million annually.    Opponents will denounce privatization as marking the demise of universal service. But a quick glance at private-sector services in express mail and parcel post indicates otherwise. Federal Express serves more towns than the Postal Service's Express Mail counterpart, and Federal Express stays open on Christmas Day to boot! United Parcel Service also has near universal coverage of the American market at competitive prices.    Critics of telephone deregulation conjured up the same scare, arguing that deregulation would undermine the longstanding public goal of universal service. Yet phone service actually has penetrated more households since deregulation. Though the complaint about loss of universal service is largely unfounded, I suggest a palliative for it anyway. Privatization legislation could require private postal operators to guarantee rural service over a specified time period. James Miller, director of the Office of Management and Budget, has estimated that the cost of providing a subsidy to support rural mail delivery would be a modest $26 million a year.    Even the Postal Service itself would gain through privatization. Its managers currently labor under restrictions that prevent them from offering high-tech electronic mail and telecommunications services. Already high-tech telecommunications are replacing important chunks of traditional mail communications. Electronic data interchange, for example, is predicted to grow 60% a year through 1990, and use of fax machines has increased sixfold just since 1983. A privatized Postal Service could enter this lucrative market. In addition, some Postal Service officials had suggested that at least partial privatization (for example, of third-class mail) would have enabled the Postal Service to cut costs without the drastic service cutbacks that have gone into effect.    Privatization offers consumers the prospect of efficient, affordable and high-quality service. It offers the Postal Service a chance for survival in an increasingly competitive, high-tech world. And it offers Congress the prospect of lopping off part of the federal deficit without tampering with highly sensitive military and welfare spending.    ---   Mr. Adie, professor of economics at Ohio University, researches postal matters for the Reason Foundation, Cato Institute and Fraser Institute.    ---   (See related story: &quot;Wage Gap Widens&quot; -- WSJ March 31, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>