<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0054 </DOCNO><HL> Auditor's Downfall Shows a ManCaught in Trap of His Own Making---By Martha BranniganStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY) </IN><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Jose L. Gomez, a former managing partner of the Grant Thornton accounting firm, surrenders today to begin a 12-year prison term.    The 39-year-old Mr. Gomez pleaded guilty last year to charges, in two federal courts and an Ohio state court, involving his role in the fraud at E.S.M. Government Securities Inc., the once-obscure Fort Lauderdale, Fla., firm that collapsed two years ago today and triggered one of the biggest financial scandals of the decade. As E.S.M.'s auditor, Mr. Gomez knowingly approved the firm's false financial statements for five years, thus allowing the massive fraud to continue. He must serve at least four years.    In these days when white-collar crime is rocking Wall Street, Mr. Gomez's story is a particularly telling one. In some regards, he was almost a cliche: an ambitious young man who rose too far too fast and wound up in the worst sort of trouble. He says he crossed the line into criminality without even realizing it.    When Mr. Gomez's activities came to light, many people were stunned, for he had seemed the model of success. He was one of the youngest people ever to be made partner at his Chicago-based firm, which then was called Alexander Grant andamp; Co. He was active in community affairs.    But he was also a fraud. Investors initially lost some $320 million in the scheme Mr. Gomez helped perpetrate, and the scandal was even blamed for a brief decline in the dollar on international markets.    In a recent interview, Mr. Gomez talked of his rise and fall. He says he never intended to do anything wrong. But in August 1979, just days after being told of his promotion to partner at Grant, two officers of E.S.M. told him of a crude accounting ruse that was hiding millions of dollars in losses; they had to bring Mr. Gomez in on the scheme to keep it from unraveling.    Mr. Gomez says he had missed the ruse in two previous annual audits, signing off on bogus financial statements showing E.S.M. to be in robust condition. He says one of the E.S.M. officers used that error to draw him into the fraud.    GOMEZ: He must have said it four or five times: &quot;How's it going to look. It's going to look terrible for you, and you just got promoted to partner. Just give us a chance. It just takes time. We're not going to have those losses.&quot;    WSJ: Do you think he was trying to intimidate you?    GOMEZ: No question about it. And it worked. I was 31 years old. I felt I had a terrific career path in front of me and a lot of ambition . . . . And I agreed just to think about it. And a day or two later, I felt I already had gone too far. I also didn't want to face it. I didn't want to face walking in (to his superiors at Alexander Grant) and saying this is what happened.    In Chicago, Burt K. Fischer, executive partner of Grant Thornton, says Mr. Gomez's fears about his blunder were misplaced. &quot;I can't think of a partner who made an honest mistake who has been hung out to dry,&quot; he says. The firm also contends that Mr. Gomez learned of the fraud before 1979.    Convincing Himself   Mr. Gomez says he decided to go along with the scheme at E.S.M., convinced that the firm's managers could make up the losses.    GOMEZ: I really wanted to believe they could do it. So I just made up my mind, OK, I'm going to let them do it. At this point in time I was looking at maybe $10 million (in losses) as being the problem, in a business that you can make $10 million very easily.    I never evaluated at that point, or later either, a criminal side to what I was doing. If I had, it might have been a deterrent.    WSJ: What did you think of it as?    GOMEZ: It was a professional decision, a judgment decision that I was making that I felt would eventually work itself out. I had a terrific argument with myself. It just came out that way. If I had sought some counsel from someone that I had some respect for, if I had even talked to my wife . . . .    WSJ: Did you go home and tell your wife?    GOMEZ: No. It's interesting. We've been married 17 years now. And it's the only item I never discussed with her or shared with her in any way.    'I Was Trapped'   E.S.M.'s losses continued to mount, and Mr. Gomez continued to approve phony financial statements.    GOMEZ: When I looked at this thing again in 1980 . . . the accumulated deficit is close to $100 million, and now it's a really big number no matter how you look at it. And I was trapped. I just totally felt that I'd lost control of it.    In late 1980, E.S.M. officers began arranging loans for Mr. Gomez, who was having personal financial problems. The loans, which weren't repaid, totaled $200,000.    GOMEZ: I don't know how all these things relate to my own inability to handle my personal finances. For an accountant, it's tough to fathom -- but not only would there not be a budget, there would be spending without thinking of such things as monthly payments. I had been spending on credit cards and borrowing from banks to pay the credit cards for some time. I was also looking to put a pool in my house. There were a lot of little things added together. No discipline whatsoever.    WSJ: Did you view the E.S.M. loans as a quid pro quo?    GOMEZ: No. I never -- and it's hard for people to accept this -- I never related my actions to the money. I didn't do it for money. I did it because I didn't want to have to face up that I had made a mistake, that I had missed it originally.    WSJ: Did you have to do special things to prevent your staff from coming upon the accounting fraud?    GOMEZ: I never did.    WSJ: Did you hold your breath during audits, thinking somebody would spot it?    GOMEZ: I often wondered what I would do if somebody walked in and said, &quot;Look what I've found.&quot; But it never happened. I gave them (his team of auditors) the same baloney answer that I had been given back in '78. It never dawned on them that it just didn't make any sense.    WSJ: Was this the only government-securities dealer your staff was auditing?    GOMEZ: Yes. They had nothing else to look at, to draw a basis on. And that was a weakness.    WSJ: What do you think the flaws were in the structure of the review process that allowed this thing to go on?    GOMEZ: It's very easy for other professionals to look down their noses at this and say, &quot;My God, this was so obvious.&quot; But I think the ones who are really honest are going to look at this and say, &quot;My God, that could have happened here.&quot;    In 1977, it became apparent to me that those being promoted early were the business producers. Not necessarily that they were weak technically, but they were the ones that were able to produce new clients, who had extensive contacts. The salesmen. It became apparent to me . . . that my own promotion depended on my becoming more productive. That's when I began turning more sales-oriented.    I think I would have been able to be more objective about my client relationships if I weren't so concerned about selling. And E.S.M. was a very strong selling point for me. (The E.S.M. account) had produced other clients, and I looked at them as being a productive vehicle.    WSJ: So you think you would have caught the fraud if it weren't for the sales pressure?    GOMEZ: If I had not had the sales pressure, I would perhaps have caught it before it happened.    He also thinks, in hindsight, that he was too inexperienced to be heading an audit -- which he was doing at age 31 even before he was named partner in 1979.    'No Substitute for Experience'    GOMEZ: It's interesting for me to say this now, because if you had asked me then, I would have said, &quot;No, you're crazy; I know more than these guys.&quot; I used to hate the term, &quot;There's no substitute for experience,&quot; and now I realize how wise it was.    Grant Thornton's Mr. Fischer acknowledges that there has been a greater emphasis on marketing in the auditing field since the 1960s. &quot;But it's not in lieu of the auditing function,&quot; he says. &quot;It's in additon to auditing, which is our bread and butter. With respect to Mr. Gomez's contention that he was too young to have so much responsibility, Mr. Fischer says: &quot;I don't buy it. That's no excuse. I was promoted to partner at a younger age than he was, and I didn't steal.&quot;    In March 1985, E.S.M. collapsed. Mr. Gomez retained a lawyer, who told him he faced serious criminal liability. Mr. Gomez says he fell into &quot;deep depression, and I am not a depressed individual.&quot; He was jolted out of it by the suicide in July of Stephen W. Arky, a 42-year-old Miami lawyer who had represented E.S.M. before its collapse. Fearing that his own depression could lead to a similar end, Mr. Gomez began cooperating with the authorities. He was the first E.S.M. figure to do so.    WSJ: Do you know how much time you've spent in terms of testifying and giving information?    GOMEZ: About 300 hours. I kept a log.    WSJ: Has that been a cathartic thing?    GOMEZ: Oh sure. It's had a tremendous therapeutic effect. And while I have many regrets about everything that happened in the past, I have no regrets about what I've done since then. I think ultimately it's been the best thing because it will allow me and my family to function without this big burden on us.    WSJ: How old are your children?    GOMEZ: Thirteen and 11.    WSJ: How have you dealt with them about this?    GOMEZ: Well, from the beginning I dealt with it openly and honestly with them. They've been tremendously affected.    WSJ: Can they understand it?    GOMEZ: They understand that there was something that happened to a company. They understand that Daddy was in a position to do something and he didn't do it right. And they understand that he's faced up to it and he's got to pay for it. And they also I hope understand that in their own life they're going to have to face things when they happen and they can't just try to get by. I've tried to use this as a lesson for them.    WSJ: How about preparing for prison?    GOMEZ: I don't know. I'm in limbo. I'd like to be able to find out what can I do, what can I bring. I'd like to be able to know whether I can have access to a typewriter or a mini-computer. You have to do something with your day. I imagine you can't just lie around doing nothing. I'd like to at least be able to maintain my technical profession by reading and working on things. Who knows? </TEXT></DOC>