<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870528-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Ruling on Asbestos-Illness PaymentsIs Near in Battle Between Firms, Insurers---By Cynthia F. MitchellStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TIC ACK GAF LPX MANFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)INSURANCE (INS) </IN><TEXT>   On Feb. 22, 1985, about 60 victims of asbestos-related diseases picketed San Francisco's Nourse Auditorium to protest the huge trial under way inside. Five former asbestos makers were fighting their insurers over which insurance companies should pay the billions of dollars in claims brought by thousands of asbestos victims.    Two years later, half of the victims at that protest -- some of whom held signs from their wheelchairs -- are dead. And the issue still isn't resolved.    &quot;If we have to picket again next year, I don't know if anyone (among those protesters) will be left,&quot; says Heather Bechtel, head of Asbestos Victims of America, the support group that arranged the protest. She estimates that every hour, one victim dies of asbestos-related diseases -- caused by the mineral that was once widely used in piping and insulation.    Though the trial isn't over yet, the third and most critical phase is just completed. Tomorrow, state Superior Court Judge Ira Brown in San Francisco will decide which insurers will be liable for the payment of current and future asbestos claims.    And Judge Brown's ruling will have far-reaching effects on the insurance and asbestos industries -- and in the sticky realm of civil suits filed by victims of other diseases caused by toxic substances.    The liability question has been decided previously by many courts in as many ways. But lawyers and industry executives expect Judge Brown's decision to set a precedent. The San Francisco trial -- billed as having more participants than any trial ever in the U.S. -- consolidated hundreds of lawsuits and countersuits between the manufacturers and their 70-odd insurers, which disagreed about the insurance companies that should pay the settlements and judgments for present and future asbestos claims. Further, Judge Brown has examined more detailed evidence than any court previously.    The manufacturers and insurers have a lot on the line. If Judge Brown narrowly interprets the extent of the insurers' liability, many former asbestos producers could find themselves without insurance coverage for billions of dollars of claims -- a situation some attorneys believe could lead to more bankruptcy-law filings. A broad interpretation also could land some insurers in that boat.    &quot;Without a doubt, this is it,&quot; says Wondie Russell, an attorney who represented Manville Corp., which was one of the five companies initially involved in the San Francisco trial but is no longer a participant because it reached out-of-court settlements with its insurers as part of its massive bankruptcy-law reorganization plan. &quot;It'll be D-day,&quot; she says.    The judge basically has three options: He could decide insurers that provided coverage when a plaintiff was exposed to the deadly mineral are liable; or, those insurers that had policies in effect when the disease was diagnosed should pay claims; or, in the broadest interpretation, the insurers that provided coverage from exposure to diagnosis -- often a period of 20 or 30 years -- must split the costs.    The judge's decision, while it specifically deals only with asbestos-related personal injury claims, could influence companies and insurers facing similar claims involving a host of substances from talc to benzene. Those substances, like asbestos, are believed to cause diseases that often don't show up for years.    &quot;This is a generic, important, insurance industry issue,&quot; says George McKeon, the general counsel for Hartford, Conn.-based Travelers Corp., which is one of the participants in the trial.    He said that generally, the insurance industry views the time when a disease is diagnosed as being the so-called point of injury. &quot;But asbestos diseases were recognized early on by medical people as starting sooner than that,&quot; he said. &quot;No one ever contemplated, when these polices were written, that we'd be faced with thousands and thousands of claims that would go back over 20 or 30 years.&quot;    The former asbestos makers named in the San Francisco suit -- Armstrong World Industries Inc., GAF Corp., Nicolet Inc. and the Fibreboard Corp. unit of Louisiana-Pacific Corp. -- are united in pushing for the most broad interpretation, which lawyers have nicknamed &quot;the triple trigger.&quot; Such a ruling by Judge Brown would give the companies the highest dollar amount of coverage and minimize the likelihood that they would have to pick up any of the bill for judgments or settlements.    The companies and their attorneys wouldn't comment specifically on the trial, pending the judge's decision. But Louisiana-Pacific's auditors qualified the 1986 financial statements of the Portland, Ore.-based forest products concern, because of the 11,000 asbestos lawsuits pending against its Fibreboard unit. The other companies say in their financial statements that they don't expect any adverse effect from the ruling.    Unlike the former asbestos makers, the insurers aren't united in their arguments. Many of the insurers that wrote coverage in the 1950s are pushing for the judge to hold that any injury occurred upon a patient's diagnosis. Conversely, insurers who wrote coverage in the 1970s and 1980s hold that injuries occurred earlier, upon exposure to the deadly mineral.    &quot;I don't think any one holding will be beneficial to the whole industry or detrimental to the whole industry,&quot; says Mr. McKeon of Travelers. He says his company has set aside adequate reserves to prepare for any of the judge's three potential rulings, but noted that some small insurers probably have not.    Travelers is espousing the view that the asbestos injuries took place at the time of exposure. Mr. McKeon notes, however, that the company would probably fare better if the judge ruled that the injuries took place at the time of diagnosis, because Travelers quit writing asbestos coverage in the 1970s.    The snail's pace of the trial has rankled even the judge, who at least once slammed his hand down in frustration and berated the attorneys present for the delays in the victims' payments. In the plush confines of Nourse Auditorium -- which the law firms involved in the case paid $200,000 to remodel to accommodate the so-called megatrial -- Judge Brown has listened to 79 witnesses and pored over 2,330 exhibits.    At first, the trial had the aura of a game show. American Legal Systems, a New York legal support firm, installed a complex computer system to handle the thousands of pages of exhibits and objections -- as well as a buzzer system and tote board so the judge could tell who was speaking.    &quot;I felt like a contestant on 'The Price is Right,'&quot; says Christopher Vejnoska, an attorney for Fibreboard. He says the judge quickly discontinued the buzzer system, however, after attorneys inadvertently kept setting the buzzers off when they set down their briefcases or coffee cups.    As for Judge Brown, who has handled nothing else since the trial began more than two years ago, his work won't be done when he issues his ruling tomorrow. He still must decide such issues as the insurers' and manufacturers' requests for damages for breach of contract and bad faith, which would determine whether the companies or their insurers would pay punitive damages. He says he expects the trial won't be finished for another year.    &quot;When this is over, I want to go over and try a month of fender benders,&quot; Judge Brown says. &quot;Little old cases will be fine with me.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>