<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Hirohito, Gravely Ill,Stirs Deep EmotionsIn Many Japanese---They Recall Emperor's Pain,And Their Own, in War;His Role Sparks Debate---By Bernard Wysocki Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A veteran Japanese biographer is reminiscing about Emperor Hirohito. Suddenly, he begins to weep.    He is thinking back to the famous meeting between the emperor and Gen. Douglas MacArthur just after World War II. The victorious American wore Army fatigues and an open collar. The defeated emperor dressed in cutaway and striped trousers. But, 42 years later, what the emperor said still carries an emotional charge.    &quot;His majesty said he didn't care what happened to him, only to the Japanese people,&quot; says 67-year-old Hiroyuki Agawa. Then, the biographer takes out a handkerchief, wipes his eyes and adds that he doesn't usually cry &quot;so easily.&quot;    Right now, these are emotional, sentimental times for many Japanese. The 86-year-old emperor is seriously ill. Although his attendants aren't making clear his exact condition, he underwent an intestinal-bypass operation in September and, after his release from the palace hospital, developed complications and required at least three blood transfusions.    Despite a recent improvement in his health, many people suspect that his 62-year reign is coming to a close. And although speaking too openly about such things is considered impolite here, a grand funeral and dozens of ceremonies are planned. Also being readied is the eventual ascension to the throne of his son, 53-year-old Crown Prince Akihito.    The emperor's death will mean the passing of the man who embodied so much Japanese history -- the Pacific war, the defeat, the occupation and the postwar economic success. For Japanese middle-aged and older, it will also be the passing of the man who embodied so much suffering. &quot;Many Japanese love our emperor because he suffered tremendously during the war, just as many Japanese people suffered,&quot; says Masamichi Inoki, a professor and writer.    Emperor Hirohito's death will probably have political effects. Right-wing Japanese say they will use it as a call to remilitarize Japan, although they aren't likely to win broad support. Mainstream politicians will be affected differently.    &quot;For about one year, there will be continuous ceremonies, starting with the funeral, and then many other things,&quot; says Hidehiko Yaoi, vice secretary general of the opposition Komeito party. &quot;There will be visits from lots of presidents and prime ministers from around the world. Diplomacy will flourish. The Japanese prime minister will become a star.&quot;    The emperor's illness has also had some purely commercial effects. As soon as he was hospitalized, stock prices of printing, paper and ink companies began rising on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. One reason: The Japanese calendar is based on the imperial reign, this being the 62-nd year of the reign of Showa (&quot;Bright Peace&quot;). A new emperor will bring a new reign, a new name for the era, and a deluge of new documents, forms, calendars and stationery.    But more than anything, the emperor's illness is focusing attention on the emperor himself -- and his role as the highest-ranking person in a very rank-conscious society, his role in shaping six decades of Japanese history and his role as the symbol of the Japanese people.    One indication of his status is his real estate. In the heart of congested, cramped Tokyo, the Imperial Palace commands 284 acres. Impressive stone walls, guard towers and a big moat face outward. Inside are acres of private woods and gardens, residences, the offices of the Imperial Household Agency and the emperor's cherished marine biology laboratory.    The emperor's lofty status is also clear in other ways. A special vocabulary of honorific terms is used when speaking to him. And the respect accorded him is apparent in the protocol of bowing. When two Japanese meet, the person of lower status bows more deeply, more frequently and at greater length. When Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone comes for an official visit, he bows deeply; the emperor responds with barely a nod of his head.    Beyond such trappings, the emperor's real power and influence in Japanese society have changed again and again. In some periods, he was virtually powerless. Before and during World War II, he was elevated to godlike status, and the war was fought largely in his name. After the war, his prestige plunged. The Americans forced him to renounce his divinity. Left-wingers wanted him tried as a war criminal.    But for the past 20 years or so, his prestige has again risen steadily, perhaps as a byproduct of Japan's postwar prosperity.    Today, according to public-opinion polls, more than 80% of the Japanese people favor keeping the present symbolic role of the emperor. Younger Japanese are often indifferent, but many middle-aged and older people say they feel &quot;emotionally close&quot; to him. And the very elderly still regard him with reverence and awe.    &quot;I would say I lead an emperor-centered life,&quot; says 84-year-old Kayo Itani of Tokyo. She is proud to be the same age as the empress, and she still remembers when, in 1924, she glimpsed the royal couple on their wedding day.    A glimpse is about all the average Japanese ever catches. His majesty has lived a remote life. He was educated entirely by tutors, and his one real taste of freedom came in 1921, when, as crown prince, he toured Europe. A few months later, he became prince regent to his mentally unstable father. Upon his father's death in 1926, Hirohito became emperor at age 25.    He gradually found himself in a complex relationship with Japan's aggressive military leaders. They manipulated him, trumpeted his divinity and invoked his name in their drive for expansion. A 1937 photograph portrays him as commander in chief of the Imperial Army and Navy -- presiding over a meeting of the Supreme Military Council, sitting alone at a head table -- distant, divine, and yet legitimizing the military's ambitions. In much the same setting, he approved the plan to attack Pearl Harbor in December 1941.    His wartime role has long sparked controversy. Most Japanese histories depict him as a pawn of the military, unable to control it. But there is also evidence that he took a keen interest in the war. Some historians go further.    &quot;He plotted with his advisers the invasions of China and Manchuria, and the attack on Pearl Harbor, which thrust the United States into the Pacific war,&quot; wrote Paul Manning, a former war correspondent, in a 1986 biography. &quot;He listened to the army and navy leaders, and once the details had been worked out, approved their recommendations for aggression and war.&quot;    On the day Singapore fell -- Feb. 15, 1942 -- the emperor appeared on the palace bridge on his white horse, peering silently at cheering crowds below. Much later, after American air raids, he walked through the charred rubble. And on Aug. 15, 1945, he addressed the nation on the radio. He recounted the hardships of the war, urged the Japanese to surrender and concluded, &quot;Submit, ye, to our will.&quot; The formal surrender ceremonies followed two weeks later on the battleship Missouri.    Since the war, the emperor has reigned but hasn't ruled. In the early postwar years, he often traveled throughout Japan. Looking at the photos, Japanese now marvel at how close people stood to him, a subtle sign of his diminished status.    With advancing age, the emperor has grown much more remote. However, his largely symbolic and ceremonial workload remained heavy -- meeting foreign royalty and heads of state, receiving ambassadors' credentials, giving awards to the worthy.    The very traditional Imperial Household Agency, with a staff of more than 1,100, organizes the emperor's day-to-day life. The staff includes a grand chamberlain, seven other chamberlains, six masters of ceremonies, six court ladies, 54 people in charge of banquets, four physicians, five people who clean the emperor's clothes, 15 corridor sweepers, and various menders and maids, chemists and cooks. Some 950 policemen guard the palace.    &quot;Backstairs at the palace&quot; books abound, mostly by former attendants and mostly relating amusing trivia of court life. Masao Sugimura, a former court physician, recalls his two-hour argument with the emperor about whether Hirohito should eat the popular but poisonous Japanese globefish, fugu. The empress finally broke up the dispute; though her role isn't clear, the emperor didn't eat the fugu.    With or without fugu, the emperor remains the conservator of many traditional Japanese pursuits. Members of the imperial family catch ducks with nets at the imperial hunting preserve. They sit stiffly through the New Year's Imperial Poetry Reading. &quot;The emperor's schedule is set, and never really varies, year in and year out,&quot; one source says.    The crown prince, by contrast, is very different. His staff arranges meetings and banquets, lectures, concerts and travel for him and Crown Princess Michiko. Some observers say his active, more accessible style may become a problem. &quot;Can he continue the same style as emperor that he has maintained as crown prince? I think there will necessarily be a compromise,&quot; a longtime acquaintance says.    The crown prince's education was less sheltered than his father's. He had an American tutor, Elizabeth Vining, whom he visited on his recent trip to the U.S. As a young man, he led an active university life with commoner friends. And against some advisers' wishes, he married a commoner, the former Michiko Shoda. At least some Japanese see the couple as a breath of fresh air.    &quot;I feel close to the emperor although he is a man in the clouds,&quot; says Yoshio Somemiya, a real-estate executive. &quot;I feel closer to the crown prince. And Michiko sama is a commoner. That helps.&quot;    Yet nobody knows what the new era will bring, although the emperor's death isn't likely to spark deep political and social change, and the imperial family's symbolic role probably will remain much as it now is. Asked by a reporter about changes between his father's reign and his own, the crown prince himself replied, &quot;It seems to me a great majority of the people in Japan is in favor of the emperor's position as symbol of the state and of the unity of the people. Therefore, I don't think there will be a considerable change.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>