<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890803-0090 </DOCNO><DD> = 890803 </DD><AN> 890803-0090. </AN><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:@  Film: Young Director's Seductive Debut@  ----@  By Julie Salamon </HL><DD> 08/03/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   Steven Soderbergh is only 26 years old, so it isn't surprising that this film director seems to have spent a great deal of time thinking about women. What's surprising is how astutely he's thought about them. Ann and Cynthia, the two female characters in his first feature film, &quot;sex, lies and videotape,&quot; aren't particularly virtuous or villainous. They are, however, by far the most vital women to appear onscreen in a long while.    This movie about Relationships ripples with an exquisitely understated erotic charge and an intense, proficient style. But it may be in danger of being overwhelmed by the advance praise that's been heaped on it. Critics began the ballyhoo in May, when the picture won top prize at the Cannes Film Festival, and one of its players, James Spader, won best actor. The hype seems vulgar and outsized for a movie whose considerable virtues center on an engaging intimacy, and wryness of tone.    The film has a terrific fresh and funny beginning. You hear a melodic, Southern woman's voice talking about garbage -- what to do with all of it? -- and other global questions. The voice, hesitant and self-deprecating, rambles on to the more specific topics of her husband and sex and the annoying prospect of an unexpected guest. Then you see her, a beautiful woman, about 30, sitting on a comfortable couch, directing her conversation to her therapist. As she talks, Mr. Soderbergh introduces the movie's four main characters almost as illustrations for the as-yet-anonymous woman's monologue.    She is Ann, a model of well-bred, upper-middle-class repression, living in Baton Rouge, La. (Mr. Soderbergh's hometown). When her therapist asks her about masturbation, she blushes so hard she shakes (&quot;No, no, no, no,&quot; is her response). Her distracted ruminations are an updated version of many literary neurotic Southern ladies, only Ann is of the New South, less exotic and very amusing in a bittersweet way. &quot;Being happy isn't all that great,&quot; she tells her shrink. When she was happy, she recalls, &quot;I got so fat.&quot;    The therapist isn't doing Ann any good. She's living a life nearly empty of sex and full of hypocrisy. Her husband John, on the other hand, maintains a balance of sex and hypocrisy: He has plenty of both. (He lies to his wife and sleeps with her sister.) The fourth main character is an old college friend of John's, an artistic vagabond who has given up on both sex and lies, or so he thinks. He's turned to videotape to guard his purity. He doesn't sleep with women, he has them talk to his camera about sex. He doesn't live life, he watches it on film.    Mr. Soderbergh is young enough to keep up a good head of rage at the idea of hypocrisy, that human beings aren't completely honest with one another. Yet for the most part he conducts his probe into feelings, a potentially mawkish swamp, with deft humor and compassion -- especially for the women. When music is used sparsely, ordinary sounds seem heightened. In this atmosphere of hyperreality the audience is made to feel voyeuristic. There is a feeling of ripeness in the air. Mr. Soderbergh keeps the sexual tension at a high level by letting the viewer in on the seduction, but never showing the actual event.    Andie MacDowell, far more memorable for her saucy role in Calvin Klein jeans ads than for her movie parts (&quot;Greystoke: the Legend of Tarzan, Lord of the Apes,&quot; &quot;St. Elmo's Fire&quot;), startles with her portrayal of Ann, she is that good. Though much of what you know about Ann comes from how she looks and how her house looks -- you know she must religiously read House andamp; Garden and order kitchen gadgets from Williams-Sonoma -- Ms. MacDowell makes her hurt heartbreakingly real. She's stuck, simply unaware that there might be something even more comfortable than perfection.    Laura San Giacomo, a stage and television actress making a memorably keen film debut here, plays Cynthia, Ann's sister. It's obvious that long ago Cynthia decided if Ann was a good girl, she, Cynthia, must be bad.    Mr. Soderbergh acknowledges the competition between the sisters in his script, but he almost doesn't have to. You get it just looking at them, and listening to them. Taking his cue from Calvin's marketing people, Mr. Soderbergh makes eloquent use of the tight closeup. The elegantly voluptuous Ann exudes pureness; a cross always dangles around her neck. Cynthia is little and skinny but intensely sexual; she tends bar in a seedy joint and has a voice sandpapered to a growl by cigarettes. Her affair with John, Ann's husband, is straightforward: a cynical mix of lust and revenge. But Cynthia's no more honest than Ann, no less trapped by the person she's determined herself to be.    The male characters, smartly played by Peter Gallagher and James Spader, are more problematic, though they move the story forward. Mr. Gallagher, a darkly sensuous man, hasn't had a movie part as juicy as John since he played a Fabian-like rock 'n' roller in &quot;The Idolmaker&quot; nearly a decade ago. With John, a smug young lawyer, what you see is all there is. Even his cleaner-than-clean white shirts radiate a satisfied sense of well-being. He's pragmatic, does only what he has to. When Cynthia suggests there isn't anything to their relationship but sex, he barely tries to argue with her. He doesn't feel obligated to lie to her the way he lies to Ann. But you get the sense right from the beginning that John exists only to be shot down. He's too much a type, too much the shallow yuppie blithely having it all. His connection to Ann is so tenuous that there isn't any snap when it breaks.    The movie's strongest and weakest point is the drifter called Graham (James Spader). He's the obvious contrast to John, not overtly sensual at all, he looks peachy, like a boy who hasn't started to shave yet. Ann doesn't know what to make of him when he shows up at her house, wearing black shirt and jeans and displaying no working knowledge of adult chit-chat.    Instead, he disarms her by asking her, very directly, the kinds of intimate questions she's used to hearing only from her shrink; for example, what do you think of marriage? Orderly Ann can't help but be drawn to this enigmatic stranger, especially after he confides that he's impotent. He's a safe fantasy object, sexless, and just perfect as a surrogate therapist who makes house calls.    Graham is, more importantly, the emblem of this movie's main, though not terribly profound message -- that voyeurs (therapists, video artists and, apparently, married ladies) aren't really living. To make the point, Mr. Soderbergh has to unmask Graham, to force him to reveal to Ann why he likes to watch.    Graham, unfortunately, is a Lake Erie of a person; looks deep, is shallow. When Ann turns the video camera on him, what he has to say about himself is disappointing. Much as Mr. Soderbergh seems to disdain psychoanalysts, he's fed Graham psychobabble to burble about why he behaves the way he does. Murmuring about a &quot;sense of closure&quot; he seems dull and pathetic.    Mr. Soderbergh's confusion about Graham probably reflects some confusion about himself (he has said that the movie was inspired by a disappointing love affair he once had). The director is young and extremely talented, so it's likely that next time he'll make an even better film than this exciting first effort. Maybe he'll feel confident enough to capitalize the title.    ---   VIDEO TIP: Film makers are naturally drawn to the idea of filming their lives instead of living them. Check out Brian De Palma's delightfully eccentric 1980 comedy, &quot;Home Movies,&quot; about a teen-ager who's tired of playing the extra in life, and wants to be a star. </TEXT></DOC>