<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880412-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis Capitalizes on His Rivals' Weaknesses To Become the Safe Choice in New York Primary </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In this political Beirut called the New York Democratic primary, Michael Dukakis succeeds on the shortcomings of his rivals.    The Rev. Jesse Jackson seems too much too soon, Sen. Albert Gore of Tennessee, too little too late. By contrast, the Massachusetts governor offers a safe median. He is like the dutiful son who triumphs on character and the failings of his brothers.    A week away from next Tuesday's voting, Mr. Dukakis sits on a $2 million war chest and a big lead in the polls. The Rev. Jackson can't be counted out but, unless Sen. Gore begins to cut into the governor's base, the black preacher faces an uphill fight in a state where racial tensions and a large Jewish population make it more difficult for his candidacy to be accepted.    If Mr. Dukakis wins and goes on to claim his party's presidential nomination, it will be a triumph consistent with his past pattern. He competes by moving toward his rivals on key issues and then undermining their claims to character or competence. His comeback in Massachusetts when he unseated Edward King as governor in 1982 reflected such a strategy; and his presidential campaign has driven rivals -- Sen. Joseph Biden of Delaware and Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt -- from the race by aggressively exposing their inconsistencies.    He is stronger where he has been tested -- such as in domestic policy -- and weak still on foreign affairs, where the Democrats have had no meaningful debate. Moreover, the character issues that allow Mr. Dukakis to prevail in a primary are likely to be less decisive in what could be a more ideological contest with Vice President George Bush this fall.    &quot;He has never been tested in a real partisan, ideological contest,&quot; says Edward Reilly, a New York pollster who advised Mr. King and, more recently, Rep. Gephardt's campaign. &quot;The question for Dukakis now is how he plots his course to the convention and prepares for when he will have a force -- like George Bush -- of equal resources across the table saying, 'No, what you believe is wrong.'&quot;    New York brings out these strengths and these weaknesses. Race and ethnic appeals here are as raw as tabloid headlines, and Gov. Dukakis shares the stage not only with his rivals but also with New York City Mayor Edward Koch and New York Gov. Mario Cuomo.    Mr. Koch's remarks -- such as the recent one that a Jew would have to be &quot;crazy&quot; to vote for Mr. Jackson -- can make boredom seem a balm. Mr. Cuomo, dubbed &quot;Machiavelli Mario&quot; by some, is an inveterate schemer and as conflicted as the state is between the Jackson and Dukakis camps. He won't endorse but on balance has continued to help his fellow governor by stressing questions of competence and trying to muzzle Sen. Gore.    &quot;Big chief, big blanket, send up big signal,&quot; jokes the senator's consultant, David Garth, who alternately baits and confers with Mr. Cuomo in a remarkable triangle with Mayor Koch.    Mr. Dukakis can't match the emotion generated by Mr. Jackson, but he is influenced by it. He is a button-down man who has been known to take a teleprompter into a union-hall rally, but his words are now honed to better address the fears of blue-collar voters. He speaks not only of jobs and opportunity in his progressive tradition but also of dignity and security. Just as Mr. Dukakis became more sensitive in Michigan to the trade issue raised by Rep. Gephardt, a Dukakis speech last week in New York echoed the Rev. Jackson's attacks on foreign drug traffickers.    &quot;You pick up things along the way that may help you define yourself better,&quot; the governor says. Others are more blunt.    &quot;Dukakis can't go back to being what he was before Gephardt and Jackson,&quot; says conservative writer and political analyst Kevin Phillips. &quot;He can't go back to being 'Massachusetts Miracle Mike.' He's been forced to bid for people worried about losing their jobs, and that's been good for Mike Dukakis.&quot;    The governor gives the back of his hand to Sen. Gore, but in a series of debates beginning this morning, the young Tennessean will have a chance to test the frontrunner on foreign policy.    As if in anticipation, Mr. Dukakis set a pro-Israel tone in a speech on Mideast policy before a Jewish audience yesterday, and he is careful to show a worldly skepticism toward the Soviet Union. In a speech last week, he inserted a 1947 quote from Harry Truman that the &quot;one thing Americans value even more than peace . . . is freedom.&quot;    The Massachusetts governor comes into New York with strong credentials in the Jewish community. But he risks hurting himself if he appears to shift to a more pro-Israel position under pressure from Sen. Gore. In his remarks yesterday, Mr. Dukakis continued to support the U.S. Mideast peace initiative but said he didn't accept &quot;every aspect&quot; of the plan.    Israel, which is struggling &quot;to maintain order,&quot; isn't to blame for the current violence in the occupied West Bank, he argued, asserting that the burden should be put on Arab leaders who have refused to negotiate with Israel.    Mr. Dukakis makes light of Vice President Bush's resume in foreign policy but trips over his own historic comparisons. He is fond of citing Presidents Theodore and Franklin Roosevelt as two governors who went directly to the White House, but both men had significant experience in Washington first. Mr. Dukakis's third example, Woodrow Wilson, may be more apt, but the former New Jersey governor compiled a mixed -- sometimes disastrous -- record on foreign policy.    Mr. Dukakis's self-confidence may exceed his knowledge. If he were president now, he says, he would be able to reach agreement with the Soviets on a strategic arms reduction treaty and a test-ban treaty as early as this spring's scheduled Moscow summit.    &quot;Both of those agreements are ready to be signed,&quot; he says. But among military officials who are pressing for the arms-reduction accord, many say this timetable isn't realistic.    &quot;Notwithstanding Gov. Dukakis's confidence, he'd have to do that without the support of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,&quot; a Pentagon official says. &quot;The problem isn't a knee-jerk reaction to arms control. The problem is practical considerations of verification.&quot;    Next Tuesday's primary will be quickly followed by Pennsylvania's on April 26, and the Dukakis campaign is looking for a one-two punch that will give it most of the combined 433 delegates at stake. Mr. Dukakis's New York schedule is interspersed with stops in Pennsylvania; last weekend he appeared at a coal miners' march in the depressed Monongahela region before flying north to Rochester and Dunkirk, N.Y.    Mr. Jackson competes as well for labor support in the industrial North, but as the race becomes more of a two-man contest, the civil rights leader is frustrated by the resistance he encounters among older voters. Surveys here and television exit polls from Wisconsin show a decided shift away from Mr. Jackson among voters over 50 years old, and Mr. Dukakis's sober style and significant concessions to Social Security recipients help preserve this edge.    The governor has the charisma now that attaches itself to any winner, but he still tends to evoke a warmer response from women than from the blue-collar white males he will need in the fall.    &quot;His personality just shines, it sinks in and melts,&quot; says an exuberant Maggie LaSalle, 27, outside a steelworkers' hall in Dunkirk. Inside, Robert Teclaw, a senior member of the local, is doubtful.    &quot;I thought he would be more forceful,&quot; says the 55-year-old stamping-plant worker. &quot;He's going to have a tough fight against the Democrats, let alone the Republicans.&quot;    The campaign's best operatives from Florida and Texas have been brought in. Just as victories in those states saved Mr. Dukakis in the South, New York has the potential to tip the scales in the North.    &quot;Dukakis has to win,&quot; Mr. Garth, the consultant, says. But that's a problem the other candidates wish they had. </TEXT></DOC>