<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880920-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BURMESE TROOPS KILLED demonstrators protesting a military coup.    Soldiers loyal to the new military regime that seized power Sunday opened fire on thousands of protesters in the streets of Rangoon, and about 100 people were reported killed. Demonstrations also flared in other cities, including Mandalay, and opposition leaders said students, Buddhist monks and striking civil servants would continue to rally for democracy. The whereabouts of Maung Maung, who was ousted as president in the coup, remained unknown.    The White House is considering ending financial aid to Burma following the military's takeover and its violent repression of demonstrations.    ---   POLAND'S PREMIER QUIT amid criticism over the economy.    The resignation of Prime Minister Zbigniew Messner and all 19 members of his cabinet was announced to Warsaw's parliament, which has faulted the government for failing to effectively implement Poland's program of economic changes. Messner conceded &quot;mishaps&quot; in handling inflation, which caused two recent waves of strikes. The departure of the cabinet, however, doesn't signal any change in economic or political policies.    A lawmaker urged the Sejm, or parliament, to legalize Solidarity. It apparently was the first such call since the trade union was banned in 1982.    ---   Armenians and Azerbaijanis fought with guns and knives in the disputed Soviet region of Nagorno-Karabakh, and sources in Yerevan said about 70 people were injured in the weekend violence. Ethnic Russian troops eventually moved in to restore order. The incident prompted a general strike in Armenia.    ---   Haiti's new president announced the appointment of a cabinet consisting of 11 civilians and one army officer &quot;for the definitive installation of democracy.&quot; Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril proclaimed himself president Sunday following a military coup that ousted the regime of Henri Namphy. The new cabinet was installed in a televised ceremony.    ---   Nicaraguan representatives met with Contra rebel leaders for the first time in three months. Both sides at the two-day conference in neutral Guatemala remained divided over how and where to resume high-level peace talks aimed at ending seven years of civil war. An earlier round of such negotiations collapsed in June.    ---   Average SAT scores declined for the first time since 1980. Combined verbal and mathematics scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test fell two points to 904 on a scale of 1600. It marked the third straight year without a gain. Black students, however, continued a decade-long pattern of gains, the College Board said.    ---   Bush accused Dukakis of trying to polarize America by &quot;emphasizing differences between rich and poor.&quot; The Democratic presidential nominee retorted that the Reagan administration has left a &quot;sea of Republican red ink that not even Moses could part.&quot; Both candidates reduced their schedules to prepare for Sunday's debate.    ---   Israel launched a test satellite into orbit that reportedly carried surveillance equipment to monitor its Arab enemies. Israel became the eighth nation to place a satellite into space. An Arab representative said the satellite gave Israel &quot;strategic leverage&quot; and warranted enhanced Arab defenses.    ---   Turkey's Ozal transformed the timing of the country's local elections into a referendum on leadership. The Turkish prime minister, in an announcement Sunday, threatened to resign &quot;according to the results&quot; of balloting on holding early elections. Ozal's resignation would be a threat to regional stability.    ---   Hurricane Gilbert's remnants swept to Illinois from Texas. The storm had spun off dozens of tornadoes, and killed three people in Texas and Oklahoma. In Mexico, workers searched for the bodies of as many as 200 people killed over the weekend as flood waters overturned four buses.    ---   The Soviet Union called for the dissolution of the U.N. Command in South Korea, and the withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed there under the U.N. flag. Moscow was joined by 12 of its allies in proposing the item for the General Assembly agenda.    ---   Perez de Cuellar is scheduled to visit South Africa and Angola this week for talks on implementing a 10-year-old U.N. independence plan for Namibia, which is ruled by Pretoria. The U.N. secretary-general is expected to discuss the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, a condition South Africa demands as part of a regional settlement. </TEXT></DOC>