<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871123-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Getting to Know South Korea's Presidential Candidates---By Claudia Rosett</HL><DD> 11/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   Tear gas, rocks, fist fights and warnings from President Chun Doo Hwan have figured prominently in South Korea's presidential race so far. But before writing off the democratic hopes of those madcap Koreans -- who go to the polls Dec. 16 -- it's worth looking past the haze and projectiles. That's what The Asian Wall Street Journal tried to do recently when it asked Korea's four leading presidential candidates to sum up their economic platforms. What emerged was evidence that democracy is indeed taking shape in Korea. Along with the framework for direct presidential elections, there's the beginning of a policy debate that seeks to discover what the public wants.    When Koreans were rioting for democracy back in June, it seemed a good guess that the ruckus might end in martial law. Instead, thanks to the growing middle-class demand for liberalization, and leaders astute enough to recognize that demand, Koreans today have a new constitution, approved overwhelmingly last month in a national referendum. Next month they will directly elect their new president, in the first free elections since 1971. It's hoped that this vote will bring the first peaceful transition in Korea's 39-year history. The winner is to serve a single five-year term, starting Feb. 25 when President Chun steps down.    The complaint we're hearing now about the four main candidates is that they're personalities without policies -- something that bodes ill for Korean multiparty democracy. Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam have traditionally led the opposition. Because neither man would agree to stand down as the opposition candidate, Kim Dae Jung last month broke with Kim Young Sam and formed his own party. This jockeying has led to street battles between rival Kim supporters, and accusations that both Kims are putting their personal ambitions above their country's interests. The third Kim in the race, Kim Jong Pil served as prime minister under the late President Park Chung Hee and is still harking back to those unpopular days. The ruling party's candidate, Roh Tae Woo, came up with the eight-point plan for democracy that stopped the June riots and paved the way for the December elections. But because Mr. Roh is a former general who helped bring President Chun to power, he faces skepticism about his democratic credentials.    So would anyone on this list know how to run a free country? In Korea, the issue until a few months ago was democracy itself. Now it's actually an open question who might win the election -- and it's worth scrambling for ideas that might confer a competitive edge.    Well, Messrs. Kim, Kim, Kim and Roh may not be Korea's answer to Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan, but their economic platforms include some planks that probably square with the broad concerns of the Korean electorate. All four candidates fret over the uneven growth of the Korean economy and stress the need for people to enjoy more of the fruits of their labor. That sounds fair in a country where wage increases have not kept up with double-digit growth of national income. The candidates say that government should confer fewer favors on Korea's famous conglomerates, and give more leeway to labor unions. They all note the importance of a free market, though to varying degrees they also endorse programs that suggest different priorities.    Beyond those themes, however, each candidate is seeking an individual sales pitch that will grab the votes.    Kim Dae Jung's catch phrase, &quot;mass-participatory economy,&quot; invites a leftist gloss -- especially coming from a man once branded a seditionist by the Chun government for his role in the 1980 Kwangju riots. But Kim Dae Jung sets himself up as a candidate who believes &quot;as much as Adam Smith did in the function of a market mechanism for allocation of resources.&quot; He labels himself a &quot;free trader&quot; and writes, &quot;I emphatically reject socialism.&quot; He sees a need for direct foreign investment in Korea. He supports &quot;the export-oriented development strategy that has been pursued by the government&quot; -- though it's not clear how he might reconcile a free market with the mercantilist aspect of export-led growth.    Roh Tae Woo also speaks mainly of the free market, but seems to understand it better. He writes that he &quot;firmly believes that adoption of policies that deviate from market principles, however good the original intentions may be, will create serious distortions and inefficiencies in the economy.&quot; He criticizes his own ruling party for doing too little to promote balanced growth, and supports open trade. He suggests, for example, that farmers be helped not by more farm subsidies, but by deregulation and &quot;promotion of nonagricultural income.&quot;    Kim Young Sam takes the populist road, with something for everyone. He wants a big welfare system, with national medical insurance, social security, and housing for the needy. He favors higher top marginal tax rates and would set up a &quot;cabinet-level planning agency for regional development.&quot; Somewhere in there he also wants a free-market economy, with a deregulated financial sector and an independent central bank -- which Korea does not have.    Kim Jong Pil advocates &quot;respect for the freedom . . . of enterprises and individuals in economic affairs.&quot; But when he gets specific, the talk is mostly of a &quot;highly disciplined government&quot; that would replace the current five-year economic plan with programs such as a &quot;10-year Special Plan for rural community modernization.&quot;    Not all the campaign promises address the key issues in the Korean economy. It would be nice, for example, to hear a lot more about the need for Korea to lower its import barriers. That would do more to help the average worker than any amount of subsidy and welfare programs. There's no good reason why Koreans should pay high prices for their groceries just so their country can be self-sufficient in, say, beef, garlic and bananas.    It's true also that some of the talk can be shrugged off as mere campaign rhetoric. But the virtue of campaign rhetoric is that candidates have a chance to sort out what plays best to voters. In the U.S.'s 1984 presidential election, for example, Walter Mondale learned that it doesn't pay to promise a tax hike.    For the next few months, Korea's critical task is to bring off the election and see that the winner succeeds smoothly to the Blue House on Feb. 25 when President Chun retires. It would be reassuring to see less rock throwing and more discussion. Policies may be running second to personalities. But policies seem to be catching up. Democracy has always required practice.    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>