<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890822-0146 </DOCNO><DD> = 890822 </DD><AN> 890822-0146. </AN><HL> Letters to the Editor:@  Tragic Losses in War We Musn't Lose </HL><DD> 08/22/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><GV> TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </GV><TEXT>   We want to commend you for your powerful three-part series (&quot;Addiction: America's Drug Crisis&quot;). Your articles captured the human dimension of the problem of alcoholism and drug dependency, as well as the complexity of these diseases, which afflict millions of people and their families each year, and cost the U.S. more than $100 billion in economic losses annually.    We were particularly pleased with the fact that your articles focused on the treatment of drug addiction as a chronic disease, characterized by relapses and the need for a lifelong personal commitment to recovery on the part of the patient through self-help groups. Treatment all too frequently is overlooked as a vital part of the equation for combating the nation's alcohol and drug problems.    Access to quality chemical-dependency treatment should be viewed as one of the key elements in the nation's drug and alcohol abuse/prevention efforts, and federal and state governments and private insurers should work together to ensure that every citizen has access to treatment. Your insightful articles should help raise public consciousness of the devastating effects of drug addiction and, it is hoped, improve the climate for addressing the drug and alcohol crisis in a humane and compassionate way.    Michael Q. Ford    President    National Association of Addiction Treatment Providers    Irvine, Calif.    ---   Ronald G. Shafer's July 31 page-one article &quot;Stolen Future,&quot; about his son Ryan's death from drugs, took a tremendous amount of courage on the part of both the Shafer family and the Journal. I cannot think of the amount of less-developed-countries debt or the number of leveraged buyouts that could possibly be more important to your readers than the drug crisis and our youngsters. Many misconceptions were vividly dispelled and warning signs agonizingly brought to our attention.    As a parent of three young children, I thank you for your brave essay and am confident many potential users and families will be spared pain because of you. Robert F. Cavallari    Buffalo, N.Y.    ---   I read with intense interest your article &quot;Born to Lose: Babies of Crack Users Crowd Hospitals, Break Everybody's Heart.&quot; I commend you for telling about a very important problem out there -- the cocaine babies, a problem that society seems to be ignoring.    Frances De Bartolo    Chicago    ---   It has been my experience, as someone involved in the adolescent drug-use issue for more than 10 years, that journalism rarely probes into this social problem as it should. Often, stories on drug use among kids are shallow and don't describe the outrageous facts of the pervasiveness of drug use, its deepening roots in our culture and the vulnerabilities of any family anywhere to its lies and pain.    Without question, illicit drug use by kids is &quot;bad news.&quot; Its swath of destruction and despair is never a pretty story. But, as Mr. Shafer points out, if one young person or one family is helped by its telling, then that's &quot;good news.&quot;    Kent C. Cooper    Los Angeles    ---   My only son also was once full of laughter; then, at age 14 he got hooked on LSD and angel dust. Unlike Mr. Shafer's son, Ryan, my son is not dead -- physically. However, he resides off and on in a mental institution, never to laugh again. And every day my heart breaks a little more.    Paul Jasper    Kinnelon, N.J.    ---   Mr. Shafer's poignant tale brings the problem home better than all the experts and statistics in the world. I'm grateful to him for sharing what is obviously a painful and bewildering story.    Deborah R. Dakins    San Francisco    ---   Mr. Shafer's story of his son's addiction and death certainly got my attention. I'm a baby boomer and have grown up during a time when drug abuse has become almost commonplace and acceptable. While a lot of information is available on the subject, it is often skipped over, being someone else's problem. This poignant account of warning signs is effective in pointing out the devastation of drugs to our nation's best resource, our children.    As a father of two boys, ages 9 and 11, a school-board member, church elder and Sunday school teacher, I am motivated to challenge other &quot;silent majority&quot; people to become educated on drug abuse and join local schools, churches and organizations to fight the drug problem on your home fronts. It is no longer someone else's problem; it is yours and mine.    The Shafer family's sharing of its tragic loss can start turning the tide in the drug battle if each of us fights against drug dealers and pushers in our communities.    W. William Weispfenning Jr.    Oakes, N.D.    ---   Mr. Shafer made us feel the devastating impact of the drug epidemic in a deeply personal way. His skill and courage produced both the highest form of journalism and a moving tribute to his son.    Frederick G. Harmon    Wilmington, Del.    ---   Your writers remind us the problem cuts across all socioeconomic lines, affects all age groups, and results in staggering human and financial losses.    As your articles so aptly state, the severity of the problem is intensified by the lack of good and accessible treatment options. Most people cannot afford the treatment when it's necessary. Meanwhile, the nation is fighting an unwarranted health &quot;rationing&quot; crisis. As a result, we lose countless young people every day as they slip &quot;off the waiting lists&quot; into oblivion.    There are some bright spots, however. For instance, citizen volunteers are uniting to seek answers. In Illinois, where some 2,500 people wait for treatment, volunteers -- many among your readership -- joined with the Gateway Foundation to complete a $4.5 million campaign to expand treatment opportunities for young people. Business people -- representatives from Household International, Kraft General Foods, Allstate and many others -- formed an alliance to provide an effective response for people in need.    Our thanks for drawing greater attention to the problem and thereby helping our volunteers work toward a solution.    Michael Darcy    Chicago    ---   Mr. Shafer's story helps educate and motivate a large audience to wake up to this national disaster. However, a story on the second-front page of the same issue whimsically describes the way the Houston Police Department has developed a &quot;marijuana use index&quot; to deal with large numbers of applicants who have more than experimented with that drug.    It's no wonder families find it difficult to keep their kids clean when even responsible publications can find humor in epidemic drug abuse.    John A. Harding M.D.    Fairport, N.Y.    ---   In your story on the strategic muddle in Washington's war on drugs, an unmentioned casualty is the legitimate importer of goods from potential drug-source countries. The U.S. Customs Service is pursuing its new drug-interdiction role with a crusader's vengeance and has immunity for damages caused by inspections. In some jurisdictions, this is leading to unrecoverable costs for importers.    As an example, our company imported a container of zinc wire from Brazil through New Orleans after having imported dozens like it through Norfolk without difficulty. In New Orleans, the Customs Service's idea of inspection was to drill holes in nearly half the drums of wire. Although our customer was able to use most of the shipment, the amount we had to refund to him for damaged wire was a disastrous hit to our razor-thin margins. To our claim for damages, the U.S. Customs Service response was, &quot;If you don't like it, take us to court.&quot;    Who is recognizing these costs as we evaluate our war against drugs? And who is watching that the Customs Service, trained mainly in the art of assessing tariffs, doesn't go off the deep end as it plays policeman?    John Grace    President    Cascadura Raleigh, N.C.    ---   Your focus on the devastating consequences of alcoholism and other drug abuse vividly portrayed the personal tragedy of this disease. Your message concerning treatment will give hope to millions of Americans who need help in dealing with their addictions.    William J. Mueller    President    Parkside Medical Services Corp.    Park Ridge, Ill. </TEXT></DOC>