<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0065 </DOCNO><HL> FTC Is Said to Vote to Sue Wickes Cos.,A Belzberg Firm Over Antitrust Rules---By Andy Pasztor and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WIX OCF ASH BSC JEFG T.FCYSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Federal Trade Commission has voted in favor of filing civil suits alleging that Wickes Cos. and a firm controlled by Canada's Belzberg family violated antitrust restrictions in separate takeover bids last year, persons familiar with the FTC investigation said.    According to these persons, the commission earlier this year formally urged the Justice Department to sue both companies for using stock option agreements allegedly to evade requirements of the Hart-Scott-Rodino antitrust law. The commission hasn't disclosed the vote and wouldn't comment on it.    Justice Department officials, who have the final say about filing such suits on behalf of the government, are reviewing the matter but haven't decided what they will do, according to federal officials and Wall Street professionals.    According to persons familiar with the FTC investigation, the agency has proposed filing civil suits in connection with Wickes's hostile $2.1 billion takeover bid for Owens-Corning Fiberglas Co. in August 1986, and a proposed $1.8 billion takeover of Ashland Oil Co. in March 1986 by the Belzbergs. Neither bid was successful.    Spokesmen for Santa Monica, Calif.-based Wickes and First City Financial Corp., which is controlled by the Belzberg family, declined to comment.    Hart-Scott is designed to allow federal regulators to review proposed mergers and acquisitions for possible antitrust problems. It requires individuals, corporations and many partnerships who may harbor takeover plans to report stock holdings of $15 million or more to the government, and await an antitrust review by the FTC before buying more shares. Earlier this year, the FTC issued regulations to plug a loophole that allowed certain investment partnerships to avoid reporting $15 million stakes to the FTC.    The current FTC investigation reflects the agency's concerns that corporate raiders have been able to sidestep the Hart-Scott waiting period -- typically 15 days or more -- and assemble large blocks of stock with the help of Wall Street brokerage firms.    As part of a broader enforcement initiative by the commission, people familiar with the inquiry said, the agency's staff is investigating whether a handful of other well-known corporate raiders have been engaging in similar tactics. Moreover, it's possible the commission will request suits alleging the same kind of disclosure violation by bidders or speculators involved in other takeover efforts besides the Wickes and Belzberg bids, according to some persons familiar with the issue.    Two brokerage houses, Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. in New York, and Los Angeles-based Jefferies andamp; Co., have been involved in many of the options agreements of the type in question. While the commission hasn't moved to take any action against brokerage houses, persons familiar with the investigation said it hasn't ruled out the idea.    The investigation centers on so-called put-and-call option agreements, which some say may have been used in as many as 30 large transactions before the government's current crackdown. Using this technique, a brokerage firm assembles a large block of stock under an options agreement with a corporate raider, but the raider doesn't buy the stock until he gets federal approval to boost his stake in the target company. &quot;This is a way to jump the gun, to line up shares while waiting for Hart-Scott clearance,&quot; said a securities lawyer.    Under a typical put-and-call agreement, a raider has a call option giving him the right to buy an assembled block of stock from a brokerage firm at a set price. The brokerage firm avoids risk in acquiring the stock, because if the raider doesn't exercise its right to call the stock, the broker can exercise a put option and require the raider to buy the same number of shares.    The investigation has prompted friction between the FTC and the Justice Department, prompting some FTC officials to worry that the department may be reluctant to file suits.    Assistant Attorney General Charles Rule, the head of the department's Antitrust Division, has said, &quot;It isn't any secret that the commission has been looking at a number of possible infractions&quot; of Hart-Scott-Rodino filing requirements. But Mr. Rule and Justice Department spokesmen declined to provide any specifics about the status of the inquiry or the firms involved.    Targets of any civil actions are likely to argue, among other things, that many put-and-call option agreements were publicly disclosed in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission well before the current investigation got cranked up. FTC investigators, on the other hand, contend that such disclosures weren't adequate.    One important question for the FTC may be whether or not the option agreement carried any risk for the brokerage firm. Securities lawyers said that some agreements were written so that if a raider failed to get government antitrust clearance, and the broker had to sell the stock in the open market, the broker would be reimbursed for any losses.    The commission didn't recommend seeking any specific penalties in the suits, according to persons familiar with the matter.    A spokesman for Bear Stearns also declined to comment. Frank Baxter, Jefferies president and chief executive officer, said, &quot;We had lawyers go through (the option agreements) with a fine-tooth comb before we did them.&quot; He added, &quot;We've stopped doing them&quot; since the FTC announced last December that it was cracking down on violations of pre-merger notification requirements under Hart-Scott.    In August 1986, Wickes launched a $2.1 billion tender offer for Owens-Corning of Toledo, Ohio. Wickes later ended its bid and sold its 8.5% stake in Owens-Corning in the open market for a $30 million profit after Owens-Corning countered with a recapitalization plan.    According to an SEC filing, Bear Stearns and Wickes, before the takeover was proposed, had a put-and-call option agreement covering a block of about 7% of Owens-Corning stock. Bear Stearns granted Wickes an option to buy more than 2.2 million Owens-Corning shares for $135.9 million, and Wickes granted Bear Stearns an option to sell an identical number of shares for the same price.    The other transaction investigators have focused on, according to people familiar with the inquiry, is the Belzbergs' proposed $1.8 billion takeover of Ashland Oil Co. in March 1986. The bid quickly ended with the family selling its 9.2% stake in Ashland back to the company at a profit.    Four months later, the SEC filed a suit charging the Belzbergs' First City Financial Corp. and Marc Belzberg, a company vice president, with failing to promptly disclose its stake in Ashland in March.    The SEC said First City used put-and-call agreements with Bear Stearns to delay the filing of disclosure reports required when anyone buys more than 5% of a company's stock. However, the SEC didn't allege that the agreements themselves were illegal, and didn't charge Bear Stearns with any wrongdoing. At the time, First City said the SEC charges were &quot;completely unfounded.&quot; According to the SEC suit, which is pending, First City and Bear Stearns had put-and-call agreements covering about 1.2 million Ashland shares. </TEXT></DOC>