<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Jet Battle:Boeing Now Gears UpTo Block the InroadsOf Airbus in Plane Sales---Delay of Futuristic 7J7 LetsFirm Push Marketing WarWith Europe Consortium---Pickens Waits in the Wings---By Eileen WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BAAIRLINES (AIR)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> SEATTLE  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A predator is stalking Boeing Co., officials of the aerospace giant concede. But for now at least, the enemy they fear most speaks with a French accent rather than a Texas twang.    True, executives are anxiously awaiting the next move from T. Boone Pickens. The corporate raider's partnership in Amarillo controlled 3% of Boeing as of the end of June, and it recently got federal permission to buy as much as 15%. But Mr. Pickens is keeping mum, so it is too early to tell whether a battle for control will break out.    Boeing, the world's largest maker of airliners and the eighth-biggest U.S. defense contractor, already has a desperate fight on its hands with a competitor it had tried to ignore. Airbus Industrie, the European consortium, is hacking away at Boeing's world-wide market share, which as recently as 1981 was nearly seven of every 10 jetliners sold. The score so far this year is much closer: Boeing 48%, Airbus 30%. And Boeing is finally gearing up for a trans-Atlantic battle.    Airbus has 287 firm orders for its A-320 jet -- a 150-seater intended to beat out the Boeing 7J7 propfan, a plane, still on the drawing board, for which Boeing has no orders. Having recently clinched an order from longtime Boeing customer American Airlines, Airbus now smells blood. And at its plant in the French city of Toulouse, Airbus now is laboring on its first design to challenge the industry's dominant widebody, the Boeing 747.    At the &quot;Lazy B,&quot; as Seattle residents sometimes call the ubiquitous 71-year-old company here, executives only recently have acknowledged the extent of the Airbus threat.    Aggressiveness has been a &quot;foreign concept to Boeing,&quot; says Gerry Gitner, the former president of Texas Air Corp. But by taking a more forceful position lately against Airbus's incursions in the market, Boeing has demonstrated that it won't &quot;take a back seat to anybody,&quot; he adds.    Ironically, the latest indication of that may be Boeing's move on Aug. 21 to delay its proposed 7J7 development program for at least a year. Boeing President Frank Shrontz doesn't specifically list competition with Airbus as the reason for delaying the company's $4 billion investment in the futuristic aircraft. For him the eventual production of the 7J7 is part of a much larger strategy -- the company's gamble for leadership among airliner builders in the next century.    &quot;Once the (7J7 launch) decision is made, the future of the company is at stake,&quot; Mr. Shrontz says in his characteristically terse style. &quot;We're betting the company.&quot;    The delay makes sense to many analysts because it will let Boeing divert about $500 million next year to the increasingly fierce marketing combat with Airbus. &quot;Each time they put (the 7J7) off, more cash is freed up,&quot; says Paul Nisbet, a Prudential-Bache Securities analyst who calls the slowdown &quot;a sign of strength.&quot;    The broad Boeing effort to strike back at Airbus could provide a major test of industrial America's competitive ability against government-supported rivals around the world. And certainly the stakes are high for U.S. trade. Boeing, the nation's largest exporting company, currently has $15.8 billion in international orders on its books. Without its $6.5 billion of foreign sales last year, the nation's $156 billion trade deficit would have been 4% higher.    When Airbus booked its first order 16 years ago, Boeing dismissed its would-be rival as a mere nuisance, whose chief purpose was to create jobs in Europe. Today, Boeing's strong bottom line, which generally is swollen by profits from deliveries of jetliners and defense systems ordered years ago, is starting to reflect Airbus's inroads. Second-quarter net income for Boeing's commercial and military businesses fell this year. Earnings dropped nearly a third on a 14% decline in sales.    Some at Boeing have even started comparing the Airbus competition to Detroit's brutal battle with Japan.    &quot;The auto industry awoke to their problem via trauma,&quot; says Phillip M. Condit, an executive vice president of Boeing's jetliner unit. He says Boeing believes it can respond more quickly than Detroit did &quot;because we see the possibility of trauma coming.&quot;    To do so, Boeing has developed a plan of attack that includes:    --Urging the U.S. government to threaten trade sanctions if France, Britain and Germany refuse to end their subsidies to Airbus.    --Adopting Airbus-style marketing incentives once rejected by Boeing, while using the powerful Boeing cash position to help make airliner purchase and lease terms more attractive.    --Drastically cutting its own costs to allow it to meet Airbus's lower prices.    --Shying away from previous plans to build up its military business through big acquisitions, so as to leave more cash free for the Airbus battle.    With these short-term tactics, Boeing has augmented the larger strategy it has proclaimed for years: The development of a high-tech family of &quot;propfan&quot; jet airliners so economical to operate that they would render conventionally powered Airbus jets virtually obsolete. (The use of a newly designed, rear-mounted propeller is considered a major step in slashing fuel usage.)    Even without the pressure Boeing feels to hoard its resources for the day-to-day marketing struggle with Airbus, the Seattle company might well have chosen to delay the decision to launch the 7J7, the first plane of the propfan series.    Airlines have balked at signing on the dotted line. None question the technical achievement represented if the Boeing 7J7 incorporates the latest in fuel savings, airframe design and electronics. But carriers, too caught up in the competitive present to focus on the future, instead have created a brisk market for cheaper 150-seaters already available, including Boeing's very successful 737.    Boeing's decision to delay the 7J7 still carries high risks, however. If the plane arrives too late, its market may already have been cut by the Airbus A-320 and a McDonnell Douglas Corp. propfan airliner that could be out before Boeing's current 1993 target.    Meanwhile, Boeing's effort to whip itself into competitive shape faces certain obstacles. Unlike U.S. auto makers when they first became serious about Japan, Boeing isn't grossly overstaffed or mismanaged, and its products have a reputation for quality. Because the company already employs state-of-the-art production processes, shaving costs could be tougher. Boeing's stated goal is to chop a whopping 25% off its cost structure by 1990.    To get to that point, Boeing last year began a wholesale reorganization of its production processes along the lines of a concept it says Ford Motor Co. successfully copied from the Japanese. Designers, engineers, cost estimators and production managers are lumped together as a &quot;design-build team&quot; at the beginning of a project. They get a target cost for the project, which they aren't allowed to exceed, so they must come up with a design that fits the cost.    Boeing had to print new supplier catalogs for the teams, because the old ones didn't list prices. Engineering manuals, which didn't include cost-benefit analyses, also had to be revised.    &quot;We don't any longer allow the engineering department to throw some design over the fence to manufacturing and say, hey, can you build this?&quot; says Arthur E. Hitsman, the president of Boeing's electronics division. The answer, he adds, would always be affirmative, but &quot;nobody would ask how much it would cost.&quot;    Because about half of the components on Boeing planes are built by subcontractors, the company is strong-arming its vendors to lower their costs. For example, Boeing combined 10 subcontracts for parts of the cargo-handling system on the 747 into one contract, gave it to a &quot;master vendor&quot; to manage and &quot;saved a bundle,&quot; one executive says.    Another major element in the cost-cutting strategy is a complicated plan to reduce total labor costs: The company would increase production rates on hot-selling models, such as the 737, thereby reducing costs. That would enable Boeing to decrease prices, which, the company hopes, might stimulate sales. Then production could be stepped up again, resulting in further cost reductions. At the same time, Boeing would try to expand its use of labor-saving automation both on the production floor and in engineering offices.    Yet Boeing also plans to increase its work force by 7% this year. The company insists it has a tight cap on hiring, taking on fewer employees than it otherwise would have, given its burgeoning backlog of nearly $30 billion in aircraft orders. Officials point out that growth in labor costs has slowed since 1983, when Boeing reached a landmark contract with the Machinists union that introduced two-tier wages to the aerospace industry.    Boeing's failure to manage growth devastated the company in 1969, when a boom in sales quickly turned to bust and two-thirds of Boeing workers were laid off. &quot;When we got into trouble, it was because we grew too fast and buried problems with people,&quot; says Dean Thornton, the president of Boeing's commercial airplane unit. &quot;That won't happen now,&quot; he insists.    But one consultant for a rival aircraft maker calls Boeing's plan to both hire people and cut costs at the same time naive. An airline executive says &quot;there's a danger they won't be able to cut that much.&quot;    Skeptics also wonder whether Boeing's 139,000 workers might find it difficult to learn competitive behavior. With 60% of employees isolated in the Pacific Northwest and with the company's policy of promoting managers from within, Boeing's work force is somewhat complacent. &quot;Their people are very arrogant about their successes, but I don't think they know how to think about cost,&quot; says one executive of a Boeing subcontractor.    One asset in Boeing's attempt to change is Mr. Shrontz himself. The 56-year-old Idaho native, a Boeing lifer except for stints at the Pentagon, is only the third Boeing chief executive since World War II. Although he has proceeded cautiously in his first year as CEO, outside observers already see evidence of his influence.    An attorney, who also has a Harvard M.B.A. degree, Mr. Shrontz is &quot;more thoughtful, cerebral&quot; than his predecessor T.A. Wilson, says David Smith, an analyst with Alex. Brown andamp; Sons Inc. in Baltimore. Mr. Shrontz rose through the commercial side of Boeing and championed the 737 jetliner, which has become the most ordered plane in commercial jet history. Boeing has sold 1,870 of its 737s.    The executive was the strategist behind Boeing's attack on Airbus subsidies at this summer's General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade discussions. Boeing, Mr. Shrontz says, has finally overcome the ambivalence that had kept the company from seeking government assistance before. He says that Boeing is &quot;caught&quot; because &quot;the public perception is that we have a significant market share. It's hard for us to take the position that we also need help.&quot;    Boeing changed its strategy last year, Mr. Shrontz says, when the company came to the conclusion that it wasn't &quot;making the net margins&quot; needed to finance the next decade's aircraft development.    By another Boeing executive's account, though, the company had also come to believe that European governments aren't just subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of developing Airbus planes, but also are indirectly underwriting production costs by about $3 million per plane.    James A. Bryan, the president of Airbus's U.S. division, denies that: &quot;Airbus is in business to make a profit. If the prices (of Airbus planes) were truly lower, as claimed, no one would ever buy from any other manufacturer.&quot;    Fighting European subsidies is touchy for Boeing, which wouldn't want to risk a trade war that would upset its big airline customers across the Atlantic. For that reason, Mr. Shrontz himself was the chief Boeing lobbyist during the trade talks, while trying also to be the salesman responsible for closing Boeing's biggest deals. The talks, which recessed inconclusively, may resume this fall.    Boeing has been taking fewer chances that Airbus will undercut its prices in aircraft competitions.    In a watershed deal in March, Boeing managed to win part of a 40-plane order from American Airlines -- Boeing sold the airline 15 planes and Airbus sold 25 -- by agreeing to leasing terms so liberal that American can if it chooses walk away from the deal just by giving a month's notice. Boeing broke one of its own rules against offering such buyer incentives, apparently to prevent American from placing an all-Airbus order.    In another startling departure, Boeing agreed to take $700 million in convertible Allegis Corp. notes in payment for 747s sold to Allegis's United Airlines unit.    Richard Albrecht, an executive vice president of the Boeing airliner unit, says Boeing was attempting to counter a low Airbus offer for its proposed A-340 widebody, and a McDonnell Douglas offer for its MD-11. While Mr. Albrecht doesn't encourage others to seek similar terms -- &quot;We're not a bank,&quot; he says -- industry sources say carriers such as Texas Air's Continental and Eastern lines also want seller-financing on pending Boeing orders.    The Airbus challenge may also help explain Boeing's hesitation about acquiring a big military-electronics company. Boeing had been on the prowl after losing out to General Motors Corp. two years ago in a $5 billion bid for Hughes Aircraft Co. Now, some Boeing watchers suggest, the aerospace giant may have lost its appetite for a Hughes-sized acquisition because it needs to devote spare cash to fighting Airbus.    Meanwhile, Boeing officials puzzle over Boone Pickens, uncertain about whether he might attempt to take over the huge, complex company. The prospect is certainly providing some unwelcome diversion from management's fight against Airbus.    The worst-case scenario presented by some Boeing officials: A move by the Texas oil executive that would require Boeing to redeploy large sums of its $3.3 billion cash pool in response.    Says Mr. Shrontz: &quot;The only way we're going to be around in a few years, when the 7J7 comes off the line, is by being conservative in our financial affairs. Pressures to get rid of our cash position would erode our long-term strength.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>