<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880412-0069 </DOCNO><HL> ATandamp;T Chief Olson Had Cancer Surgery; Firm Declines to Boost Stake in Olivetti </HL><AUTHOR> Janet Guyon and Laura Colby (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> T EUROP SUNW MSFT </CO><IN> EDP TNM </IN><TEXT>   American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. confirmed that its 62-year-old chairman and chief executive officer, James E. Olson, underwent surgery for colon cancer on March 25, and said he is recuperating at his New Jersey home.    New York-based ATandamp;T said Mr. Olson, who is undergoing chemotherapy, might not attend the company's annual meeting next week. Meanwhile, the telecommunications giant is being run by Robert E. Allen, 52, president and chief operating officer.    Separately, ATandamp;T's rocky relationship with Ing. C. Olivetti andamp; Co. hit another rough patch over the weekend, as ATandamp;T declined to raise its stake in its 22%-owned partner, an Italian computer maker. And, as expected, ATandamp;T and its other computer partner, Sun Microsystems Inc., Mountain View, Calif., demonstrated new software that will make ATandamp;T's Unix computer operating system easier for office workers to use.    In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, ATandamp;T shares closed at $27.875, down 25 cents, on volume of more than 1.5 million shares.    The ATandamp;T disclosure of Mr. Olson's illness came after inquiries from reporters. ATandamp;T managers have said for some weeks that Mr. Olson was thought to be ill but that the nature of the malady wasn't clear. An ATandamp;T spokesman said that, according to the company's legal department, the company wasn't bound to disclose the illness unless it was clear &quot;it was known to be a long-term incapacity.&quot;    In addition, Mr. Olson had created a five-man office of the chairman, which includes, in addition to himself, Mr. Allen and Vice Chairmen Randall Tobias, 45, Charles Marshall, 58, and Morris Tanenbaum, 59. &quot;This is a long way from a one-man shop,&quot; the spokesman said.    ATandamp;T said it is too early to tell how soon Mr. Olson will recover. &quot;So far, his recovery is proceeding well,&quot; the spokesman said. Mr. Olson had initially complained of flu symptoms, then entered a hospital for tests. Surgery at a hospital in New York disclosed a malignant tumor, which was removed, ATandamp;T said.    Under Mr. Olson, ATandamp;T has emphasized cost cutting and improvement of earnings. The company has retrenched, concentrating on its basic businesses, while continuing its embattled entry into the computer business.    In an announcement yesterday in Ivrea, Italy, Olivetti said ATandamp;T's decision not to raise its stake followed talks that &quot;evidenced significant basic differences&quot; between the two companies. Olivetti, which is 13%-owned by its chairman, Carlo De Benedetti, balked at ATandamp;T's request to increase its management role at the company, Olivetti said. Mr. De Benedetti's stake is owned through his Cie. Industriali Riunite holding company.    An Olivetti spokeswoman said the company would have favored a closer relationship with ATandamp;T, had the U.S. company promoted Olivetti's development and market share. Mr. De Benedetti has long complained that ATandamp;T hasn't sold enough of the personal computers and work stations that Olivetti makes for ATandamp;T to sell in the U.S. The Olivetti spokeswoman said yesterday that &quot;the alliance with ATandamp;T will continue, if this doesn't in any way endanger Olivetti's corporate identity or independence.&quot;    ATandamp;T wouldn't comment on Olivetti's statements. But ATandamp;T sources said that, contrary to the impression given by Olivetti, Mr. De Benedetti had approached ATandamp;T some weeks ago, asking to speed up the timetable adopted in 1986 for the companies' alliance. Under that agreement, which replaced a 1983 pact, ATandamp;T agreed not to raise its stake in Olivetti above 25% until 1990, when ATandamp;T is free to raise or lower its stake as it sees fit.    Analysts speculated that Mr. De Benedetti was hoping ATandamp;T could, perhaps by buying his Olivetti stake, help him finance his bid to take over Societe Generale de Belgique S.A., which has a crucial meeting of shareholders scheduled for Thursday. Rumors have been circulating in Italy that Mr. De Benedetti might sell his Olivetti stake. Riunite officials, however, have vehemently denied that he plans to pull out of Olivetti, where he has said he plans to remain for five years.    ATandamp;T sources said that, although Mr. De Benedetti favored ATandamp;T's increasing its stake, he didn't want to give up control or accede to ATandamp;T's requests for faster delivery of Olivetti-made computers. Executives of ATandamp;T's Data Systems Group have said last year's fourth-quarter sales of personal computers were hurt by slow deliveries from Olivetti. ATandamp;T also has been unhappy with Olivetti's launching a minicomputer line in Europe that competes with ATandamp;T's 3B line, instead of trying harder to sell ATandamp;T's products.    Sources said that over the weekend, ATandamp;T executives in meetings with Mr. De Benedetti refused to increase the ATandamp;T stake without gaining Mr. De Benedetti's agreement to solve the Data Systems Group's troubles on ATandamp;T's terms. The future of the companies' alliance remains unclear. Last month, Mr. De Benedetti said Olivetti and ATandamp;T were in three-way talks with Italy's state-owned STET S.p.A. for a telecommunications joint venture that could include an exchange of shareholdings.    ATandamp;T's Olivetti troubles added further intrigue to its news conference yesterday with Sun Microsystems, where the new software, called Open Look, was demonstrated amid Unix endorsements by a variety of applications software companies and computer makers. Sun said its first products with Open Look will appear by the end of this year.    But while Open Look benefits Sun's bid to become a major computer company, its benefit to ATandamp;T isn't as direct. ATandamp;T isn't selling Unix as the main system for desktop machines. ATandamp;T's Olivetti machines run on International Business Machines Corp. operating systems, and the president of ATandamp;T's Data Systems Group, Vittorio Cassoni, who came from Olivetti in 1986, said ATandamp;T doesn't have any plans to emphasize Unix on the desktop. ATandamp;T has said it plans to use Unix running on Sun's powerful Sparc microprocessor for its new line of minicomputers due out next year.    Both ATandamp;T and Sun have a long way to go to make a dent in the dominance of IBM and others in the business world. Mr. Cassoni said only 300,000 Unix computers of any size are currently installed. This compares with two million shipments of IBM's latest personal computer. But, Mr. Cassoni said, while Unix accounted for only 6% of total computer shipments in 1986, it will account for 22% by 1991.    Such growth will result from pending government bids demanding Unix. Big Unix government bids also appear to be behind Unix endorsements from the chief executives of two applications software companies, Lotus Development Corp. and Ashton-Tate Corp. Both executives, as expected, said they plan to convert their popular office software to Unix.    But neither Lotus nor Ashton-Tate would commit to Sun's Sparc microprocessor or any other chip. Ashton-Tate endorsed Open Look, but Lotus's president, James Manzi, didn't. Lotus will adapt its programs to whatever processor and user interface is used in coming multibillion-dollar government bids, Mr. Manzi said.    Meanwhile, Microsoft Corp., which boycotted the news conference and had offered ATandamp;T its user interface, named Presentation Manager, said it may adapt its business programs to Unix using Presentation Manager, which it has developed for IBM computers. A Microsoft executive said the company started shipping Presentation Manager to 3,000 software developers last week, and IBM plans final shipments to customers in October. ATandamp;T and Sun are more than six months behind with Open Look on Unix. </TEXT></DOC>