<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Making English Official Isn't Answer for America---By Murray Friedman</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   An emotional debate is under way across America over whether English should be designated the official language. Despite the extent and pervasiveness of the controversy, there is little indication that either side is listening to the other.    A number of states and cities have already enacted legislation. After one million signatures were gathered, California put a measure on the ballot last November in an effort to limit the use of Spanish in public life. The bill was overwhelmingly approved by the voters -- despite the opposition of Gov. George Deukmejian and the state attorney general -- and requires that lawmakers and state officials &quot;take all steps necessary to ensure that the role of English as the common language of the State of California is reserved and enhanced.&quot; Any person living or doing business in California may sue to enforce the measure. Eleven other states have adopted similar legislation and action is pending in at least 15 more.    The &quot;English only&quot; movement finds its vocal support from U.S. English, a Washington-based organization that in the past four years has increased its ranks from 300 to 260,000 members nationwide, making it one of the fastest-growing public-interest groups in the country. Its strength stems clearly from the linking of diverse elements in the country.    U.S. English has a distinguished advisory board. Nobel Prize-winning novelist Saul Bellow, former TV anchorman Walter Cronkite, heart surgeon Denton Cooley and author and educator Jacques Barzun are but a few of its supporters. S.I. Hayakawa, the semanticist and former U.S. senator, is the organization's honorary chairman.    Part of the force behind the movement arises also from those who sense the fragmentation in our society and the seeming breakdown of traditional values. The anxiety felt over this apparent loss in civic direction has found an outlet in efforts to bring back Bible reading and prayer in the public schools. Frustrated by lack of success here, the focus for some has shifted onto the issue of language.    Few would deny the sincere concern expressed by former Gov. Richard Lamm of Colorado, one of the movement's most outspoken political leaders, when he described English as the &quot;social glue&quot; that has kept our country together. &quot;We should be color blind,&quot; he declared, &quot;but not linguistically deaf. . . . We should welcome different people, but not adopt different languages.&quot; Many are concerned also that the use of bilingualism in the public schools, presumably as a temporary measure to help newcomers adjust, has created a bureaucracy of self-interested professionals that is self-perpetuating and separationist-inspired.    Still, it is hard not to miss the whiff of xenophobia that surrounds the issue. Large numbers of aliens, many poor and nonwhite, have been flocking here, whether by plane, by boat or by foot. It is not surprising, then, that some in the &quot;English only&quot; movement have lobbied also for tougher immigration laws and lower immigration quotas.    U.S. English fears -- and hopes to avoid -- the kind of situation that has plagued Canada and Belgium, where language differences have been politically divisive. The group hopes, also, to remove bilingual ballots from voting places, even though the federal Voting Rights Act requires that such ballots be made available in counties where non-English speakers account for more than 5% of the populace.    On the other hand, critics of &quot;English only&quot; worry that these laws will lead to the removal of interpreters for witnesses, crime victims and defendants in our courts. They fear the legislation will limit non-English speakers' access to health, police, fire and emergency services. Public-service announcements in any language other than English would be abolished, they warn.    There can be little doubt that we must develop approaches to promote the use of English among newly arrived immigrants. But where U.S. English would adopt a punitive sink-or-swim attitude, the opposition would prefer the English Proficiency Act. Proponents of &quot;English only&quot; have not supported the English Proficiency Act, which would make available federal grants for literacy programs for adults whose native language is not English.    The fact is that newcomers, like their predecessors, are eager to learn English. Not long ago a report in Education Week noted the large number of non-English-speaking Americans who have been turned away from oversubscribed English-language instruction classes.    A study recently completed by the Rand Corp. shows that Hispanics, like other immigrant groups, realize that being proficient in English is a step toward increased economic opportunity. A study in Miami concluded that 98% of Latino parents (as compared with 94% of Anglo parents) believed it essential for their children to become competent in English. A 1984 survey conducted by the National Opinion Research Center revealed that 81% of Hispanics believed that speaking and understanding English is a &quot;very important&quot; obligation of citizenship. Only 2% of the respondents thought it was not an obligation. The need to make English into our official language and even develop, as some suggest, a constitutional amendment to bring this about seems like overkill.    As with older immigrants, language mastery can be a transitional phase. There will, of course, be citizens who will never be able to speak English, such as some Puerto Ricans or foreign-born spouses. But, as in the past, their numbers will be negligible. Native language remains a source of family and community cohesion that conservatives as well as liberals should respect. Those who wish to make English -- for even the purest of motives -- into our official language ought to think twice before seeking to break down this source of strength, even as they encourage newcomers to gain full mastery of our language.    ---   Mr. Friedman is the vice chairman of the U.S. Civil Rights Commission. </TEXT></DOC>