<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880727-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Health Hazards: How Medical Advances Often Worsen Illnesses And Even Cause Death --- New Drugs and Procedures Bring New Side Effects; Some Doctors Can't Cope --- A Deadly Potassium Dosage </HL><AUTHOR> Alan L. Otten (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Medical literature now calls them &quot;adverse medical outcomes,&quot; &quot;potentially compensable events,&quot; even &quot;therapeutic misadventures.&quot; The traditional term is &quot;iatrogenic.&quot; By any name, though, the problem is critical: injury and illness caused by doctors, nurses, hospitals, labs and other health-care providers.    Unquestionably, American medicine daily accomplishes new miracles -- saving lives that never before could have been saved, repairing damage that never before could have been repaired, successfully treating illnesses and accidents that never before could have been treated. But along with the miracles come mishaps, sometimes fatal. And the problem may be growing.    &quot;When we review all admissions at a particular hospital, somewhere between 1% and 5% of the patients will have had an occurrence involving poor or questionable care,&quot; says Joyce Craddick, a pediatric cardiologist who heads Medical Management Analysis International Inc., a medical risk-management firm. &quot;Some may be minor, but some result in death.&quot;    The problems are manifold: Bad diagnoses. Unnecessary surgery. Overprescribing or misprescribing drugs. High rates of hospital infection. Lab-test errors. Faulty medical devices. Alcoholic or drug-addicted doctors.    &quot;Unless you absolutely need them, doctors are good people to stay away from and hospitals very good places to stay out of,&quot; says Eugene Robin, a Stanford professor of medicine and frequent critic of his own profession.    A routine test on an elderly woman hospitalized for a bronchial infection shows a low potassium level. Although nothing previously had indicated a potassium deficiency, her doctor orders it supplied intravenously. The IV delivery isn't properly monitored, the woman gets too much too fast, her heart stops, and she dies of potassium intoxication. Final irony: She may not really have needed extra potassium.    &quot;Based on published studies, we estimate that well over 200,000 Americans are injured or killed each year as a result of negligence by doctors,&quot; declares the Ralph Nader-affiliated Health Research Group.    Many problems undoubtedly result from sheer incompetence. But many medical people argue that, paradoxically, medical progress itself contributes to &quot;adverse medical outcomes.&quot;    &quot;As medical technology and surgical procedures increase in their ability to ameliorate, they unfortunately also increase in their ability to harm,&quot; says John Ball, executive vice president of the American College of Physicians. &quot;My own sense is that the ratio {of helping to harming patients} isn't changing, but when things do go wrong, they are more visible and perhaps more severe.&quot;    Wider use of catheters in various surgical operations increases infection rates. The deluge of new drugs increases the chances of excessive or inappropriate prescribing, already one of the most common complaints studied by medical monitoring groups. A new drug such as cyclosporine, for instance, helps patients accept transplanted organs but may make them less resistant to viruses.    And despite continuing-education seminars, many doctors find it hard to keep up with the flood of new procedures and technology. &quot;If you went to medical school before the fetal monitor was used, you are not likely to be comfortable with it,&quot; says Sidney Wolfe, who heads the Health Research Group. &quot;Many doctors don't know how to read a fetal monitor and tend to overdiagnose distress, and that means still more unnecessary Caesarean sections.&quot;    A scary record pours out of government reports, medical journals, risk-management textbooks, congressional testimony:   --Rand Corp. researchers ask a panel of nationally known physicians to review a large sample of men and women undergoing carotid endarterectomy, a dangerous operation to reduce the risk of stroke by clearing blocked neck arteries. The panel found 35% of the operations clearly appropriate, 32% &quot;inappropriate&quot; and 32% in a gray area. Rand's conclusion: &quot;substantial overuse&quot; of the procedure.    --Robert Haley, who directed a landmark study by the Centers for Disease Control several years ago that found that nearly 5.7% of all hospital patients came down with infections acquired in the hospital, says the problem might well be worse today. &quot;The overall rate is probably up because so many hospitals aren't doing a good job,&quot; he explains.    --The Philadelphia Professional Standards Review Organization studies all cases of cardiac pacemakers implanted at 30 Philadelphia-area hospitals over a six-month period. It finds 44% of the implants definitely indicated, 36% possibly indicated and 20% not indicated.    --Two Duke University researchers survey various studies testing the way different doctors diagnose the same patients. &quot;In general,&quot; they conclude, &quot;the proportion of times various observers looking at the same thing will disagree with each other or even with themselves ranges from 10% to 50%.&quot;    A 28-year-old waitress visits a hospital emergency room at 3 a.m. complaining of abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea. A blood test indicates an elevated white cell count, a sign of trouble, but two hours later she is allowed to leave without being seen by a physician or receiving any discharge instructions. That evening, she is admitted to another hospital for emergency removal of a ruptured appendix.    Most physicians and hospital authorities insist that many bad outcomes are unavoidable. Patients may be too old or too sick to begin with. A perfectly proper treatment may have unknown side effects. Patients are warned that a new procedure is risky but decide to go ahead anyhow and are angered if things turn out badly.    &quot;Twenty-five years ago, there were no artificial heart valves,&quot; Dr. Ball observes. &quot;If your natural valve went bad, you died. Now, it can be replaced. If a person dies then, how do you know whether the valve was defective, was put in badly, or the person was just so sick that he was going to die anyway?&quot;    Even critics acknowledge progress. &quot;In general, things are slowly getting better,&quot; says David Eddy, director of Duke's Center for Health Policy Research. &quot;There's more awareness of how much we don't know, how inappropriate some of the things we are doing are. But the movement still needs to be speeded up.&quot;    Spurred by the surge of malpractice suits and prodding from professional organizations and state agencies, hospitals, health-maintenance organizations and group practices are trying to tighten procedures. Many have instituted risk-management programs that review cases and statistics indicating emerging problem areas and even individual problem doctors. Computers can question out-of-line prescriptions, double-check that a doctor orders the proper tests and make sure test results are received and reviewed.    Some state medical boards, historically doctor-dominated and lax in disciplining incompetence, are finally taking a tougher line, revoking or suspending doctors' licenses or putting faulty physicians on probation. Government-organized peer-review groups evaluate treatment under Medicare and are weeding out some drug-impaired, alcoholic or downright incompetent doctors. And a new federal clearinghouse for information on disciplinary actions, malpractice awards and the like will make it harder for a doctor barred from practice in one state simply to move to another.    &quot;The health-care system is somewhat like air-traffic control at O'Hare,&quot; says Daniel Creasey, the president of the Harvard medical institutions' Risk Management Foundation. &quot;So much can go wrong, and every once in a while something does. Yet most of the time it works right.&quot;    But new trouble spots are emerging at least as fast as others are removed. Ever-increasing pressure to reduce health-care costs, an acute nursing shortage that shows no early sign of easing, and falling profit margins or actual losses in many hospitals can't help but lead to poorer-quality medical care, most experts say.    A faulty on-off switch, a defective thermostat and an inoperative alarm combine to allow a hospital incubator to overheat. A nurse notices an eight-day-old baby running a high fever, takes him out, sponges him down -- then puts him back in the incubator. He is literally cooked to death.    Moreover, much cost-cutting emphasis involves shifting from care in hospitals to outpatient care in ambulatory settings and doctors' offices, where there is far less oversight. &quot;The downside of good quality review in the hospital is that it drives marginal physicians more and more into their office practice, where there is no peer review,&quot; says Thomas Dehn, a Milwaukee radiologist who heads the American Medical Peer Review Association.    As the population ages, more care will also be provided in nursing homes, where quality control usually is far below that of hospitals and the risk of infections from bed sores, catheters, flu and other epidemics is far greater.    As medical advances continue, doctors and academics say, too many new procedures are being adopted without real evidence that they are more effective than alternative practices or even than doing nothing at all.    Somehow, on the basis of fragmentary or poorly interpreted evidence or perhaps simply the assertion of a leading practitioner, a particular test or operation becomes standard medical practice, and then evidence to the contrary is stoutly resisted. Many critics ask why there aren't controlled, random experiments on the benefits and costs of particular operations or other medical procedures, just as there are for new drugs.    A routine chest X-ray on a 68-year-old woman -- hospitalized for mild breathing difficulties and minor heart problems -- finds a small lung spot. A lung biopsy is performed, producing complications requiring insertion of chest tubes and her transfer to the intensive-care unit. There, she develops a staphylococcal infection and is put on a respirator. For several months, her condition worsens, and eventually she dies. A review finds no need to hospitalize her in the first place and no need for the biopsy that started her downhill. Moreover, her doctor had a long history of unnecessary hospital admissions.    &quot;For most of the things we do, we have not had any real scientific trials to see whether the risks outweigh the benefits or vice versa,&quot; Stanford's Dr. Robin says. &quot;And when we do find that a treatment isn't any good, we don't admit error very readily.&quot;    Agrees Duke's Dr. Eddy: &quot;If medicine were subjected to an investigating commission like NASA had after the space shuttle blew up, we would be severely embarrassed. How many people are candidates for this procedure? We don't know. What are the risks? No good evidence on that. What is the total cost to society? We haven't worked that out.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>