<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0022 </DOCNO><HL> North's Ex-Secretary to Testify TodayAbout Alteration of Contra-Aid Data---By Edward T. Pound and David RogersStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The congressional Iran-Contra inquiry turns its attention to the former secretary of Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, following a week of the most damaging testimony yet to the fired White House aide, his associates and the Reagan administration.    Congressional investigators believe that Col. North, as the Iran-Contra affair began unraveling in November, directed his secretary, Fawn Hall, to doctor as many as seven White House documents and shred others revealing what he and fellow administration officials knew about secret aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents. Investigators and others say that Ms. Hall recalls altering only four memos, though she is expected to testify that she could have changed others.    Ms. Hall's scheduled appearance today before the combined House and Senate committees follows a week of testimony during which Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams's credibility was shaken in two days of questioning, and new disclosures tarnished Col. North and his close ally in the Iran-Contra operations, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord.    &quot;You were wrong at the top of your lungs,&quot; said Sen. William Cohen (R., Maine), accusing Mr. Abrams of misleading Congress and the public last October about secret arms shipments to the Contras. And the release of previously classified testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee only underscored the anger on Capitol Hill. &quot;Had you been under oath, that's perjury,&quot; said then Sen. Thomas Eagleton (D., Mo.) in an exchange recorded in December with Mr. Abrams.    It now seems certain that Gen. Secord will be asked to testify again. He was the first witness and testified last month that patriotism, not profits, motivated him to use his private network to arrange weapons sales to Iran and airlift arms to the Contras for the administration.    But his close business partner, Albert Hakim, testified last week that Gen. Secord used profits from the Iran-Contra operations for his own personal benefit, even after the summer of 1985 when, according to Gen. Secord's testimony, he had forsworn the money.    Mr. Hakim, who managed finances for the private network, also testified that Gen. Secord knew about a secret $200,000 account, designated as Belly-Button, that he set up for Col. North's benefit in May 1986, and about related efforts by Mr. Hakim to assist Col. North and his family. Those funds were never transferred.    Gen. Secord didn't disclose any knowledge of Mr. Hakim's efforts when he testified publicly, nor, according to congressional sources, when he was questioned privately by investigators.    Mr. Hakim gave details of the huge profits from the Iran and Contra arms operations that were banked for himself, Gen. Secord and Thomas Clines, a former agent of the Central Intelligence Agency. Mr. Clines, who served as an arms dealer in Europe for the Contra arms sales, pocketed $990,000, according to testimony and records provided by Mr. Hakim.    Mr. Clines, who left the CIA under pressure in the late 1970s, owned a company that pleaded guilty in 1984 to filing false invoices in an alleged scheme to overcharge the Pentagon for shipping arms to Egypt.    Mr. Hakim now controls almost $8 million in profits that are invested in London and Switzerland, including nearly $1.6 million in the name of Korel Assets, which Mr. Hakim said he set up for Gen. Secord's benefit.    Most of the profits came from the sale of weapons to Iran, but Mr. Hakim confirmed that the private arms network had received much larger commissions than previously acknowledged in the sale of weapons and ammunition to Nicaraguan insurgents in 1985 and 1986.    Arms bought in one instance for $188,300 by the Secord network were marked up more than 60%, and a commission of $561,125 was added to a roughly $1 million shipment in the spring of 1985, according to documents released by the committees.    These sales were negotiated by Gen. Secord with the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, and the margins grew when the network gained control of private donations for the Contras and the proceeds from U.S. weapon sales to Iran in 1986.    The partners were then effectively both the sellers and buyers of arms for the insurgents, and Mr. Hakim said it was decided in August 1986 to maximize profits by charging a 40% commission on a last $2.1 million purchase for the Contras before U.S. military aid was permitted to resume in the fall.    He said Gen. Secord was initially opposed, but the $861,327 profit was taken with his apparent acquiescence. While Gen. Secord has insisted that he waived any claim to such profits as early as the summer of 1985, Mr. Hakim said Gen. Secord's share was regularly set aside in the general's Korel Assets account.    Col. North's difficulties were compounded by evidence that Mr. Hakim's Swiss lawyer met with the Marine officer's wife last September as part of a plan to channel money surreptitiously to the North family. Under questioning Friday, Mr. Hakim repeatedly denied he had sought to compromise Col. North. It remains unclear what Col. North knows about any such dealings.    His secretary, Ms. Hall, will testify about directions Col. North gave her to destroy or alter documents shortly before Attorney General Edwin Meese began an informal investigation last November.    Congressional and other sources also said that after extensive closed-door questioning, Ms. Hall intends to testify that she added a reference to President Reagan when she altered an April 11, 1985, memo from Col. North to then-National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane.    In earlier questioning, investigators say there were indications that she had deleted a recommendation to brief the president on details involving the finances and military activities of the Contras.    ---   Andy Pasztor contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>