<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880912-0093 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY </HL><AUTHOR> Brenton R. Schlender </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> EDP ELE </IN><TEXT>      Crowding More Data   Onto Computer Disks   FIRST THERE were floppy disks -- flexible magnetic platters for recording computer data. Then came optical disks, which use light beams and lenses to store and read information.    Now there is the Floptical disk system, a hybrid device that combines attributes of both its predecessors and gives disks 25 times the capacity of a conventional floppy. It will become available later this year.    Made by Insite Peripherals, a Santa Clara, Calif. company, Floptical disk drives use an optical tracking device to locate specially marked data sectors on a floppy; these sectors are much more densely packed than those that a conventional magnetic disk drive can detect. After the optical device locates the proper spot on a disk, a conventional magnetic recording head takes over to either write or read data.    One of the primary uses of Floptical disks will be to store large programs. Apple Computer Inc.'s new version of the Unix operating system for its Macintosh II computers, for example, currently is shipped to customers on 70 floppy disks. It could be contained on just three Floptical disks.    Because the Floptical disk drive uses standard recording heads and motors and because its optical components are similar to those found on common audio CD players, Insite will be able to price the Floptical drive competitively -- $250 each in quantity purchases from computer makers and roughly twice that on the retail level. As for the Floptical disks, they won't cost much more than standard disks, which now sell for about $2.50 each.    Customizing Chips   On One's Own   FOR YEARS, users of computer chips have been able to design custom-made chips. But usually they had to rely on chip companies to actually manufacture the chips.    Now there are several new ways for these users to make or modify chips on their own. For example, Intel Corp. and SEEQ Technology Inc., two Silicon Valley chip makers, recently introduced what they call &quot;flash&quot; memory chips. A user can install these chips on a computer and then &quot;flash&quot; -- or load -- them with customized data or instructions. Already, auto makers are using flash chips in cars that use computers to control certain electronic devices.    Actel Corp., another Silicon Valley chip maker, offers chip users a way to design chips that can perform actual functions, something memory chips can't do. The Actel method requires the purchase of one of the company's special $20,000 computers and uses chips called &quot;desktop configurable gate arrays.&quot; Actel claims that a custom chip that once cost $50,000 to develop from scratch can be made for less than $100 with the new system.    Then there's the $4.2 million portable chip factory recently introduced by Lasarray Corp. of Irvine, Calif. The Lasarray MicroFab allows users to make their own chips in a fraction of the time it would take a chip manufacturer. The company says a computer chip can be designed, fabricated and tested in as little as 24 hours.    3-D Graphics Return   To Life on Computers   THE IDEA OF three-dimensional pictures usually conjures up images of flimsy cardboard sunglasses with red and blue lenses and hokey horror movies from the 1950s -- in other words, of things long gone.    But on the powerful workstation computers used by engineers, 3-D graphics are very much alive. And while early 3-D systems had undeniable drawbacks -- they cost tens of thousands of dollars, produced flickery images and required users to wear bulky goggles -- the problems have now been worked out.    Consider the 3Display graphics system from Stereographics Corp., a San Rafael, Calif., computer company. It consists of a transparent screen that fits over a workstation monitor, an electronic device to create the stereoscopic images and polarized glasses that look and feel like sunglasses. The three components work together to produce steady, lifelike 3-D images. The cost of the system is $7,200.    According to Stereographics, the 3-Display system can be used on a number of workstation computers, including those made by Silicon Graphics Inc. and Sun Microsystems Inc., both of Mountain View, Calif., and the ones made by Apollo Computer Inc. of Chelmsford, Mass. (Tektronix Inc., a Beaverton, Ore., computer company, makes a similar 3-D system. It lists for $12,000 and can only be used on the company's own workstation computers.)    Computers That Break   The Language Barrier   COMPUTERS THAT translate the spoken word from one language into another are on the way. For example, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh have developed an experimental computer system that can translate rudimentary spoken Japanese into a computer-generated version of spoken English.    And later this fall, Advanced Products and Technologies Inc. of Redmond, Wash., will introduce a hand-held computer called the Voice. It will be able to recognize 10,000 common English phrases and give voice to them in a number of different tongues, including French, German, Spanish and Italian.    Company officials think banks, hotels, travel agents, police departments and hospitals, as well as travelers, will make use of the computers.    The Voice is about the size of two VHS videocassettes and will cost about $2,000. Also required is a $200 cartridge onto which a user has to record his voice so that it can be recognized by the computer. </TEXT></DOC>