<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871228-0045 </DOCNO><HL> Sony Moves Boldly to Boost U.S. Profits---Unit Faces Problems,Including Weak Dollar---By Douglas R. Sease and Jeffrey A. TannenbaumStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SNEELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   The slogan urges: &quot;A Quantum Leap to World Class Manufacturing.&quot; However, that motto, plastered all over Sony Corp's sprawling television plant in San Diego, startles some visitors. Many arrive taking it for granted that Sony is already world-class.    But Tokyo-based Sony takes nothing for granted these days. Its success in the U.S. has been less than phenomenal recently, and the company is trying to overcome some tough problems. In a bold move to diversify, Sony in November agreed to buy CBS Inc.'s record subsidiary for $2 billion. But that's only part of an effort to shore up U.S. profits that has engaged Sony's entire work force, including its slogan-makers.    Dogged competition, new trade barriers, fast-changing technologies and, above all, the weaker dollar have battered the company here. In response, Sony is speeding the development of new products, cutting overhead costs and increasing its manufacturing in the U.S. And even as it tries to diversify, it is also fighting to expand its share of the American market for consumer electronics, although it sees its future growth mostly outside of consumer electronics.    Sony has a lot going for it. To many consumers, its name remains synonymous with innovation and quality. &quot;It's the most magic name we have in the industry,&quot; says a retail-chain buyer in Richmond, Va. Says Stuart A. Rose, chairman of Audio/Video Affiliates Inc., a retail chain based in Dayton, Ohio: &quot;Sony has certainly built up a quality reputation, above and beyond the others.&quot;    Even so, economic pressures have kept Sony on the defensive in the U.S. Profits of the Sony Corp. of America subsidiary, based in Park Ridge, N.J., peaked in 1981 at a level that Sony has yet to regain. The subsidiary was actually unprofitable in 1982 and 1983, although Sony refuses to disclose the figures.    As Sony began to recover from the recession of the early 1980s, the U.S. dollar began its sharp decline. Sony of America, which recorded sales of about $2.6 billion for its recent fiscal year ended March 31, currently makes less than one-third of the goods it sells here. It must buy the rest abroad, mostly in yen. The yen's rising value has driven up costs even on some U.S.-made Sony products that use imported parts. In less than three years, the dollar's buying power in yen has eroded nearly 50%.    At the same time, tougher competition forced prices down and made it hard to raise them. That has lowered Sony of America's dollar profits -- which take yet another beating when translated into yen on Sony Corp.'s books in Tokyo.    Sony Corp. extracted some $10 million in dividends from its American subsidiary in the most recent fiscal year. That bolstered the separate, unconsolidated finances of the parent firm. But it made the American subsidiary's longstanding goal of self-sufficiency more distant than ever; Sony of America must still turn to Tokyo for capital.    &quot;The company is going through an agonizing readjustment to the strong yen,&quot; says Robert F. Dillon, the chief financial officer of the U.S. subsidiary.    Weaker competitors in the consumer-electronics market are merging. One prominent dropout, RCA Corp., was merged into General Electric Co. in 1986. Now the combined GE-RCA consumer-electronics operations will be sold to Thomson S.A. of France. Says Sony of America's Mr. Dillon: &quot;We're hanging in there and expect to be one of the survivors, but it has been a very tough fight.&quot; Indeed, Sony has lost one important battle. Its pioneering, Beta-format videocassette recorders are being pushed out of the U.S. market by competitors' VHS machines.    Sony is best known for home television sets, but these sets account for only 25% of its total U.S. sales. Another 25% comes from audio products, including personal stereos and compact-disk players. In fact, the audio business is growing faster, and producing better profits, than the TV business. Of the remaining U.S. sales, the biggest chunk -- and the fastest-growing -- is non-consumer products, such as the electronic equipment used for television production.    Long regarded as a maverick, parent Sony has always relied on promotional flair and a technological edge. But &quot;the gap has gotten narrower as our competitors have improved their products,&quot; says Neil Vander Dussen, the president of Sony of America and its No. 2 officer, under chairman Masaaki Morita (a brother of the parent company's chairman, Akio Morita). Indeed, a former Sony of America planner says the company was chagrined to learn three years ago that consumers in brand-blind tests generally couldn't tell the difference between Sony sets and rivals.    To once again stand out, Sony increasingly emphasizes design and has been increasing the number of TV models, to about 60 currently. Brad Kibbel, a current merchandising manager, says Sony's high-technology XBR series of televisions has been selling &quot;as much for the design as for the picture quality.&quot;    Increasingly, Sony of America is customizing TV sets for a few of the highest-volume customers. Dick Komiyama, the president of the consumer display products division, says 10% of Sony of America's TV volume now comes from custom sets -- a program initiated only in 1985. For example, Sony won Mobil Corp.'s Chicago-based Montgomery Ward andamp; Co. subsidiary as a customer by slightly altering a 27-inch TV set with a $950 list price. The Montgomery Ward televisions include a second speaker, for improved sound, and have a slightly different cabinet design.    Because their Sony TV sets are slightly different from everybody else's, customset customers set prices with the knowledge that nobody else can undercut them on the same product. That's a crucial change. &quot;With Sony the retailer has always had a hard time making a profit,&quot; says Audio/Video Affiliates' Mr. Rose. The reason is that many dealers use standard Sony TVs as &quot;loss leaders&quot; to win prestige and store traffic.    Sony of America also has reorganized itself to foster centralized buying of its standard, or &quot;open,&quot; products, by large national accounts. These customers no longer have to deal separately with numerous branches and independent distributors around the country. &quot;Sony was extremely hard to deal with,&quot; says the Richmond-based buyer. &quot;Now it is easier to deal with and much more effective, in my opinion, in the pursuit of market share.&quot; Indeed, Sony says its U.S. market share for television sets has risen about a full point since 1983, to nearly 7%.    In pursuit of a future outside consumer electronics, Sony of America has created four &quot;internal venture companies,&quot; or IVCs, which sell medical and security equipment, video software and computerized workstations. The four units' sales, now about $30 million a year, are expected to double in two or three years. &quot;In the long-range future, there's major potential in these areas,&quot; Mr. Vander Dussen says.    But rivals see the same potential. The U.S. market for computerized workstations -- used by many engineers and other professionals -- is already crowded and price-sensitive. The market is dominated by two small American companies, Apollo Computer Inc. of Chelmsford, Mass., and Sun Microsystems Inc. of Mountain View, Calif. Others, including Apple Computer Inc. and International Business Machines Corp., are forcing their way in.    While juggling its product mix, Sony also is slashing costs by overhauling its U.S. manufacturing. Says Clint Michaelis, president of Sony Manufacturing Corp. of America, a Sony of America division whose San Diego plant accounts for 20% to 25% of Sony of America's sales: &quot;The strong yen is obviously giving us trouble, competition is horrendous, and there are new technologies and automation. We've got to make the changes.&quot;    To make the &quot;quantum leap&quot; Sony is further automating its San Diego plant. It is also shifting more of its work to Mexico. One of Sony's earlier responses to the rising yen was to move the manufacture of TV-set subassemblies to Korea, where the currency is linked to the dollar and labor costs are lower. The long shipping time between the Far East and the U.S., however, created other problems.    Now a twin plant -- in Tijuana, Mexico, where labor is less costly -- increasingly makes subassemblies for the main San Diego plant, as well as a 13-inch television set. Eventually, all the San Diego set manufacture may move to Mexico. That will allow the San Diego plant to produce computerized workstations and other relatively new products with higher profit margins. </TEXT></DOC>