<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0021 </DOCNO><HL> Firms With Ties to South AfricaStrike Back at Colleges That Divest---By Dennis KnealeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC X FMC JNJ MOB GM XRX IBMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><TEXT>   Some U.S. companies are quietly fighting back against universities critical of a corporate presence in South Africa by hitting the schools where it hurts most -- in the bank account.    As more colleges sell off shares of companies with South African ties, some of the corporations under fire are refusing to contribute grants, scholarships and faculty bonuses to the schools.    The actions are intensifying the already-bitter debate over South Africa now spilling from campuses to corporate boardrooms. Even as some of the strongest advocates of operating in the troubled land -- such as International Business Machines Corp., Coca-Cola Co. and General Motors Corp. -- reverse course and set plans to leave, others are growing more combative about staying behind.    Although the extent of the corporate moves is still unclear, the stakes involved are huge. U.S. companies gave $1.57 billion to some 3,000 colleges and universities in 1984-85, according to the Council on Financial Aid to Higher Education in New York. And many of the biggest, most generous givers are big-name concerns with high-profile units in South Africa.    Critics of apartheid say companies that withhold or implicitly threaten to withhold contributions -- such as FMC Corp., Marathon Oil Corp., Mobil Corp. and several others -- are imperiling academic freedom and campus debate. But some business executives counter that the schools are getting what they deserve and accuse them of hypocrisy for shedding company stocks while keeping a hand out for donations from the same corporations.    &quot;In other words, if our corporation isn't good enough for you, you aren't good enough for our corporation,&quot; says a spokesman at FMC, a Chicago maker of food-processing equipment that in recent months has ended grants to six schools and has threatened action against several others.    The combative approach appears to be gathering momentum at a critical time. U.S. companies are fleeing South Africa in droves, further pressuring those that stay. South Africa's political and economic climate is widely expected to deteriorate further, fueling calls back home for wholesale U.S. disinvestment.    Moreover, the latest round of annual evaluations of corporate performance in upholding fair-employment principles in South Africa was released yesterday. Lower corporate ratings could trigger &quot;partial-divestment&quot; rules at some colleges, which require selling only the stocks of companies that get poor grades in fair-employment practices. A new spate of stock sales could increase tensions and prompt more companies to withhold donations.    Finally, the number of colleges and universities adopting new stock-divestment rules -- a response to fierce pressure from students and faculty -- is rising rapidly. And those rules are far tougher than the partial-divestment policies of past years. The Investor Responsibility Research Center in Washington says 100 universities have sold off stock because of the South Africa issue since 1977; 39 schools have toughened their policies since last March alone, and 18 of those decided to divest altogether, regardless of a company's record in the country.    Educators are uncertain how far the corporate campaigns will go. &quot;That kind of backfire is just beginning,&quot; says Ester Elphick, a researcher with a consortium of 46 universities tracking the South African debate. Marathon's corporate foundation adopted a policy against contributing to divesting schools, partly due to cost cutting. It has ended donations to &quot;under 20&quot; schools, according to a company spokesman who won't elaborate. FMC ended $30,000 in grants to the University of Minnesota, won't renew awards totaling $24,000 to four California universities and cut off grants to schools in Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa and Arizona.    Though the FMC contributions might seem relatively small, the company's moves may have far-reaching effects. &quot;It removes (those colleges) from future consideration, too,&quot; says an FMC spokesman. &quot;Right away, a whole flock of schools won't be eligible for donations.&quot; But individual students may be hurt worst of all. Included in the grants that FMC canceled were four $1,000 scholarships for minority engineering students.    Other companies are turning up the heat without ending grants outright. Johnson andamp; Johnson Co. Chairman James Burke resigned as head of a fund-raising effort at Rutgers University in New Jersey after the school adopted a tough divestment policy. And Mobil made clear its misgivings about the University of Wyoming's divestment policy in a letter to the school's president. &quot;We are deeply distressed and confused,&quot; wrote Mobil's chairman. &quot;We write to you as a company that has contributed financially to the University of Wyoming and has employed your graduates.&quot; The letter called the school's new total-divestment rule &quot;unfair and counterproductive.&quot;    &quot;There's no blatant threat there, but they're saying something,&quot; says Agnes Kubik, a reporter for the Branding Iron student newspaper who obtained a copy of the letter. A Mobil spokesman says the company doesn't have a formal policy on whether to give money to schools that won't hold Mobil shares but declines to comment further.    Some U.S. companies refuse to penalize colleges for their divestment strategies by cutting financial aid. &quot;They are two entirely separate issues,&quot; says a spokesman at General Motors, which doles out $30 million a year to higher education and is in the process of leaving South Africa. His comments are echoed by officials at IBM and at Xerox Corp., which still operates in South Africa.    But the funding cutoffs may be larger than anyone knows because &quot;it behooves neither side to go public,&quot; says Brian Rom, a New York consultant to institutional investors. Companies aren't anxious to publicize their tough stand, fearful of bad public relations. Schools don't want to draw attention to the grants they have lost and hope to salvage relationships with the companies.    The measures are already affecting debate on some campuses. A recent survey by the Investor Responsibility Research Center of 70 schools with divestment policies found that eight had been threatened with lost contributions; seven said fears of lost aid prevented them from adopting tougher stock-sale rules. The study also noted that many schools didn't want their names or their recent stock sales revealed -- and for good reason. Ten companies had pre-ordered the report listing what schools sold which stocks.    Fears of lost contributions or strained relations with the corporate world concern tiny and big-name schools alike. &quot;Many of these (South Africa-related) companies are substantial benefactors to U.S. universities,&quot; says John Deutch, provost at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. MIT hasn't yet adopted aggressive divestment rules for an $800 million portfolio that includes $150 million in South Africa-related investments. One reason: a wholesale selloff by any school might prompt leading companies to &quot;reevaluate their attitude toward that particular school and toward higher education generally,&quot; he says.    &quot;It's a compelling dilemma for a college president,&quot; says Nannerl O. Keohane, president of Wellesley College, a 2,200-student women's college in Massachusetts that just rejected a tougher stock-sale policy. She says she is pulled in several directions. She must promote open campus debate, yet defend the university's stand -- despite her own support for the tougher policy. Moreover, she has just joined the IBM board of directors and had warned the company that Wellesley might embrace total divestment. (IBM appointed her anyway.) Above all she must ensure the college's financial health. &quot;All other moral vision has to be kept in perspective,&quot; she says.    Like most university officials, Ms. Keohane insists that a school's stock-sale rules don't brand a company as morally corrupt; rather, she says, such rules reflect disagreement with just one policy. Thus, a school isn't being hypocritical when it takes money from the same company. Few schools have policies that both push divestment and refuse grants. Princeton University does but has sold shares of only one company rated poorly in fair-employment practices -- and that company wasn't a contributor, anyway.    But many business executives say that schools do want to have it both ways and that divestment is &quot;an absurdity&quot; that does nothing to end apartheid thousands of miles away. &quot;If it's a moral issue, how in the world can you be selective about ityou're being hypocritical,&quot; says Alan Pifer, former president of the Carnegie Corp. of New York foundation and a divestment opponent. If schools want to get moral, he asks, why don't they boycott products, refuse donations, deny corporate recruiting and the like?    Still, critics fault companies for retaliation and predict coming confrontatons. &quot;That kind of blackmail drastically jeopardizes universities' acdemic freedoms,&quot; says Richard Knight of the American Committee on Africa. If the corporate counterpunches incease, he adds, &quot;universities will have to stick together on this one -- and they probably will.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>