<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0018 </DOCNO><HL> Meese Says Diversion of Iran Arms FundsSurprised Reagan, Denies Lag in Inquiry---By David Rogers and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Attorney General Edwin Meese testified that he conducted his early Iran-Contra inquiry as President Reagan's principal legal adviser -- not as a &quot;friend&quot; -- and that the president was surprised to learn of the diversion of arms-sales profits to the Nicaraguan insurgents.    &quot;I didn't have political allies, I had competent people,&quot; the attorney general said of the Justice Department team that assisted in his inquiry. He also denied that he had been slow to recognize the potential for criminal wrongdoing and the misleading statements of high-ranking officials around him.    Appearing before House and Senate committees investigating the controversy, Mr. Meese sought to silence criticism of his performance. But his testimony left major questions regarding the conduct of an investigation that he himself described as only an &quot;overview&quot; of the brewing scandal last fall.    Justice Department documents released yesterday indicate that while the criminal division was already involved in a separate inquiry into alleged violations involving U.S. aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents, Mr. Meese didn't bring the division into the Iran-Contra inquiry until days after discovering evidence of the diversion.    Mr. Meese testified that he never pressed his late friend, former Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey, about the diversion. And in the midst of Mr. Meese's inquiry, National Security Council staffers destroyed relevant classified documents.    While cautious in his responses, the attorney general indicated it is &quot;probable&quot; the NSC was covered by a congressional ban on U.S. military aid to the insurgents from 1984 to 1986. He said that as outlined in an internal Justice Department memorandum, it was &quot;certainly a possibility&quot; that this law had been violated by the diversion scheme last year. And in a pointed exchange, he said that giving false testimony to Congress -- under oath or not -- was a felony under statutes that apply as well to the NSC staff.    Sitting alone at the witness table, Mr. Meese adopted a low-key, but combative style. His testimony is significant both for his legal role and the details provided on backstage deliberations in the administration.    As attorney general, he played a part in crafting a January 1986 presidential finding that authorized the arms sales to Iran, but his greater importance in the Iran-Contra affair comes from his actions last fall when the operation began to unravel, setting off internal disputes in the administration.    The attorney general revealed that it was former National Security Adviser John Poindexter who first raised the concern with him about potential legal questions after the Iran initiative was exposed early last November. As late as Nov. 14, Michael Ledeen, a former NSC consultant, was trying to salvage another arms transaction through an Iranian middleman, said Mr. Meese, who portrayed an atmosphere of increased concern in the White House even as the president held out hopes of the release of two more American hostages.    Mr. Meese said that until Nov. 22, when Justice Department attorneys discovered an NSC memo outlining the diversion scheme, he was unaware of the operation. Prior testimony, however, has established that it was known to important Meese allies in the administration. Chief among these were Adm. Poindexter and Mr. Casey, a personal friend since the 1980 presidential election. Yet Mr. Meese's account indicates that both men misled the attorney general at critical junctures.    Mr. Casey, for example, sought a meeting with Mr. Meese Nov. 22, hours after the discovery of the diversion memo and only minutes after the attorney general had spoken by telephone with Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, the former NSC aide who has testified he worked with Mr. Casey and Adm. Poindexter in the Iran-Contra operation.    Meeting at the late director's home that evening, Mr. Meese said he never asked his friend if he knew of the diversion. By Mr. Meese's account, Mr. Casey appears to have withheld information regarding an internal CIA inquiry that had begun a month before into the same issue.    Three days later, the two men met at Mr. Casey's home again, hours before Adm. Poindexter resigned and Col. North was dismissed from his position at the NSC. Mr. Meese said he never specifically asked the late director if he knew of the diversion, but that Mr. Casey indicated then he had been unaware of the scheme. And according to notes disclosed yesterday by the committees, the late director flatly denied knowing of the diversion at a meeting with congressional leaders that same morning.    Mr. Meese's account portrayed the president as being surprised when first told of the diversion by the attorney general last Nov. 24, but reflected little anger on the part of Mr. Reagan. The president put off overnight the decision to ask Adm. Poindexter for his resignation.    Even the firing of Col. North was played down by Mr. Meese, who said the White House's intent instead had been more one of simply having the now-popular officer return to a Marine Corps assignment.    Citing the notes of his assistants, Mr. Meese was able to pepper his testimony with details. But as with Adm. Poindexter's testimony, the attorney general was frequently unable to recall conversations in sensitive meetings.    &quot;I don't recall it and he doesn't recall what he told me, but as best I can piece together, he told me,&quot; he testified in connection with a conversation last November with Deputy Attorney General Arnold Burns. And Mr. Meese could remember nothing of a briefing given to him by Col. North on the Iran initiative in January last year. &quot;I do not specifically remember that meeting,&quot; he said, &quot;but I am satisfied that it took place.&quot;    Though he interviewed such officials as Secretary of State George Shultz with an aide present, Mr. Meese appears to have met or talked with many other high-ranking officials alone and without note-takers. Among these were Vice President George Bush and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, as well as Adm. Poindexter and Mr. Casey, two men who knew much about the operation. Mr. Meese said many of his talks with Mr. Casey, including their Nov. 22 meeting lasting as long as an hour at the late director's home, weren't &quot;any part of the inquiry, as such.&quot;    Weeks before Mr. Meese began his controversial Iran-Contra inquiry, a separate team of federal fraud prosecutors had gathered information that &quot;conclusively established&quot; that some funds earmarked by Congress for humanitarian aid to the Contras instead were &quot;used to buy weapons,&quot; according to a copy of an internal memo written to Assistant Attorney General William Weld by one of his assistants.    According to the memo released by the committees, the alleged scheme &quot;involved the submission of false documentation&quot; to the government by &quot;unilateral assets&quot; of the CIA -- apparently a reference to individuals associated with the agency. The memo also said the alleged scheme was &quot;clearly prohibited by the Boland Amendment.&quot;    The fraud investigation was part of a larger, but previously undisclosed, Justice Department criminal inquiry that apparently involved the activities of Col. North and some of the same individuals later implicated in the Iran-Contra scandal.    In the midst of that earlier criminal probe, department investigators suspected that senior officials of the U.S. Customs Service, the CIA station chief in Costa Rica and U.S. Embassy officials in that country attempted to discourage or interfere with the investigation, according to the memo. Mr. Meese is likely to face sharp questioning about what he knew, if anything, about these and other controversial issues when he returns to testify today.    Yesterday, Mr. Meese maintained that as far as he knew last November, there was &quot;absolutely no connection&quot; between the subjects covered by his early Iran-Contra inquiry and any other ongoing criminal investigations by the Justice Department at the time.    The attorney general's testimony, however, raises new questions about steps by Mr. Meese and Adm. Poindexter last fall to sidetrack a separate Federal Bureau of Investigation inquiry focusing on the operations of Southern Air Transport, a Miami-based cargo airline involved in shipping arms both to the Contras and to Iran.    Mr. Meese previously acknowledged that, at Adm. Poindexter's urging last Oct. 31, he obtained a delay in that FBI inquiry, on the ground that it threatened to interfere with still-secret efforts to release American hostages in the Middle East. Mr. Meese has maintained the delay was &quot;entirely appropriate,&quot; didn't impede the investigation and caused no controversy among Justice Department and FBI officials.    However, documents released yesterday indicate that when the initial 10-day delay expired, the bureau was &quot;anxious to resume its investigation&quot; and sought a green light from Justice Department headquarters.    According to his own notes, Mr. Meese then asked Adm. Poindexter to check again on the &quot;status&quot; of the airline's involvement in secret hostage negotiations. Despite four separate requests from the FBI, Justice Department officials withheld approval to resume the investigation until Nov. 20.    Mr. Meese, who also contacted Treasury Secretary James Baker to urge a delay in the Southern Air investigations, told lawmakers he didn't realize the carrier's important role in the scandal until later that month. But earlier testimony has revealed that Col. North, Adm. Poindexter and some of their associates feared that a prompt and aggressive criminal investigation of the former CIA-controlled airline could reveal the secret arms-for-hostages deal with Iran and diversion of funds to the Contras.    At one point in the hearing, Rep. Peter Rodino (D., N.J.) asserted that the Justice Department still hadn't provided certain telephone logs, calendars, notes and other internal agency documents sought by congressional investigators. Mr. Meese countered that he has &quot;cooperated fully&quot; with the committees by turning over more than 36,000 pages of documents and making 39 current and former Justice Department officials available for questioning.    Separately, the Senate Intelligence Committee confirmed that its former vice chairman, Sen. Patrick Leahy, last January had leaked a draft report on the Iran-Contra affair to NBC News. The disclosure explains Sen. Leahy's early resignation from the panel on Jan. 13. The Vermont liberal sought to blunt criticism in a prepared statement expressing chagrin, but saying he never intended that the material be made public. </TEXT></DOC>