<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870925-0022 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHEVARDNADZE AGREED with Shultz on the need for an Iran-Iraq cease-fire.    The Soviet foreign minister and the secretary of state, after a meeting in New York, said they agreed that a U.N. truce resolution should be implemented. They declined, however, to say whether they had reached agreement on whether the Soviets would support a U.S. call for an arms embargo against Iran to back up the resolution. Meanwhile, Lloyd's of London said a mine sank a survey ship this week, hours before a U.S. attack on an Iranian mine-laying ship. Washington and Tehran agreed that 26 Iranian crewmen detained after the attack would be released tomorrow in Oman.    Weinberger, traveling to Saudi Arabia to begin a Persian Gulf tour, disclosed that a secret Army unit provided the helicopter force used in the attack.    ---   Canada and the U.S. are holding high-level discussions on resuming free-trade pact talks, a spokesman for Prime Minister Mulroney said. Ottawa broke off talks because, it said, the U.S. wouldn't agree to a binding dispute-solving mechanism. Canada demanded major concessions before it would resume talks on the pact.    ---   A poll found that more Americans oppose Bork's Supreme Court nomination than support it. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey of 1,544 adults, made following the U.S. Appeals Court judge's televised testimony to the Senate Judiciary panel, found that 42% oppose confirmation, 34% favor it and 24% aren't sure.    ---   The U.S. urged other nations to be skeptical of recent Nicaraguan peace moves, but House Speaker Wright said the Sandinista government has shown &quot;good faith.&quot; In Managua, Ruben Zamora, a Salvadoran rebel leader, said he would return to El Salvador to take part in talks set up under a five-nation Central American peace plan.    ---   Kim Dae Jung has agreed to quit the South Korean presidential race and settle for a post in a Kim Young Sam government or the opposition party presidency, according to people who know both men well. Kim Jong Pil, a possible conservative rival to ruling party candidate Roh, will announce plans Monday.    ---   Shamir criticized proposed U.S. arms sales to Saudi Arabia, suggesting the Saudis instead rely on Israel for protection. Unless an Arab country is &quot;active in peace with Israel,&quot; the prime minister said, it shouldn't get sophisticated U.S. weapons. Opposition in Congress blocked a recent Saudi arms-sale proposal.    ---   The Senate approved a measure that would ban foreign companies from U.S. military construction contracts unless U.S. firms have &quot;fair and equitable&quot; access to similar projects in the foreign firms' own countries. A sponsor of the bill said it was intended to prod Japan into opening up its Kansai airport project to U.S. firms.    ---   Chad and Libya agreed to allow the Organization of African Unity to mediate their 14-year-old border dispute, but both continued to claim the Aouzou strip. Both countries also agreed to abide by a two-week-old OAU-brokered cease-fire and will supply documents to support their claims to the 1,000 mile strip in the Sahara.    ---   A nuclear test ban was rejected by the Senate as it waded through a long list of proposed amendments to a defense appropriations bill. The measure called for a two-year halt in large underground tests if the Soviets agreed to comply. In Nevada, the 12th announced U.S. nuclear test this year shook buildings 105 miles away in Las Vegas.    ---   South Africa issued conflicting reports on a possible military coup in Transkei, one of the apartheid system's tribal homelands that no other nation recognizes. Pretoria's official radio first reported that a coup had taken place, but later retracted the report and said six Transkei ministers had resigned following a corruption investigation.    ---   NATO and Warsaw Pact delegates met in Vienna for what could be the final round of talks on troop cuts in Europe before they are replaced after 14 fruitless years. The Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction talks have been bogged down since they began in 1973 by disagreement over the counting of troops and verification methods.    ---   Aquino gave her army a free hand in an offensive against communist rebels who have blown up five bridges and virtually isolated a province southeast of Manila. The Philippine president has been criticized for holding the army back in its fight with the rebels. Elite troops were airlifted from a northern province to join the battle.    ---   Moscow said Mathias Rust, the teen-age West German pilot who was sentenced to four years in a labor camp for his illegal flight from Finland to Red Square, has asked for a pardon. The foreign ministry said the pardon request would be passed to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the country's parliament, for consideration. </TEXT></DOC>