<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870203-0126 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Firms Head for Japan in Effort to Sell Junk Bonds---Investment Banks Hope Hard WorkNow Will Yield Customers Later---By Ann Monroe and Michael R. SesitStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN MERBOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND) </IN><TEXT>   Searching for new buyers of the high-yield securities known as junk bonds, U.S. investment banks are wooing what seems to be an unlikely bride -- the usually cautious Japanese investor.    In recent months, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and other junk bond underwriters have been devoting a lot of time and effort to what they say is a successful pursuit of Japanese buyers. Officials at Japanese institutions paint a more tentative picture, but they also say the appetite is there.    Japanese participation in the $125 billion junk bond market is still small. One official at Drexel, which says it's among the most active firms in Japan, says he'd be surprised if the Japanese held more than $3 billion. Other officials say much Japanese participation is probably indirect, through mutual funds and loans to junk bond issuers.    But the Japanese potential has U.S. firms flocking to Tokyo. Last November, Drexel brought top officials from a dozen client companies to Japan for a miniature version of the high-yield bond seminar it stages in Beverly Hills every spring. The conference was headed by Michael Milken -- the first time the firm's chief junk bond salesman ever left the U.S. to meet with investors, officials say.    The Drexel effort, which included simultaneous translation and featured such star junk bond issuers as MCI Communications Corp., Warner Communications Inc., Occidental Petroleum Corp., Texas Air Corp., Wickes Cos. and Revlon Group Inc., was by far the most elaborate so far. But Merrill Lynch officials were also in Tokyo late last year peddling a junk bond mutual fund.    Raymond J. Minella, a managing director, says the firm sold about $60 million of the $340 million fund to Japanese investors, as well as half of a separate $50 million fund. Merrill plans to send a full-time junk bond specialist to Tokyo this year, and other firms have similar plans.    Officials at several investment banks say they've had conversations with Japanese brokerage houses about jointly designing junk bond mutual funds to be targeted to a Japanese audience. Prudential Insurance Co. of America is considering such a project, says Alexander Schwartz, who runs Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.'s high-yield department. Japanese investors will become a &quot;meaningful source&quot; of funds, Mr. Schwartz adds, &quot;if the mutual funds perform well and there are no major bombs.&quot;    Several factors are prodding Japanese investors away from their usual near-exclusive reliance on U.S. government securities when they invest offshore. One is the drop in U.S. interest rates. &quot;Because U.S. Treasury yields have fallen so much, this type of investment isn't enough for them,&quot; says Nobuaki Ohmura, a senior vice president at Daiwa Securities Co.'s U.S. unit.    That could become apparent today, when the Treasury begins its $29 billion quarterly financing with a $10 billion sale of three-year notes. Some analysts have attributed a recent bond market slump mainly to concern that foreign investors, worried about the declining dollar, won't buy significant amounts of the Treasury securities.    Japanese investors are especially eager for higher yields on dollar-denominated securities because spreads between U.S. and Japanese interest rates have narrowed. With 10-year U.S. Treasury bonds paying only about two percentage points more than their Japanese equivalents, compared with more than five points two years ago, Japanese dollar investors have to be less conservative if they want enough of a kick in yield to compensate for their currency risk.    In addition, institutions that manage Japanese pension funds are becoming more competitive. But many of them can pay dividends only out of current income, not capital gains -- pushing them toward high-yield securities to keep their dividends up.    Among the most active Japanese institutions, sources say, are leasing companies, which have been providing a hefty chunk of their corporate parents' earnings. &quot;If you look at the results of the Japanese industrial companies,&quot; says Ron Yurcak, the Drexel trader who was one of the catalysts of the firm's Japanese push, &quot;you see they're showing declining profits and even losses&quot; that are cushioned by gains on the sales of securities. Those gains, he says, come from their leasing subsidiaries' investments.    Some trust companies are also active investors, Mr. Yurcak says. Sources say Sumitomo Trust andamp; Banking Co. is one of the most aggressive Japanese investors. The bank has set up a special group to analyze high-yield investments.    Several Japanese institutions concede they lack the research capacity to analyze junk bond issuers. For that and other reasons, many prefer to spread their risks by investing in mutual funds. Sumitomo Life Insurance Co. has $20 million to $30 million in high-yield funds, says Michihisa Tanimoto, a New York official. That way, he says, &quot;If some defaults take place, only the price goes down.&quot;    Investors willing to put money into a single company are extremely choosy, preferring familiar names. For instance, Japanese banks have participated in leveraged buyouts of well-known companies that before the buyout had investment-grade ratings, such as Revlon and Beatrice Cos. Other favorites, Mr. Yurcak says, have included Levi Strauss andamp; Co., Texas Air and FMC Corp. Another Drexel official says the Beatrice bonds were such a hit in Tokyo that several Drexel rivals made a market in them.    The bonds issued in a $225 million Macy's Credit Corp. offering last fall were designed with Japanese and European investors in mind, says Jonathan Kolatch, a vice president at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., which structured the offering. They were non-callable with a relatively short maturity -- features the Japanese like. &quot;I think there has been a lot of buying,&quot; he said, &quot;if the issues met their criteria.&quot;    Because many Japanese institutions are restricted to investment-grade securities, they've found some ingenious ways of structuring their higher-yielding investments. One is to take equity participations in high-yield mutual funds. They also make direct loans to junk bond issuers and have been among the lenders in several large leveraged buyouts, say investment bankers.    They're also protecting themselves, in at least some instances, by setting up an interest rate arbitrage with their junk bond investments that shields them from interest rate and currency risks. A company can borrow dollars, paying a floating interest rate, and invest in junk bonds, which pay fixed rates. The company can then swap out of the fixed-rate payments into floating-rate payments that are higher than the rate on the company's original dollar borrowing. Using this strategy, bankers say, investors can lock in a gain of more than a quarter of a percentage point, although they still have the risk of default and lose liquidity on the junk bond investment.    One reason it's hard to get a fix on exactly how much Japanese investment there has been -- apart from Japanese reticence in discussing what is a sensitive subject -- is that many of the Japanese purchases are on the secondary market, where they're harder to track. One banker attributes that to a desire to see how the bonds will trade before investing in them.    But it's also because, in this area at least, the Japanese are anything but snap investors. &quot;You have to give them time to consider,&quot; says Robert Fallon, who heads Drexel's capital markets effort in Tokyo. &quot;It often requires a physical visit -- it's not a commodity product.&quot; Most decisions are made by committee, and since that often takes two weeks or more, investors may simply miss the initial offering.    Japanese interest, which U.S. bankers say had been growing steadily over most of last year, was curbed by the Boesky scandal, which broke just after Drexel's Tokyo conference. &quot;Japanese investors are interested in these securities,&quot; says a senior official at Dai-Ichi Mutual Life Insurance Co. in Tokyo, &quot;but there are problems. There is Boesky.&quot;    &quot;The Japanese took a step back,&quot; agrees Drexel's Mr. Yurcak. &quot;They asked a lot of questions.&quot; But he says that after about a month, investors started moving back into the market.    Both U.S. and Japanese officials agree that much of the Japanese buying to date is experimental. The purchases are &quot;really just tests, a trial. . . . It isn't systematic yet,&quot; says Daiwa's Mr. Ohmura. Merrill's Mr. Minella characterizes that firm's Tokyo visits as &quot;missionary work.&quot;    But U.S. bankers, who watched the same process among American investors a decade or so ago, expect to reap generous profit from their investment of time and energy now. The Japanese are already becoming comfortable with mortgage-backed bonds and high-grade corporate bonds, they note, and have begun dabbling in equity. And they've got an enormous amount of money to invest. &quot;This is a market everyone will become more or less active in,&quot; predicts Mr. Minella. </TEXT></DOC>