<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871027-0016 </DOCNO><HL> Industrials Plunge 156.83 Points in Heavy Trading;Bond Prices Surge, and Dollar Falls Against the Mark---Stocks' Drop Equals 8.04%;Early Exchange ClosingsAre Extended to Friday---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 10/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FORGN JAPAN CANDASTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Gloom in the stock market deepened yesterday, an eerie day when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 156.83 points, or 8.04%.    Trading was heavy and nearly as lopsided as the previous Monday's.    At the 2 p.m. EST close of New York Stock Exchange trading, the industrial average came to rest at 1793.93, or about 55 points above the low it hit after its record drop of 508 points exactly a week before. Yesterday's point decline was second only to the previous Monday's, which translated to 22.6%.    Prices also collapsed in the over-the-counter market. The National Association of Securities Dealers Composite Index of OTC prices fell 29.55 points, or 9%, to 298.90, a slide nearly as sharp as last Monday's OTC market crash. Yesterday's plunge wiped out all OTC market price gains through 1986 and beyond; at the end of 1985, the composite stood at 342.93.    Following yesterday's selling blitz, the Big Board, American Stock Exchange and the NASD, which regulates OTC trading, extended the shortened sessions through Friday. The three had scheduled three days of early closings, at 2 p.m. EST.    Also, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange again boosted margins for speculators in its Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index contract.    Meanwhile, government bond market prices continued to bloat -- almost two full points, or $20 per $1,000 face amount -- with capital wrenched from the stock market. The dollar fell nearly to its spring 1987 low against the West German mark amid nervous and volatile currency trading, and commodities prices resumed their plunge as investors again were liquidating positions in earnest.    While yesterday's trading proceeded with an eerie smoothness, selling overwhelmed buying to a greater extent than on any other day except on the Oct. 19 crash. In yesterday's Big Board trading, issues declining in price totaled 1,791 while just 134 stocks gained. In the Oct. 19 rout, 1,973 declined while only 52 advanced.    The volume of declining issues was 301,434,000 shares of the Big Board's total volume of 308,820,000; the volume of stocks gaining in price was a scant 1,862,100. A week before, decliner volume totaled 602,781,000 shares while the volume for gainers was just 1,129,000.    Traders said the stock-selling cascade in effect began even before the New York market opened, with many London brokers declining to purchase major positions in U.S. stocks during their session. The London brokers' retreat also increased fear and selling pressure among U.S. investors, traders added.    Bad as yesterday was for holders of stocks, there was no shortage of opinion among Wall Street pundits and traders predicting worse times ahead. In the past week, &quot;I've bought low, and sold lower,&quot; said Ronald Shear, an Amex floor broker with Investors Co., and stocks &quot;may be headed cheaper,&quot; he added.    A gloomy prediction from a Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. market analyst, Elaine Garzarelli, was more influential. An hour before the early close, with the industrial average down about 120 points, she was quoted on the Dow Jones News Service predicting that the industrial average is &quot;likely to fall&quot; to the 1300 to 1500 range &quot;within the next week.&quot;    Philip Erlanger, the chief technical analyst at Hartford, Conn.-based Advest Inc., said yesterday's rout sets up a tense period ahead, in which a swing of some 2,700 points on the industrial average hangs in the balance.    &quot;Any technical analyst will tell you that a bull market can absorb a correction of up to about 50% and still reach its technical objective -- which would be about 3500 on the Dow for the bull market that began in August 1982,&quot; Mr. Erlanger said.    &quot;So the test is the 1700 level,&quot; he added. If the industrial average falls significantly below 1700 between now and the end of the year, he said, &quot;it'll be clear signal that the bull supercycle has ended and we're into a bear market.&quot;    Mr. Erlanger explained, &quot;Firm technical support in that case would be the point from which the current bull market began -- under 800 on the Dow.&quot;    Despite yesterday's gloom and doomsaying, somebody had to have bought the more than 308 million shares that changed hands on the Big Board, veteran brokers noted.    One such broker at Merrill Lynch, who has been bearish on the stock market since the spring, said that &quot;while I'm not putting my customers into stocks right now, I'm not telling them to get out either.&quot;    He added: &quot;Unless you believe the game is up for America as the world's strongest economy, blue-chip stock prices simply have to recover from these levels. And I'm not ready to believe the game is up.&quot;    Among the institutional buyers is John LeFrere, managing partner of Delta Capital Management, a New York money-management concern. He, too, counseled against liquidating stocks in the current market climate. Instead, he said he has been using cash to buy severely depressed stocks -- those with price-to-earnings ratios of half the market's average P/E ratio, which currently is about 13.    But Mr. LeFrere warns, &quot;You have to be buying with the full knowledge that the market could go lower&quot; before it recovers.    Program traders, who were widely blamed for accelerating last week's market record crash, &quot;weren't operating,&quot; said Richard Falk, director of equities for PaineWebber Inc., a major program-trading firm.    The head of stock-index futures trading at another firm in New York said, &quot;I called the stock exchange, and they wouldn't even let me do buy programs.&quot; These are arbitrage trades in which the firm buys relatively underpriced stocks and sells relatively overpriced stock-index futures to lock in a profit.    On Monday of last week, arbitrage-related program trading accounted for nearly 20% of Big Board trading volume, up from an average of about 15%, estimated Richard Torrenzano, exchange spokesman. With the exchange's automated order routing systems closed to program traders since last Tuesday, he said, program-trading volume yesterday was practically nil, as far as he knew.    One New York money manager said, however, he believes that program trading hasn't been snuffed out. He said yesterday that investment bankers, whom he wouldn't name, were calling their institutional clients, offering to do stock-index arbitrage trades involving the purchase of index futures and simultaneous sale of baskets of stocks.    Institutional-investment sources said that while the Big Board's denial of its automated order routing system to program trading makes such a maneuver more difficult, it doesn't necessarily foreclose it.    These observers say that the risk of price changes before a program trade is completed can make the trade unprofitable, and such a risk is greater when access to automated order routing is denied. But program trades can be executed even without such access, these sources say, provided that such traders get their agents to all the appropriate Big Board specialists' posts within a brief time -- say, within 20 minutes.    In response to continued market volatility, the Chicago Merc increased margins one-third for speculators trading its Sandamp;P 500 stock-index contract, to $20,000 from $15,000.    The margin increase, following last week's boost to $15,000 from $10,000, may tend to increase volatility in the Sandamp;P 500 pit as small traders pull out of the market after being unable, or unwilling, to post more cash in their accounts, traders said. Dozens of small traders retreated from the Sandamp;P 500 trading pit after last week's margin increase, traders said, thereby increasing volatility.    Futures exchanges increase margins to try and lessen the risk of trading losses to their clearing member firms, which process trades for and assume the trading risks of smaller traders.    The Chicago Merc, as well as the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Board Options Exchange, said that all clearing members continued to meet financial obligations.    The mayhem in international stock markets yesterday was even worse than in the U.S.    Take Switzerland, for example. When Peter Hangartner, a member of the management committee in charge of securities trading for Bank Julius Baer in Zurich, reported for work yesterday morning, he said &quot;the first thing we saw was that Japan (the Tokyo Stock Exchange) was down 6% and Hong Kong -- which had been closed for a week -- had lost a third of its value. That means we would have sellers in Europe.&quot;    Indeed, even before the Frankfurt market officially opened, it was down 4% to 5% and London opened down 5%. To Mr. Hangartner, that meant the Zurich exchange already was set to open lower because &quot;foreign institutions would be selling in Zurich.&quot;    To meet redemption orders from clients, Mr. Hangartner said, money managers around the world &quot;are selling in markets where they can sell; they are looking for markets that still have reasonable prices and where there are still bids. I call it competitive selling.&quot;    The Zurich market's &quot;reward&quot; for accommodating such selling yesterday was a whopping 12.3% decline. &quot;People were selling across the board,&quot; said Mr. Hangartner. Despite the steep price declines, however, traders said that in contrast to last week's chaotic trading, Swiss activity yesterday was orderly.    Currency market participants said that in addition to yesterday's stock market rout, the dollar was driven lower by the spreading rumor that the G-7 trading partners -- the U.S., Britain, France, West Germany, Japan, Canada and Italy -- quietly have agreed to lower the ranges in which they will defend the dollar against the other major currencies.    The G-7 nations agreed in Paris last February to defend the dollar at then-current levels. That's about where the American currency is trading now, following foreign central-bank intervention variously estimated to have totaled $80 billion to $90 billion so far this year.    Also contributing to yesterday's volatile foreign-exchange trading was a Tokyo news report that quoted an unnamed Japanese official as saying that his government foresaw the yen rising still further against the U.S. dollar. &quot;The market took that as reason to sell dollars,&quot; said Jack Kessler, a senior vice president at Chase Manhattan Bank.    In hectic trading, the dollar yesterday fell as low as 1.7650 West German marks and 141.32 yen before recovering to 1.7775 marks and 142.50 yen late in the day in New York.    &quot;Since we are now trading below 1.78 (marks to the dollar) without any central-bank intervention or other action by the administration to prop the dollar up, the market perceives a lower range,&quot; said Mr. Kessler.    &quot;Most customers -- corporations, individual investors and institutions -- are aggressively selling dollars,&quot; he added. The same was true of many banks, other traders said. Mr. Kessler estimated that yesterday's trading volume was 20% above normal.    Mr. Kessler won't say on what side of the dollar Chase positioned itself last night. He also declined to say how profitable the bank's currency trading had been the last two weeks other than to say, &quot;We've been doing fine.&quot;    Another trader at one big bank said that the major buyers of dollars have been U.S. international mutual funds &quot;because of the large redemptions they're seeing.&quot; When investors in such funds want to liquidate their holdings, the funds must sell some of their foreign securities and then sell -- for dollars -- the currencies of the countries in which the issuers of those securities are based.    Also bolstering the dollar, traders said, was fear of central-bank intervention -- buying dollars to support the U.S. currency. Another was Persian Gulf tensions. The dollar often is regarded as a safe investment in times of turmoil.    Senior officials at several Wall Street firms said that they were keeping up fairly well with the sustained volume but that they nonetheless appreciated the extra breathing space they will get from the decisions by the Big Board, Amex and NASD to truncate trading hours through Friday.    George Ball, chairman and chief executive officer of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said the early closings were needed &quot;simply because of the fatigue factor. We've got people who were working until 2 a.m. or 3 a.m. every day last week, and tired individuals make mistakes.&quot;    Charles McQuade, president of Securities Industry Automation Corp., which operates the computer systems at the Big Board and Amex, said, &quot;We've held up quite well&quot; since struggling through last Monday's 508-point drop.    The level of problem trades -- ones where there is some dispute or mistake in the paper work -- now are running at normal levels after escalating last week, Mr. McQuade said. He added that settlement of last Monday's trades -- where stock and cash actually change hands -- was &quot;going fine.&quot;    Yesterday, Mr. McQuade spoke to a group of reporters that toured SIAC's facilities in downtown Manhattan. The reporters agreed to not to disclose, for security reasons, the location of the facilities, which house about 1,000 employees and about 200 mainframe and minicomputers that process the trades made on the Big Board and the Amex.    Throughout the market plunge that began in earnest almost two weeks ago, some traders have given their colleagues a few chuckles with some gallows humor.    One example spotted yesterday was a sign hanging above a trading post on the Amex floor. It read: &quot;Lost: three-legged dog, blind in one eye, recently castrated. Answers to the name of Lucky.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>