<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880615-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Let Open Doors Swing Both Ways --- Migration Helps Poorest of Poor </HL><AUTHOR> Jeffrey Herbst </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   The fundamental assumption of the industrialized world's policies toward the Third World is that progress is possible everywhere. However, a stark division is now taking place within the Third World that dictates a change in such thinking.    A few fast-growing countries, such as South Korea and Taiwan, are on the verge of claiming industrialized status. A second group of slower developing nations, including Kenya, Cameroon and Costa Rica, will probably sustain their current economic status and may progress toward higher development. The formulation of policy by industrialized nations toward these two groups of countries will always be difficult, as the current trade conflicts between the U.S. and Taiwan and Korea demonstrate. However, with intelligence, prudence and a modicum of good luck, the developed world has a chance, while protecting basic domestic interests, of using time-tested policies to aid poor countries with the potential to develop.    Unfortunately, there is also a third group: countries that are so poor and so bereft of natural resources that they will not demonstrate any significant development for decades to come, if ever. Indeed, the Sahelian countries of Africa, such as Mali and Mauritania, and many of the island nations of the Pacific are so poor that the real test for the international community will be to keep large portions of their populations from dying.    The prospect of a large number of permanently dysfunctional states is a relatively recent development. While there have always been countries (Spain and Portugal, for example) that have been in decline for long periods of time, before World War II the world punished states with poor prospects by eliminating them. Especially in Europe, an almost Darwinian system evolved where unproductive political arrangements, such as the Austro-Hungarian Empire, were challenged and eventually disappeared. However, with the rise of the norms of sovereignty and noninterference in domestic affairs after World War II, the world is a relatively safe place for even the weakest of states.    But the price of security for the weakest is the likelihood that many exceptionally poor countries with almost zero development prospects probably will exist for many decades to come. Clearly, it would be morally unacceptable simply to write off these nations because nature and history have been unkind to them. At the same time, our thinking about the poorest countries must be tempered with a new realism. The world has not developed policies that take into account the reality of the permanently poor.    One example of a policy that could address some of the problems of countries suffering from permanent stagnation is to increase aid to countries that show prospects for development and that are willing to accept migration from countries that are not going to develop. Ivory Coast, for instance, has done a great service to West Africa by accepting between one million and two million migrants in the past 20 years from nearby countries that are regressing economically, especially Burkina Faso, Mali and Guinea.    While these migrants undoubtedly start at the bottom of the economic ladder in Ivory Coast, many have made great progress in a growing nation and have been able to send money to their families back home. (Many settle permanently in Ivory Coast, while others return home in their old age.) These remittances aid the poorest of the poor in a more direct manner that any aid program could possibly hope to. The U.S. and other Western nations should reward countries like Ivory Coast by further increasing aid and by changing trade policies so that these countries find it easier to export goods.    To develop a truly humane policy toward countries that cannot progress, we may have to forget traditional measures of generosity. Instead, the most effective way to aid the world's poorest may be to allow them to escape permanent poverty by letting more migrate to rich countries. The best measure of generosity toward the world's poorest nations is not the dollars spent making permanent stagnation more palatable but how many people we allow to leave economic hell for a place where they have the potential to better themselves.    ---   Mr. Herbst is a lecturer in politics at Princeton.    (See related story: &quot;'Brain Drain': A Make-Believe Malady&quot; -- WSJ June 15, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>