<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Financier Warner, 2 Others ConvictedOf Violations Connected to Failed ESM---By Richard KoenigStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> CINCINNATI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Marvin L. Warner and two other bankers involved in the Ohio thrift crisis of 1985 were convicted in state court here of banking and securities violations.    Mr. Warner, a Cincinnati financier who owned Home State Savings Bank, was found guilty of six counts of unauthorized acts in connection with investments Home State made through E.S.M. Government Securities Inc. and of three counts of state securities violations.    The failure of E.S.M. in March 1985 was followed within days by the collapse of Cincinnati-based Home State, which in turn triggered a run on other Ohio thrifts and the temporary closing of about 70 of them. Prosecutors alleged that Home State had losses of $147 million from its E.S.M. investments.    Mr. Warner, who had served as U.S. ambassador to Switzerland in the Carter administration, faces a maximum prison sentence of 13 1/2 years plus fines and a possible demand for restitution to the state of Ohio for its own expenses in making depositors whole. Sentencing is scheduled for March 30.    Mr. Warner, a silvery-haired man of 67 who had taken the witness stand in his own defense, responded to the verdict by again asserting his innocence. His lawyers said they will appeal the verdict.    Burton M. Bongard, 46, a former president of Home State, was found guilty of 82 counts of unauthorized acts or misapplication of bank funds. The maximum sentence is 15 years in prison plus fines and possible restitution.    David J. Schiebel, 57, an officer at Home State and for several months its president, was found guilty of three counts of securities violations. The maximum sentence is 4 1/2 years in prison plus fines and possible restitution.    Attorneys for Messrs. Bongard and Schiebel said they will appeal the verdict.    The verdict, reached in the ninth day of deliberation by the jury, followed a trial in Hamilton County Common Pleas Court that lasted 56 days and produced more than 40 witnesses. Much of the case focused on transactions called repurchase agreements, which, though structured as the sale and repurchase of securities, amount to being loans. E.S.M., based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., lent money to Home State while taking as collateral securities owned by Home State.    The state alleged that Home State had provided E.S.M. with collateral far in excess of the safety margin that securities dealers typically demand in case the market value of the collateral falls. The state further alleged that the excessive collateral payments violated a resolution by Home State's board to limit the payments.    In exchange for the excessive collateral, the state alleged, E.S.M. provided Home State with profits on fictitious trades. Prosecutors noted that Messrs. Warner and Bongard had personal accounts at E.S.M. by which, the prosecutors, said, the two men also profited from fictitious trades.    The state theorized that the Home State-E.S.M. transactions helped to give both financial institutions the appearance of financial health when in fact they were faltering.    In his testimony, Mr. Warner said he didn't become aware of excessive collateral payments to E.S.M. until August 1983. The Home State-E.S.M. transactions at issue started May 31, 1983, and continued until Oct. 14, 1983.    Mr. Warner also said he didn't learn of E.S.M.'s financial troubles until January 1985. As for the board's resolution meant to curb collateral payments, he said he didn't always read board reports.    Referring to E.S.M. officials, Mr. Warner contended that Home State &quot;was victimized by the smoothest defrauders in the history of American banking.&quot; Messrs. Bongard and Schiebel also argued that they were victims of E.S.M. and of its outside auditor, who has pleaded guilty to felony charges in connection with his approval of false financial reports.    The trial confronted Mr. Warner with the testimony of Ronnie R. Ewton, a former friend and the former chairman of E.S.M. but now the state's star witness. Mr. Ewton said he had told Mr. Warner as early as September 1983 that E.S.M. had incurred heavy losses. Since his testimony, Mr. Ewton has begun to serve a nine-year prison term imposed by a state judge despite pleas for lenience by prosecutors with whom Mr. Ewton has cooperated.    The alleged securities violations stem from a $30 million debenture offering that Home State made in 1984. The state alleged that materials related to the offering misstated the thrift's financial condition.    Mr. Warner was found not guilty of 76 alleged counts, and Mr. Schiebel was found innocent of 82 alleged counts of unauthorized acts or misapplication of bank funds. Mr. Schiebel was also found not guilty of one alleged count of securities violations.    Lawrence A. Kane Jr., the special prosecutor for the state, said Judge Richard A. Niehaus, who presided over the trial, asked him to prepare a memorandum about restitution to the state that the defendants possibly would have to pay. Mr. Kane estimated the cost of the thrift crisis to the state at $226 million. In addition to making Home State depositors and debenture holders whole, the state has spent some $4 million to prosecute its charges. </TEXT></DOC>