<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880408-0025 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: OPEC News, Computer-Driven Buying Lift Crude Oil Prices in Surprise Rally </HL><AUTHOR> William Power (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PET MIN NDX PCS </IN><TEXT>   U.S. crude-oil futures staged a surprise rally, erasing the week's earlier losses.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange, May delivery West Texas Intermediate crude gained 25 cents, to close at $17.06 a barrel, just off the day's high. Earlier in Europe, North Sea Brent crude rose five cents.    Analysts said prices firmed on computer-driven buying and a variety of news about the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, whose price-monitoring committee is meeting in Vienna tomorrow.    Many traders attributed almost all of the price gains in New York to a noticeable buying spree by technical-oriented trading firms including Candamp;D Commodities, a major futures speculator whose buying in recent weeks has rocked the soybean and wheat pits in Chicago.    Candamp;D officials weren't available for comment, but traders said the firm bought at least 3,000 crude contracts on Nymex yesterday, equivalent to three million barrels of oil.    Traders said some of the buying was spurred by a report that Venezuela's oil minister will visit four non-OPEC, oil-producing nations after tomorrow's pricing meeting to push for production and pricing restraint; Saudi Arabia's minister and others are expected to do likewise. Richard D. Donovan, head of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.'s international-energy desk, said such OPEC activity demonstrates how much the cartel's power to fix prices has diminished.    While few analysts expect tomorrow's meeting to yield important results, Nauman Barakat, analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., said some traders bought anyway yesterday out of concern that if the five-nation committee does accomplish something, the surprise is going to be on the upside. &quot;They're saying, 'Hey, let's cover our shorts just in case they do something to surprise us.'&quot;    Mr. Barakat said the most he expects from the meeting is for OPEC to blame non-OPEC producers for the recent price turmoil in the energy markets. &quot;There'll be more heat than light&quot; in Vienna, he predicted.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Choppy trading continued to dominate the livestock markets yesterday as traders struggled with a dearth of news. Cattle futures prices closed mixed while hog futures prices ended slightly lower. Little new is going on in the cattle industry. Although the supply of fattened cattle on the nation's feedlots is relatively tight, meatpackers aren't bidding up prices. They anticipate bigger herds, and so lower prices, next month. &quot;The market is on the fence,&quot; said Charles Levitt, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., Chicago. &quot;It doesn't know which way to go.&quot; Likewise, hog traders are keeping their powder dry. Hog futures prices are being held in check by their high premium to spot prices. An analyst said cash prices aren't likely to rise significantly until later this spring. That is when the supply of fattened hogs usually drops as farmers turn their attention to spring planting.    COPPER: Futures prices recovered from a two-day slump. May delivery copper settled at $1.063 a pound, up 2.55 cents. &quot;For the past few days the market had gotten away from its own fundamentals, and had been influenced by weakness in precious metals and the decline in sterling, which prompted arbitrage selling from London of futures in New York,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director for Elders Futures Inc. Yesterday, traders focused again on copper's fundamentals. One positive indicator was the 11% rise in U.S. sales of domestic cars and trucks in late March over a year earlier, Mr. O'Neill said. The auto industry has been using more copper in recent years due to increasingly sophisticated electric systems in vehicles. Separately, the Commodity Exchange announced that the Commodity Futures Trading Commission approved a reduction in the number of copper contracts a trader can hold as the delivery month progresses. The limit will be 2,500 contracts through the close of business on the sixth calendar day of the delivery month. The limit will drop to 1,200 contracts from the seventh day through the conclusion of the last business day of the delivery month. For other traded months, the limit of 6,000 contracts a month will remain in effect.    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices seesawed in light, trendless trading. The failure of any evidence to materialize supporting Wednesday's rumor that the Group of Seven leading industrialized countries favor supporting the dollar at 125 yen stalled further attempts at a rally, traders said. Traders are now awaiting next week's G-7 meeting in Washington and the release of monthly U.S. trade figures before making major commitments to the market, they said. After trading between 266.45 and 268.75, bellwether Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures for June settlement closed 0.20 higher at 267.60. -   PRECIOUS METALS: Gold and platinum prices were slightly higher, at $450.80 and $528.60 an ounce respectively, but silver closed down 2.7 cents at $6.407 an ounce. Prices took a stiff dive Wednesday on the U.S. dollar's rally. Bernard Savaiko, senior precious metals analyst at PaineWebber Inc., said yesterday's minor crudeoil rally and the dollar's easing helped gold and platinum rise. But major silver selling by one major trading firm, Candamp;D Commodities, helped drive down that metal's price. </TEXT></DOC>