<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880325-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Dollar's Sudden, Sharp Slide After Weeks Of Stability Sends Stock Market Lower </HL><AUTHOR> Douglas R. Sease (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON FRX STK ECO </IN><TEXT>   Suddenly, investors have the U.S. dollar to worry about again.    After weeks of blissful unconcern about an apparently stable dollar, a sharp slide in the currency yesterday unnerved many stock market investors, who sent share prices plunging. The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at 2023.87, down 43.77, after slumping as much as 49.90 points during the day.    The dollar was quoted at 125.55 yen in late New York trading, down from 126.75 Wednesday.    Analysts differed on what caused the dollar's slide, which began in Tokyo, and how important it is in the long run.    Peter Canelo, a market strategist at Bear Stearns andamp; Co., suggested that currency traders simply got too excited when the dollar drifted below a certain technical level against the yen in Tokyo. He contended that the dollar remains on a sound footing and that downward pressure will ease.    &quot;People should take about a five-day vacation and come back April 1 and they'll find this storm has blown over,&quot; he said.    But a more dire outlook was launched late Wednesday when Martin Feldstein, former chief economic adviser to President Reagan, said he wouldn't be surprised to see the dollar at or below 120 yen within six months. This outlook suggests that the U.S. economy is too strong for the nation to continue to correct its huge trade deficit.    Charles Taylor, an analyst in the Washington, D.C., office of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., supported that view. Recent economic statistics, including yesterday's reports on February personal income and consumption expenditures, show a strong economy, he said. That means that U.S. demand for imports is unlikely to slow enough to correct the trade deficit, he added, despite the past three relatively encouraging monthly trade reports.    &quot;I think people realize that there's an element to the monthly trade numbers that is like tossing a coin,&quot; he said. &quot;Just because you get three heads in a row doesn't mean the next one will be heads, too.&quot;    In any event, the dollar's slide set off a slump in bonds and a round of heavy program selling at the opening of the stock market. Stock investors, many of whom were ready to see the bad side of any news, added to the selling pressure.    Steven Einhorn, a market strategist at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., said that given investors' various concerns, the stock market is trapped in an economic box.    &quot;If the economy gives off signs of lethargy, it means that earnings expectations will come down and that takes a toll on share prices,&quot; he said. &quot;But if the economy shows some strength, that takes a toll on the bond market and sends interest rates higher and that hurts stock prices. We're in a situation where good news is bad for stocks and bad news is bad for stocks.&quot;    Still, the sharp drop in stock prices didn't clarify the long-term trend for the market, which had drifted aimlessly the two previous days. While analysts such as Mr. Einhorn are concerned about the downward potential of the market, others said the plunge was a normal correction to be expected after the runup in stock prices over the past several weeks.    &quot;The Dow Jones Industrial Average went up 191 points between Feb. 8 and last Friday. That's a gain of 10.1% in just six weeks,&quot; said William LeFevre, the market strategist for Advest. &quot;You usually get some kind of correction after that and we're down 62 points from the high now. It's typical to give back a third of an advance. But it's not the beginning of a 1,000-point slide down or a 500-point down day.&quot;    A.C. Moore, director of research at Argus Research Corp., said the stock market's potential to decline is limited by the narrow spread in yields between bonds and stocks, as well as by the amount of cash that still hasn't been committed to the market. &quot;With some further evidence that the economy is improving, the market will move higher,&quot; he predicted.    Although program trading played a limited role in yesterday's overall market activity, the drop in stock prices nevetheless came within a tenth of a point of testing a new barrier to runaway price moves. Last month, the New York Stock Exchange instituted a rule that denies traders the use of the NYSE automated order-entry system to execute program trades after a 50-point daily swing up or down in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The average was down 49.90 in midafternoon, but then rebounded slightly.    Market analysts and arbitragers said that the 50-point limit set by the exchange has become something of a psychological barrier limiting downward market moves. &quot;Traders on the floor just assume that if there's any selling pressure coming from the computers, it will disappear at about 50 points,&quot; said Mr. Canelo of Bear Stearns.    Robert N. Gordon, president of Twenty-First Securities Corp., which engages in arbitrage of stock-index futures and options and the stocks in those indexes, discounted appearances of collusion. While it may look like a conscious decision by arbitragers to pull back from the 50-point limit, he said, there are too many diverse factors at work to allow that degree of control.    &quot;Let's say you pull the trigger to sell $10 million of stocks,&quot; he said. &quot;If there are buyers out there for all of that, it won't have any affect on the market. But if there aren't any buyers, it could send you right through the 50-point barrier.&quot;    He argues, in fact, that the 50-point limit encourages program trading among small firms like his own. He said that he will execute a program more quickly now if stock prices are down sharply to avoid being frozen out by the 50-point limit.    At the same time, he added, it would be to the advantage of the big trading houses to keep selling past the 50-point barrier. That would eliminate smaller competitors like Twenty-First Securities from using the Big Board's computer system to take advantage of arbitrage situations while the big firms' armies of floor brokers could execute programs by submitting individual orders to specialists.    ---   Scott McMurray contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>