<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870519-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE PENTAGON SAID Iraq attacked a U.S. frigate despite radio warnings.    Officials said the Iraqi warplane's missile assault Sunday in the Persian Gulf, in which 28 crew members were killed, followed two radio warnings to the Mirage F-1 fighter jet from the ship, the USS Stark. Nonetheless, the frigate, part of a U.S. naval force assigned to the gulf, never activated an array of defense systems it carried to thwart such a raid. The air strike creates new strains in U.S.-Iraq relations, and is expected to subject the Navy to criticism for apparently being caught off guard.    Reagan expressed &quot;concern and anger&quot; and ordered naval ships in the gulf to assume a heightened state of alert. Iraq's president, in a letter to Reagan, stated &quot;deepest regret&quot; over what he called the &quot;unintentional&quot; incident.    ---   THE HIGH COURT RULED that an 1866 civil-rights law isn't limited to blacks.    In two decisions, the Supreme Court justices said the 121-year-old Civil Rights Act, originally passed to help combat discrimination against blacks, may be invoked by whites alleging ethnic bias. The court said the provisions of the law should be read broadly to prohibit any form of discrimination that Congress may have viewed as racial at the time it passed the law. The rulings provide a powerful weapon for whites of different heritages fighting discrimination.    The court said murderers always are entitled to new sentencing trials if a juror is wrongly disqualified for voicing qualms about capital punishment.    ---   North personally cashed more than $2,000 in traveler's checks that he received from Nicaraguan rebel leader Adolfo Calero, according to sources familiar with the congressional Iran-Contra inquiry. Investigators for the House-Senate panels are trying to determine if North used any of the money for personal expenses.    ---   Brazilian President Sarney said he would accept a one-year reduction in his term, to five years. The decision, which would mean direct presidential elections in 1989, seemed likely to provoke an angry reaction from the many congressmen who believe the constituent assembly alone has the right to determine the mandate.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres met in Washington with Soviet envoy Yuri Dubynin to discuss possible Kremlin participation in a Mideast peace conference, an Israeli official disclosed. The meeting Sunday was held after Peres, in speeches to U.S. Jewish leaders, said that Moscow should be given a limited role in an international forum.    ---   Thousands of demonstrators battled with South Korean riot police as violence erupted throughout the country during protests marking the seventh anniversary of an uprising in the southern city of Kwangju. Mobs of students, workers and religious activists called for immediate elections and the removal of President Chun Doo Hwan.    ---   The leader of Fiji's military coup said he was installed as chairman of a caretaker government, but acknowledged that the South Pacific nation's governor-general hasn't recognized the coup as legal. The governor-general, however, said he had received assurances that military rule would be ended &quot;as soon as it is possible.&quot;    A hijacker was overpowered by cabin crew members of an Air New Zealand jet at Nadi Airport after the Fiji Indian had commandeered the jet and threatened to blow up the plane with dynamite. The man, who had released all but three of the 126 people aboard, was negotiating with the control tower when the hijacking was thwarted.    ---   Queen Elizabeth II dissolved Britain's Parliament, officially opening a three-week general election campaign in which Prime Minister Thatcher is seeking a third term. Britain's third party, the Alliance of the Liberals and Social Democrats, published a campaign platform, pledging a reduction in unemployment.    ---   Sen. Paul Simon of Illinois entered the race for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. Speaking in Carbondale, Ill., Simon portrayed himself as an unreconstructed Democrat, and sounded the party's classic themes of jobs, education and domestic spending.    ---   Federal prosecutors in New York said they wouldn't drop a year-old case against 10 men charged in a plot to smuggle about $2 billion of arms to Iran. The case had been delayed after it was disclosed that the White House authorized arms sales to Iran. The trial is scheduled to begin Oct. 19.    ---   Peruvian troops surrounded about 5,000 striking police officers who marched on the Congress building in Lima to press demands for a wage increase of nearly 800%. The soldiers fired automatic rifles in the air to keep the strikers from reaching the building. Clashes weren't reported.    ---   Deng Xiaoping said in published remarks that China's government was grossly overstaffed at all levels and had to become more efficient to compete internationally. Deng, however, said the Communist Party's leadership would remain &quot;unshakable&quot; despite planned political changes.    ---   France's Communist Party opened a three-day central committee meeting in Paris, and leader Georges Marchais proposed Andre Lajoinie as the party's 1988 presidential candidate. Lajoinie's approval by the committee was expected.    ---   Two Palestinians pleaded innocent in an Austrian court to murder charges stemming from a December 1985 guerrilla attack at a Vienna airport. The assault coincided with a similar raid in Rome. In Genoa, the appeals of 15 people charged in the hijacking of the Achille Lauro liner began, with lawyers on both sides demanding retrials.    ---   West Germany's Kohl said he would accept an East-West agreement to eliminate midrange and shorter-range missiles from Europe. The chancellor's statement came after his Christian Democrats, generally hardliners on defense issues, lost ground in two state elections Sunday to the pro-disarmament Free Democratic Party.    ---   Died: Wilbur J. Cohen, 73, former secretary of the Health, Education and Welfare Department, in Seoul, South Korea. </TEXT></DOC>