<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880815-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Northrop Officers Kept Facts From Board In South Korean Deal, Inquiries Indicate </HL><AUTHOR> Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> NOC FREST </CO><IN> MON ARO AIR </IN><G> CNG JUS </G><TEXT>   Information emerging from two government investigations of Northrop Corp.'s South Korean financial ventures indicates that company officers withheld crucial facts from the Northrop board when it approved the ventures, according to individuals familiar with the investigations.    As previously reported, the Los Angeles-based defense contractor's payment of $7.75 million to businesses controlled by a member of the Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee is the subject of separate inquiries by the House Energy and Commerce Committee and a federal grand jury in Los Angeles. Northrop has maintained that $6.25 million of the money, paid into a Hong Kong account controlled by the Korean Olympics official was intended to finance a hotel development in Korea.    In the Justice Department's criminal inquiry, investigators are looking into whether the hotel, which was never built, was a vehicle to funnel money to Korean government officials, in violation of the federal Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Because of a previous instance of about $30 million in questionable foreign payments by Northrop, Northrop and its chairman, Thomas V. Jones, still are subject to the terms of a 1975 consent decree in federal court in Washington specifically barring violations of the corrupt-practices law.    When Northrop paid the money into the Hong Kong account in 1984, the company was trying to sell $3 billion worth of F-20 jet fighters to the government of then South Korean President Chun Doo Hwan. (Northrop eventually ended the F-20 program without having sold any of the jet fighters.) It chose Park Chong Kyu, now deceased, the Olympics official who was a long-time friend of President Chun, to mount what investigators believe was a secret lobbying campaign.    Northrop's board, which under company regulations is required to approve substantial foreign payments, agreed to the hotel venture to show their commitment to the economy of South Korea. But the board apparently wasn't informed that its partner in the deal was Mr. Park, operator of a notorious private club in Seoul where international arms dealers and Korean government leaders mingled with call girls. A former presidential aide who was previously jailed on corruption charges, Mr. Park had a reputation among Americans in Korea as a well-connected 'Mr. Fixit.' His activities on Northrop's behalf were the subject of a recent page one story in this newspaper.    When they approved the hotel during a board meeting in July 1984, Northrop directors asked company officers to take several specific steps to ensure that Northrop's payments would comply with federal law, and received assurances that such steps would be taken, according to persons familiar with the investigations.    Two of the board's requests, that contracts contain language safeguarding Northrop's money and that Northrop representatives sit on the board of the hotel project, apparently weren't followed in contracts and other agreements. Board members, when they asked for a land appraiser's valuation of the hotel property, also weren't told that an appraisal already existed putting the value of the land at less than $200,000. Board members were given a value of $6.25 million, according to those familiar with the investigation.    These individuals said Meredith O. Wilson, chairman of the board's executive committee, asked corporate officers to investigate the backgrounds of Koreans involved in the hotel project. Mr. Wilson, a retired Stanford University professor, is said to have asked, &quot;Do we know who we're dealing with?&quot; He was told by Mr. Jones, who is also chief executive of Northrop, that Mr. Jones personally would investigate those involved through his own contacts in the Korean government, according to individuals who questioned Mr. Wilson as part of the government's investigations.    These individuals said Mr. Wilson has asserted that his question was never answered. Mr. Jones has said publicly that he met with Mr. Park the month after the board meeting, when Mr. Park attended the Summer Olympics in Los Angeles as an official guest. However, Mr. Jones didn't report to the board on his meeting with Mr. Park, nor did he reveal that Mr. Park was Northrop's lobbyist, the individuals said.    Mr. Jones and Mr. Wilson couldn't be reached for comment and a Northrop spokesman declined to comment.    The executive committee of Northrop's board has conducted a two-year investigation into the Korean dealings, including a questionable $1.5 million payment to Mr. Park's associates in 1986 after they wrote letters to Mr. Jones threatening to expose Northrop's relationship to Mr. Park. The board's queries led earlier this year to the sudden retirement of three company executives who were involved in the Korean dealings -- including Northrop's chief financial officer. At the recommendation of the executive committee, the company has sued relatives and associates of Mr. Park in Korea to recover the $6.25 million.    Northrop met its Korean lobbyist through one of several Korean consultants on its payroll, James K. Shin. In an interview with attorneys from the law firm Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue, which conducted the Northrop board's probe, Mr. Shin called the hotel transaction a &quot;farce.&quot; The transcript of the interview, part of a massive report to the executive committee, was made available to news organizations last week.    Mr. Shin told the attorneys that he and Mr. Park spent about $90,000 a month of Northrop's money for lobbying, including money spent to &quot;entertain&quot; Korean government and military officials at hostess bars. Although Mr. Shin said he wasn't aware of payments being made to Korean officials directly, he said he &quot;assumed that Park would use the $5 million for a payoff,&quot; according to the interview transcript. Associates of Mr. Shin, a resident of Honolulu, said the former lobbyist and his bank records have been subpoenaed by the federal grand jury. Individuals familiar with the investigation said they have reason to believe that Mr. Shin may have received $1.5 million of Northrop's lobbying funds from Mr. Park shortly before Mr. Park died of liver cancer in 1985. Mr. Shin didn't return telephone calls or respond to messages left with his associates.    Meanwhile, in Seoul the Korean National Assembly opened its own investigation last week into Northrop's dealings in Korea as part of a broad investigation, sought by opposition politicians, of the financial dealings of former President Chun and his family. A special assembly investigative committee is focusing on allegations that Mr. Chun or his younger brother, Chun Kyung Hwan, received money from Northrop in return for their expected help in assuring that Korea's air force bought the F-20s. The former president has said he had meetings with Northrop's Mr. Jones but denies that he took any money. The younger Mr. Chun is currently on trial on charges of influence-peddling and embezzlement in an unrelated case.    ---   Joseph P. Manguno in Seoul, South Korea contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>