<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870929-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Reform the AID Reformers---By Peter F. Schaefer</HL><DD> 09/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Soon after taking office, Ronald Reagan told a meeting of world leaders in Cancun, Mexico, what developing nations must do to grow economically. Development, he explained, is created and sustained by private initiative &quot;liberated and empowered,&quot; not coerced by governments.    But under the Reagan administration, less than 5% of U.S. foreign assistance has gone directly to the private sector in developing countries. Instead, the U.S. government continues to subsidize statist or socialist economic policies abroad.    The main culprit in this has been the U.S. Agency for International Development. AID continues pursuing the flawed policies that for decades have substantially contributed to keeping developing nations impoverished. AID, for example, continues to distribute over 90% of its funds as &quot;government-to-government transfers,&quot; fueling the growth of huge, bureaucratic state sectors in the Third World. It depresses domestic food prices in developing countries -- and thereby farmers' incomes -- with hundreds of thousands of metric tons of food aid. And it funds a land-reform program in El Salvador that has greatly diminished agricultural output. Production levels on the cooperative farms created by the program are lower than those of existing privately owned farms, and the cooperatives grow deeper in debt each year.    A new approach is desperately needed. It should include these reforms:    --Rewrite the Basic Human Needs legislation. The Reagan administration, with bipartisan congressional support, should recraft the Basic Human Needs statute of 1973 to emphasize the concept of private-sector activity leading to self-sustaining growth. Congress must reverse the current approach, which replaced the goal of helping developing country economies achieve broad-based growth with the desire to help alleviate the suffering of the &quot;poorest of the poor&quot; via wealth transfers. The Basic Human Needs legislation, which constitutes AID's guiding principles, largely transformed AID into a welfare agency for the Third World.    --Redirect most of U.S. economic assistance to local private sectors, rather than to governments and government entities. There is no substantial reason the major portion of assistance cannot provide immediate and direct benefit to local private sectors. As the work of Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto strongly indicates, the primary impediments to economic growth are LDC government policies that suppress entrepreneurship and the pervasive AID intransigence. Work that points up the failures of traditional channels of aid at the same time it suggests viable alternatives can and should be supported by all U.S. foreign-assistance programs.    --Reorganize the foreign assistance system, shifting the bulk of economic responsibilities to the Treasury Department. It is essential to delineate and, when necessary, segregate U.S. efforts that promote humanitarian assistance, economic growth, and short-term political stability. Congress and the administration need to redefine the functions of the key actors in the foreign-aid system: the International Development Cooperation Agency, AID, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, the Export-Import Bank, the Trade and Development Program, the multilateral development banks, and the federal departments that oversee their activities.    In particular, the U.S. should shift as much economic development responsibility as possible from the State Department to the Treasury Department, placing political assistance firmly at State and keeping humanitarian assistance at a slimmer AID.    Treasury currently has primary responsibility for multilateral development assistance, the stated objective of which is primarily self-sustaining economic development. Moreover, it is Treasury Secretary James Baker who has helped set the global agenda for dealing with Third World debt by pushing for policy reform and private-sector support. Such a reorganization would not require extensive new legislation, the creation of new institutions, or substantial new budget appropriations.    Although the Ex-Im Bank, which finances U.S. exports, is an independent agency, it now coordinates its activities closely with Treasury. Congress could merge Ex-Im with the Trade and Development Program, which provides feasibility studies to evaluate trade opportunities for U.S. manufacturers. The Ex-Im Bank then could be paired with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, which now provides insurance and financial assistance to U.S. firms making long-term investments in developing countries. This would create a finance and development group more private-sector-oriented and more able to respond to today's economic needs. Congress could reconstitute both Ex-Im's and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation's boards to give Treasury the dominant position.    --Revitalize the International Development Cooperation Agency and move it from AID to the Treasury Department. The International Development Cooperation Agency was created by the Carter administration to set the policy direction for AID, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and the Trade and Development Program. But the Reagan administration effectively eliminated the agency by combining it with AID, allowing the official whose primary job it is to fulfill the Basic Human Needs legislation also to set overall U.S. foreign-assistance policy. Separating the position of AID administrator and IDCA head would help divorce the development of a global economic strategy from the parochial imperatives of operating an aid agency bounded by the legislation.    --Modify the Overseas Private Investment Corporation's charter, due for review late this year, to give it a primary role in managing U.S. support for private-sector economic efforts. The reason: It does not share AID's ambivalence about private enterprise.    --Reconstitute AID firmly under the State Department, directing it to administer whatever social development programs survive after a rewrite of the Basic Human Needs legislation. It could be run by an assistant secretary within the Economic Bureau, which is under the undersecretary for economic affairs. The Economic Support Fund, which is a fast-disbursing, more politically oriented account, could be separately administered within the structure of the undersecretary for security assistance, science and technology.    --Have the Overseas Private Investment Corporation manage local currencies generated by the sale of surplus U.S. food commodities. This would ensure the funds are used in the private sector. AID has done very little to promote the use of these funds by private sectors because there is an ambivalence about the real purpose of these local currencies: should they support AID's budget or stimulate private growth? Currently such proceeds are jointly administered by AID and the host government for public-sector use. By providing these funds to the private sector for relending, AID effectively loses budget resources.    Alan Woods, whose nomination as AID administrator is being considered by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee this week, has in the past demonstrated a strong commitment to market-oriented solutions to trade issues. Let us hope that he will support efforts for foreign-aid reform. By revamping the organizations charged with managing development policy -- such as AID -- the U.S. can at last begin to help developing nations along the path toward sustained economic growth.    ---   Mr. Schaefer is a Washington-based investment banker specializing in developing countries. This is adapted from a Heritage Foundation report. </TEXT></DOC>