<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870930-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Import Battle:Foreign-Trade ZonesAid Many CompaniesBut Stir Up Criticism---Opponents Say Tariff BreaksCut Into American Jobs,Worsen U.S. Trade Gap---A Fight Over a Toyota Plant---By Ken SlocumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN TOYOY JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The nation's fast-growing foreign-trade zones are turning into battle zones.    Amid record U.S. trade deficits and rising protectionist sentiment, major battles have broken out this year over trade zones in Virginia, Kentucky and Illinois.    On one side are the trade-zone operators and the companies and communities benefiting from the tariff breaks that the zones offer. The zones have long seen themselves as &quot;the Mom and apple pie of capitalism,&quot; says Tommy Berry, manager of the Panama City, Fla., zone, where three U.S. and one foreign company have set up facilities. He says his zone brings 160 jobs and millions of business dollars to surrounding Bay County, a sleepy slice of the Florida Panhandle with 13% unemployment.    Manning the opposing trenches are many U.S. companies fighting bids by foreign competitors or U.S.-foreign joint ventures to win trade-zone status for new plants. In addition, more and more critics in Congress, labor unions, trade groups and elsewhere argue that trade zones are worsening the U.S. trade deficit by favoring imports over exports. They also say the zones cost more American jobs than they create and give foreign companies &quot;almost a type of subsidy by U.S. taxpayers,&quot; in the words of Linda Hoffman, a vice president of the Automotive Parts and Accessories Association.    At the very least, the critics' protests are certain to slow markedly the approval of new zones by the federal government.    Right now, trade zones are booming. Scattered among 47 states and Puerto Rico are a total of 247 general-purpose zones and subzones for individual plants, up from only 27 in 1975. About $39.17 billion of goods moved through them last year, some 62 times the 1975 level. Many of America's biggest companies, including all three major U.S. auto makers, use them. Some 50 applications for new zones and subzones are docketed for consideration, with more awaiting processing.    But the boom hasn't brought easy times.    &quot;We find ourselves on the firing line before those who wish us less than success,&quot; says Frank Birkhead, executive vice president of the McAllen, Texas, Trade Zone, the nation's busiest general-purpose zone.    New York's Rep. John LaFalce recently introduced a bill that would sharply restrict auto assembly in foreign-trade zones. Ohio Congresswoman Marcy Kaptur has called for a moratorium on new zones and a ban on Japanese auto makers' use of them at all. The House Ways and Means Committee has asked for studies by the General Accounting Office and the International Trade Commission, and the committee also plans hearings. Big labor groups, including the United Auto Workers, are lobbying for new restrictions on the zones' activities; a UAW economist even suggests a ban on manufacturing.    A foreign-trade zone isn't a place as much as a special tariff status granted by a board in the Commerce Department. Under federal law, all customs ports of entry are entitled to a general-purpose trade zone. Requirements for subzones are tougher. Factors weighed in granting them include an inability of a facility to be accommodated in a local general-purpose zone, a public benefit such as investments and jobs, production of goods previously imported and generation of exports.    Zones are generally run by states or port authorities, but the department retains a voice and closely scrutinizes applications for manufacturing or large assembly plants in zones. Zones are tight-lipped about their operations, and there's no overall breakdown of such basic details as foreign vs. American use.    Typically, a company imports parts duty-free into a zone, where it assembles them into a finished product that then can be exported from the U.S. duty-free or can enter the U.S. at a lower rate than had the parts come in separately. Companies also use zones for repackaging and warehousing. Because a duty isn't due until a product leaves the zone -- with most imports, it is due when they arrive in the U.S. -- zones can slow an importer's cash outlays and increase cash flow.    The cost advantages are exemplified by Berg Steel Pipe Co., a German-French joint venture in Panama City's zone. Berg produces large-diameter pipe for the oil and other industries, importing some of the needed steel plate from West Germany and Italy for about $450 to $500 a ton. Imported as materials, the plate normally would be taxed at 6%. But with trade-zone status, Berg can convert the plate into pipe and move it into the U.S. market at the rate for finished products -- 1.9% -- or export it free of tariff.    With such savings, companies of all kinds are setting up in zones. The variety of goods processed runs from Ambrosia Chocolate Co.'s bulk chocolate in Milwaukee to Xerox Corp.'s copiers near Rochester, N.Y. General Motors Corp. has 11 plants in foreign-trade zones, Ford Motor Co. 12 and Chrysler Corp. nine. Other trade zones include Bethlehem Steel Corp.'s shipbuilding yard in Sparrows Point, Md.; a Caterpillar Inc. engine plant near Peoria, Ill., and three Eli Lilly andamp; Co. plants in Indiana. There also are familiar foreign names, such as Porsche, Nissan and Mazda. And although both the tonnage and dollar volume are dominated by giant corporations, more small than big companies are involved.    The zones originated with 1934 New Deal legislation that sought to stimulate international trade and create jobs through modest activities such as storage, repackaging and transshipment. The law was expanded in 1950 and 1980 to allow manufacturing in the zones and to exclude domestic processing costs from U.S. duties.    The zones have aided some communities significantly. Berg Pipe's 1982 move to the Panama City zone, for instance, helped a long-depressed county. &quot;Berg Pipe not only built a $20.5 million state-of-the-art plant and brought new technology and jobs to this county but set up a business climate that brought in other companies,&quot; the zone's Mr. Berry says. Besides Berg, the zone includes a facility of Milwaukee-based Harnischfeger Corp., which imports and modifies construction cranes and then ships them to the U.S. market and abroad, and a new $17 million plant where a unit of Allied-Signal Inc. will produce non-asbestos brake shoes.    For some companies, the zones have been a godsend. In 1985, the Smith Corona division of SCM Corp. was on the ropes and considering moving its typewriter production to Singapore. &quot;We lost ground badly to Japanese competition, mainly in price,&quot; recalls Karen Sager, customs administrative coordinator. &quot;One of our biggest costs was materials, and to get quality parts and price, we had to go overseas.&quot;    At the time, Smith Corona was paying 3% to 7% duty on imported parts while Japanese typewriters, through a quirk in the customs code, entered duty-free. The company's payroll had dropped to 850 in 1985 from 4,000 in the early 1980s.    In a convulsive reorganization, Smith Corona consolidated its operations into one building from seven, then obtained trade-zone status for the facility. As a result, parts could be imported duty-free, and then, after manufacture into typewriters, enter the U.S. market without duty. The machines also were redesigned so as to slash assembly time to 1 1/2 hours from seven.    &quot;In 12 months, we went from multimillion-dollar losses to multimillion-dollar profits,&quot; Ms. Sager says. Production is running at 5,000 typewriters a day, up sharply from 1,500 a day in early 1985. Employment at Smith Corona, now a subsidiary of Hanson Trust PLC of the United Kingdom, has climbed to 1,800.    A more typical case is a Coastal Corp. subsidiary that refines imported oil in a Corpus Christi, Texas, foreign-trade subzone. If its Coastal Refining andamp; Marketing unit exports finished products, it doesn't pay any import duty at all. But even if nothing is exported, the company still saves at least $268,000 a year in the zone from, among other things, interest earned by postponing duty payments, says John Parker, production-control manager for the refining company.    Nevertheless, some increasingly influential critics contend that foreign-trade zones hurt the U.S. economy. They say even American companies usually use a zone to bring in foreign goods cheaply; thus, it takes business away from domestic suppliers. They add that although companies also export from zones -- helping the U.S. trade balance -- the activity tilts toward imports. And when the company is foreign, the objections are even louder.    Stihl Inc., the U.S. unit of a German company that says it's the world's largest producer of chain saws, recently sought foreign-trade zone status for its Virginia Beach, Va., plant. But objections were raised by Textron Inc.'s Homelite division and the Outdoor Power Equipment Institute, whose members include major U.S. producers of similar gear. Homelite argued that trade-zone status would create &quot;an unwarranted competitive advantage for Stihl, to the detriment of other American manufacturers.&quot;    Stihl argued that it itself would be at a competitive disadvantage if denied zone status. Noting that a third of its U.S.-made products are exported, Stihl said a &quot;a simple solution&quot; would be to close its Virginia Beach plant, which employs 400, and serve the U.S. with finished imports from West Germany. The case is still before the Commerce Department board.    A similar fight surrounds Toyota Motor Corp.'s efforts to get subzone status for a new plant in Kentucky. The subzone would allow Toyota to bypass duties -- averaging 3.3% -- on imported parts and then just pay the lower duty on the finished product, in this case 2.5%. But the company, which had expected routine approval, ran into a protectionist firestorm. Contends Alex Warren, vice president for administration at Toyota's U.S. manufacturing operation: &quot;No other automobile manufacturer has had to go through a hearing at this stage {of the process}. I was absolutely flabbergasted.&quot; The Commerce Department held the hearing to enable all sides to air their views, a spokesman says.    Although Toyota's supporters see the attack on its application a clear-cut case of protectionist Japan-bashing, one opponent, the Automotive Parts and Accessories Association, contends that Japanese auto makers use such zones unfairly. &quot;They bring in the pieces and assemble them here and get around the voluntary restraint agreement,&quot; under which the Japanese agreed to hold down auto exports to the U.S., the group's Ms. Hoffman says. The association also is protesting a pending application for a Bloomington, Ill., subzone for a joint sports-car venture of Chrysler and Mitsubishi Motors Corp.    Ms. Hoffman and others say trade zones help foreign more than American auto makers because foreign cars use a higher percentage of imported parts. The Japanese producers dispute the significance of that, but Toyota estimates that a foreign-trade zone would save it between $30 and close to $40 a car, or $6 million to $8 million a year at full production of 200,000 cars. By contrast, General Motors says a trade zone saves it $4 to $5 a car; Chrysler says $5.    Critics also argue that while the 3,000 people that Toyota expects to employ in Kentucky will simply take jobs from the domestic auto industry, the plant will cost American jobs overall because of Toyota's greater use of imported parts. However, Japanese auto makers contend that any &quot;displacement&quot; would affect cars made in Japan. Nonetheless, Rep. LaFalce's bill would require 80% of the value added in cars assembled in U.S. trade zones to be American; he says that in Japanese auto plants now located in zones, 80% of the value involves imported parts.    It's too early to tell how foreign-trade zones will fare in Congress. Marshall Miller, a Kansas City attorney who works on trade-zone issues, comments: &quot;My perspective over the long term is that the zones are doing exactly what Congress intended them to do. I honestly don't expect anything drastic.&quot; A government study about four years ago &quot;found nothing wrong with the zone program,&quot; he says.    But others say things have changed since that study. &quot;It's much more understood in 1987 that the U.S. has a dangerous trade problem,&quot; says Steve Beckman, international economist for the UAW. He especially fears the spread of one-plant subzones, which he says &quot;have grown astronomically&quot; and now &quot;are recognized as a significant element of U.S. trade policy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>