<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880712-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Gaping Gap: Pentagon Lags in Race To Match the Soviets In Rocket Launchers --- Despite Recent Successes, Satellites for Surveillance And Defense Are Lacking --- Russia's Tenfold Advantages </HL><AUTHOR> Tim Carrington and John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Following a string of successful rocket launches, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge recently boasted that the military's space program &quot;is back in business.&quot;    But despite the Pentagon's self-proclaimed recovery from a series of disasters in 1986, the U.S. space program remains anemic next to that of the Soviet Union. The military lacks the rocket launchers and satellites needed to collect intelligence and defend the nation in the next decade.    The shortcomings could hobble the military's ability to make intelligence immediately available to battlefield commanders and block the eventual deployment of strategic defense weapons.    Since the 1986 explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, most attention has focused on problems in the civilian program run by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. But the military program also has deficiencies. When trouble flares in the world, for example, the Soviets often launch one or more surveillance satellites within days. The U.S. needs at least six weeks, and frequently months, to plan a new space flight. These satellites monitor missile launches, eavesdrop on communications, and take photographs as well as receive infrared and radar images.    &quot;Today, the Soviets can conduct rapidly paced, highly effective space control operations,&quot; says Gen. John Piotrowski, commander in chief of the U.S. Space Command in Colorado. &quot;The U.S. cannot.&quot;    Meanwhile, as the superpowers pursue new arms-control treaties, military officials warn that the proliferation of small, mobile missiles currently outstrips the capacity of U.S. spacecraft to verify Soviet compliance with such accords.    &quot;We're already overtaxing our capabilities in space,&quot; warns Sen. David Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat who heads the Intelligence Committee. &quot;You have a situation that to me is just increasingly alarming.&quot;    Moscow and Washington have followed different paths in their military space programs. The Soviets launch large numbers of relatively simple, expendable satellites that perform specific tasks for only weeks or months before running out of fuel. The U.S., by contrast, launches technologically sophisticated devices that are maneuverable and designed to last years.    Equipped with eight types of launch vehicles, the Soviet Union can send 10 times more poundage into space than the U.S. Moscow also conducts about 100 space launches a year, 10 times more than the U.S. now conducts, and four times the U.S. rate planned for 1991, when the space program should have recovered fully from the shuttle and rocket disasters of 1986. After the shuttle explosion, two other satellite launches failed in the spring of 1986. Altogether, in an 18-month period starting with a failed launch in 1985, the U.S. experienced five launch failures.    In May, the Senate prodded the Reagan administration into approving a multibillion-dollar plan to modernize the satellite fleet used to verify arms pacts. The plan includes development of a new class of spy satellite, a move the Central Intelligence Agency has resisted as too costly.    The military's space program suffers from a basic contradiction. U.S. strategists see space as an arena for military competition and, in the event of war, confrontation. Yet the administration hasn't applied any of its usual earthbound maneuvers, neither trying to negotiate limits on antisatellite weapons nor attempting to ensure that the U.S. can defend, repair and replace damaged satellites. And Congress has halted financing for development of an American satellite killer.    Despite the talk of war in space, &quot;we've geared more for peacetime than crisis,&quot; says Maj. Gen. Thomas Moorman, who coordinates space activities for the Air Force. Military leaders talk about controlling space, but &quot;it's hard to see where space control would come from,&quot; says Colin Gray, president of the National Institute for Public Policy. &quot;Look at our military space policy -- it's just words.&quot;    In contrast, Soviet military doctrine stresses such control of space, and the Kremlin has been developing the first generation of anti-satellite weapons, or ASATs, including high-altitude missiles and two ground-based lasers at a test site in Siberia. Moscow may be able to deploy space-based laser weapons in the 1990s, Pentagon officials worry, and also may be able to disrupt, or &quot;spoof,&quot; U.S. satellites and satellite communications without actually attacking American spacecraft.    Today's Soviet weapons are crude and some haven't been tested since 1982, but they are probably capable of blinding U.S. satellites in low-altitude orbits, says Rear Adm. William Ramsey, deputy to Gen. Piotrowski in Colorado Springs.    &quot;ASATs are more likely to be deployed -- and to work -- than space-based missile defenses,&quot; argues a recent report by the Union of Concerned Scientists. &quot;The U.S., which relies heavily on satellites for crucial national security functions, has no coherent policy to deal with this threat.&quot;    Arms-control advocates argue that the best way to close the space gap is to ban anti-satellite weapons. &quot;On balance, I think we'd be better off if neither side had an ASAT capability,&quot; says John Pike of the Federation of American Scientists.    But administration officials argue that such a ban couldn't be verified, in part because the Soviets also use their ASAT booster rocket to launch two types of spy satellites, so no one could be certain whether they were launching a satellite or a satellite killer until it was too late.    The Air Force is in the early stages of a project to help today's satellites defend themselves with on-board warning systems, stealth features that would make them harder to find, and protection against electronic jamming, laser attacks and nuclear radiation. Someday, satellites may be built to detect and evade attacks, but such defenses make the devices heavier and more expensive to launch.    Gen. Moorman and others say it could take more than a decade -- and billions of dollars -- to undo 20 years of bad decisions about how to put military spacecraft into orbit. After relying on 1950s-vintage rockets, the U.S. decided in the 1970s to depend entirely on the space shuttle for getting military payloads into space.    Partly because launches are so costly, the U.S. compounded the problem by deciding to field a small number of complex, long-lasting spy satellites like the KH-12, an advanced photo-reconnaissance satellite that can be refueled in orbit by the currently inoperative space shuttle. &quot;We end up with a handful of objects that are incredibly expensive,&quot; says Mr. Gray. &quot;And because they're so expensive, there's no ability to replace them.&quot; There's another problem: Only the shuttle can launch the large satellites.    Even if the U.S. invests billions of dollars, it is unlikely to catch the Soviets, who are expected to quadruple their space lift capacity by 2005, according to U.S. intelligence studies. Moscow's manned space program, which could help develop the ability to repair and refuel satellites in space, is equally advanced, says a senior intelligence official.    The shuttle explosion has forced the military to begin rebuilding its rocket capabilities. But the U.S. space program has never developed efficiencies of scale. It costs $3,000 to $4,000 a pound to lift satellites into space -- a price of about $250 million for some payloads and rockets. Strategists say such costs must be cut by a factor of 10 to bring the cost of a Star Wars system into reasonable bounds.    Seven major contractors are designing new launch systems, but Military Space, an industry newsletter, has described the plans as &quot;something old, something new, something borrowed, something blue.&quot; And Air Force officials worry that the hoped-for cost savings will prove elusive.    Confusion still surrounds the nation's lift program because the agency that might be its biggest user, the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, itself faces an uncertain future.    A decision to deploy space-based anti-missile systems, along with the related space sensors, would require hundreds of new launches and a family of new rockets. The debate over Star Wars has mostly been about whether the interceptors themselves would work once they were vaulted into space, but a more important question is whether the U.S. could ever get them into orbit in the first place.    &quot;SDI would require a capability beyond what the current system can handle,&quot; says Air Force Col. George Hess, who is managing space-lift requirements for the program. He and other SDI officials say that if the U.S. decides to deploy Star Wars weapons, the necessary boosters will be delivered on time, but they concede that the launches will add greatly to the costs of strategic defenses.    One Air Force officer estimates that a first phase anti-missile system, consisting of 300 battle satellites, would require the U.S. to launch about three million pounds of space weapons each year, at an annual cost of $12 billion.    Additional satellites, or more exotic laser weapons equipped with small power plants, would add hugely to the space lift demands. A Senate staff study says it could cost $250 billion just to lift a full-blown Star Wars system into orbit.    Air Force Secretary Aldridge, whom Sen. Boren calls &quot;one of the lone voices of reason and thoughtfulness,&quot; is trying to wean the military from its reliance on the space shuttle by pushing an expanded fleet of throwaway rockets.    While these could handle the backlog of 24 shuttle and rocket missions grounded by the recent space disasters, and accommodate routine satellite launches during the next decade, deployment of strategic defenses will require new technologies that are supposed to be cheaper than current systems by an order of magnitude. &quot;There has been no significant investment in making space transportation more cost-effective since the early 1970s,&quot; Col. Hess says.    And even if Star Wars never gets off the drawing board, let alone the ground, the demands on America's satellite network will grow significantly.    To keep track of the Soviets' latest weaponry, including SS-24 and SS-25 mobile missiles, the U.S. needs a network of satellites that can watch huge areas of the U.S.S.R. through long winter nights and frequently awful weather, says a congressional intelligence expert. The U.S. is developing radar technology that can provide such coverage; the problem is buying enough of it, putting it into orbit, and keeping it there.    Furthermore, says Sen. Boren: &quot;If your resources are limited and you're concentrating all your assets on arms-control verification, your capabilities elsewhere are going to be stretched very thin.&quot; And &quot;elsewhere&quot; is becoming increasingly important to U.S. intelligence, which for example failed for months to notice that Saudi Arabia had obtained new Chinese long-range missiles.    &quot;We intend to keep pushing for a more robust space program,&quot; says Sen. Boren. &quot;I'm not going to let this go away.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>