<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870223-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Five Named in Indictments StemmingFrom Failure of Florida's Sunrise Sandamp;L---By Martha BranniganStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   A federal grand jury in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., indicted Robert C. Jacoby, former chairman, president and chief executive officer of the failed Sunrise Savings andamp; Loan Association, along with two additional officers and two top borrowers.    The five men are charged with conspiracy and misapplication of bank funds and with making false statements in connection with more than $120 million in loans made for real estate development between 1983 and 1985 by the Boynton Beach, Fla., thrift.    The others charged are William Frame, former senior vice president of Sunrise and president of its mortgage unit; Thomas Skubal, a former vice president of the mortgage unit; and two Florida shopping-center developers, Thomas Moye and William Frederick, who own Commercial Center Development Corp., with operations in Florida.    Four of the defendants entered pleas of not guilty before a federal magistrate in Fort Lauderdale Friday. John F. Evans, an attorney for Mr. Jacoby, said his client will enter a plea of not guilty this week, but declined to comment further.    In a statement, the developers reasserted their innocence and charged that they were being made &quot;scapegoats&quot; for the institution's failure. They additionally faulted the government for failing to recognize Sunrise's precarious state earlier. They noted as well that they continue to be active in real estate development.    Messrs. Jacoby and Frame resigned from the thrift in April 1985 under pressure from regulators, who had been monitoring its operations under a supervisory agreement entered into a year earlier.    Sunrise, which began operations in 1980, was declared insolvent in July 1985 and seized by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which appointed the Federal Savings andamp; Loan Insurance Corp. as receiver. The thrift was placed under the management of another company. Last September, Sunrise was closed and reopened as Beach Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association -- minus the bad loans.    In its short life, Sunrise took a fast track, spurning traditional residential mortgage lending in favor of risky commercial real estate loans. The thrift gathered deposits primarily from Florida retirees, who were drawn to its high interest rates and personalized service, which included serving bagels and coffee.    Assets of the institution, one of Wall Street's high-flyers in the early 1980s, soared to $1.5 billion in 1985 from $4.7 million in 1980. The price of its Class A common stock rose to a high of $30.75 in 1984 from a low of $5.25 in 1981.    Most of the thrift's assets were in high-risk real estate development loans.    Sunrise typically funded commercial real estate loan costs that included interest and fees on the loan and attorneys' fees. Developers often had no equity at stake.    Among other things, the indictment alleges that the three officers made huge loans to Messrs. Moye and Frederick that not only were far in excess of regulatory limits on loans to one borrower, but also were based on false personal financial statements.    According to the indictment, when the two developers couldn't meet interest payments, they wrote overdraft checks on personal and corporate accounts, and Sunrise cleared the checks. The developers then applied the funds to pay interest on their outstanding loans, it said. It alleges that the defendants created a series of sham loan transactions involving third parties -- including a cousin of Mr. Frederick -- to pay back about $3 million in such overdrafts.    In one instance, the indictment says, Sunrise purchased an undeveloped parcel of land in Hallandale from Messrs. Moye and Frederick for $13.5 million, which was about $3 million more than its fair market value. The two men then used the funds to pay interest on about $60 million in troubled loans held by Sunrise so that the thrift could remove them from its delinquency report, the indictment says.    Sometimes construction funds were used for unrelated purposes, the indictment says.    In one case, Messrs. Moye and Frederick allegedly diverted about $675,000 in Sunrise funds to pay for a vacant lot next to their residence on the Boca Raton waterfront. The indictment recounted another instance in which Sunrise diverted to a New York bank $1.3 million that had been authorized for construction projects. The two men used the money to pay for a 26-carat diamond at a Christie's auction, it alleged.    Lothar R. Genge, a special attorney with the Miami Strike Force office of the U.S. Department of Justice, said the investigation is continuing, but declined to discuss additional indictments, which are widely expected.    The three thrift officials are among Sunrise officers and directors named as defendants in a civil suit filed last September by the Federal Savings andamp; Loan Insurance Corp. The suit, much broader in scope than the indictment handed up Friday, alleges a variety of other abuses, including so-called land-flip sales, involving these and other borrowers. Such transactions consist of a series of sham sales aimed at artificially boosting the price of a parcel of property. The suit seeks more than $250 million in damages.    In addition, several class-action suits filed by Sunrise shareholders against Sunrise and certain officers have been consolidated and are pending in U.S. District Court in Philadelphia. </TEXT></DOC>