<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890809-0138 </DOCNO><DD> = 890809 </DD><AN> 890809-0138. </AN><HL> Asia:@  A Year Later, Burma Fights On@  ----@  By Dominic Faulder </HL><DD> 08/09/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>   This week marks the first anniversary of the start of the largest demonstrations ever seen in Burma, when millions of people marched for democracy and an end to the ruinous Burmese Way to Socialism. For a few weeks, this obscure Buddhist nation of nearly 40 million people was the world's top news story; a year later, it is again largely forgotten.    The handful of tourists is confined to closely chaperoned groups, and journalists have been banned indefinitely. The xenophobic military rulers recently cut the country's minimal international telecommunications for a week. One of the few certainties is that not one of last year's demands -- multiparty democracy, freedom of speech and assembly, or an accounting of the estimated 3,000 dead -- has been met. Indeed, the engines of repression appear to be revving up again.    Rangoon, the capital, has seen a visible buildup in light infantry since June; in the past two weeks, there have been hundreds, perhaps thousands, of political arrests. Jails have been emptied of criminals to create space for political prisoners. It was reported in late June that a former political detention center on the remote Kokos Islands has been reactivated.    Meanwhile, the National League for Democracy, the largest and best-organized of some 225 opposition parties, is being systematically dismembered. Its charismatic leader, 44-year-old Aung San Suu Kyi, the daughter of assassinated pre-independence hero Aung San, has been under house arrest since July 20, as is league Chairman Tin U. Aung San Suu Kyi is believed to have started a hunger strike. The minister for trade, Col. David Abel, denies that Aung San Suu Kyi's English husband, Michael Aris, a Tibet scholar at Oxford, is being held against his will. The British Foreign Office has protested the apparent isolation of Mr. Aris. The next target may well be 83-year-old former Premier U Nu, beloved head of the opposition League for Democracy and Peace.    Burma's political unrest did not start with the events that claimed so much attention this time last year. Gen. Ne Win seized power in 1962, launching his Burmese Way to Socialism. In 26 years he managed to turn Burma from one of Asia's richest nations to one of the world's poorest. Per-capita income today is around $150. Dissent is not allowed and Burma's self-imposed isolation has made it the Albania of Asia.    One of the first cracks in the totalitarian structure showed in mid-1987, when Gen. Ne Win unleashed a torrent of abuse upon party bureaucrats and civil servants for supposedly misinforming him about the country's dizzying downward spiral. The tongue-lashing was a harbinger of things to come: In September 1987, the government declared worthless all banknotes over 15 kyat (officially $2.34 but about one-seventh of that on the black market). Tourists found themselves with banknotes good only as souvenirs, while long-suffering Burmese found their savings suddenly fit only for lighting cheroots. Riots broke out.    The army clamped the lid back on, but with rice and fuel in short supply, popular resentment smoldered. Demonstrations were put down, brutally, in March and June 1988. By July, the mood in central Burma was volcanic. Even Gen. Ne Win could read the writing on the wall. His belated solution was to suggest multiparty democracy, resigning July 23 as a gesture of good will. No one doubted, however, that he was still the power behind the scenes, especially since longtime ally Sein Lwin, head of the brutal riot police and perhaps the most unpopular man in Burma, succeeded him.    The main demonstrations in Rangoon began on the afternoon of Aug. 3. High-school students wore masks over their lower faces and ran down Shwedagon Pagoda Road bearing a pennant with the Fighting Peacock emblem under which generations of Burmese students have rallied. (The National League for Democracy later adopted it as its emblem.) The 10,000 or so marchers peacefully demonstrated for about an hour, then went home for dinner. Martial law was declared that evening, and light infantry units with automatic weapons and shotguns were everywhere the next day.    On the astrologically auspicious Aug. 8, 1988, huge numbers of Burmese citizens took to the streets of Rangoon, Mandalay and other major cities. Again, the security forces mostly let them run their course. Late in the night, however, an order to disperse was ignored and the shooting began. Four days and 1,000 lives later, the despised Sein Lwin finally stood down, just 17 days after taking office.    His successor was another Ne Win crony, Maung Maung, a Western-educated lawyer who was the only civilian in Gen. Ne Win's clique. But Maung Maung's conciliatory efforts, such as the establishment of a then-respected election commission and promises of quick elections, came too late. Demonstrators wanted real democracy, not another puppet.    The unwieldy opposition, meanwhile, could not translate its clear public mandate for change into a unified alternative government. A state of technical anarchy set in, which in its ugliest manifestation led to the decapitation of more than 40 police and alleged government agents. The stage was set for the bloody coup on Sept. 18 that installed Gen. Saw Maung, 60, and his State Law and Order Restoration Council. By official admission, more than 500 alleged looters and &quot;badhats&quot; were summarily executed in the weeks that followed. &quot;The country has come back from an abyss, and I saved the country, for the good of the people, according to law,&quot; Gen. Saw Maung said in January.    But his reassurances rang hollow, since most people believed Gen. Ne Win really held -- and holds -- the reins of power anyway. In June and early July of this year, Aung San Suu Kyi flouted martial law by addressing rallies of up to 15,000 people. She reminded the public, in peaceful and well-ordered mass assemblies, that none of last year's basic demands for freedom and democracy have changed. She specifically denounced Gen. Ne Win as the architect of all Burma's woes. &quot;It's U Ne Win my father disapproved of and distrusted,&quot; Aung San Suu Kyi said last month.    The army is well aware of the power a martyr commands in Burma, where memories are long and legends strong. The simple fact that she is the daughter of Burma's most revered hero gives Aung San Suu Kyi an almost mystical stature. Gen. Ne Win may have met his match -- certainly in terms of sheer stubbornness -- in this unlikely political phoenix, who after years in England returned to Burma last year chiefly to visit her dying mother. The regime may have played to Aung San Suu Kyi's strengths. As her jailers, they have become guardians of her well-being. And exile would give her unfettered access to the foreign media.    Gen. Saw Maung probably will keep his word and proceed with elections of a kind next year. But in the light of what has happened, there is good reason to doubt that the Burmese Way to Democracy will have any more to do with democracy than the idiosyncratic Burmese Way to Socialism ever did with socialism.    ---   Mr. Faulder is managing correspondent of Bureau Bangkok, a news-gathering company. </TEXT></DOC>