<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871211-0030 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Wire:A Special Weekly Report FromThe Wall Street Journal'sCapital Bureau---Compiled by Rich Jaroslovsky</HL><DD> 12/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST LATAM GOVMT TAXES FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)PETROLEUM (PET)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><DATELINE> A 1988 MOSCOW SUMMIT is likely  </DATELINE><TEXT>   but not certain.    U.S. and Soviet officials both express readiness to work on a treaty to reduce strategic arms, and hint they may be willing to schedule a 1988 summit even if an accord hasn't been precooked. In their meetings with administration officials, the Soviets talked as if the only question about a return visit to Moscow by Reagan is when, not whether, it will happen.    Reagan would be eager to go as the capstone of what may otherwise be a desultory final year in office. But Gorbachev may be reluctant to receive Reagan without more progress toward negotiating deep cuts in long-range nuclear weapons and some limits on Reagan's Star Wars program.    While some colleagues criticized Gorbachev for a no-results 1985 parley, the feeling is that the Soviets now view Reagan as less of a threat.    FRUSTRATION GROWS with the White House among House Republicans.    They express dismay over White House acquiescence in the deficit-reduction agreement, in Speaker Wright's Central American diplomacy and in arms-control provisions of the Pentagon authorization bill. They also feel stung by Reagan's criticism of INF treaty foes.    House conservatives complain that moderates have seized the White House. &quot;There's a feeling that we've been cut adrift,&quot; says Illinois Rep. Hyde. The GOP lawmakers concede they lack the votes to successfully buck Reagan. &quot;In a 30-year tradition of impotence, the House Republicans will dissipate their anger and do nothing,&quot; laments Georgia Rep. Gingrich. But some say they may not go down the line with Reagan on tough issues next year.    INFLATION FEARS are misplaced, administration and Fed officials insist.    A falling dollar, low unemployment and signs of continued growth lead some analysts to predict that price increases lie ahead. But even before the stock market's crash, Fed chairman Greenspan saw no signs of high inflation. Since the crash, Fed officials see even less reason to worry.    White House economist Sprinkel says, &quot;If there's any evidence of accelerating inflation, I don't see it.&quot; A clue may come this morning in the report on November producer prices; most expect an increase of only about 0.3%. One reason officials are sanguine about inflation is the expectation that the crash will slow economic growth.    Recent figures convince some that only a slight cut in the 1988 growth estimate is needed, but Sprinkel counsels that more bad news may lie ahead.    INVITATION INTRIGUE: Aides say Dole's delay in endorsing the INF treaty was designed in part to send the White House a message that he was miffed over Bush's preferential treatment during the Gorbachev visit. But Bush is also upset that an invitation went to Dwayne Andreas, an agribusinessman close to Dole.    SIMON'S CHOICE of former Democratic Chairman Manatt as his new campaign chief stirs ire in Iowa. Manatt was involved in a failed deal to buy thousands of acres of foreclosed Midwestern farm land. &quot;We're against what he represents,&quot; says Dixon Terry of the Iowa League of Rural Voters. Manatt insists that farmers would have been given the chance to buy back the land.    LIMITED LEVERAGE: As fears rise that Korea's government won't abide by the results of next week's presidential election, analysts say the U.S. has few options. It doesn't have much economic leverage over prosperous Korea and isn't likely to withdraw military support. The most likely target for U.S. ire could be Seoul's cherished plans to be Olympics host next summer.    CONSERVATIVES FLAIL at the INF treaty. Conservative Caucus chairman Howard Phillips mails appeals to all delegates to the last three GOP conventions. Some groups use phone banks to try to stir up the faithful. But the treaty foes admit they have an uphill fight, since many of those they hope to woo are Reagan loyalists.    OPEC'S ACTIONS could influence the fate of the U.S. windfall-profits tax.    If the cartel fails to curb production, oil prices could slip -- bolstering efforts of the oil companies and their allies to repeal the tax on grounds that it yields little or no revenue. The companies fear that any possible pickup in revenues from the tax will make Congress extend it beyond the currently scheduled 1993 phase-out.    Senate Finance Chairman Bentsen and Speaker Wright, both Texans, push repeal. So do presidential candidates ranging from Kemp to Dukakis, who seeks a political opening to the South. But the key figure will be Ways and Means Chairman Rostenkowski. He privately insists he opposes repeal, but some think he is using his opposition as a bargaining chip.    A critical factor in the debate is a January Congressional Budget Office estimate on how much revenue the tax may generate in 1988 and beyond.    MINOR MEMOS: Hat trick: On Wednesday, House Democratic leader Foley had breakfast, lunch and dinner with Gorbachev. . . . Several members of the Soviet delegation descended on the local Brooks Brothers store. One popular item: all-cotton underwear. . . . Majority leader Byrd says Sen. Wirth's request to hold a vote open overnight so he could both vote and make an out-of-town speech is &quot;the most ridiculous suggestion I have ever heard in 29 years in the Senate.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>