<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871022-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Norway FindsAllies ViolatedCocom Controls---Sources Say Probe by PoliceUncovers Big ShipmentsTo Soviets by Europeans---By Eduardo Lachica and Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A Norwegian police investigation of illegal shipments of high-technology products by a state-owned arms maker has uncovered what appear to be far more serious violations of allied export-control rules by Italian, West German, French and British companies, U.S. officials said.    The Norwegian government wasn't expected to announce those findings officially until today, but U.S. officials and congressmen were angered by what they learned yesterday from confidential briefings by Norwegian diplomats.    &quot;This lays bare how weak the Cocom controls are and how arbitrarily they're adhered to,&quot; a senior administration official said. Cocom, the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, is a Paris-based organization through which the U.S., Japan and 14 North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies supervise joint curbs on the shipment of strategically-sensitive goods to the Soviet bloc.    Administration and congressional sources identified the companies named in the Norwegian investigation as Innocenti Santeuspacchio S.p.A. of Milan, Italy; Schiess AG of Lungen, West Germany; Donau Werkzeugmaschinen G.m.b.H. of Lungenau, West Germany; and KTM of Britain. The French company is Ratier-Forest S.A., whose role in diverting machine tools to the Soviets already has been acknowledged by the French government. The companies were identified after the European business day had ended and couldn't be reached for comment.    The sources said these companies -- all reputable European machine-tool builders -- are suspected of having supplied sophisticated machine tools to the Soviets in quantities that far exceeded the previously known shipments by a Toshiba Corp. unit and a now-defunct subsidiary of the Norwegian arms maker AS Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk.    Pentagon officials suspect that the sales of some of these sophisticated devices could seriously have damaged allied anti-submarine capability by helping the Soviets produce quieter propellers for their new attack submarines.    The Norwegian report also is expected to disclose that Norwegian technicians involved in the Kongsberg sale saw U.S.-made machine tools at the same Leningrad shipyard to which the controversial Toshiba-Kongsberg equipment was sent. The sources didn't identify the source of the U.S. equipment.    The Italian and British embassies denied any knowledge of Cocom violations by Innocenti or KTM. A West German official acknowledged that Bonn is checking allegations involving Donau and Schiess shipments to the Soviet Union but said it's too early to make any judgments about those cases.    One possible effect of the latest disclosures may be to ease the threat of congressional sanctions against the earliest-known violators, Toshiba Machine Co., which is the Toshiba unit, and Kongsberg, and to divert lawmakers' ire toward the other European allies.    Sen. Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the ranking Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, fired off letters to the ambassadors of the four countries involved, demanding an explanation and further information about the alleged diversions. In his letter to French Ambassador Emmanuel de Margerie, Sen. Helms protested France's apparent indifference to the consequences of the Ratier-Forest shipments.    According to a high-ranking administration official, the Norwegian report alleges that 23 machines were shipped to the Soviet Union by Innocenti, 32 by Schiess, five by Donau and an unspecified number by KTM. The French government earlier admitted that Ratier-Forest delivered nine of its machines to the Soviets.    These numbers far exceed the eight machines that the Toshiba unit is known to have delivered to Leningrad, four of which had Kongsberg-made computers. Congressional sources said some of the newly disclosed shipments went to other Soviet shipyards besides Leningrad.    U.S. officials weren't certain how many of these shipments clearly violated Cocom regulations. But while the U.S. has yet to make a precise assessment of the damage done by the newly disclosed shipments, the senior administration official said it makes the Toshiba shipments &quot;look like a poor stepchild.&quot;    Meanwhile, a senior U.S. official leveled fresh charges that France sometimes is failing properly to enforce Western restrictions on sensitive technology exports to the Soviet bloc. The criticism came as a U.S. delegation prepared to begin a trip aimed at persuading European allies to improve their enforcement of export control laws.    The new U.S. criticism came from Stephen Bryen, deputy undersecretary of defense for trade security policy. On the positive side, he said that French bureaucrats have corrected lax practices of the 1970s and now are careful to issue legal export licenses only for equipment permitted under Western agreements. But when an exporting company lies or otherwise breaks the rules, Mr. Bryen charged, France still has trouble doing much about it.&quot;The area where they (the French) are weak today is enforcement,&quot; Mr. Bryen said.    Denis Bauchard, the French Foreign Ministry official who supervises commercial, financial and industrial questions, declined official comment on Mr. Bryen's remarks. But French officials privately rejected the U.S. official's criticism.    ---   E.S. Browning in Paris contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>