<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0034 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Copper Prices Rise on Demand for Metal, Perhaps Marking Seasonal Buying Rise </HL><AUTHOR> John Valentine (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD MIN MON </IN><TEXT>   Copper futures prices rose yesterday on active demand for the metal in the cash market and the possibility that it might represent the beginning of the long-awaited fall seasonal pickup in copper buying.    The December-delivery contract spurted up 3.55 cents to 95.05 cents a pound. At one point during the day's trading, the December contract advanced to 96 cents, just shy of the life-of-contract high of 96.50 cents established last Nov. 30.    According to one analyst, traders have been impressed by copper's steady price during the low-consumption summer months. But the surge in the price of copper to a record $1.46 a pound that occurred in the latter half of 1987 isn't expected to be duplicated this year.    One analyst said that as the December contract price rose near 93.50 cents a pound it touched off scattered pre-set buy orders, and when it broke above that level it triggered a heavier flurry of programmed buy orders.    Ben Hanauer, vice president of metal dealers Rudolf Wolff andamp; Co., New York, said strong demand for copper from brass and rod mills is likely to reduce stocks of copper in warehouses of New York's Commodity Exchange by about 3,000 tons. Comex stocks now stand at 23,034 tons.    &quot;Merchants are expected to begin taking significant amounts of copper out of Comex warehouses throughout the country in order to meet August and September commitments to their mill customers,&quot; Mr. Hanauer said. Comex has 32 certified firms, with warehouses in 43 locations in the U.S. where copper can be stored for delivery against exchange contracts, an exchange spokeswoman said.    In the Comex warehouse in Tacoma, Wash., according to Mr. Hanauer, copper stocks -- which total 1,127 tons -- are expected to cleaned out completely because &quot;that copper can be sold at a premium to the Far East.&quot; One analyst noted recent demand from the Far East, particularly from Japan.    And Michael Frawley, metals trader at PaineWebber Inc., New York, said, &quot;It's well known that China has been an aggressive buyer of copper in the cash market,&quot; too.    In addition, Mr. Frawley said, a major indicator that the market was about to turn higher was the way it held steady Wednesday despite news that the monthlong Peruvian miners' strike had been settled. Peru is a major copper producer and exporter. He said the Wednesday performance attracted strong demand for futures contracts from commodity funds.    According to one copper dealer, yesterday's buying &quot;could be the beginning of fall demand, or it could be as simple as that somebody decided to buy December contracts. It's too early to tell, and trading is too thin as yet to do any projecting.&quot;    In other commodity markets yesterday:   CURRENCIES: Major foreign-currency futures rose in active trading, amid reports of concerted central-bank intervention to depress the U.S. dollar. Commerce Secretary William Verity's clarification of a published remark depressed foreign currencies from the day's highs in late trading, however. Mr. Verity said that in an interview with the West German weekly newspaper Die Zeit he had had &quot;no intentions of suggesting any particular value&quot; for the mark; in that interview, which appeared in print yesterday, he had suggested that a dollar at 1.80 marks would be positive for U.S. exports and the world economy. Traders for the most part remain bearish on foreign currency futures, predicting that the uptrend in U.S. interest rates and the nation's strong economic performance could further bolster the dollar.    LIVESTOCK andamp; MEATS: Cattle futures contracts for delivery through February rose yesterday, amid continued strong demand for beef at the retail level, said Philip Stanley, an analyst at Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc., Chicago. For the past two weeks, heavy buying by grocery stores and restaurants has helped push up the price of boxed beef sold by meatpackers, and thus the price that slaughtering operations are willing to pay for choice steers. The price of the cattle futures contract for October delivery has risen 6% since Aug. 1. The rise is surprising; beef sales in supermarkets normally slip in hot weather. However, strong consumer demand has helped keep retail prices near the high levels hit in the spring. Some analysts are speculating that consumers are putting a lot of beef into their freezers in hopes of avoiding the price increases that are widely expected later this year. Porkbelly futures prices rallied. Analysts said the recent drop in pork-belly futures prices attracted bargain buyers.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Wheat futures prices rose slightly on news that the Agriculture Department made China eligible to buy an additional two million metric tons of subsidized U.S. wheat. China has purchased nearly all of the 3.2 million tons of subsidized wheat that this spring it received authority to buy. Under a program designed to boost grain exports, the department compensates exporters that sell U.S. wheat at cheap rates to certain countries. Soybean futures prices slipped and corn prices edged higher. Analysts attributed the quiet trading to apprehension about prospects for a break in the Midwest heat wave. &quot;We couldn't get moving,&quot; said Bud Frazier, executive vice president of Balfour Maclaine Inc., Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>