<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0133 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   LEVITATED commuter trains, electricity stored in giant magnets and other miracles promised by new superconductors are probably many years away. But researchers already are exploring less futuristic uses of the new materials. Indeed, some initial applications will probably be to replace superconductors now used in devices such as detectors of magnetic fields in the brain.    Moreover, even most of the far-out ideas aren't new; many have been under study since the early 1960s. Much of the excitement about the new superconductors -- which carry electric current without resistance at more cheaply attained, higher temperatures than before -- stems from their potential to revive projects stymied by cost problems.    &quot;The beauty of having worked on superconductor applications in the past is that we know what numbers are likely to change&quot; with improved technology, says Michael Jeffries, a General Electric Co. research manager. He adds that the new superconductors may breathe new life into GE research on small, powerful motors and generators for ships.    BUT VETERANS in the field caution that the materials face big hurdles. &quot;Even if we overcome fabrication problems with the new superconductors, industrial customers will ask questions like, 'Is it worth replacing copper at 60 cents a pound with a superconductor?&quot;' says James Wong, the president of Supercon Inc., a maker of superconductive wire. For a few applications -- mostly those requiring mammoth magnetic forces -- the answer to this question always has been yes. When cooled to about 350 degrees below zero Fahrenheit with liquid helium, cnventional superconductive wire made of niobium compounds can carry far more current than copper and consequently can enable electromagnets to produce huge magneticfields. Superconducting magnets were first used widely in physics research, where they are employed to accelerate atomic particles and to contain them in detecting systems. The magnets -- some living-room size -- also have been developed to constrain intensely hot, charged atomic particles used in research on fusion, the nuclear reaction that may someday provide cheap, abundant power.    UTILITIES WON'T have to wait for fusion-breakthroughs to use the new superconductors, though. Scientists already have proved the feasibility of generating electricity by expanding hot gases inside big magnets. The technology, which can increase power generation efficiency by a third or more, could yield &quot;a significant cost advantage (in power generation) if the new superconductors evolve,&quot; says Michael Petrick, an Argonne National Laboratory researcher.    Utilities also have toyed for years with the idea of feeding electrical power into giant superconducting magnets -- where it stays undiminished until tapped. Three years ago, the Bonneville Power Administration in Portland, Ore., working with Los Alamos National Laboratory, placed a big test magnet on-line in Tacoma, Wash. The device, which operated for six months, could store enough electricity to power a house for about a week, says a Bonneville official.    A few commercial applications of superconductor magnets already have blossomed and are natural candidates for use of the new superconductors. Up to 80% of superconducting wire now sold winds up in magnetic resonance imaging devices, or MRI, which uses powerful magnets to make images of the body's internal organs, says Bruce Zeitlin, vice president, Intermagnetics General Corp., a Guilderland, N.Y., superconductor maker.    ERIEZ MAGNETICS of Erie, Pa., last year unveiled a super conductor magnet system to extract titanium and other impurities from clay. The system, which consumes 90% less power than conventional magnets, may soon be adapted for use in purifying coal, water and other substances, says Chester Giermak, Eriez's president. &quot;When customers ask about the new superconductors, we say they are three, five or 10 years off,&quot; he adds.    Researchers agree that the new superconductors will probably be employed sooner than that in electronics. They explain that developing thin films of the new, superconducting ceramics for use in chips is expected to be much easier than fabricating ceramic wires for making magnets and other products.    Sandwiched in thin layers around an insulating material, superconductors in devices called Josephson junctions act as tiny, incredibly fast on-off switches. Such switches incorporated into chips promise to speed up computers and other electronic devices.    Earlier this year, Hypres Inc., of Elmsford, N.Y., introduced a high-frequency oscilloscope -- used in testing electronic equipment employing conventional superconductors. Hypres also has found a way to build thin, multiple layers of a superconductor -- a major step toward making more powerful computer chips, says President Sadeg Faris.    Superconductor devices also serve as very sensitive detectors of magnetic fields and certain forms of radiation. Such devices are being explored for several military applications -- such as detecting submerged submarines from the air or missile launches from outer space. Biomagnetic Technologies Inc. in San Diego already markets a conventional superconductor device to detect tiny magnetic fields induced by the brain's electrical activity. By pinpointing the focus of the electrical discharges accompanying epileptic seizures, the devices are expected to help surgeons locate and remove bits of brain tissue that produce the seizures. </TEXT></DOC>