<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881011-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ALGERIA'S LEADER VOWED political changes in an effort to halt riots.    Responding to demands from protesters, President Chadli Bendjedid said he was prepared to make &quot;political reforms in all fields,&quot; and indicated that he wouldn't seek re-election next year. But he emphasized that the economic austerity program that sparked recent unrest would continue. The speech came as soldiers fired on protesters in Algiers, killing about 25. More than 260 people have died in a week of violence.    Rising food prices, a result of economic changes instituted last January, have been the chief complaint of protesters in the northern African nation.    ---   YUGOSLAVIA IMPOSED &quot;urgent measures&quot; in Montenegro as protests persisted.    As thousands of workers and students staged demonstrations in Titograd, Communist authorities in Belgrade ordered increased police patrols and other unspecified steps in the province to quell protests prompted by an economic crisis and ethnic tension. The leader of the republic resigned during a meeting of the regional party leadership. Unrest also was reported in the city of Niksic.    Protest has swept much of southern and eastern Yugoslavia in recent weeks. Police used force over the weekend to disperse Montenegrin demonstrators.    ---   Democrat Dukakis proposed allowing first-time home buyers to use Individual Retirement Accounts and other tax-sheltered savings without paying deferred tax or penalties. The plan is aimed at about five million renter households with incomes between $20,000 and $40,000 a year and ages between 21 and 40 years.    Republican candidate Bush accused his Democratic rival of &quot;sympathy for criminals,&quot; and unveiled a plan to increase criminal penalties and to give victims an expanded role in criminal proceedings.    ---   Criminal charges are expected against several officials of Bank of Credit andamp; Commerce International Holdings S.A. in connection with alleged currency-reporting violations, an attorney for the Luxembourg-based bank said. The money-laundering inquiry involved suspected international narcotics trafficking.    ---   Palestinian leaders have agreed to recommend the declaration of a Palestinian state, PLO officials said, but the timing of a special meeting to issue the statement remained uncertain. The decision came at a meeting in Tunis. Israel scorned the move, saying it wouldn't &quot;give them anything.&quot;    ---   Czechoslovakia's premier resigned after 18 years in office. Lubomir Strougal also gave up his seat on the 12-member Communist Party Politburo. Prague's official news agency also reported that the premier of Slovakia quit. Party chief Milos Jakes accepted the resignations, considered part of a reorganization of the Czech leadership.    ---   U.S. officials said negotiators for South Africa, Cuba and Angola have neared an agreement for the withdrawal of about 50,000 Cuban troops from Angola over a 24-month to 30-month period. In exchange, South Africa would end its 73-year rule over neighboring Namibia. The progress was reported after weekend talks in New York.    ---   Costa Rica's President Arias said his Central American peace initiative was &quot;running out of time,&quot; but he rejected calls for an international peacekeeping force in the region. The five nations that signed the accord 14 months ago plan to meet next month to discuss obstacles to the plan.    ---   Shevardnadze met in Paris with Mitterrand, and France and the Soviet Union agreed to return to a system of holding annual summits. Following the meeting between the French president and the Soviet foreign minister, a Paris spokesman said talks were scheduled for this year and next between Mitterrand and Gorbachev.    ---   NASA said the O-ring seals in the joints of the space shuttle Discovery's left booster rocket didn't sustain any damage during last month's launch. A faulty seal caused the 1986 Challenger explosion. Workers were still disassembling the right booster.    ---   Poland's Solidarity union accused the Warsaw government of reprisals against workers involved in recent strikes. The union said 100 workers had been dismissed from their jobs. And Lech Walesa said the government was attempting to influence the composition of the union's team at talks, expected next week, on Poland's future.    ---   Tamil rebels in Sri Lanka killed as many as 50 Sinhalese in a northern province in what the military described as the worst violence since Indian peacekeeping forces arrived in the island nation a year ago. In Colombo and other cities, Sinhalese businesses remained closed to protest government peace overtures to the minority Tamils.    ---   Burma's government said about 1,000 Karens guerrillas tried to seize a military post and battled Rangoon's troops along the border with Thailand. The fighting was considered one of the biggest engagements in recent months. The ethnic-based rebels have been fighting the government for decades. </TEXT></DOC>