<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870119-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Deng Protege's Demise as Party LeaderHints at Contest for Succession in China---By James R. SchiffmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> PEKING  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The abrupt dismissal of Hu Yaobang as chief of China's Communist Party reopens a question that the aging supreme leader Deng Xiaoping had sought to settle: Who will succeed Mr. Deng?    Mr. Hu, long thought to be the chosen successor to carry on the far-reaching economic and political reforms begun by Mr. Deng, was forced to resign from his party post Friday. Zhao Ziyang, maintaining his post as premier, was named to serve concurrently as party general secretary. A new premier wasn't named, in what diplomats interpret either as a sign that Mr. Deng, who is 82 years old, hasn't made up his mind, or -- more likely -- that the coalitions at the top aren't in agreement.    &quot;The succession effort, which was getting shakier and shakier in the last year, is now going down in flames,&quot; says Harry Harding, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington. Adds another Western analyst of China: &quot;This looks like the opening salvo of the post-Deng era.&quot;    The suddenness of Mr. Hu's fall suggests to some diplomats that, while the pragmatic Mr. Deng remains in control, conservative opposition to Mr. Hu, 71, won out. And it appears to presage intense jockeying for power before September's scheduled party congress.    So far, shifts in policy aren't perceptible. Various Chinese leaders, from Mr. Deng on down, have sought to reassure that China will continue economic liberalization and its open door to the world. But the relatively easygoing political atmosphere of the past several years has shifted, as an intense campaign against &quot;bourgeois liberalism&quot; -- or Western-style political ideas -- has taken shape. The campaign's efforts to reassert party control and strengthen ideological education could slow the pace of economic reforms, such as those designed to free factory managers from party interference.    &quot;There has been an inherent contradiction in the reform effort between trying to appeal to the private interests of people to make the economy more free and open and, on the other hand, trying to retain tight political control,&quot; says Kenneth Lieberthal, director of the Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan. &quot;There have been substantial arguments over where the balance should lie. Hu Yaobang came out more in favor of liberalization, and the center of the balance clearly lagged behind him.&quot;    Recent student demonstrations demanding more political freedoms may have been the last straw for the conservatives, providing &quot;the opportunity for those chagrined {with Mr. Hu} within the leadership to come together,&quot; Mr. Lieberthal adds. Diplomats also think Mr. Deng may have harbored doubts for a long time about Mr. Hu's abilities. When Mr. Hu came under attack by conservatives for his handling of the student demonstrations, the diplomats speculate, Mr. Deng either found the occasion appropriate to dump Mr. Hu or he succumbed without a fight to the conservative attack.    Diplomats and Chinese sources cite several reasons why Mr. Hu might have run afoul of Mr. Deng. Mr. Hu isn't popular among senior military men, who resisted Mr. Deng's efforts to have Mr. Hu succeed him as chairman of the country's Military Affairs Commission.    And Mr. Hu has a reputation for flamboyance in a country where steadiness is valued. &quot;He's always putting his foot in his mouth,&quot; the Western analyst says. In 1983 Mr. Hu caused a stir by threatening to scuttle a visit to China by President Reagan over U.S. relations with Taiwan. The visit went ahead.    Political reform, which was raised in mid-1986 as a major task, could be a casualty. Aimed at separating the government and Communist Party, political reform was to have been a major topic at the forthcoming party congress. &quot;I think this will suffer a certain setback,&quot; says an Asian diplomat.    The removal of Mr. Hu marks the biggest leadership change since Mr. Deng consolidated power and ousted Mao Tse-tung's chosen successor, Hua Guofeng, from the party leadership in 1981. Past major leadership changes have been followed by swings in policies.    One indication of a conservative shift is the prominence that the state-run media is giving to calls for greater adherence to socialist orthodoxy by Peng Zhen, the 84-year-old chairman of the National People's Congress, or legislature.    Mr. Hu developed a reputation for bending orthodox socialist tenets when they got in the way of reforms. Mr. Hu apparently advocated a greater separation between the government and party than Mr. Deng was willing to tolerate, diplomats and Chinese sources say. Mr. Deng himself is an advocate of economic reform, but also believes in strong control by the Communist Party. Mao Tse-tung used to liken Mr. Deng to a ball of cotton with a pin inside, a Chinese source says, indicating his liberal exterior belied an inner prickliness.    It's unclear whether Premier Zhao will inherit Mr. Hu's mantle as successor. Mr. Zhao is a skilled administrator but diplomats wonder if he is up to the task of leading the world's largest communist party. &quot;Something, perhaps charisma, seems to be lacking in him,&quot; says one diplomat.    A clue to the alignment of forces should come when a new premier is named. (Mr. Zhao's holding of the premiership and the senior party post is considered temporary.) If Vice Premier Li Peng is named premier, it could be interpreted as a victory for conservatives, as Mr. Li is associated with several elder conservatives. Vice Premier Tian Jiyun would be a reformers' choice, given his close links to Mr. Zhao. Other possibilities include Tianjin Mayor Li Ruihuan.    Another thing to watch is the fate of Mr. Hu. Although he was removed as party secretary, he retained his position on the five-member Politburo, the party's innermost circle.    Like all Chinese leaders, Mr. Hu has built a nationwide network of supporters and loyalists. If he loses all power, his supporters -- who presumably are strong advocates of reform like their mentor -- could lose influence. &quot;If Hu's position further declines, the center of gravity in the leadership might shift more to the conservative side,&quot; says the Asian diplomat.    If Mr. Hu is pushed all the way out, high-ranking colleagues also could be in jeopardy. Already, Zhu Houzi, the party propaganda chief who was closely associated with Mr. Hu, is rumored to be either out or on the way out. Deng Liqun, a leading conservative and former propaganda chief, has become the major force in this influential area, a Chinese source says.    Hu Qili, a Politburo member who had been mentioned as a possible successor to Hu Yaobang as party head, also could find himself in trouble.    ---   Also contributing to this article were Jeremy Mark and J. Terence Gallagher in New York. </TEXT></DOC>