<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880302-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Memory on Trial: Witnesses of Crimes Are Being Challenged As Frequently Fallible --- Courts Allow Defense to Give Psychologists' Testimony About Unreliable Recall --- The Effect of Personal Biases </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When he heard the crash of breaking glass in the clothing store below his second-floor Bronx apartment, the tenant ran downstairs.    He confronted a man with his arms full of clothing, who quickly ran off. A half-hour later, cruising the streets with police, the tenant, who is white, spotted and positively identified a black man as the burglar. The suspect, Louis Neal, was carrying a sweater that came from the store. But he protested he had found it lying on the sidewalk.    At the trial, Mr. Neal's lawyer, Allan Haber of the Legal Aid Society, called Robert Bookhout, a psychologist at Brooklyn College, to the stand. Unlike most psychologist witnesses of the past, Mr. Bookhout didn't discuss the psychological state of the accused or the tenant. Instead, he described experiments dealing with the memory of those who witness crimes. The experiments, he said, show that witnesses are likely to err in identifying suspects of a different race who are seen for only a few moments under stressful conditions.    Mr. Neal was acquitted. Mr. Bookhout's testimony apparently convinced the jury that, as Mr. Haber puts it, &quot;almost any black man walking down the street with a sweater at that time would have been identified&quot; as the burglar.    Psychologists like Mr. Bookhout increasingly pop up in criminal courts these days as defense lawyers tap a new and controversial field of research into the memories of eyewitnesses.    That research shows that a witness's memory, especially in identifying a criminal, is far less reliable than believed. Experiments indicate further that a witness's memory of a crime or a criminal's face can be changed by the way a detective questions the witness, by the way police organize a lineup, or by interrogating the witness under hypnosis. Experiments also show that the witness who says he is 100% certain the accused is the culprit is just as likely to be wrong as the witness who is vague or ambivalent about his identification.    Courts long have recognized that eyewitnesses aren't always right. But under common law, eyewitness testimony remains the strongest evidence that can be brought against an accused, and it alone can lead to a conviction. A lay jury, after hearing the witness examined and cross-examined by the attorneys, is assumed to be capable of judging the eyewitness's reliability. Occasionally, of course, the system breaks down, and an innocent person is convicted.    Defense lawyers a decade ago began trying to call on psychologists to help them challenge eyewitnesses' testimony. But judges generally disallowed the testimony, letting jurors determine for themselves whether eyewitness testimony was accurate.    In 1983, however, the Arizona Supreme Court overturned a conviction on the ground that the judge refused to let a psychologist testify in a murder case about the psychological research. A year later, the California Supreme Court made a similar decision, and appellate courts subsequently held that the juries were entitled to hear about research on eyewitnesses' reliability. More than 100 psychologists have since testified in various cases as experts on eyewitness memory.    This trend has touched off a spirited debate among psychologists. &quot;It's a perfectly respectable area of research in psychology, but it is in the very early stages,&quot; says psychologist Michael McCloskey at Johns Hopkins University, one of several psychologists who strongly oppose their colleagues' taking the witness stand. He argues that it is impossible to duplicate in the laboratory the kind of stress that witnesses experience in a crime. Thus, he says, it is far too soon for the research to be used in court.    Critics also argue that because the psychologists are usually called in by defense lawyers, they tend to emphasize those experiments that would undermine an eyewitness's testimony and play down contradictory experiments.    Most psychologists defend the experiments, however. And indeed some recent cases have underscored how mistaken eyewitnesses can be. In a case in New York City, a jury convicted 32-year-old Marion Coakley on the basis of eyewitness accounts. Mr. Coakley was given a prison term on charges of breaking into an apartment where a couple was in bed watching television, assaulting the man, and then blindfolding and raping the woman. The couple, who had seen the rapist only by the light of the TV set, positively identified Mr. Coakley in a police lineup. After Mr. Coakley spent two years in prison, long-neglected blood and semen tests proved his claim of innocence, and he was set free.    The new research indicates that such publicized cases of eyewitnesses' fallibility &quot;are just the tip of a much larger iceberg,&quot; says Stephen D. Penrod, a memory researcher at the University of Wisconsin in Madison who holds doctorates in both psychology and law. &quot;The rate of mistaken identification is significantly higher than most people tend to believe,&quot; he says.    The psychology experiments are descendants of demonstrations that date back at least to one at Harvard University in 1904. A class of unsuspecting students was startled when a man suddenly rushed into the room, staged a brief fight with the teacher, fired some blank gunshots and rushed out. Asked to describe the assailant or to identify him in a lineup, few of the students gave the right information.    Prof. Bookhout pulled off such an experiment during a live television newscast about a decade ago. Fewer than 15% of the more than 2,000 viewers who called in immediately afterward correctly picked the assailant out of a lineup, he recalls. This is about the percentage that would result from sheer guessing, he says.    In their more sophisticated experiments, the psychologists use videotapes of simulated crimes and show them to volunteers, usually college psychology majors. The psychologists record several versions, with slight variations in detail, enabling them to pick out elements of the crime scene that hinder or enhance the accuracy of the volunteers' identifications.    This is the way the researchers uncovered what psychologist Elizabeth Loftus at the University of Washington in Seattle calls the &quot;weapons focus effect.&quot; An armed robbery is videotaped in two versions. In one version, the robber keeps his weapon hidden under his coat; in the other version, he brandishes a pistol. Volunteers who watch the version where the gun is hidden generally are 40% to 50% more likely to accurately identify the robber in a videotaped lineup than those who saw the gun openly displayed. By drawing eyewitnesses' attention away from the robber's face, the openly displayed weapon reduces the reliability of the witnesses' identification of the culprit.    Many experiments confirm what most people intuitively assume: Identifications made days or weeks after a crime are less reliable than those made minutes or hours afterward. Disguises and poor lighting reduce the ability of witnesses to identify criminals. And it is more difficult for a witness to identify a criminal of another race than one of his own race.    But some discoveries aren't so obvious. In experiments by Prof. Bookhout, students saw videotaped crimes that involved innocent bystanders. When they were asked seven weeks later to pick out the robber from a set of mug shots, 40% correctly spotted the robber -- but 40% identified one of the innocent bystanders as the robber.    Personal biases also can influence eyewitnesses' memory. Psychologists cite a famous 1945 Harvard University experiment. Volunteers were shown a photograph of subway passengers in which a white man with an open razor in his hand is standing next to a seated black man. When the volunteers described the scene to others, the razor wielder was described as black.    Suggestions can also become memories, experiments by Prof. Loftus suggest. She showed students color slides of an auto accident in which a red Datsun is parked by an intersection. The students then filled out a questionnaire that included the question &quot;Did another car pass the red Datsun when it was stopped at the yield sign?&quot; There was no such sign in the pictures, but when the students were later asked to write a description of the accident, 25% described the &quot;yield&quot; sign, some even giving its colors and position.    Hypnotists also can deliberately or inadvertently implant an unreal or false memory in a witness in a similar fashion, experiments have shown.    Subtle suggestions by police can lead an eyewitness to err in picking a suspect out of a lineup, dozens of experiments indicate. In a recent joint experiment by psychologists at Wisconsin and Harvard universities, witnesses to a videotaped robbery subsequently viewed a videotaped lineup. &quot;We gave subtle instructions that implied but didn't actually say that the suspect was in the lineup,&quot; Prof. Penrod says, even though half the time the real culprit wasn't in the lineup.    This subtle hint led 97% of the students to identify a person in the lineup as the robber, even though the real robber wasn't present in many of the lineups. Overall, the students who got such &quot;biased&quot; instructions were only 24% correct in either picking out the robber or saying that he wasn't present. Students who received more neutral instructions were 48% correct in spotting the robber or saying that he wasn't in the lineup.    In real life, Prof. Penrod says, when witnesses comb through mug shots immediately after a crime, they worry about picking the wrong person. But when they are called in to view a lineup, it is implied or stated that the police believe they have the culprit in hand. Police rarely tell witnesses that the suspect may not be in the lineup. In this situation &quot;witnesses are clearly less reluctant to make a choice even if it's wrong,&quot; he says. Witnesses also have an all-too-human tendency to try to please the detectives by making a choice, the psychologists say. </TEXT></DOC>