<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880523-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Signs of Renewed Oil Glut Raise Doubts Over Forecasts of a Strong 1988 Market </HL><AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PET CMD MIN </IN><TEXT>   The oil glut may be coming back, clouding the outlook for petroleum prices.    World oil markets had been widely expected to strengthen through the rest of the year on brisk demand for petroleum. Analysts and economists in recent weeks were raising their projections for the year, with some doubling their earlier forecasts of a 1% gain in demand.    The bullish expectations helped to diminish oil ministers' drive to seek agreement between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and eight non-OPEC oil exporters on production cuts to prop up the price.    But developments of the past few days, including an apparent return to near-record levels for above-ground oil inventories, suggest that petroleum demand for the year -- though stronger than in 1987 -- may be less buoyant than the most recent forecasts. What's more, OPEC is pumping considerably more oil than it was before its unsuccessful effort last month to seek an accord with the non-OPEC producers.    Most oil analysts still expect prices to firm later in the year -- but possibly only after a sharp drop that could result in a new 1988 price low this summer. Some say this may be the tell-tale week for the direction of oil prices over the summer.    The industry, as usual, is keeping a wary eye on OPEC, which will hold another meeting June 8. Oil markets often strengthen just before such meetings. But this time, some oil traders are betting prices will fall in the next few days, possibly by $1 or more a barrel, and stay low through the summer.    &quot;It will be straight down until June 8,&quot; says Steven LaBonte, a Denver-based trader. On Friday, West Texas Intermediate crude for June delivery fell 28 cents a barrel to close at $17.17.    But the more likely outcome in the view of many oil economists is that prices won't move much in either direction until OPEC members' production plans for the second half of the year are clearer.    Charles T. Maxwell, senior energy strategist for Cyrus J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc., says he expects the OPEC crudes that currently sell for around $16 a barrel to remain in a range of $16 to $16.80 over the next eight weeks. But he expects the price to recover to the $17 to $18 range in the fourth quarter.    The industry is clearly divided, however, over the direction prices will take after the OPEC meeting -- assuming that the cartel, as expected, fails to reach agreement to cut output sharply.    Paul Mlotok, a Salomon Brothers Inc. oil economist who has been more bullish on the market than most, continues to forecast a strong second half, with West Texas Intermediate rising to more than $20 a barrel.    But some of the other analysts who expect prices to rise later in the year are less positive about near-term prospects. &quot;I'm going to zip up my bear suit again sooner or later,&quot; says Peter Gignoux, a London-based oil analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton.    One reason for this is the recent jump in OPEC production, which appears to have climbed by half a million barrels a day in April from the March level. Petro-Logistics Ltd., a Geneva, Switzerland, consulting firm that tracks OPEC production, estimates that total output of the 13 nations averaged 18.5 million barrels a day last month.    Production apparently dropped in the first half of May to 18.2 million barrels a day, Petro-Logistics says, but that is still 200,000 barrels a day higher than the projected demand for OPEC crude in the second half of the year.    The increased OPEC production also comes on top of a big buildup in petroleum inventories, as demand seems suddenly to have turned sluggish. Some analysts suggest that big increases in this year's first-quarter demand, such as the 5% gain in the U.S., may have &quot;borrowed&quot; demand from future months.    &quot;The third quarter is looking ugly as sin,&quot; says Humphrey Harrison, a Banque Paribas oil analyst in London.    Looking ahead to other commodities this week:   Copper   Early signs of increased supplies have significantly reduced the price differential of near-term copper contracts over later-delivery ones on London and New York futures exchanges.    The London Metal Exchange is expected to announce today that 8,000 to 10,000 tons of copper were put in its warehouses last week for delivery against the LME spot contract. That substantial increase follows a big rise in the New York Commodity Exchange's inventories in the last three days of last week.    Traders closely watch these inventories as an indication of supplies. U.S. industrial stocks, which generally can't be measured as readily, have risen by about 20,000 tons in the past two months because of increased U.S. output, according to industry sources.    Early last week, the premium for spot copper over three-month delivery copper was as high as $750 a metric ton in London. By Friday, in anticipation of the rise in inventories, the premium reportedly had shrunk by about half. In New York, the premium also began to narrow late last week.    Grains and Soybeans   Weather is expected to continue dominating the futures pits at the Chicago Board of Trade this week. But analysts say stronger evidence of drought damage will be needed to sustain last week's rally. Prices of some soybean futures contracts rose about 50 cents a bushel, or 7%, last week to their highest levels since 1984.    &quot;The market needs more and more to feed itself,&quot; said Arthur Parrish, a grain analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton, New York. Even though the new soybean crop has barely been planted, prices have been sensitive to the dry Midwest weather because U.S. stockpiles are shrinking.    Some analysts expect more attention to shift this week to wheat futures prices, which rose about 30 cents a bushel, or 10%, last week. The spotlight will be on hard red winter wheat, which is primarily used for export and to make bread. Its moisture requirements will peak in the next four weeks as the plant's kernels fill out before the mid-June harvest.    A widespread virus called wheat streak mosaic is exacerbating problems. It prevents wheat from developing the roots needed to reach moisture deep in the ground. A Kansas official said Friday the state's harvest might fall short of the 357 million bushels projected this month by the U.S. Agriculture Department. </TEXT></DOC>