<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880721-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Defusing the Third World Missile Threat </HL><AUTHOR> Aaron Karp </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM AFRIC EUROP FREST MDEST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><TEXT>   Ballistic missiles are becoming an ominous reality in the Third World. Nineteen Third World nations (and Israel) currently possess or are striving to develop them.    Three weeks after Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi announced on Feb. 25 that his nation had successfully tested a ballistic missile with a range of at least 150 miles, the U.S. State Department said China had sold Saudi Arabia an unspecified number of missiles with a range of about 1,600 miles. Like India's Prithvi missile, which alters New Delhi's relationship with Islamabad because it has the range to strike almost any target in Pakistan, China's CSS-2, when it becomes fully operational in Saudi Arabia, will alter the regional military balance. Libya and Syria are negotiating for Chinese missiles as well.    Ballistic missiles already have been used in the Iran-Iraq War. Between February and April, Iran and Iraq fired more than 250 inaccurate missiles at each other's cities, causing thousands of casualties. Most, if not all, were Soviet-built.    On one level, the ballistic missiles are for these nations a logical step in building up their military forces. But in terms of global security, the most worrisome aspect of the missiles is their potential as nuclear-weapons delivery systems. They typically have a payload capacity of more than 1,100 pounds and thus could carry nuclear warheads. Recognizing this danger, many of the world's leading economic powers began meeting secretly in 1983 to develop a protocol restricting exports of missile technology. After four years of negotiation, the international Missile Technology Control Regime was unveiled last year and includes the U.S., Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Japan and West Germany. It marks the first multilateral effort to include potential delivery systems under nuclear nonproliferation controls and thus represents a significant nonproliferation step.    The regime comes at a critical moment, just as many Third World missile programs near maturity, but as currently structured it is too weak to do much more than slow their progress. Some critics of the regime urge the immediate development and deployment of anti-tactical ballistic missiles to cope with the Third World missile threat. But diplomatic options offer greater promise in the long run. If Third World ballistic missile programs are to be prevented from evolving into effective nuclear delivery systems, the regime must be strengthened considerably:   --More suppliers of missile technology must be brought into the regime. The most important holdouts are China and the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union poses a special problem, for while it does not appear to share individual missile technologies with anyone -- not even with India, its favorite Third World ally -- it has been exceptionally generous in exporting surface-to-surface missiles, over 1,000 since 1968. In 1983, for example, Moscow sent Syria a new generation of SS-21s. Although these missiles are &quot;battlefield weapons,&quot; they have a range of about 75 miles and can reach strategic targets in Israel. More recently, at the Moscow summit in May, Mikhail Gorbachev agreed to consider steps to cope with the problem. Whether these words will be matched by actions remains to be seen.    Argentina, Brazil, Israel and Sweden are also high priorities for inclusion. In the long run other nations with advanced aerospace industries must be included, among them Belgium, India, the Netherlands, South Africa, South Korea and Taiwan.    --The regime's restrictions must be broadened and translated into national laws for strict enforcement. As a general policy, more items of technology should be included under category one, the mandatory export ban. The discretionary restrictions of category two should be amended from their present bias favoring exports of development and production technology to a bias against such exports. The burden of proof must rest on buyer and seller alike to ensure that the technology will be used for peaceful purposes only. Sales must be conditioned on assurances -- preferably including on-site inspection -- that the technology is used exclusively for approved purposes.    --Exporters should condition the sale of space-launch technology on adherence to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Since the threat posed by Third World missiles is primarily nuclear, non-nuclear missiles are considered less worrisome. A Non-Proliferation Treaty signatory that fully upholds the treaty cannot arm its missiles with nuclear warheads. Adherence to the treaty should not be seen as a green light for selling missile technology, however, since even conventional or chemically armed missiles are far from harmless. But supplying missile technology to a government that rejects the treaty, such as Argentina, Brazil, India or Israel, is the height of irresponsibility.    --Nations must press for a universal ban on testing ballistic missiles. Because no new missile system can become operational without a series of test flights, a test ban would make it impossible for any country to develop new missile systems. A universal missile test ban can emerge only from negotiations between Washington and Moscow, the owners of the largest existing ballistic missile forces. Once they agree on a basic plan, it could be expanded to include other governments. But it is not essential for the rest of the world to wait on the vagaries of superpower relations. Similar test bans can be established regionally and could be equally effective.    ---   Mr. Karp leads the arms-trade project at the independent Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, funded by the Swedish Parliament. This is adapted from an article in the June issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. </TEXT></DOC>