<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890727-0008 </DOCNO><DD> = 890727 </DD><AN> 890727-0008. </AN><HL> Capital Dogfight:@  Grumman F-14's Fate@  -- And Firm's Course --@  Face Day of Decision@  ---@  Scuttling Carrier-Based Plane,@  As Pentagon Is Seeking,@  Would Cost 3,000 Jobs@  ---@  Will Top Gun Be Shot Down?@  ----@  By Andy Pasztor and Charles W. Stevens@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 07/27/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> GQ </CO><IN> AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><GV> DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </GV><DATELINE> BETHPAGE, N.Y.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When a Grumman-built F-14 Tomcat shot down two Libyan fighters over the Mediterranean early this year, workers at Grumman Corp. headquarters celebrated by wearing special T-shirts emblazoned &quot;U.S.: 2, Libya: 0.&quot;    Such macho pride has defined the corporate culture of Grumman throughout its 60 years as the premier supplier of naval aircraft. Sporting menacing names such as Hellcat and Avenger, sturdy Grumman planes helped turn the tide in the Pacific during World War II, with a young pilot named George Bush playing his part. Later -- in Korea, Vietnam, and most recently the Middle East -- Grumman jets roared off carrier decks to battle the hottest Soviet-built warplanes.    But now Grumman's planes may have finally met their match, done in by Pentagon budget cutters and deficit-conscious lawmakers. The House today is scheduled to take up Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's proposal to kill production of the F-14 as well as Grumman's venerable A-6 bombers, and the vote is expected to be close. The Senate Armed Services Committee already has voted to end production, and the full Senate is likely to go along.    The Pentagon chief argues that the planes, designed in the 1950s and '60s, are too expensive and that the military can't afford to keep the plants operating at inefficient low rates.    The cuts would eliminate thousands of jobs, lop off about a third of the company's $3.65 billion in annual sales, and forever change its character. Grumman would survive. In fact, current funding provides for production of F-14 and A-6 planes through 1991. But in one stroke, Grumman would be slated for elimination as a major aircraft manufacturer. Its only remaining aircraft would be non-combat craft such as cargo and radar planes that it builds for the Navy, although it is the lead contractor on developing the high-tech Joint STARS flying command post for the Air Force.    Analysts generally expect Grumman to earn about $73 million this year, off from last year's $86.5 million, which included a one-time gain. But profit margins are expected to improve in the company's electronics and truck businesses. Sales this year are expected to match or exceed last year's $3.65 billion, with 84% representing government business.    Loss of the F-14 contract would be unlikely to have much effect on Grumman's stock price, analysts say. Gary J. Reich, an aerospace-industry analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton in New York, notes that Grumman's stock has been stuck between $19 and $24 since the October 1987 crash.    Some analysts see Grumman as a takeover target as a result of its troubles. Chairman John O'Brien, however, says the company will stay independent, with 40% of the stock in the hands of employees.    The test of political wills over Grumman's fate has national as well as corporate implications. Grumman has &quot;a proven track record of building carrier-based aircraft,&quot; says Robert Costello, who resigned as the Pentagon's top acquisition official several months ago. &quot;That's a national asset. You can't just throw it away.&quot; Grumman's elimination would leave McDonnell Douglas Corp. as the only producer of carrier-based fighters.    But Grumman might not be the only defense contractor to see its role reduced or eliminated. In an era of shrinking military budgets and stepped-up arms-control negotiations with the Russians, defense planners predict an extended period of retrenchment and world-wide consolidation.    &quot;The number of U.S. aircraft manufacturers clearly will have to shrink,&quot; says consultant Donald Hicks, a former defense undersecretary for research. &quot;Firms that didn't look or plan far enough ahead will be changed forever, or perhaps disappear.&quot;    With the debate on Capitol Hill intensifying in recent days, Grumman's champions are fighting back ferociously. Hoping for a $1 billion package to save the F-14, home-state lawmakers are cutting deals to win votes by agreeing to back the pet programs of other congressmen.    Grumman's supporters have joined forces with powerful congressional delegations from Texas and Pennsylvania battling to save another weapon scheduled for Mr. Cheney's budget ax: the Marine Corps' V-22, a troop transport that takes off like a helicopter and cruises like a plane.    Company lobbyists are bad-mouthing competitors, leaning hard on subcontractors for political support and recruiting retired Navy brass to press their case. Nationwide television and newspaper ads trumpet the F-14s prowess, while Grumman's public-relations office has flooded newspapers and television stations with prepared articles and press releases intended to be used as news stories. But at best, Grumman can only delay the inevitable. The same budget pressures are bound to haunt the company's combat planes year after year.    &quot;There's not enough money to go around for everybody's wish list,&quot; Vice President Dan Quayle told reporters Monday during a break in his efforts to lobby lawmakers to support the administration's defense cuts. Secretary Cheney, he said, has &quot;made a very tough call&quot; in targeting the F-14 and other programs. &quot;Now we've got to deliver on it.&quot;    Although the company is battling to save the F-14 for a few more years, management already has grudgingly concluded that Grumman's long-term growth lies in other areas. Once the Navy moves on to the next generation of fighters, Grumman Chairman O'Brien concedes, &quot;I see us having a difficult time staying in the carrier fighter business.&quot;    The economic impact would be huge -- and the human cost, too. Grumman estimates that killing the F-14 would cost 3,000 company jobs and perhaps force 20,000 or so layoffs by subcontractors, with the Long Island economy suffering the most. That would come on top of 5,000 jobs the company has eliminated over the past two years.    Generations of Long Island families have flocked to work in its assembly plants since Leroy Grumman, a former Navy officer and hotshot test pilot, founded the company in a garage in 1929. Grumman can outlive the Cheney cuts because much of its revenue already comes from other sources, including specialty military aircraft, work on satellites and the proposed space station, the assembling of mail trucks and even the manufacture of pontoon boats.    In fact, Grumman's booming military electronics business -- the most promising area for sustained growth -- is likely to exceed all of the company's current aircraft operations in the next several years.    But however lucrative the new work may be, it lacks the heart-pounding appeal of building supersonic jet fighters like the F-14 Tomcat, glorified by Hollywood in &quot;Top Gun&quot; and other movies. &quot;It's hard to get the same product identification if you're making software packages for dataprocessing systems,&quot; Kurt Schroeder, the company's chief test pilot, observes.    Turning away from combat planes clearly would be traumatic for many of Grumman's roughly 30,000 employees. Dan Culleton, a Grumman manager who boasts that his father, sister, brother and an uncle all worked for Grumman, now brings his five-year-old son inside giant Building One to see how F-14 cockpits are built. Mr. Culleton worries that &quot;the odds are only 50-50, or even a little less,&quot; that his boy will have the chance to continue the family tradition. &quot;It's hard for me to conceive of Grumman not building airplanes,&quot; he says.    The firm's problems really began in the mid-1980s, when it decided against seeking a share of the new generation of fighters envisioned by the Navy in order to concentrate its technical and financial resources on an overriding goal: winning the multibillion-dollar contract to build a replacement for the bulbous-nosed A-6 Intruder, the Navy's only long-range, all-weather bomber. But the company isn't among the firms picked for that contract, leaving it without a new line of warplanes when production of its battle-tested but aging models is phased out.    The next blow came last December, when Pentagon officials took aim at the A-6 years before Grumman had expected. Then, just as the company revved up efforts to protect the A-6, Mr. Cheney came into office and immediately launched a surprise attack on the F-14, the fastest of all U.S. Navy fighters.    Suddenly on the defensive, Grumman's lobbyists swung into high gear. Peter Oram, head of Grumman's aircraft operations, hurriedly arranged a trip to visit the air commanders of the Pacific and Atlantic fleets, playing off their fears and recruiting them in a campaign to lobby with top brass against the cutbacks. Since then, the Navy's leadership has formally appealed Mr. Cheney's proposed cutbacks a number of times -- without any success.    Grumman also sought help from prominent former Navy and Marine pilots who over the years have entrusted their lives to Grumman equipment. Among the most emotional supporters are Democratic Sen. John Glenn of Ohio, a decorated Marine Corps pilot who flew Grumman planes in Korea before his renowned space exploits, and Adm. Thomas Moorer, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who helped develop the F-14.    In weekly meetings organized by Grumman officials on Capitol Hill, New York's congressional delegation maps out strategy. Their efforts have been aided by Mr. O'Brien, Grumman's combative chairman, who has flown to Washington to meet with at least 15 additional lawmakers since the spring.    A former flight-test analyst who relishes belittling archrival McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s F-18 carrier-based fighters, Mr. O'Brien says bluntly: &quot;I don't see F-18s shooting down any Libyans.&quot; Mr. Cheney's proposed budget nevertheless earmarks nearly $2 billion a year to continue hefty production of the shorter-range and slower -- but much less expensive -- McDonnell Douglas jets.    Grumman's supporters contend that relying on McDonnell Douglas isn't enough. Dismantling the F-14 assembly line will hobble the nation's carrier fleet with an acute shortage of front-line fighters in the 1990s, they insist. The Pentagon counters that it can quickly develop the F-14's replacement -- a super-sophisticated aircraft called the Advanced Tactical Fighter, or ATF -- and buy it in large enough numbers over the next several years to keep carrier decks filled.    But ATF design teams already have been slowed down by two previous budget cuts. And many critics, including Pentagon insiders, doubt that the ambitious schedule will be met.    Canceling F-14 production without having replacements ready is like jumping out of a tall building &quot;because someone promised to bring a net before you hit the ground,&quot; says Sen. Alfonse D'Amato. The New York Republican is expected to lead the fight for Grumman during the appropriations process.    Traditional coalition politics may yet save the F-14. In addition to casting their lot with backers of the jeopardized V-22 troop transport, Grumman's supporters have rounded up support from Virginia lawmakers, who defend Navy planes because the carriers that haul them are built, and many are based, in that state. The coalition recently won an important test vote when the House Armed Services Committee retained money for the F-14 and V-22 programs alike -- at the expense of the B-2 Stealth bomber and other high-tech Pentagon projects. Grumman happily counts on unwavering support from one committee member, Democratic Rep. George Hochbrueckner, a former Grumman engineer whose Long Island district includes thousands of worried company employees. &quot;The issue is larger than the fate of one company,&quot; he asserts. &quot;We're fighting to prevent a potential disaster for all of naval aviation.&quot;    Such superheated rhetoric doesn't sit well with many other members of the committee, including its ranking Republican, Rep. William Dickinson of Alabama. He dismisses Grumman's plight as a &quot;very parochial issue,&quot; noting that New York lawmakers rarely advocate higher defense spending. &quot;We hear from them only when it affects their district,&quot; he says.    Meanwhile, out in the fleet, sailors have more concerns of their own. Once-proud Grumman planes increasingly are being relegated to secondary roles after they pass their prime. Older models are being converted to tankers used for in-air refuelings -- to keep newer combat aircraft buzzing above the carriers. </TEXT></DOC>