<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880222-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: Don't Contribute to Campaign-Law Trouble </HL><AUTHOR> Katharine R. Boyce and Richard E. Messick </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   As the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary have shown, this presidential election year promises to be full of surprises. For the businessman active in politics, these surprises could turn out to be quite unpleasant.    Corporate executives can be subjected to lengthy investigations and fines for political activities commonly undertaken and once thought unobjectionable. Criminal prosecutions are no longer out of the question, either.    The FBI is examining allegations that Hollywood businessman Stuart Karl kept employees working for the Hart presidential campaign on his payroll and that he &quot;reimbursed&quot; other employees who donated to Hart. Investigative files recently released by the Federal Election Commission reveal that Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. was fined $7,000 for hosting fundraisers and providing corporate jets and limousines to John Glenn and his 1984 presidential campaign staff.    The post-Watergate campaign-law &quot;reforms&quot; created a complex body of law governing every aspect of political fund-raising. Until recently, enforcement efforts were directed primarily at political candidates and political action committees (PACs). Now the FEC documents and the FBI investigation indicate that corporate executives are targets as well. Yet we've found that few executives realize the legal pitfalls associated with political activities.    Certain things must be avoided at all costs, no matter what the candidate or his lawyers say. Failure to abide by these proscriptions can lead to criminal prosecution:   --Do not pay corporate employees for time spent on political activities. Paying salaries, fringe benefits or providing other financial support to someone working on a campaign is the equivalent of a direct corporate contribution.    --Do not give more than $1,000 to any federal candidate for any election. Loans and guarantees of loans count against this limit. &quot;Gifts&quot; or &quot;loans&quot; to others count if they are intended to be given to the candidate.    --Do not reimburse others for political contributions. Reimbursing others is circumventing the $1,000 limit and hiding the true source of the contribution. Both are flatly prohibited.    --Do not give or lend corporate assets to a candidate. Allowing candidates to use corporate office space, borrow corporate telephones or word processors after hours or furnishing anything else &quot;of value&quot; at less than the &quot;usual and normal charge&quot; is an illegal corporate contribution. The candidate must be charged the market price, not the corporation's marginal or full cost. Providing a corporate jet is also taboo, unless special reimbursement rules are observed.    --Do not pressure others to make political contributions. Donations to political candidates and corporate political action committees must be voluntary. Pressuring subordinates or suppliers to give is strictly banned. This includes suggesting that someone give because others have given.    Other prohibitions on corporate executives are not so easy to state or obey. For example, it's clear that a businessman can use his office phone to make one political call, or that he can write one campaign-related letter on company stationery with the company's word processor without these uses of corporate facilities being treated as an illegal corporate contribution. But what about two calls? Ten letters?    The regulations say corporate facilities can be used for &quot;occasional, isolated or incidental&quot; political activities. But what constitutes &quot;occasional, isolated or incidental&quot; is in the eyes of the Federal Election Commission and its enforcement staff. Until the recent release of the commission's investigative files from the 1984 campaign, we would have said 10 letters were okay. Now we're not so sure. And if an executive's secretary is asked to type and send them, or if they are delivered through interoffice mail, we'd definitely advise against it.    What once would have been considered overly cautious advice is now required by the action the commission took in the 1984 case. The FEC ruled that at some point a corporate executive's activities take on the character of corporate actions. Once this happens, everything from a phone call to a breakfast meeting in the corporate dining room amounts to corporate activity on behalf of a candidate -- something forbidden by the campaign laws.    It's too soon to say with certainty where the line is or how much one has to do to cross it. But the FEC says it exists. Executives who cross it do so at their, and their corporation's, peril.    Here is a final, quick checklist that should help executives from straying over this evolving line:   --Use personal or plain stationery and your own stamps for campaign-related letters.    --Make sure corporate personnel -- secretaries, messengers and other clerical staff -- are either voluntary or compensated from noncorporate sources (personal or PAC funds) for political activity.    --If campaign events (i.e., fund-raising breakfasts) are held on corporate premises, an individual, PAC or candidate committee should reimburse the corporation for the normal and usual charge.    The campaign finance laws are complex. Our guidelines don't address every activity where problems can arise. But executives who observe these rules should be able to avoid unpleasant surprises this campaign season.    ---   Ms. Boyce represented several of the defendants in the FEC's 1984 enforcement action. Mr. Messick was chief counsel of the National Republican Senatorial Committee in 1983-1984. They are currently with a Washington, D.C., law firm. </TEXT></DOC>