<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880607-0082 </DOCNO><HL> More Blacks Quitting White-Run Firms --- Many Cite Bias, Desire to Help Minority Firms </HL><AUTHOR> Frank E. James (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   From a sleek, contemporary store in the heart of Chicago's South Side, Pamela Anderson sells delicately hand-painted wine glasses, oak counter stools and other housewares. Though the work might seem a substantial comedown from her former job as an assistant vice president at First National Bank of Chicago, the 31-year-old Ms. Anderson, who is black, says she is much happier -- smoking less and exercising more -- now that she no longer works for a predominantly white organization.    James Hill, also black, routinely spurns executive recruiters who want to place him in a job he once lusted after: vice president at a big corporation. He prefers being president of Burrell Communications Group's public-relations unit. Mr. Hill, 40, jumped two years ago to black-owned Burrell from Sara Lee Corp., where he was public-relations director. One reason: He felt uncomfortable as the only black manager at Sara Lee headquarters.    Ms. Anderson and Mr. Hill represent what many people believe is a widening exodus of talented blacks from mainstream white businesses and professional firms. The primary reasons for leaving are racial: Some blacks say they are pushed by perceived blatant racism at the white companies or by more subtle complaints; others say they are pulled by a desire to help black businesses prosper.    &quot;We just want to be treated like everyone else,&quot; says Phillip Turner, 34, who left the U.S. attorney's office in Chicago to work at a black law firm at a lower salary.    Although it's impossible to know just how many blacks are turning in business cards issued by white institutions, there is evidence of a trend. Some black-owned businesses say they are getting more job inquiries from people who want to leave the mainstream. &quot;Six years ago black firms really had to do a search to get blacks to come into minority firms,&quot; says Edgrick Johnson, executive vice president of Independence Bank of Chicago, one of the nation's largest black-owned banks. &quot;Now I get calls and resumes from people trying to get out (of white businesses).&quot;    Moreover, agendas at conferences that focus on black business issues are shifting increasingly from issues relating to upward mobility in big corporations to seminars on how to start one's own business, management specialists say.    Some big companies, while not conceding that the trend exists, nevertheless express worry. Norma Curby, director of equal-opportunity affairs at Monsanto Corp., St. Louis, says the exodus, if it is real and if it continues, &quot;should be of great concern to large businesses in America. Not only will a major population of talent be lost to these businesses, but it seriously suggests the possibility of social polarization where black professionals increasingly view large firms as unresponsive to their personal and professional needs.&quot;    Some blacks worry that defections from white businesses may hinder the progress of blacks in general. &quot;The major companies in this country have such an influence in this economy and such a share of the resources that blacks can't afford to abandon them,&quot; says Edward W. Jones Jr., a black management consultant in South Orange, N.J. &quot;It's mandatory that blacks have the chance to succeed in major corporations. If we're locked out of major corporations, we're locked out of America.&quot;    The trend is hard to gauge because not all blacks leave white companies for racial reasons. (Indeed, the exodus has been accelerated by the thinning of American middle-management ranks, a result of corporate downsizing and mergers.) And it's often difficult to separate race from even mundane reasons for leaving. Was a conflict with a boss racially motivated, or were the two people just incompatible? If a black executive leaves because he was passed over for a promotion, was race a factor in his stalled career?    But interviews with blacks who have left white companies make it clear that race is often behind a departure. Among the reasons given most often, one can be summed up in a sentence: &quot;I didn't want to sell my soul.&quot; One person who makes that statement, Richard W. Shealey, president and chief operating officer of Independence Bank, says many blacks come to feel that success in white-dominated enterprises sooner or later means severely compromising their identity as blacks.    For instance, Mr. Shealey, who has tried to nurture black bankers throughout his career, is convinced he would have had to play down that activity at Continental Illinois Bank andamp; Trust to climb the ladder there. When he helped to found an organization for black bankers, he says, colleagues at Continental Illinois told him superiors at the bank were unhappy about his involvement with the group. A bank spokesman says: &quot;While that may have been (Mr. Shealey's) perception, it was not our policy then and isn't now to discourage employees from getting involved in activities that benefit the community.&quot;    Blacks who have left white-dominated concerns don't advocate segregation. Instead, they see their departures as perhaps the quickest way to get into a game where the deck isn't stacked so much against them. Says Mr. Turner, the former assistant U.S. attorney: &quot;Some white lawyers think what we're doing is racially segregating ourselves, and they say, 'You guys are as racist as you accuse us of being.' That's not true. We just want to be someplace where we have an opportunity.&quot;    Mr. Turner says he joined Jones, Ware andamp; Grenard in part because it's a relatively new firm that has already established an excellent reputation in Chicago. But he also saw a much greater chance of becoming a partner there than at a big white firm where partnerships often are based on whether a lawyer can bring in substantial clients, like major corporations. &quot;Do you think (a Fortune 500 company) is going to hire some black lawyer?&quot; Mr. Turner asks. &quot;Are you kidding?&quot;    Another factor was the constant pressure he felt to prove himself. &quot;I felt if I goofed up, I not only goofed up for myself but for other black people who would come after me. The white lawyers didn't have that pressure. They could just take the attitude that they did their best, and whatever happened happened.&quot; To cope, Mr. Turner would run every other day, pushing himself to the point of total exhaustion.    Defectors to black companies also complain of feeling they had to show they didn't get their jobs just because of affirmative action. &quot;In white corporate America, as a black person you have to prove and re-prove yourself everyday,&quot; says Andrea Smith, public-relations manager for Soft Sheen Products Inc., a black-oriented haircare products company in Chicago.    Ms. Smith previously worked for a large health-care products company where one of her roles was to organize special events and conferences. But she felt that her superior distrusted her as a black woman, because the boss would often quietly make calls behind Ms. Smith's back to make sure arrangements had been properly made. In contrast, Ms. Smith says, &quot;there is lagniappe, the creole word that means a little something extra in support and camaraderie, at a black company.&quot;    Blacks who have quit white-run businesses say they don't miss insults from whites who often didn't even realize they were insulting, or the edginess on the part of whites uncomfortable around blacks.    For instance, Ms. Anderson remembers a breakfast meeting with a white businessman and bank client during the 1984 Summer Olympics. In small talk before the meeting, the client remarked on Olympic medalist Carl Lewis's prowess and said to Ms. Anderson: &quot;You people sure can run.&quot; Situations like these place blacks in a no-win position: They can either speak up, defend their race and risk offending a business associate, or bite their tongues and damage their own self-respect.    Of course, blacks don't believe that by leaving white employers, they will escape racism entirely. They do, however, believe they will encounter it less. Ms. Anderson, part owner of the housewares store, says, &quot;As an entrepreneur, you can choose who your vendors and suppliers are.&quot; Her store has a black lawyer, a black accountant and a black store designer -- and she adds that such choices have external benefits as well: &quot;We've been able to circulate our dollars among our own people, and that's a good feeling.&quot;    That sentiment reflects the desire of many blacks who have left white-run companies to help build black-led businesses that will become lasting parts of the black community. Eric McKissack, 34, who left First Chicago in 1986 to become director of research at the black-led investment-advisory firm Ariel Capital Management, says: &quot;It's necessary to build institutions because we need more of an economic base in our communities so that we have a greater degree of self-determination.&quot;    Choosing to step off the white corporate ladder is hard for many blacks simply because it was difficult for them to get there in the first place. &quot;My mother said, 'You're going to leave that good-paying job to be a clerk in a store?'&quot; remembers Ms. Anderson. &quot;She couldn't understand. This job in the corporate world was the epitome of success. It's what my parents busted their butts and fought for all those years. That's why it's even more frustrating when you do all you're supposed to do and find it's not all it's supposed to be.&quot;    She also had to resolve her sense of guilt: &quot;I did feel that it was important that other blacks and minorities saw a black woman assistant vice president with all the trappings of success. But at the same time, I thought maybe I had to be selfish, for my own peace of mind. You can't keep on doing something you don't believe in. It just eats your soul.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>