<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870309-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:The Hazards of Firing at Will---By Andrew M. Kramer</HL><DD> 03/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In the same month in 1984, an Arizona appeals court allowed a credit analyst to sue American Express for firing him, a Connecticut court allowed an employee suit against Aetna Life andamp; Casualty for wrongful discharge and the New Jersey Supreme Court cleared the way for a fired mid-level manager to sue his former boss, Hoffmann-LaRoche.    These cases, while unrelated, were not anomalies. Fired employees have successfully filed suit against employers for wrongful discharge in more than two-thirds of the states, and Washington, D.C., as courts have begun to rewrite the traditional common-law rule that an employer may hire and fire for any reason or no reason at all. Courts are holding companies to promises the companies never thought they made -- promises found in employee handbooks, job-offer letters and even oral assurances about job security.    American Express, for example, fired the credit analyst for allegedly sending obscene material to a management employee. The analyst, who had been an exemplary employee for more than 10 years, was given no opportunity to rebut the allegation. Another employee later admitted responsibility for the act.    When the analyst took the company to court, he brought along the employee manual. In it, the company declared: &quot;We have enthusiastically accepted our responsibility to provide you with good working conditions, good wages, good benefits, fair treatment and the personal respect which is rightfully yours. . . .&quot;    Relying on that manual, the state appeals court decided that such &quot;representations made by an employer in a personnel or policies manual may become part of an employment contract and may modify the employer's right to terminate an otherwise at-will employee.&quot;    Like many employers, this one probably had no idea such benign statements in a handbook could be made into binding terms in a contract. We have entered a new era of employer-employee relationships, one marked by new court-created worker rights and employer obligations.    Along with personnel manuals, a number of other snares await the unwary manager:    --Oral promises: Employers may be bound by verbal assurances given to employees. Avis transferred a reluctant manager from San Francisco to its New York car-rental operation, assuring him that if his new position didn't work out, he could have his old job back. It didn't work out. Avis fired him, and he sued. The federal courts in New York said the company had made a promise and the employee had relied on it to his detriment. A promise is a promise, and it can be enforced by the court -- in this case to the tune of $300,000 in potential lost wages and benefits.    --Questions of Fair Dealing: Certain jurisdictions, notably California and Montana, have adopted an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Employees must be treated fairly -- not an unreasonable guidepost, but one only lately enforced by the courts. The difficulty is having a jury determine what is fair treatment.    In Montana, for example, a cashier was told, without prior warning, to either resign or be fired. She was also told that if she resigned she would get a good recommendation. Distraught and caught by surprise, she signed a resignation letter but never got the recommendation. She went to court and got $1,891 in compensatory damages and $50,000 in punitives.    --Invasions of Privacy: An employee in Massachusetts, discharged after being forced to take a polygraph test and answer questions about his alleged use of drugs, sued his former employer for invasion of privacy. He was awarded $358,000 in potential lost wages and benefits, and an additional $50,000 for the employer's having told other employees that he had been discharged for drug use.    --References: In a number of states, employees are suing their former employers for libel and slander based on references or statements made to a prospective employer.    --Violating Public Policy: Employees who are fired for reporting employers' illegal actions or refusing to perform illegal acts also are finding relief in courts. In California, Arco fired an employee for allegedly refusing to participate in an illegal scheme to fix retail gas prices. The court held that the employee could sue Arco on the ground that the company violated public policy to fire someone for refusing to break the law.    What can employers do to protect themselves?    First and foremost, ensure compliance with company policies and procedures set forth in employee handbook and manuals. The critical question: Are supervisors really following these policies when they take action against an employee?    Personnel managers must ensure that supervisors are sensitive to the potential for wrongful-discharge actions. They must insist that supervisors know the policies and procedures in the manual, and that no one makes promises that cannot be kept.    Add disclaimers to handbooks with language such as, &quot;This manual is not a contract of employment and we retain the right to alter this manual at any time,&quot; or, &quot;This policy does not in any way affect our right to terminate an employee for any reason, at any time, nor does it affect your right to leave at any time.&quot;    Employers also should know what is taking place in the interviewing process. What promises are being made to an applicant? What does the offer letter say? Such documents or oral statements can be used later in wrongful-discharge cases.    Employers also should insist on honest and critical performance evaluations. It is amazing how often evaluations of a fired employee look like evaluations of an employee who is being retained. They are simply far too complimentary. Most supervisors and managers are not frank and candid in their evaluations. If you are not going to evaluate an employee accurately, you are better off not evaluating him at all. Terminated employees can use good evaluations in litigation.    Before an employee is terminated, ask the supervisor: &quot;If you had to appear before a jury, why would you say the employee should be discharged?&quot; Supervisors also should be asked if the action being taken is consistent with other actions previously taken and whether the employee knew that certain conduct would result in discharge.    Finally, presume that litigation might well result -- and don't presume that the supervisor making the decision to fire will still be working for you when the case goes to trial. Document immediately each event leading to the termination.    ---   Mr. Kramer is head of the labor section at Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue, an international law firm. </TEXT></DOC>