<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880202-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   MEESE DENIED any wrongdoing in connection with a planned pipeline project.    The attorney general, reading a five-page statement at a news conference at the Justice Department, said his involvement with the private oil-pipeline project in Iraq was &quot;entirely lawful&quot; and blamed his escalating political problems on &quot;media sensationalism.&quot; He asserted that his support for the project never included &quot;any discussion, hint or implication&quot; of improper payments to Israeli politicians. The $1 billion pipeline was never built.    Meese, who declined to take questions, said he didn't recall reading a portion of a 1985 memo on the plan that refers to the payoffs to the Israelis.    ---   THE U.S. IS PROMOTING a peace plan to end unrest in Israeli-occupied areas.    The proposal, which possibly could lead to shuttle diplomacy in the Mideast by Secretary of State Shultz, calls for Israeli-Arab negotiations over the status of the West Bank and Gaza Strip starting before the end of the year. The initiative urges limited self-rule and local elections in the occupied territories within months and final-status talks -- involving Israel, Jordan, Palestinian leaders and perhaps others -- starting in December.    Israeli soldiers killed two Arabs and wounded three others when they opened fire on a crowd of stone-throwing Palestinians in the West Bank.    ---   Reagan portrayed his $36 million Contra aid package as a last-chance effort to make Nicaragua's government comply with a regional peace plan. But as lobbying against the package intensified, the White House said Reagan may agree to give Congress a role in deciding when the insurgents can receive $3.6 million in military aid.    ---   Shultz will meet Feb. 21-23 with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze in Moscow to prepare for a fourth superpower summit and to discuss cuts in strategic arms. In Washington, Defense Secretary Carlucci said failure to ratify a treaty banning medium-range weapons would likely lead to additional Soviet missiles in Europe.    ---   Angola's government has accepted for the first time the principle that all 40,000 Cuban troops must leave the African nation as part of a regional peace settlement, the State Department said. A spokesman said Cuban officials have endorsed the Angolan stance, which was conveyed last week to a high-level U.S. delegation in Luanda.    ---   Sen. Inouye asked lawmakers to rescind an $8 million appropriation he had backed for a private organization to build schools for North African Jews living in France. The Hawaii Democrat said he had &quot;made an error in judgment&quot; by backing the measure. A member of the group gave $1,000 to Inouye's 1986 re-election campaign.    ---   Arizona Gov. Evan Mecham told state legislators studying his possible impeachment that he didn't hide a $350,000 campaign loan. The GOP governor insisted that he acted legally in lumping the loan from a Tempe developer with two other loans on his financial reports. Meanwhile, a recall election was scheduled for May 17.    ---   The National Cancer Institute said the breast cancer detection rate among American women is the highest on record, but death rates have increased slightly in recent years. The study also said that although lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer deaths, the death rate decreased among males in 1985, but rose in women.    ---   Poland devalued its currency, the zloty, by about 16% against the dollar. An austerity program also took effect, increasing food prices by an average of 40%. Solidarity announced that it wouldn't appeal for large-scale protests against the price boosts, but the outlawed trade federation said it would support any local demonstrations.    ---   Election officials in Ecuador said two opposition presidential candidates would compete in a runoff May 8 after defeating the governing party's candidate in Sunday's election. Both candidates have pledged to steer the country away from the conservative policies of President Leon Febres Cordero, a U.S. ally in South America.    ---   Finland's President Koivisto missed outright victory in the country's presidential election. But the Social Democrat, who won about 48% of the popular vote, looked certain to be chosen for a new six-year term by a 301-member electoral college.    ---   Two American Indians surrendered to authorities following a 10-hour standoff in which they had taken 17 people hostage in the offices of the Robesonian newspaper in Lumberton, N.C. The captors, who released the hostages unharmed, said they were protesting the death of a black jail inmate.    ---   A control-tower operator said he feels &quot;very bad&quot; about last week's accident near Philadelphia between an Amtrak passenger train and a maintenance vehicle. About 25 people were hurt. Tom Connor, who fled his post, said he would submit to drug tests.    ---   Britain announced that it was awarding an honorary knighthood to Weinberger. Queen Elizabeth II approved the award in recognition of the former U.S. defense secretary's &quot;outstanding and invaluable&quot; contribution to defense cooperation between the U.S. and Britain, the Foreign Office said.    ---   Moslem rebels disrupted elections in three southern towns in the Philippines as voters tried to cast ballots in local contests, which were postponed in some areas until today. In Manila, the government ordered tighter security measures following threats against American and other diplomats.    ---   Indian troops in Sri Lanka arrested 54 Tamil rebels, bringing to 188 the number arrested in a three-day crackdown in the Jaffna peninsula, officials said. Arms and ammunition also were seized in the raids.    ---   Died: Georgi M. Malenkov, 86, former Soviet leader who succeeded Stalin, last month. Details weren't disclosed. . . . Roscoe Haynie, 77, ex-president of LTV Corp., in North Palm Beach, Fla. . . . Francis Sorg, 88, former chairman of Sorg Printing Co., Saturday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>