<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880822-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   QUAYLE SKIPPED a planned campaign appearance with Bush in Illinois.    The Republican vice presidential nominee traveled to Washington for three days of intensive work with his campaign chairman. Bush described as a &quot;tempest in a teapot&quot; disclosures that the junior Indiana senator used family contacts to win assignment to the National Guard and avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. Republicans were buoyed by a Newsweek poll released Saturday showing Bush with a 51%-to-42% lead over Dukakis.    Senate Republican leader Dole, who had been under consideration for the No. 2 spot on the ticket, said he expected the Quayle controversy to &quot;last a while.&quot;    ---   U.S. officials paid tribute to Ambassador Raphel and Brig. Gen. Wassom as their bodies arrived from Pakistan, where they died in last week's plane explosion that killed President Zia. Pakistani officials have detained 80 people in their inquiry. Pakistanis also worry whether Zia's death will disrupt election plans.    ---   Burmese troops patrolled the streets of Rangoon as student-led protesters prepared for a nationwide general strike called for today. The strike is expected to be the first test for President Maung Maung, who came to power Friday a week after Sein Lwin resigned following bloody protests that Burmese officials say killed at least 112.    ---   Solidarity activists called for a strike at the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk after the Polish government failed to respond to an offer of talks on the growing labor unrest. At least 10 coal mines in the southern region of Silesia and the northern port of Szczecin have been shut by strikes, and the government has deployed troops in those areas.    ---   A powerful earthquake struck Nepal and eastern India, triggering landslides and floods and killing at least 500 people and injuring more than 3,000. Seismologists in New Delhi said the quake measured 6.5 on the Richter scale and was the most powerful to strike the Himalayan region since 1950.    ---   Israeli soldiers killed two Palestinian protesters and wounded eight, according to hospital officials in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Separately, police arrested four men in connection with the bombing of a Haifa cafe Saturday that wounded 25 Israelis. Israeli troops also killed four Arab guerrillas in Lebanon, the army said Saturday.    ---   Police in Moscow and Prague broke up demonstrations marking the 20th anniversary of the Soviet-led military intervention in Czechoslovakia. As many as 10,000 people marched in the Czech capital demanding a withdrawal of Soviet troops. In Moscow, police used an unusual degree of force in quelling a small Pushkin Square protest.    The Soviet government approved plans to boost consumer-goods production by $40 billion over the next two years. Officials worry that support for Gorbachev's reforms may erode unless empty shelves in the nation's stores can be filled.    ---   U.N. peace officers said a cease-fire that began Saturday in the Iran-Iraq war appears to be holding despite charges of violations by both sides. Iraq said one of its soldiers was killed by a sniper and Iran said Iraqi troops continued firing after the deadline. Both countries are speeding the rebuilding of war-damaged oil facilities.    ---   Central African diplomatic sources said ethnic clashes in northern Burundi last week left about 3,000 dead, and as many as 30,000 refugees fled into neighboring Rwanda. The fighting broke out between the Hutu, Burundi's majority tribe, and the Tutsi, the minority tribe that controls the military and government of the former Belgian colony.    ---   The Pentagon blamed U.S. mistakes and actions by Iran in its official report, released Friday, on the downing by the USS Vincennes of an Iran Air jetliner with 290 aboard. Carlucci overruled a recommendation for a letter of censure to one Vincennes officer, the only punishment contemplated in the incident.    ---   IRA leaders made plans to circumvent a possible British government move to reintroduce internment without trial. Protestant leaders in Northern Ireland demanded a return to the policy following an IRA bombing that killed eight British soldiers Friday.    ---   A car bomb exploded near a Syrian army checkpoint in Beirut, injuring at least 18 people. The explosion and a foiled bombing attempt hours later occurred following a deadlock by Lebanon's parliament on choosing a successor to President Gemayel.    ---   A U.S. official is investigating the death of Palau's president, Lazarus Salii, who was found Saturday with a gunshot wound to the head. Police in the U.S.-administered Pacific trust territory aren't sure whether he committed suicide or was murdered.    ---   Died: Robert S. Potter, 68, director and former general counsel of Dow Jones andamp; Co., Saturday, in New York. </TEXT></DOC>