<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870413-0018 </DOCNO><HL> AIDS Conferees Share New Hopes,New Fears, in Battling the Disease---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> KEYSTONE, Colo.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Scientists grappling with acquired immune deficiency syndrome shared good news and bad last week at a major AIDS conference here.    The good news is that the researchers understand better how the virus interacts with its victims' cells, and are taking new steps in drug and vaccine development. The bad news is that the family of AIDS viruses is multiplying, and that the outlook for infected people now seems worse.    Indeed, the conference, which was sponsored by the University of California at Los Angeles, illustrated how with each step forward scientists are also uncovering new layers of complexity surrounding the virus and its awesome pathogenic power. As one of the participants, reflecting on the current state of research, put it, &quot;The easy part is over; now the hard part begins.&quot;    Binding Sites: The Lock and Key    Laurence A. Lasky, a senior scientist at Genentech Inc., took the podium in his shirt sleeves to tell how he had pinpointed the spot where the AIDS virus binds to protein receptors on target cells. This binding, a kind of biochemical lock-and-key arrangement, is a critical step in the life cycle of the virus. If scientists could find a way to block it -- devising, in effect, a fake key -- they could prevent infection.    Nobel laureate David Baltimore hailed Dr. Lasky's work as &quot;a gorgeous experiment&quot; and one that shows how AIDS is driving research in many areas of biological science. &quot;We now understand virus-receptor interaction better with AIDS than with any other disease,&quot; said Dr. Baltimore, director of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass. &quot;This advances the state of the art.&quot; It may be a while, however, before Dr. Lasky's lab feat becomes part of a practical prevention program.    A Family of New Strains   The growing number of AIDS variants is complicating the picture for researchers, who now speak of a family of human immunodeficiency viruses. The original virus, now called HIV by international accord, has been joined by two new West African strains -- LAV-2 and HTLV-4. Moreover, said Robert C. Gallo of the National Cancer Institute, &quot;there seem to be (other) retroviruses from Africa unrelated to any of the HIVs&quot; so far identified.    The French say LAV-2 causes AIDS. As for HTLV-4, Harvard's Myron E. Essex has said that the virus, isolated from West African prostitutes, hasn't yet caused AIDS. But he now concedes it might do so -- thus damping hopes that HTLV-4 could be used as a natural vaccine.    This multiplicity causes problems for blood testing. For example, most Central Africans who carry the LAV-2 virus don't show positive with the standard AIDS-screening procedure now used at blood banks, said Marc Alizon of the Pasteur Institute. Thus, he urged blood banks to test separately for the new strains.    A further complication is that the AIDS virus appears to interact with other viruses -- such as herpes, cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus -- making the host's body more receptive to infection, or making a latent infection become active.    Dr. Gallo suggested, too, that many of the cancers linked with AIDS -- including Kaposi's sarcoma, liver cancer and several types of lymphoma -- may have other causes once HIV infection is established. He reported a provocative experiment in which human Kaposi's cells were transplanted onto a mouse. What resulted wasn't simply the graft of a human tumor but a mouse-type Kaposi's tumor, suggesting an independent virus may have spawned the new lesion.    Developing Drug Therapies   Such complexities are a challenge to those working on new kinds of drugs.    Makoto Matsukura, a scientist at the National Cancer Institute, reported a test-tube success using agents known as phosphorothioates. These belong to a class of compounds called &quot;anti-sense&quot; compounds, which can turn off the specific function of a viral gene. Dr. Matsukura said researchers had inhibited viral production significantly with them. This, he said, implies &quot;important therapeutic potential.&quot; Similarly, John A. Zaia of the City of Hope, a medical-research center in Duarte, Calif., said he had made an anti-sense compound for an AIDS-virus gene called TAT-3, and had achieved &quot;potent anti-viral activity&quot; in the test tube.    New uses for AZT (azidothymidine) and related drugs also may be on the horizon. AZT, which is marketed by Burroughs-Wellcome Co. under the trade name Retrovir, is being tested on children with AIDS and related neurological disease at NCI, in a study directed by Phil Pizzo. And Ruth Ruprecht, a scientist at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, has found that AZT crosses the placental barrier in mice, suggesting that prenatal treatment may be possible.    Samuel Broder, NCI's associate director for clinical oncology, said that AZT and its sister compounds DDC (dideoxycytidine) and DDA (dideoxyadenosine) work in the test tube against HTLV-4. &quot;So these drugs are likely to work against the new African viruses&quot; as well as the original AIDS virus, he told the conferees. The reason: The drug's target, an enzyme that promotes viral reproduction, remains constant among the variant strains.    Toward an AIDS Vaccine   One puzzle that continues to confound vaccine researchers is why AIDS patients make plenty of antibodies but still get sick. &quot;None of us knows yet what constitutes protective immunity,&quot; said Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.    Dani Bolognesi of Duke University pointed out that the major obstacles in AIDS-vaccine development are the virus's variant strains, its genetic diversity and its ability to infect the host in at least two ways: directly, through free-roaming virus particles; and cell to cell, through host cells it has already commandeered. This necessitates at least two kinds of immune response: antibodies and killer cells.    But Dr. Bolognesi said he saw &quot;a ray of hope&quot; in the work of the British researcher Angus Dagleish. Dr. Dagleish told conferees that he has constructed a vaccine prototype using a so-called anti-idiotype. This is a futuristic model for vaccines that, unlike many present-day vaccines, contain no natural virus particles.    To produce them, scientists inject animals with a viral protein and then harvest the antibodies that the animals' immune systems make in response. Then they inject those antibodies into other animals, provoking antibodies to the antibodies. Because the lock-and-key model applies as well to antibodies and foreign proteins, these successive generations of antibodies carry an &quot;internal image&quot; of the original virus -- which, scientists hope, may spark an immune response.    Dr. Bolognesi noted that AIDS would require a &quot;cocktail&quot; vaccine, in which elements from all the variant strains were blended to achieve broad immunity.    Adding to the sober tone of the conference were recent data about the progression of AIDS from infection to disease. To date, public-health officials have estimated that 20% to 30% of those infected with the virus would develop AIDS within five years, after which the risk would decline. The hope was that a majority of those infected would remain &quot;healthy carriers&quot; for life. That hope is now eroding as the epidemic, still young, unfolds.    &quot;Those early estimates are unreliable given the recent introduction of the virus into the population,&quot; said Paul Volberding, head of AIDS Activities at San Francisco General Hospital. A study of homosexual men in San Francisco shows that more than 60% of those infected have developed AIDS within seven years, Dr. Volberding said, &quot;and it's getting worse.&quot; The San Francisco study parallels a previously reported West German study.    Moreover, Dr. Volberding said, it has been found that &quot;the risk is linear for five years and then accelerates.&quot; Some scientists believe that infected people who don't develop AIDS may eventually suffer subtler forms of immune deficiency or slowly smoldering malignancies.    Such indications -- along with the estimate by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control that 1.5 million Americans are now infected with AIDS -- are helping break down ethical barriers to early testing and treatment. &quot;Working with a rapid and fatal epidemic,&quot; Dr. Volberding noted, &quot;has made it imperative that we change the rules.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>