<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881115-0177 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: When Midsize Law Firms Are Suitable </HL><SO> </SO><IN> FIN </IN><TEXT>   Re your Oct. 19 article &quot;Midsize Law Firms Struggle to Survive&quot;: I was one of the partners of Demov, Morris andamp; Hammerling -- one of the firms whose dissolution you described. I do take issue, however, with the principal implication of your article -- that there is no longer a place for the midsize, high-quality, general-practice law firm in New York City. I, for one, believe that there always will be a place for such firms, notwithstanding my prior experience, and I have put my own money where my mouth is -- by joining Morrison Cohen andamp; Singer, a midsize Manhattan firm.    Morrison Cohen andamp; Singer started four years ago as a 20-person firm. Today we have approximately 35 professionals. Our client base is substantial, and many of our clients share their legal work with us and with large firms -- matching their needs with the firm that can deal most effectively and efficiently with their problem. What's made our firm work and thrive, both in terms of economics and job satisfaction, is a special &quot;glue&quot; composed of many constituent parts -- a mutual respect of each other's strengths and abilities, a willingness to take risks, a commitment to share one's values, knowledge and experience not only with associates but also with one's partners and, most important, a belief in the continuing importance of personal honor and integrity.    Your article fails to point out that the principal allure of the &quot;megafirm&quot; to individual lawyer-rainmakers is not increased staffing capabilities but rather personal financial betterment, and so to lawyers who view the practice of law as merely another &quot;business&quot; the prospect of financial betterment is reason enough to defect from the midsize firms. However, it is certainly possible for the economics of a midsize firm to be as good as those of the megafirms. Further, there remain many who believe that the practice of law is not a business, but rather a profession that must be conducted in a businesslike manner. This distinction is critical.    The central tenet of any business is profit maximization, chiefly achieved through production efficiency. Viewed in this light, a law firm would be a kind of paper factory. A client's problem is fed into one end, is subjected to processing (by adding units of legal research, writing, word processing, overhead, etc.) and emerges as a finished product (i.e., an opinion, a set of documents, a court decision, etc.). Maximizing production efficiency requires that lawyers in such firms become highly specialized. Their roles are reduced to those of assembly-line workers: Each specialist attacks only the small piece of the overall problem that lies within his own increasingly specialized area of expertise. In a real sense, this kind of megafirm would largely be a conglomeration of superspecialized discrete law practices, no one of which can long survive independently, held together by a &quot;brand name&quot; and a common accounting system.    But the model of the megafirm as a business contains the seeds of its own destruction -- overspecialization of lawyers. How can the lawyer trained only in the megafirm obtain the one personal quality that distinguishes good lawyers from bad lawyers -- judgment? Judgment is obtained only through broad experience, either one's own or the shared experience of others, and it is only through judgment that a lawyer can exercise his most important role as &quot;counselor&quot; to his clients. The Fortune 500 clients who engage the megafirms have their own legal &quot;counselors&quot; of course -- their own in-house counsel. For such clients, the relative lack of &quot;counselors&quot; at the megafirms (except for those who were originally trained in the smaller firms) poses no problem; the megafirm has in a sense become the back office of these clients.    For the clients that do not have their own in-house counsel, the attorney's role as counselor and adviser is critical. It is for these clients (although smaller in size, certainly larger in number) that the midsize firm has the most to offer -- lawyers who, while expert in a particular area, also have broad personal experience in other areas and who have had the benefit of sharing the experiences of their partners (whom they know personally and not just as names on the letterhead).    It is possible to start from scratch a small-to-midsize law firm in New York these days. These should be the firms that successful lawyers would want to run to, not from.    Andrew M. Schreier   Attorney at Law   New York   ---   I disagree with the views expressed in your article describing the inevitable disappearance of the midsize law firm. I am an active, longtime client of one such midsize, midtown law firm, whose spectrum of services and capabilities is perfectly matched to my needs. My legal needs, I hasten to add, are various.    In the past year alone, my attorneys have assisted me with refinancing my major real-estate holdings in Manhattan, acquiring a residence in Southhampton, estate planning, general commercial transactions concerning my restaurant operations, organizing my soon-to-be-opened new liquor store and tax planning for all of the above.    To my law firm, I am an important client and I receive the personal attention that I could not possibly receive at the larger New York firms. From the perspective of a successful, growing, medium-size business owner, the midsize firm provides the best delivery of quality legal services -- you get to know personally the specific lawyers with whom you work, you obtain the benefits of various legal specialists' input and advice without feeling as though you're shuffled around from one anonymous department to another, and while the quality of legal work is entirely comparable with that of the larger firms, the cost to the client is not.    Jim McMullen   New York</TEXT></DOC>