<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870827-0012 </DOCNO><HL> Summit Path:Arms-Control AccordIs Increasingly LikelyAfter Bonn Concession---U.S.-Soviet Talks Shape UpFor November as GermansAgree to Remove Missiles---Legacy for Reagan Years---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROPNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   President Reagan is within striking distance of a historic arms-control agreement that would change the tone of superpower relations and serve as the centerpiece of the last 16 months of his presidency.    The most significant obstacle to a U.S.-Soviet agreement to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe was removed yesterday when West Germany said it is willing to dismantle 72 nuclear-tipped Pershing missiles that it controls. The two superpowers already had agreed last month to eliminate all their missiles of similar range.    While a summit isn't guaranteed -- some questions of verification remain -- White House officials talk hopefully of a November meeting in the U.S. between Mikhail Gorbachev and Mr. Reagan. To enhance that possibility, the U.S. this week made a significant concession by easing its proposal for on-site verification. And yesterday, in a speech in Los Angeles on U.S.-Soviet relations, Mr. Reagan sounded optimistic.    &quot;The immediate agenda of arms reduction is clear. We can wrap up an agreement on intermediate-range nuclear missiles promptly,&quot; he said.    A summit meeting would have immediate political benefits for President Reagan and long-term strategic consequences for East-West relations. It would help Mr. Reagan present himself as a successful statesman and perhaps put behind him questions about his leadership raised by the Iran-Contra scandal. And, as President Reagan so often notes, if these arms negotiations succeed, he will be the first American leader to conclude a pact that reduces nuclear weapons' numbers rather than merely limits their growth -- an accomplishment that could be expected to set the pattern for future arms-control agreements.    But an agreement on the intermediate-range missiles would bring a new and more difficult challenge in arms control: How to deal with the Soviets' superior conventional forces in Europe and contain European nervousness about U.S. reliability as a protective partner. Budget constraints in the U.S. and most of Western Europe make it highly unlikely that military spending will rise enough to enable the West to match Moscow tank for tank or to develop advanced new weapons to offset Soviet superiority.    As a result, most Soviet watchers say, Mr. Gorbachev will find it easy to continue his skillful campaign to woo Western Europe by proposing that East and West make equal reductions in conventional weaponry; he knows the U.S. is likely to oppose deep cuts that would perpetuate a Soviet military edge in Europe.    The Soviet leader is assumed to have not only political but also economic motives. To revive his stalled economy, he needs big infusions of Western technology and capital that are most likely to come from a Europe that feels he is seriously ready to reduce weapons and tensions.    While White House officials are seeking to damp excessive optimism about a summit, most outside experts believe a meeting is all but inevitable. &quot;All Gorbachev has to decide is whether he wants a summit before or after he celebrates Lenin's revolution&quot; Nov. 7, says William Hyland, a Kremlin-watcher in the Nixon and Ford administrations.    West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's decision yesterday to give way on what the Soviets have called the major obstacle indicates he didn't wish to be seen as the man blocking a superpower arms agreement.    The next significant step is likely to come Sept. 15 when Secretary of State George Shultz and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze are scheduled to open three days of talks in Washington. Such a meeting would be a likely occasion for working out details on verification and other sticking points.    If, as expected, a summit is held, it would bring U.S.-Soviet relations, often confrontational in Mr. Reagan's presidency, back to the mainstream course that has marked them for most of the past 25 years.    Mr. Reagan acknowledged yesterday that Mr. Gorbachev's campaign of &quot;glasnost,&quot; or openness, and his political skills are producing significant changes in the Soviet approach to the rest of the world. &quot;We are seeing a Soviet leadership that appears more willing to address the problems that have divided East and West so long and to seek agreements based on mutual benefit,&quot; the president said.    The question for Mr. Reagan in his final months may be whether he can seize the initiative in the superpower dialogue or must continue to respond to Soviet proposals. Mr. Reagan sought to take the offensive yesterday by calling on the Soviet Union to disclose its military budget, reveal details of its conventional armed forces and get its forces out of Afghanistan.    He reiterated some of his standard conservative themes by laying out &quot;guideposts&quot; that would determine whether the superpowers move into a significantly improved relationship. They include destruction of the Berlin wall, &quot;self-determination&quot; in Eastern Europe, elimination of the so-called Brezhnev doctrine calling for Soviet support for revolutionary movements around the world, and a cooperative approach to defensive systems like &quot;Star Wars.&quot;    But the president has given no indication he intends to link an arms pact to progress on other issues. Indeed, critics of the agreement nearing completion charge that the administration is undermining Western security by eliminating medium-range nuclear weapons in Europe without any commensurate reductions in intercontinental-range weapons. The Soviets are free to add new SS-24 and SS-25 missiles that, because of their long range, are excluded from the pact being negotiated -- but that could still be deployed in parts of the Soviet Union where they could be targeted on Europe.    This potential new threat, coupled with America's willingness to eliminate medium-range missiles that only six years ago it insisted were vital to Europe's security, has led critics like former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to charge that the administration is essentially encouraging Bonn to seek accommodation with the Soviets.    Some West German government sources suggested that the first evidence of such accommodation came in Chancellor Kohl's announcement yesterday. He said he would scrap Pershing missiles on German soil if the two superpowers conclude an agreement to remove their own nuclear missiles from Europe. These sources say Mr. Kohl acted not only out of a wish to please America and ease domestic political pressure but also out of concern that the issue might mar the long-awaited Sept. 7 visit of East German President Erich Honecker, who would be the first East German leader to travel to West Germany.    Although Mr. Kohl attached a number of conditions to his announcement, none are considered significant. &quot;The knot has been undone,&quot; said one European diplomat in Bonn. &quot;He put a lot of ifs and buts around the proposal, but the result has been achieved.&quot;    Both West German and U.S. officials sought to establish that Mr. Kohl's decision wasn't the result of American pressure. Publicly, Mr. Kohl tried to portray his proposal as a national rather than an Alliance decision.    Western disarmament experts saw this distinction as a bid to bolster the argument that the Pershing missiles are third-party systems that should remain outside Soviet-American negotiations. This is important because both Britain and France control nuclear missiles that they have insisted must not be part of the superpower negotiations; a precedent on German missiles could be cited by the Soviets to try to include the British and French missiles in any deal. (West Germany controls the Pershing 1-As even though the warheads are American.)    &quot;This is my own proposal,&quot; Mr. Kohl said. But he added, &quot;I have been in very intense consultations with our American friends in the last 48 hours. I want the incumbent president to sign an accord this year.&quot;    For the moment, the ball is in Moscow's court. Mr. Kohl set four conditions for dismantling the Pershings: Washington and Moscow must formally agree on a pact, must resolve the verification issue, must ratify the agreement and then must actually eliminate their missiles. In short, Mr. Kohl is saying Germany's missiles will be the last to go.    But the presumption is the four conditions will be met and thus the missiles will go. &quot;I am prepared to state today,&quot; Mr. Kohl said, &quot;that with the final removal of all Soviet and American medium-range missiles, the Pershing 1-As should not be modernized but rather dismantled.&quot;    Moscow's initial reaction was to complain that the chancellor was attempting to shift responsibility from West Germany to the Soviets in the event there is no arms agreement. But Western experts see this as a pro forma response rather than a sign that genuine trouble lurks.    More important will be the Soviet response to this week's American proposal on verification. It calls for on-site inspection to verify destruction of missiles, and for possible surprise inspections to ensure that banned medium-range missiles aren't being secretly built in other production facilities. But the new proposal cuts back on the number of possible surprise inspections and drops the idea of placing inspectors outside missile assembly sites.    A U.S. arms-control official in Washington cautioned yesterday that nobody can anticipate how the Soviets will respond and that there could be months of negotiating before details are worked out. &quot;Nobody is going to allow this to be rushed to a conclusion,&quot; he said. &quot;There's a lot of green-eyeshade work.&quot;    ---   Victoria Pope in Bonn contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>