<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880126-0122 </DOCNO><HL> The Presidential Quadrille </HL><AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Aren't we Americans overdoing self-laceration a little in this election year? Reflect on the almost masochistic relish we take in decrying both the men who dare offer themselves as possibilities for the White House and the process by which our presidential nominees are selected.    Now it may be that, with the exception of Jesse Jackson, none of the declared candidates in either party possesses an electric personality. But we have had effective presidents in the past who were low in personal electricity. All the Democratic candidates and most of the Republicans (Pat Robertson must be kidding) appear men of intelligence, ability and address who display concern for issues and a sense of responsibility about the American future.    Seven Dwarves? The critical question in politics is still the punch line from the old joke about two friends who encounter each other after a long interval. &quot;How's your wife?&quot; asks one. &quot;Compared to what?&quot; replies the other. Compared to the president the republic has endured for these seven endless years, nearly all the candidates rate well by such relevant tests as grasp of issues, knowledge of America and the world, intellectual curiosity, readiness to seek informed advice, commitment to honesty in government and, very likely, native intelligence. Almost any one would be an improvement over the present recumbent. They hardly constitute a crowd that shames the nation.    As for our presidential selection process, it is obviously far from perfect. Iowa and New Hampshire exert an entirely disproportionate influence, we have too many primaries altogether (twice as many as we had 20 years ago), and the mass television debate is a rather demeaning affair. Still, in moderation primaries are an indispensable means of introducing the candidates to the country -- and the country to the candidates. For all the accompanying nonsense, the voters know a good deal more today about the contenders than they did six months ago, and the contenders know a good deal more about the nation they propose to govern.    The names of most candidates may not yet be household words. But this does not necessarily disqualify them from the White House. The winners will be household words soon enough. In the meantime, the lantern of the press plays fitfully upon them, spotlighting one for a heady moment, then relegating him to the darkness and spotlighting another. Looking back among the Democrats, October was Gov. Michael Dukakis's month in the media spotlight; November was Sen. Paul Simon's. December began as Sen. Albert Gore's month until the second coming of Gary Hart. January has been Gov. Bruce Babbitt's month. February may offer reprises to Messrs. Dukakis, Simon or Gore or a new chance for Rep. Richard Gephardt. These have been the months when the press vamps for time.    But beginning on Feb. 8 with the Iowa caucuses, the voters will take over the process. Soon the weaker candidates will fall by the wayside. As the field narrows, the media buildup of the survivors will intensify: cover stories in the news magazines; interviews with mothers, sisters, daughters; reminiscences by childhood and college chums. By midsummer, we probably will feel that we have known the finalists most of our lives.    Who will these finalists be? I will leave the Republicans to those better acquainted with that party and its tribal customs. But let us contemplate the Democratic possibilities. Their geographical experience has been diverse. The etiquette of debate requires them to exaggerate nuances of disagreement, but in fact they present a united front on most issues and are all generally faithful to the party's liberal traditions.    This is as it should be. There would be no sense in the Democrats' nominating a conservative. If the nation is still in the conservative phase of the political cycle, the voters will prefer the genuine Republican article to a Democratic imitation every time. Moreover, every indication is that the conservative mood of the 1980s is running its course and that a new phase in the cycle impends. It would be folly for the Democrats to move to the right at just the time when the electorate is beginning to edge over toward the left.    The question remains whether the prospect of a deadlock may force new contenders into the Democratic contest. Mr. Hart's re-entry seems likely to increase the chance that no candidate will have a commanding lead by mid-March. Messrs. Hart and Jackson, both widely regarded as unelectable, may have a third or more of the delegates between them at the convention, with the other two-thirds dispersed among several regional candidates.    Suppose the March 8 primary, &quot;Super Tuesday,&quot; when 35% of the Democratic delegates are to be chosen, fails to produce an electable front-runner. Is it possible then for a new candidate to emerge, enter at least the California and New Jersey primaries (June 7), perhaps Ohio and Indiana (May 3), and develop enough momentum to be brokered through to the nomination between June 8 and July 18, when the conclave opens in Atlanta?    It won't be easy. The candidates who have expended so much heart, energy, time and money in slogging around the country over the past two years can be expected to restrain their enthusiasm over a Johnny-come-lately who rushes in at the last moment and tries to sweep up the chips. Some voters may feel that way too.    One school of thought, located in Georgia, holds that the present candidates will defer only to a person of such transcendent eminence that their own stature would not be diminished by his nomination. These people, a doughty corps of true believers, forecast the resurrection of Jimmy Carter. Now, ex-presidents have an understandable desire for vindication. Herbert Hoover went to the Republican convention in 1936 hoping that the delegates would turn to him. Jimmy Carter's chances for renomination are about as good as those of that earlier engineer in the White House.    Democratic &quot;deus ex machina&quot; speculations these days turn rather to three names: Sens. Sam Nunn of Georgia and Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York. Sen. Nunn is an able and agreeable man. He has demonstrated an impressive mastery of national security issues and has somewhat moderated his conservative positions on domestic issues. But he remains too conservative, I would think, to carry much appeal outside the white South.    Sen. Bradley is a serious-minded and intelligent man who, for better or worse, produced a revision of the tax code and has made valuable contributions to the discussion of the Latin American external debt. But, except for conservation, he has not identified himself with any of the historic issues of the Democratic Party -- the use of government to promote the general welfare; or regulation in the public interest; or the plight of the ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-nourished; or racial justice; or civil liberties. His advocacy of the flat tax would have appalled Cordell Hull, the father of the progressive income tax amendment, and Speaker Jim Wright is surely more in the Democratic style when he opposes Sen. Bradley's insistence on the scheduled reduction in tax rates for the rich.    In foreign policy, Sen. Bradley has been the only Northern Democrat in the Senate to support aid for the Contras; he is a wobbler on Star Wars; and he has hardly been a leader in the fight for arms control. His contribution to policy toward the Soviet Union is to propose that &quot;we demand economic reform as a condition . . . for permitting the Soviet Union to borrow on more favorable terms&quot; -- an approach calculated to do little but irritate a proud nation seeking respect on the international scene. I may have him wrong; but he hardly seems much of a Democrat, at least in the Roosevelt-Truman-Kennedy-Johnson sense of the word, and it is not easy to see what in his public record entitles him to consideration as a Democratic candidate. Unavailability always enhances a politician's charm, and one doubts that the Bradley boom would survive his first fortnight on the hustings.    Nor can either Sam Nunn or Bill Bradley be said to have an electric personality. Gov. Cuomo possesses electricity in abundance. But, like the other two, he has been quite determined in saying that he will not be a candidate in 1988. Many Democrats decline to take him at his word. They concede that he would no doubt be greatly relieved if Super Tuesday coughs up a front-runner. But suppose all signs on March 9 point to a deadlock? Suppose a cross-section of Democrats calls on him to remember his obligations to his party and his country? It would still not be too late to enter the California and New Jersey primaries -- both states made to order for Gov. Cuomo. He could even run in New York. So the dream goes. Maybe it is a pipe dream. Anyway, it will be an entertaining spring.    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>