<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890907-0120 </DOCNO><DD> = 890907 </DD><AN> 890907-0120. </AN><HL> Smart Weapons, Stressed Out Soldiers@  ----@  By Ian Cheeseman </HL><DD> 09/07/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   There has not been a full-scale war, using all available weapons and techniques, since the end of World War II. In the intervening years, technology has advanced by quantum leaps. But the raw materiel of war -- the enlisted men and the officers who command them -- is essentially the same.    In today's military, technology has dictated that to avoid unacceptable losses, men must be kept in very small groups, widely separated and moving frequently to avoid a single strike taking out a whole platoon or company.    These factors are the opposite of those employed since men first went to war. In the past, peer pressure helped ensure a high level of performance in the face of the enemy. If a soldier's companions were within sight and sound, it was unacceptable for him not to fight as well as he could. He did not want to let down the team.    On today's field of conflict, those peer pressures are frequently absent; a soldier is often alone with his thoughts as the enemy rolls toward him. How much easier it is to lie low and not engage the enemy if nobody can see you.    To these pressures must be added the fear of the unknown. Many U.S. troops and all other NATO soldiers have loved ones in what would be the war zone of Western Europe. Could a soldier call down a fire mission on his hometown not knowing if his girlfriend or grandmother had managed to flee before the enemy rolled in? Because of the NATO commitment to fight a defensive war, this is not a dilemma Warsaw pact forces will ever face.    Battlefield stress has been recognized since World War I, but the sheer terror that must be overcome to operate some of today's complex weapons has not been sufficiently tested. This is because it simply is not possible in a civilized society to subject individuals to the ordeal that would be required. Imagine the following scenario, which may allow a civilian to understand this level of stress:    You are driving along the highway and look up to see a truck on your side of the road. You jam on the brakes and start to slide sideways. The truck clips your fender and you spin to a stop. The car is damaged, but you are unhurt.    Your friend beside you is screaming, and the adrenalin rush has made your legs weak, your heart races and your hands shake. You now have seven seconds to change the batteries in the flashlight you keep in the car, turn it on and point it at the truck, or it will hit you again -- and this time it will kill you.    This is very similar to having a tank fire on your foxhole and miss. Changing the batteries in a flashlight, turning it on and pointing it are similar actions to loading and firing one of the least sophisticated of today's light anti-tank weapons. Seven seconds is about the time it would take a tank to reload its main gun and fire. The simple task of changing flashlight batteries is one that most people have done dozens of times under normal conditions. But to do it under the circumstances just described would be beyond most people. Pity the poor soldier.    On a modern battlefield an infantryman can expect to be the target of the whole panoply of weaponry -- from the simple rifle to main battle tanks and helicopter gunships -- all of which he will feel are aimed solely at him. He may not be able to use his radio, because of electronic countermeasures; he may not be able to see another member of his own side because of distance or smoke or attrition, and he will feel as if he has been in a succession of malevolent car wrecks aimed solely at destroying him. During all this he will be expected to maintain and deploy weapons it took the West's finest scientists and designers many years and billions of dollars to perfect under ideal conditions.    Armies do not deploy supermen to operate these weapons. The average enlisted soldier is a lot less like Rambo than like a plumber or the gardener that you see every month. Indeed, in Europe the high proportion of reservists that will be called to war means that many plumbers and gardeners will be on the front lines.    Trained technicians sitting in air-conditioned computer rooms during peacetime make plenty of mistakes. Imagine a reservist, under fire from a battery of self-propelled guns, trying to operate a &quot;smart&quot; weapon that he has not seen for months or perhaps years.    The senior officers who command him will never be able to understand what he is going through. Almost by definition, senior officers are never alone. They have to have staff and enlisted men around them to manage the command process. And while they will be in danger from the enemy, they will not be facing that danger alone, or very nearly so. Until the advent of modern communications, generals experienced the stress and conditions under which their men were fighting. They had to be within sight of their own troops and the enemy to control the action. Now even a regimental commander may be miles from the forward edge of the battle.    The problem today is not whether sophisticated technological weapons will work. The challenge facing manufacturers and commanders is whether an average 19-year-old kid from the inner city or his reservist uncle can remember enough of his training and summon up enough courage to use effectively the weapons he has been given. Smart weapons and competitive strategies do not win wars; smart men and combative officers do.    ---   Mr. Cheeseman, a free-lance writer, is a former editor in chief of Computer News, a British weekly, and a former enlisted infantry officer. </TEXT></DOC>