<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880429-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Techno-Guru: If Japan Poses Threat In Superconductors, Shoji Tanaka Is Why --- He Gets Academics, Officials And Rival Firms to Join In Science's Newest Race --- Chips, Optics and Now This </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Kreider Yoder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN HIT NIPNY IBM ROK DD </CO><IN> ELE </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan wins technology wars because of men like Shoji Tanaka.    Thirteen years ago, Mr. Tanaka led his nation's charge into semiconductor research. Today, Japan leads the world chip market. In the late 1970s, he urged an assault on a new hybrid technology that melded optics and electronics. Today, Japan dominates the market for fiber optics and optical disks.    Now, Japan has its eye on superconductors, a revolutionary technology that many believe could prove as important an advance as the transistor. To lead its scientists into research battle, Japan, not surprisingly, has turned once again to Mr. Tanaka.    The 60-year-old professor of applied physics recently was named the head of a superconductor research consortium. His mission is to exploit the technology of superconductors, an old idea thrust to the forefront by a scientific breakthrough. Japan wants to propel the new superconductors out of the lab and into the factory.    As a research guru with a keen sense of commercial possibility, Mr. Tanaka counsels his nation's electronics giants. As a technology visionary, he has the ear of his government. As an unofficial statesman for industry, he has a platform from which he can broadcast his gospel of scientific cooperation here and in foreign capitals.    Widely respected for his early research on superconductors, Mr. Tanaka has clout far beyond the laboratory, unlike many of his rivals in Europe and the U.S. The ability of people like him to rally industry, government and academia around a new technology is one of Japan's key advantages over the West.    The graying, bespectacled professor isn't a dynamic leader in the Western mold. Like many of his nation's elders, such as Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, he wields influence through a vast informal network of interpersonal relationships. &quot;Prof. Tanaka {is} a closeup of Japan itself,&quot; says Shinichi Uchida, an associate professor at Tokyo University who has worked with Mr. Tanaka.    His ability to weld disparate, often quarrelsome groups will be put to the test in his new job. The consortium puts 100 scientists from 44 of Japan's biggest industrial concerns under his direction. The race to commercialize new, higher-temperature superconductors pits his team against formidable competitors in Japan, the U.S. and Europe, among them International Business Machines Corp. and American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. To the victor belongs the spoils of the market.    Mr. Tanaka was among the first scientists to recognize the potential of superconductors, which are substances that can carry electricity with no resistance and thus no loss of power. If made practical, they could bring spectacular changes to almost any electrical product or process. That could mean vastly faster and more energy-efficient products such as computers, cars and household appliances. But until the recent breakthrough, superconductors had to be chilled to a hopelessly low temperature to work, so except for a few applications there really was no technology.    Now there is -- a technology Mr. Tanaka happened upon partly by chance. The Tokyo University professor had studied semiconductor physics at Indiana's Purdue University in the late 1950s and early 1960s. In 1975, he returned to the U.S., which then dominated chip research. Eager to walk the leading edge of chip technology, he arranged to visit several of the most prominent corporate laboratories.    One day, while at an IBM lab in Yorktown Heights, N.Y., Mr. Tanaka happened upon a bulletin board on his way to the men's room. Tacked to the board was an announcement of an in-house seminar. The topic: the superconducting properties of an obscure ceramic. Curious, Mr. Tanaka quickly jotted down the ceramic's chemical notation.    Several weeks later when he got back to Tokyo, he combed the library for articles on the little-known compound. He managed to turn up only one research paper. That further piqued his interest and he set out to study the material. &quot;He always likes doing research on odd-ball materials -- things that don't appear of much use to anybody,&quot; Mr. Uchida says.    Mr. Tanaka continued to study the ceramic for the next 11 years, but he couldn't find any uses for it. Eventually, even the Japanese government lost interest in his research. In 1986, it canceled a grant for superconductor research because his lab wasn't producing tangible results.    Then, in late 1986, a deputy called his attention to an article in an obscure scientific journal by K. Alex Mueller and J. George Bednorz, researchers at IBM in Zurich. In it, the pair described a new class of superconducting ceramic that worked at a warmer temperature than had long been thought possible. Excited at their apparent breakthrough, the deputy assigned the task of duplicating the findings to one of his charges, a college senior who was casting about for a topic for his graduation thesis.    Six days later, Mr. Tanaka got an urgent call from Mr. Uchida. The student had replicated the IBM scientists' findings. Word of the superconducting ceramic began to spread fast. In the U.S., Paul Chu of the University of Houston pushed the limits even further. He cooked up a slightly different ceramic that was superconducting at still-warmer temperatures -- so warm that the temperature could be achieved cheaply by using liquid nitrogen as a refrigerant. The news threw the world's scientific community into a frenzy.    Messrs. Mueller and Bednorz got a Nobel Prize for their work. Mr. Chu got a deluge of lucrative job offers. Mr. Tanaka got a call from the Ministry of International Trade and Industry.    As scientists in other countries scrambled to push the technology to new limits, there was a growing sense of urgency in Japan. In early 1987, Masatoshi Urashima, a new-technology planner at MITI, approached Mr. Tanaka. MITI wanted to organize a consortium to undertake research into superconductors. Participants would share the risks, the costs and the benefits of research.    Within weeks, the two men were calling each other 10 times a day, laying plans for the study groups, committees and budget proposals for a national superconductor program. &quot;Mr. Tanaka has tremendous foresight,&quot; says Mr. Urashima. &quot;In the early stage of a technology, when we're groping around and ideas don't seem to come, he's always got prescience.&quot;    Several months later, MITI had signed up the 44 industrial giants, among them Hitachi Ltd., Mitsubishi Electric Corp., NEC Corp. and Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd.    Membership gives the companies access to a network of critical information. Participants will be first to understand MITI's thinking, competitors' thinking and the most promising approaches to exploiting ceramic superconductors, says NEC vice president Michiyuki Uenohara. &quot;Those byproducts are more important to us than the technology itself.&quot;    But Mr. Tanaka has failed to persuade any foreign companies to join his lab, despite repeated invitations. IBM officials complain the cost is too high. (Members pay 102 million yen to join, or about $825,000, and annual dues equal to about $110,000.) Besides, IBM says, the work is already being done at home.    Rockwell International Corp. and Du Pont Co. have opted for less expensive associate memberships, which will give them limited access to the lab's research.    Jim Martin, director of Rockwell's technology office in Tokyo, says associate membership &quot;is the biggest step we can make at this time.&quot; U.S. companies aren't familiar with Japanese consortiums, he adds, and &quot;it's still hard to see what the benefits and risks are.&quot;    But Mr. Tanaka frets that U.S. companies are missing the point. &quot;It's vital for them to penetrate Japan's information network,&quot; he says.    Mr. Tanaka has ambitious plans for the lab. He has recruited a cadre of scientists from Europe, Canada and the U.S. He intends to install custom-made robots to make and test superconductor samples, thus freeing researchers for more vital tasks, such as the tough challenge of forming the brittle ceramics into products.    Meanwhile, much of the earlier panic in Japan's scientific and industrial communities has subsided. Japan has learned it is well positioned to try to commercially exploit superconductors. Japanese companies already are at the forefront of development of an older generation of superconductors, those that have to be cooled almost to absolute zero. They are undisputed leaders in processing materials, especially ceramics. Labs here have produced additional advances in basic superconductor research in recent months.    But Japan's aggressiveness in pursuing the lead has sparked fears in the international scientific community. &quot;They are going to win this,&quot; a U.S. government scientist in Japan says. &quot;They're going to walk away with&quot; the technology.    Such talk disturbs Mr. Tanaka. &quot;Superconductivity,&quot; he says, &quot;must be seen as an asset belonging to all humanity.&quot;    Mr. Tanaka worries about the danger signs he has seen during recent trips to the U.S. America, he says, is reacting with panic and rage at the prospect of Japan's dominating yet another high-tech market. He says it is imperative that Japan avoid a repeat of the acrimonious aftermath of its push into semiconductors. Japan must share its research with the world, he argues, though it may feel it has little to gain by sharing. He also warns that the U.S. must swallow its pride and join Japan's organized research efforts. American aloofness could bring on a rush of Japanese nationalism, his argument runs, and if that happens, Japan may rush to dominate superconductivity -- and tensions between the nations will heighten.    &quot;The Japanese always run to nationalism,&quot; he says. &quot;That nationalism needs to be strictly controlled.&quot;    Mr. Tanaka knows where nationalism has led Japan. As an 18-year-old in 1945, he watched American bombs raze his Tokyo neighborhood. He fears a technology war is brewing. Superconductors could provide the first battlefield. &quot;It's a fear that younger generations just don't understand,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>