<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871223-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Some Economic Cliff Notes---By Paul W. McCracken</HL><DD> 12/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FREST GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Black Monday and the market events of October may not, it seems, send the U.S. economy into a recession after all. Even so, the potential for things to go awry remains uncomfortably large.    No great sagacity is required to suggest that the international economic order is in some disarray. &quot;A toe dance along the edge of the cliff&quot; may not even be too lurid a metaphor; having a little more of the cliff's surface visible would be comforting. And Black Mondays are, to invoke an old metaphor from The Economist, the thermometer registering the heat but not the furnace producing it. (After this year's political traumas, one must be scrupulous about literary credits.)    Part of the problem is that there are three major disequilibrating forces at work in the world economy, and a disproportionate share of attention is focused on one. That one is, of course, the U.S. budget deficit, and it does remain a major force distorting world trade and financial flows. The logic of this has practically become a litany. And for the rest of the world, focusing on Uncle Sam's fiscal sins has had the wonderful advantage that troublesome matters at home could be ignored. Mark Twain once wryly observed that nothing so needs reforming as other people's habits.    There are, however, two others sets of forces imposing strains on the international economic order, and they are not trivial. One is the continued stagnation of the European economies. The pattern here varies, but for most of Europe unemployment rates are in the 11% to 12% zone. For West Germany it is more than 8% -- this for a country that with a quite stable price level used to have unemployment rates in the 1% to 2% zone. And European rates may drift higher in 1988, according to projections of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.    The main reasons these unemployment rates should be reduced have to do with the fundamental obligation of domestic economic policy to encourage an adequate creation of job opportunities at home, and European governments have been flunking that test. But in this globalized era, these policies have adverse effects for others as well, including the U.S. From 1980 to 1986, U.S. exports to Canada rose 57% and to Japan, 21%. In 1986, however, U.S. exports to Europe's Big Four (the U.K., Italy, France and West Germany) were 7% lower than in 1980. And this Euro-stagnation is even more serious for lesser developed countries as they endeavor to enlarge or maintain their own earnings from exports to the industrial world.    The obsessive preoccupation with a large export surplus to achieve domestic prosperity in Asia, and to some extent in Europe, is the third major distortion imposed on the world economy, and it is a major source of mounting political pressures for protectionist U.S. trade legislation. When these economies were struggling and of minor significance in world markets, a certain amount of not quite playing by the rules of a liberal trading order could be tolerated. Now they are upper-middle- to high-income countries and must begin to act like the big boys on the block that they have become.    Hong Kong's current account surplus this year will approach $2,000 per capita and Taiwan's at least $1,000; Japan's and West Germany's are remaining about $700 per capita. If the U.S. government were to set about to achieve a current account surplus of anything like these magnitudes, and it looked as if this goal might really be achieved, there would be screams of outrage and anguish from Europe and Asia. These countries, of course, should use more of their productive power to lift the material levels of living of their own people more rapidly. This does not sound like a request for sacrificial actions.    Given this mosaic of economic problems and imbalances, what makes sense for U.S. policy? It is not amiss to put the question that way. The era when the U.S. could be the deep-pocket uncle benevolently assuming the responsibility and the bill for the world's economic ills is long since gone. Moreover, managing U.S. economic policy is the job for the U.S. We can preach to others, and they can preach to us, but these sermons do not seem notable for their therapeutic effects. In any case, what we need to do at home to relieve international economic tensions is what we should do in our self-interest.    Broad-scope protectionist legislation is tempting as a direct-action approach, but in the end the U.S. economy itself would be the victim, and it would also feed the forces leading to a disintegration of the international economic order. Economies whose strategy is to nestle down comfortably behind trade barriers always, and quite logically, develop severe cases of economic arthritis. A major U.S. move toward a protectionist strategy would go into the history books as a classic case.    Intervention to stabilize the exchange rate of the dollar is also a loser. Gyrating exchange rates are, of course, undesirable and impede trade. But the way to avoid them is through basic policies ensuring that the market's underlying fundamentals are more stable. Direct action to glue currencies together is price control, and price controls (the experience of many centuries suggests) create short-term mischief and finally break down.    Goethe once observed that if everyone would sweep in front of his own door, the whole world would be clean. The part of the world economy's imbalances for which we have direct responsibility is our own federal budget. The combination of Treasury borrowing and private credit needs remains larger than our flow of domestic savings, and requires a continuing inflow of foreign funds for things to balance out. This means high interest rates at home. The &quot;real rate&quot; (the rate on 10-year Treasury obligations minus the rate of inflation) in the 1980s has averaged about 6% -- far above earlier periods and far above what the economy on a continuing basis could validate.    This need for foreign lending exposes us to the risk of disarray in credit markets if a real crisis of confidence were to erupt. In that case, the combination of even higher interest rates and a paralysis of credit markets would carry a high probability of a recession, reduced export earnings of LDC borrowers, and defaults and repudiation of these loans that could impair the capital of some American banks. We need, with some federal budget actions, to put more distance between ourselves and the edge of that cliff.    It also seems clear, however, that the institutions of government are incapable of handling the budget problem. The timid and inadequate budget compromise reached in Congress yesterday simply underscores this point.    Political leaders cannot entirely evade responsibility for the current excessive deficit, since their actions created it, but the disarray in government is in part caused by a wider disarray. People want the deficit reduced, but in ways that involve no new taxes and no spending cuts. And there is no consensus among economists about whether a government deficit means higher interest rates, tends to expand the economy, etc. If ideas influence policy, the paralytic state of fiscal policy in Washington reflects the disheveled state of thinking in the world of ideas.    The budget, however, will not manage itself. Some way must be found to put it on course. In our history an impasse over policy has been broken occasionally by some sort of national commission, and it is time for one again. Such a commission resolved the Social Security problem earlier in this decade. In the Johnson years a commission's proposals were the means for restructuring the budget. Still earlier, it was a commission that recommended the creation of the Federal Reserve System. This approach enables the president and members of Congress to avoid some flak by merely implementing what &quot;the commission told us to do.&quot;    It is easy to suggest that nothing much can be done until 1989, but problems urgently needing correction do not always arrange their own schedule according to the convenience of the political calendar. Between now and 1989 there is too much time for a misstep that could send the economy over the edge.    ---   Mr. McCracken is Day distinguished professor emeritus of business administration, the University of Michigan. </TEXT></DOC>