<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0014 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan Warns of Expanded Soviet RoleIf U.S. Fails to Protect Kuwaiti Tankers---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FRESTTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan, trying to justify his Persian Gulf policy in the face of mounting domestic criticism and tepid allied support, said the U.S. Navy must escort Kuwaiti oil tankers because &quot;if we don't do the job, the Soviets will.&quot;    Mr. Reagan, in a televised speech last night, generally tried to put a gloss on last week's lackluster Venice summit meeting. He insisted that new allied agreement on a negotiating position has created a &quot;historic opportunity&quot; for an arms-control accord with the Soviets. The president said he is formally telling U.S. arms negotiators to propose eliminating both short-range and medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe.    The president also tried to use criticism he heard in Venice as a tool to extract spending cuts and budget reforms from Congress. He acknowledged that leaders of the other industrialized nations have &quot;a sense of unease&quot; about American budget deficits.    As a result, he urged Congress to agree to a constitutional amendment to balance the federal budget and to give him a line-item veto. But besides pushing for those longtime initiatives that have never won a groundswell of support in Congress, Mr. Reagan didn't offer any concrete proposals for reaching a budget compromise with lawmakers.    Though the speech was intended to counter criticism that the summit didn't accomplish much, some of Mr. Reagan's most pointed comments were intended to quell the growing domestic political problems over his plan to provide naval escorts to protect 11 Kuwaiti tankers from attack by Iran. But Mr. Reagan's comments may only add to the confusion about whether his administration's main aim is to protect the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf or to minimize the Soviet presence there.    Mr. Reagan said that if the U.S. fails to protect the tankers, &quot;we would abdicate our role as a naval power. And we would open opportunities for the Soviets to move into this chokepoint of the free world's oil flow. In a word, if we don't do the job, the Soviets will.&quot;    Kuwait, an ally of Iraq in the six-year Iran-Iraq war, also has asked the Soviets to protect some tankers, and the Soviets have agreed. But administration spokesmen trying to explain the U.S. decision have vacillated about how much the Soviet decision affected American policy.    Some spokesmen have said the U.S. had to agree to help Kuwait as a way to minimize the Soviet role, while others have asserted that the U.S. might be willing to work with the Soviets to develop some kind of joint operating agreement in the gulf.    Mr. Reagan's comments appeared to be a clear statement that he has decided to try to limit the Soviet role. His remarks also suggested that the U.S. will treat the Kuwaiti tankers, which will be allowed to fly the American flag, as if they were U.S. ships. He said the U.S. can't fail to protect the tankers &quot;simply because these ships previously flew the flag of another country, Kuwait.&quot;    Mr. Reagan also asserted that he was &quot;gratified&quot; by the support allies in Venice showed for his Persian Gulf plan. While he noted that Britain is continuing its practice of escorting its own ships, he didn't offer any evidence of new support. And aides acknowledge that allies aren't planning to assist in the escorts or to help pay for them.    Moreover, despite the president's assertions, the allies at the Venice summit were so wary of the tough U.S. Persian Gulf policy that American officials were forced to scale back their proposals for cooperation, and the issue was hardly discussed.    In Washington, meanwhile, skepticism about the escorts continues to mount. In remarks to journalists before Mr. Reagan's speech, Sen. Joseph Biden, a Democratic presidential candidate from Delaware, asserted that &quot;the policy of this administration is driven by anti-Soviet imperative that's always blown out of proportion, leading to military reactions, which is always wrong. We should be much more sober about what's going on in that region.&quot;    Mr. Reagan was able to offer more evidence of allied unity on arms control. At a meeting of North Atlantic Treaty Organization foreign ministers shortly after the Venice summit, he said, the NATO allies offered &quot;full&quot; support for American proposals in talks on cutting nuclear weapons in Europe.    As a result, Mr. Reagan said, he will formally instruct American negotiators at arms talks in Geneva to propose that both superpowers eliminate all short-range as well as medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe. The U.S. already has proposed eliminating all its medium-range missiles, but this represents the first time the U.S. has formally proposed eliminating all short-range missiles as well.    The announcement had been expected since the West German government, just before the Venice summit, had agreed to the proposal. Previously, the West Germans and other European allies had expressed misgivings about eliminating short-range as well as medium-range missiles.    Europeans have worried that eliminating short-range missiles could lead to demands in both the East and the West for an end to all nuclear weapons in Europe, a move that would allow the Soviets to take advantage of their superiority in conventional weapons. German acceptance of the plan, despite such misgivings, opened the way for the U.S. to propose formally the elimination of the short-range missiles -- an idea the Soviets put forward earlier.    Mr. Reagan appealed for bipartisan support in the U.S. for the arms proposals. &quot;For it is only with the support of Congress as well as the help of our allies that we will be able to accomplish those historic arms reductions,&quot; he said.    While the speech made it clear that Mr. Reagan's top foreign-policy priority following the summit is arms control, it also represented an attempt by the president to regain the initiative in the debate swirling on Capitol Hill about the budget.    Mr. Reagan talked at length about the budget, an indication that he expects to turn his focus more to the issue in coming weeks. And he pledged to begin traveling around the country more frequently promoting an &quot;economic bill of rights&quot; that will include broad Republican themes about limiting government spending and reducing the government's role in the economy.    Mr. Reagan said he was using last night's speech to appeal directly to the American people for support in urging Congress to cut spending and reform the budget process. &quot;If our budget reduction efforts aren't consistent and credible, we will be sending signals all over the world that the American economy is in trouble again,&quot; the president said. The country, he added, has reached &quot;breakpoint, decision time&quot; on the budget.    Specifically, he asked for support for the balanced-budget amendment and for line-item veto authority. Such reforms &quot;will correct some of the glaring deficiencies of the current budget process,&quot; he said.    There are signs the balanced-budget idea will pick up support in Congress; sponsors of a balanced-budget amendment are scheduled to reintroduce legislation backing the idea in the House and Senate tomorrow, and the legislation has 226 co-sponsors in the House.    But on the key question of whether he is ready to begin serious negotiations with congressional leaders on the details of a new budget, Mr. Reagan suggested he isn't prepared to bargain if the discussions are to include proposals for tax increases or cuts in defense. &quot;Some are even talking about a budget summit,&quot; he said. &quot;Well, we're ready to talk and consult at any time, but not if the objective is additional spending, more taxes and less defense. What we want is less spending, period.&quot;    White House aides insist that, until Congress improves its budget system to ensure that lawmakers live up to agreements they negotiate with the president, the administration won't debate over changes in the budget it has sent to Capitol Hill.    Still, Mr. Reagan didn't rule out all tax increases as he did in a recent speech to the National Association of Manufacturers. That suggests he might be leaving himself room to bargain with Democrats who are preparing a new tax package to cut the budget deficit.    In response to Mr. Reagan's remarks, Democratic leaders again urged Mr. Reagan to begin negotiating the details of a new budget. Sen. Lawton Chiles (D., Fla.), chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, urged Mr. Reagan to &quot;stop the political bickering and put everything on the table&quot; in an effort to cut the budget deficit. </TEXT></DOC>