<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870520-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Paul BilzerianIs InvestigatedOn Tender Bids---Sources Noting U.S. InquiryCite Trading by RaiderIn Hammermill, Cluett---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JEFGSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Corporate raider Paul A. Bilzerian is being investigated by the government for possible securities-law violations as a result of disclosures by former Jefferies andamp; Co. chairman Boyd L. Jefferies, according to people familiar with the investigation.    Mr. Bilzerian has been named in recent subpoenas issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission, according to people familiar with the subpoenas. They seek information about Mr. Bilzerian's dealings in a number of stocks that were accumulated by him, including Cluett, Peabody andamp; Co. and Hammermill Paper Co., two companies that became targets of tender offers by Mr. Bilzerian, the people said.    Mr. Bilzerian's activities also are under scrutiny by the U.S. attorney's office for possible criminal violations of securities laws, people familiar with the matter added.    They said investigators are trying to determine whether Mr. Jefferies and Mr. Bilzerian engaged in any &quot;parking&quot; arrangements to conceal the true ownership of stock and whether any disclosure laws were violated. Investigators are also examining a number of invoices from Jefferies andamp; Co. to Mr. Bilzerian, purportedly for investment banking services, people familiar with the investigation said.    Mr. Bilzerian, reached at his Tampa, Fla., office yesterday, confirmed that he received a subpoena some time ago that &quot;mentions every deal-stock we've ever done.&quot; He said that he frequently traded through Jefferies, but that he severed his ties to the Los Angeles-based securities dealer about six months ago.    Mr. Bilzerian said that he isn't aware that he is the target of any investigation and said, &quot;I'd be shocked if we've done anything wrong.&quot; He added that he has fully complied with the government's requests and has provided &quot;a ton of documents&quot; to government investigators.    Gary Lynch, SEC director of enforcement, declined to comment. A spokesman for the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office also declined to comment.    People familiar with past parking schemes have suggested several reasons why investors might want to conceal ownership of stock. They might be seeking to avoid disclosure requirements, thereby achieving tactical advantages of surprise and strength in making a takeover bid; they might be trying to circumvent net capital and margin requirements; or they might be trying to avoid regulations that require short-swing profits to be forfeited if investors hold more than 10% of a company's stock for less than six months.    A securities firm might agree to park stock in exchange for other business or favors, or might do so if guaranteed a profit on their holdings, possibly through advance knowledge of a takeover, the people said.    In March Mr. Jefferies pleaded guilty to two felonies for his roles in a stock-parking scheme with takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky, and in a scheme to manipulate the price of a Fireman's Fund Corp. stock offering. Mr. Jefferies had been implicated by Mr. Boesky.    When Mr. Jefferies's agreement to plead guilty was announced, the government indicated that Mr. Jefferies had implicated others in Wall Street's widening scandal. The people familiar with the investigation said Mr. Jefferies has provided information about his dealings with Mr. Bilzerian and is continuing to cooperate with the government. Lawyers for Mr. Jefferies declined to comment yesterday.    Both Mr. Jefferies's parking arrangement with Mr. Boesky and the scheme to manipulate Fireman's Fund stock involved the preparation of false invoices for &quot;investment banking services.&quot; The invoices masked parking-related payments between the parties.    Yesterday, Mr. Bilzerian said that he had received invoices from Jefferies for investment banking services in the amount of $125,000 in connection with his 1985 tender offer for apparel maker Cluett Peabody. He said that he paid the amount after arguing with Mr. Jefferies about the amount due, because it was E.F. Hutton andamp; Co., and not Jefferies, that ultimately provided him with investment banking advice. He denied that the payment had anything to do with any parking scheme.    &quot;If something we did was technically incorrect, then our lawyers will have to answer to somebody,&quot; Mr. Bilzerian said, emphasizing that he was advised by several prominent law firms with respect to every move he made.    People familiar with the government's investigation said Mr. Bilzerian's accumulation of stock in Hammermill prior to his tender offer last July also is under scrutiny. The day the offer was announced, Mr. Bilzerian disclosed that he had acquired 3.3 million Hammermill shares, nearly 20% of the company's stock, including a 1.7 million-share block he purchased that day for $88 million in a privately negotiated transaction. Jefferies handled the block purchase, the people said.    International Paper Co. eventually acquired Hammermill by outbidding Mr. Bilzerian, who tendered his stake to International Paper, making a substantial profit. Yesterday Mr. Bilzerian denied any wrongdoing in Hammermill trading, noting that details of the block purchase were disclosed in SEC filings. He said Jefferies earned a commission on the block trade but didn't issue any invoices for the transaction or provide investment banking services.    Hammermill stock recently figured in insider-trading charges against former Merrill Lynch investment banker Nahum Vaskevitch. The SEC charged in March that Mr. Vaskevitch, a managing director in mergers and acquisitions in Merrill Lynch's London office, traded in Hammermill stock based on confidential information obtained because Merrill Lynch had been retained as an investment banker &quot;by the target company or a potential acquirer.&quot;    Yesterday, Mr. Bilzerian said he had consulted with Merrill Lynch before launching his Hammermill bid and had cooperated in the SEC's investigation of Mr. Vaskevitch. Mr. Vaskevitch, through his lawyer, has denied any wrongdoing.    In addition to Cluett Peabody and Hammermill, Mr. Bilzerian was involved in a bitterly contested takeover bid for Allied Stores Corp. This year he has disclosed substantial stakes in Ramada Inc., a hotel and casino company, and Pay 'N Pak Stores Inc. </TEXT></DOC>