<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870507-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SECORD SAID he was told that Reagan was aware of covert Contra funding.    The retired Air Force major general, appearing for a second day before House and Senate panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair, said then-National Security Adviser Poindexter told him in January 1986 that the president was aware of the &quot;Contra project&quot; and was &quot;pleased&quot; with Secord's contribution. Secord also said that Lt. Col. Oliver North had indicated that he also had discussed the project with Reagan.    A publicist admitted conspiring with North and Carl Channell to defraud the U.S. through a fund-raising effort to arm Nicaraguan rebels. Richard Miller pleaded guilty to a one-count felony information filed by independent counsel Lawrence Walsh.    William Casey, 74, died of pneumonia in Long Island, N.Y. Investigators said the former CIA chief's death left many Iran-Contra questions unanswered.    ---   WHITE VOTERS RETURNED South Africa's ruling National Party to power.    Preliminary results from the whites-only balloting indicated the party was sure to retain its 39-year hold on the government. The voting showed that although it may increase its number of seats in Parliament, it may also get a smaller percentage vote than it did in 1981. This is due to the growing polarization of the white electorate, with the Conservative Party growing on the right and several independent candidates taking support on the left.    More than a million black workers and students joined a nationwide protest against the election, which was called two years ahead of schedule.    ---   Gary Hart again denied that he was having an affair with a Miami actress and said the controversy's negative effect on his Democratic presidential campaign &quot;will be short-term.&quot; Hart's wife, who joined him in New Hampshire, said she wasn't disturbed by the story and doesn't believe &quot;it ought to bother anyone else.&quot;    ---   The widow of a Challenger co-pilot filed a $1.5 billion lawsuit against the U.S. government, Morton Thiokol Inc. and a former NASA engineer. The lawsuit seeks $500 million in damages from the three defendants, accusing them of negligence. It also asks an additional $1 billion in punitive damages from Thiokol.    ---   Nakasone is expected to serve out his term, which ends in October. Political experts in Tokyo said calls for the Japanese premier's early resignation are diminishing, but the change seems to have little connection to his trip to Washington, where he made scant progress in resolving trade tensions with the U.S.    ---   Two studies concluded that women who drink as few as one alcoholic beverage daily may raise their risk of breast cancer by 40% or more. The findings by researchers in Boston and at the National Cancer Institute bolster a known link between alcohol and breast cancer.    ---   The House voted to require the U.S. to adhere to the unratified 1979 SALT II arms treaty with the Soviet Union. The 245-181 vote on an amendment to a bill authorizing next year's defense budget came despite objections by Reagan, who has asserted that the Soviets have violated the accord.    ---   White House officials are considering the placement of new short-range U.S. nuclear missiles in Western Europe if an agreement is reached with the Soviet Union to eliminate medium-range weapons. A Reagan official also said that NATO allies would be encouraged to install short-range missiles.    ---   U.S. drug agents arrested 64 people in Los Angeles, Miami and New York on drug-trafficking and money-laundering charges. The arrests came at the conclusion of a three-year undercover operation, in which $115 million was laundered by drug-enforcement officials.    ---   A reputed crime boss was convicted in Philadelphia of conspiring to extort $1 million from a developer. Nicodemo &quot;Little Nicky&quot; Scarfo was convicted on one count each of extortion and conspiracy in a plot to extract a bribe from Willard Rouse III.    ---   Bakker was dismissed as a minister of the Assemblies of God, leaders of the Pentacostal denomination announced. Richard Dortch, who succeeded Bakker following the PTL Club leader's admission of a liaison with a former New York church secretary, also was dismissed by the ministry.    ---   A presidential panel opened an inquiry into the sex-and-spy scandal at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Members of the commission, headed by former Defense Secretary Laird, said it may urge immediate steps to remedy security problems and disciplinary action against Americans found to have been lax in intelligence matters.    ---   Reagan said he wants to accelerate purchases for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, but he ruled out major tax incentives to spur U.S. oil exploration.    ---   Hundreds of rioters hijacked cars, hurled gasoline bombs and besieged a Belfast, Northern Ireland, police station to protest the presence of riot officers at a funeral for an Irish Republican Army guerrilla. At least 17 people were reported injured.    ---   Manila officials reached an agreement in principle with rebel negotiators on ending a nearly 15-year-old Moslem insurgency in the Philippines, a government emissary said. Details of the pact weren't disclosed, but it was said to include the number of provinces to be given limited autonomy.    Marcos and his wife lost an appeal of a contempt order resulting from their refusal to give documents to a grand jury in Alexandria, Va., that is investigating alleged corruption in arms contracts.    ---   A former Chilean official was sentenced by a federal court in Washington to as long as seven years in prison for his role in the 1976 car-bombing death of Chilean diplomat Orlando Letelier. The former army major, who pleaded guilty Feb. 4, was ordered to serve at least 10 months in prison.    ---   South Korean students hurled firebombs and rocks during an anti-government demonstration in Kwangju, and at least 19 people were reported injured after police responded with tear gas. In Seoul, opposition lawmakers demanded resumption of the debate over constitutional changes.    ---   A commercial plane crashed in southern Sudan, killing all 13 people aboard, officials in Khartoum said. The dead included a two-member Dutch crew. Rebels active in the area claimed to have downed the aircraft. </TEXT></DOC>