<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0035 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   IRAN HAS ESTABLISHED a vast wartime arms network in Western countries.    Despite an embargo by most Western nations, documents seized by Swedish customs authorities and interviews with dozens of experts in the arms trade suggest that the munitions-to-Tehran business stretches across the continents, from Argentina to Yugoslavia to Burma. In addition, Iran is building up a defense industry of its own to fight the war with Iraq. Meanwhile, as attacks escalated in the Persian Gulf, the U.S. delayed today's deadline for Iran to accept a U.N. cease-fire call, and gave its support to a peace mission by Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar.    Iran hit an Italian freighter with bazooka fire in the gulf and raked a Japanese tanker with machine guns. Another U.S. convoy sailed south unimpeded.    ---   A prosecutor in Moscow accused West German pilot Mathias Rust of insulting the Soviet Union by landing his plane in Red Square last May, and asked that the 19-year-old be sentenced to eight years in a labor camp. The remarks came during closing arguments in the trial of Rust, who has admitted illegally entering Soviet territory.    ---   The Census Bureau reported that while women have made significant inroads in some traditionally male-dominated occupations, most workers remain in sexually segregated jobs. The report said that such segregation contributes to a persistently large earnings gap between men and women.    ---   The White House said Reagan probably would meet with Shevardnadze when the Soviet foreign minister holds talks in Washington with Shultz. The Sept. 15-17 Shultz-Shevardnadze meeting is expected to pave the way for a superpower arms-control pact and a possible Reagan-Gorbachev summit.    ---   Federal investigators said two jets that nearly collided over the Atlantic in July missed each other by 30 feet, and the crew of the Delta Air Lines jet, which was off course, did little to verify the plane's location. The safety board officials urged the FAA to require crews to conduct additional safety checks.    ---   Reagan appointed a commission to identify government programs that could be transferred to the private sector. The 13-member panel, which is to issue a report in six months, will study selling public housing units and using private firms to manage prisons and provide government-sponsored medical insurance.    ---   A Veterans Administration study found that former Marine Corps troops in Vietnam have died of lung cancer and certain lymph cancers at a significantly higher rate than other corps members who didn't serve in the war. While the study wasn't designed to determine a cause, the VA said &quot;exposure to Agent Orange may be suspected.&quot;    ---   Wildfires caused thousands of people to evacuate their houses as National Guardsmen and prison inmates helped firefighters battle blazes that have burned nearly 300,000 acres of brush and timber in four Western states. The fires in California, Washington, Idaho and Oregon have injured at least 58 people and damaged about 35 homes.    ---   Soldiers in Burundi ousted the East African country's president and established a ruling junta under an army major, according to state radio. Burundian President Bagaza, a socialist with ties to Moscow who assumed power in a bloodless coup in 1976, was in Quebec, Canada, attending a summit meeting of French-speaking nations.    ---   South Korean riot police fired tear gas to disperse about 13,000 striking shipyard workers who occupied a Hyundai Heavy Industries shipyard in Ulsan after a worker was killed when a van plowed into a crowd of protesters. The labor unrest that erupted in early July continued throughout the country with hundreds of walkouts reported.    ---   The Philippine military said communist rebels killed at least 30 soldiers in an ambush east of Manila. As many as 46 people have been slain following a guerrilla call to exploit disarray caused by last week's coup attempt. Meanwhile, Moslem rebels said they supported the renegade troops who staged the anti-government mutiny.    ---   A Montana researcher destroyed 14 elm trees that he had injected with a genetically altered bacteria earlier this summer. The scientist, Gary Strobel, said the experiment on the trees was consuming too much of his time. The fallen trees were burned in a Montana State University incinerator.    ---   A lawyer for arms dealer Hakim said the Iranian-American businessman is a target of an Iran-Contra grand jury's investigation. The attorney also told an appeals court in Washington that Hakim's constitutional rights against self-incrimination would be violated if he were compelled to produce records of alleged covert arms deals.    ---   British Coal modified its new disciplinary code in a bid to avert a threatened strike. The nationalized coal company said several of the code's provisions were &quot;clarified&quot; to eliminate misunderstanding and correct misrepresentations made by leaders of the National Union of Mineworkers.    ---   Officials in Tennessee imposed a countywide curfew and placed jurors under guard after more than 200 people rioted in a Meigs County courtroom when the panel declared a man innocent of murder. The former defendant, acquitted in a shotgun slaying, reportedly was in hiding.    ---   U.S. authorities arrested the former chief minister of the Turks and Caicos Islands, Norman Saunders, to be a material witness in the cocaine-smuggling trial of alleged Colombian drug trafficker Carlos Lehder Rivas. Saunders is accused of providing lodging for Lehder and others.    ---   World Bank officials said China plans to increase grain imports, enlarge individual land holdings and allow entrepreneurs to operate state enterprises within the next decade. The moves, outlined by acting Communist Party chief Zhao, are part of a long-term plan by Beijing's leaders to accelerate economic and political changes. </TEXT></DOC>