<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880302-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Pentagon Payoffs: Honored Employee Is A Key in Huge Fraud In Defense Purchasing --- Clothing, Textile Companies Bribed Him and a Friend, Won Lucrative Contracts --- 'Nobody Watched the Store' </HL><AUTHOR> Edward T. Pound (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TEX ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS </G><DATELINE> PHILADELPHIA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Frank Coccia was an exceptional government employee, or so it seemed.    As a top civilian official at a Defense Department procurement agency here, he controlled military-clothing and textile purchases of about $1.3 billion annually. He was considered a tough and capable boss and was showered with bonuses and awards for outstanding performance.    But Mr. Coccia stood out in other ways, too. He took big payoffs from clothing contractors and hid most of the booty in his modest suburban home. Federal investigators seized $440,000 in cash, money orders, gold coins and securities from Mr. Coccia as part of a probe that has uncovered one of the most pervasive procurement frauds in recent Pentagon history.    Corrupt companies have won hundreds of millions of dollars in lucrative business because they paid off government officials, investigators say. &quot;These things seem so mundane and routine -- things like sailor suits, shirts, pants and duffel bags -- that they slide through the normal checks and balances,&quot; says Gary Quigley, a senior Defense Department fraud lawyer in Washington.    In the past year, federal criminal charges have been filed against 29 defendants, including clothing manufacturers, suppliers, consultants and four senior procurement officials. Prosecutors have obtained 19 convictions so far and plan to file more charges. Federal agents also are exploring whether any officials in Washington acted improperly, and a federal grand jury here is developing bid-rigging evidence.    Most of the corruption has been uncovered in a three-year-old investigation based in Philadelphia and known as Operation Thimble. Under the watchful eyes of federal agents and at times a video camera, one briber-turned-informer gave Mr. Coccia $12,000 in cash and money orders during several meetings at a New Jersey motel. And a consultant described by prosecutors as Mr. Coccia's bagman referred to illegal payments by such code words as &quot;shirts,&quot; &quot;coupons&quot; and &quot;shoes.&quot; He was overheard in wiretaps telling Mr. Coccia: &quot;I'll start shipping you shoes next week.&quot;    Investigators and defense officials say that clothing and military-gear sales have been so monopolized by a few groups of small companies that the military is having trouble finding alternative suppliers to replace those implicated in the scandal.    Just recently, Dale Fashions Inc., a small New Jersey company that had been barred from doing business with the government, was nevertheless awarded a stopgap contract for Navy jumpers. Its president, George Chinnici, later pleaded guilty to conspiracy and fraud charges. According to investigators, he has also admitted paying about $470,000 in bribes to 11 current and former officials. His company still has the jumpers contract.    The contract was awarded by Mr. Coccia's old outfit, the Defense Personnel Support Center's clothing and textile directorate here. Marine Col. John Caputa, who heads the directorate, says there was no available alternative contractor. Col. Caputa says his office, which sets aside almost all of its work for small businesses, got into its current fix because it relied on &quot;a small cadre of contractors, some 50 or so,&quot; for most of its goods.    The scandal's impact has spread far beyond Philadelphia and the Pentagon. In economically depressed Selma, Ala., for instance, more than 400 employees of Selma Apparel Corp., most of them black seamstresses, were laid off after the company was indicted in Philadelphia last year and was barred from seeking new government contracts. The company was a major supplier of combat fatigues. One company official shot himself in the head after federal agents questioned him, but he survived and was also indicted. This week the official, Allen Edwards, pleaded guilty to conspiracy and fraud charges. Four other defendants have tentatively agreed to plead guilty. (Meanwhile, another company bought the Selma plant and recently hired 150 seamstresses.)    In all, the Defense Department has barred 35 companies or people from doing business with the government and excluded 21 others from dealing with the Pentagon for various periods of times. &quot;Our most effective tool in combating corrupt contractors is to bar them,&quot; says Robert Burton, a senior Defense Department fraud lawyer. &quot;This can have very serious consequences especially when you consider that the Defense Department, in many cases, is their only customer.&quot;    At the heart of the scandal, investigators say, is greed. Joseph Ford, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, says that while contractors sometimes rig bids, &quot;if one contractor wants a contract bad enough, he'll do anything to eliminate a competing contractor. . . . He will put the knife in the guy's back.&quot;    The central figures in the inquiry, which is being conducted by the FBI and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service of the Pentagon, are Mr. Coccia, 55, and his close friend Leo Lamer, 66. Mr. Lamer is a former defense employee and decorated World War II combat veteran who prosecutors say was Mr. Coccia's bagman for 12 years. Both Mr. Coccia and Mr. Lamer last year pleaded guilty to criminal charges in federal court here -- Mr. Coccia to racketeering and Mr. Lamer to bribery -- and are cooperating with the government's inquiry. They are scheduled to be sentenced this month.    Until last year when he was fired, Mr. Coccia was deputy director of the clothing and textile directorate, which buys and distributes almost all the clothing and gear used by the armed services. Last fiscal year, this included more than 920,000 pairs of combat boots, nearly one million helmets and more than 10 million pairs of socks.    In a memorandum filed in U.S. district court here, prosecutors said of Mr. Coccia: &quot;He had great power, authority and responsibility in all of the Defense Department's clothing procurement programs. He was respected and trusted as a leader and an expert in his field.&quot;    Mr. Lamer, meanwhile, left the government in 1972 and became a consultant to many military-clothing companies, which won hundreds of millions of dollars in contracts from Mr. Coccia's office. In court papers, prosecutors described how Mr. Lamer served as a middleman carrying bribes from clients to Mr. Coccia and other Defense Department officials. They said Mr. Lamer laundered payoffs by exchanging cash for money orders and gold coins, sometimes sending the laundered proceeds to Mr. Coccia in shoe boxes.    Prosecutors alleged that Mr. Lamer held himself out as a consultant but that in reality his business &quot;consisted almost exclusively of corrupting the procurement process through bribery and fraud.&quot;    Exactly how much money Mr. Coccia made from his illicit schemes isn't certain, but he is pictured in the prosecutors' papers as someone who gorged himself on payoffs. One supplier told the FBI that he paid Mr. Coccia $2,000 to $3,000 monthly over a six-year period.    Prosecutors said they could prove that Mr. Coccia pocketed at least $330,000 in bribes and gratuities. FBI agents found $191,172 in cash, $90,940 in money orders, and 122 gold coins in his Medford, N.J., house in March 1986.    The scandal began unfolding more than three years ago when a contractor, Mario D'Antonio, began talking to the authorities. Mr. D'Antonio, who is 60 years old, owned East Wind Industries Inc., a Delaware clothing and luggage manufacturing company that held $58 million in contracts. According to federal investigators, he began cooperating after he was caught filing false payment claims with the Pentagon.    Mr. D'Antonio agreed to plead guilty to filing false claims with the government and to work undercover for investigators. In several meetings, he told how bids were rigged by contractors; how corrupt consultants, principally Mr. Lamer, operated; and how piles of cash were available to officials willing to favor contractors.    It was Mr. D'Antonio who was videotaped giving money to Mr. Coccia. And FBI affidavits show that he tape-recorded telephone conversations and meetings with other contractors, who implicated several government employees in bribery schemes. Court-ordered wiretaps on the phones of Messrs. Coccia and Lamer subsequently produced an avalanche of evidence.    The prosecutors said that Mr. Coccia and two other former Defense Department employees, Donald Sherry and Murray Abramowitz, who both pleaded guilty to accepting illegal payments, admitted helping Mr. Lamer's clients in return for money.    The deep-rooted nature of the corruption was illustrated by Mr. Abramowitz, a 35-year Defense Department veteran who evaluated the production capabilities of contractors. In an interview with investigators last year, he recalled that 17 contractors and Mr. Lamer had given him money over the years. He admitted receiving at least $40,000 in gratuities and said contractors often would stick cash in his pocket as he completed inspections at their plants.    Mr. Sherry, who was a senior official supervising 50 contracting officers, also implicated one of the Pentagon's largest apparel manufacturers, Amertex Enterprises Ltd. of San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico, in the scandal. According to public Defense Department reports, Mr. Sherry alleged that Amertex's owner gave him an envelope containing $25,000 cash during a 1985 vacation trip to Puerto Rico. The payment, Mr. Sherry said, was made shortly after Amertex won a $96 million contract for chemical protective suits.    Neither Amertex nor its owner, Leo Jacobson, has been charged with a criminal offense, though both have been barred from obtaining future Pentagon contracts. Mr. Jacobson, who back in 1984 was honored by the Small Business Administration as Puerto Rico's minority small-business man of the year, suggests in an interview that Mr. Sherry accused him only because they didn't get along.    To Mr. Quigley, the Defense Department fraud lawyer, all of this has a familiar ring. He notes that a U.S. Senate subcommittee in the 1950s uncovered large payoffs and bid-rigging by military-clothing contractors, yet he says the current criminal inquiry established that within a few years, by the 1960s, payoffs were once again being made. &quot;The problem,&quot; he says, &quot;was that nobody was watching the store.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>