<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Alfonsin's Missteps Weaken ConsensusOn Solving Argentina's Economic Woes---By Mary Williams Walsh and Judith EvansStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> BUENOS AIRES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Argentine President Raul Alfonsin is regaining the footing he lost two months ago when his Radical Civic Union was roundly defeated in mid-term elections.    But despite his political revival, Mr. Alfonsin is likely to be unable during his remaining two years in office to push through the kind of overhaul Argentina's creditors want. Argentina is almost hopelessly mired in its own economic problems at a time when creditors are unenthusiastic about new lending to debtor nations. Monthly consumer-price inflation here reached 19.5% in September, the highest since 1985, when government economists shrank inflation to almost nothing with their Austral Plan. Local investors, spooked by years of erratic price increases and devaluations, refuse to put their money into Argentina. The nation's ratio of debt obligations to export earnings is the highest in Latin America. And manufactured exports are falling, while they grow in troubled Mexico.    Worse, Argentina lacks social consensus on how to address these problems. Businessmen grumble about state intervention, even as they lap up state contracts and subsidies. Opposition Peronists say the government's economic programs hurt workers, even as their own economists move toward similar policies.    Despite this lack of direction, Mr. Alfonsin's Radicals went for months talking of a &quot;consolidation of democracy,&quot; brought about by elaborate and costly steps such as changing Argentina's constitution, permitting the president's re-election and moving the national capital to the undeveloped countryside.    Then, in September, Argentines went to the polls and had an anti-Radical tantrum. Twelve Radical deputies lost their congressional seats to Peronists, wiping out the ruling party's slim majority. In state elections, Peronists took governorships away from Radicals in five states, leaving the ruling party with only two.    Mr. Alfonsin sulked after his unanticipated defeat. He seemed uninspired in his public appearances and for weeks he avoided making a televised speech to the nation. Rumors flew that he wanted to resign. Mr. Alfonsin refused to say if he would go on supporting his economic team, an apolitical group of technocrats who are applauded by foreign creditors but widely held responsible within Argentina for painful adjustments.    Then, a week ago, Mr. Alfonsin gave his full support to the economic team, declaring at a news conference that it &quot;will stay for the duration of my government, whatever policy it may bring forward.&quot; He also said he has no intention of running for president in 1989.    Political analysts cheered. &quot;That day, the anti-democratic program that had been masquerading as a 'consolidation of democracy' was buried,&quot; says an approving Buenos Aires economic consultant, Javier Gonzalez Fraga.    At about the same time, several other events in Argentina helped convince political observers that their country was crawling forward again. For one thing, a celebrated, two-year-old kidnap-murder case was solved, and the killers turned out to be federal police.    The police chief tried to convince a horrified public that the big fish had all been caught, but the attorney general said he suspected a high-level cover-up. The very existence of such a debate told Argentines that their new democracy was strong enough to admit to official wrongdoing.    In addition, 1,500 Peronists trying to democratize their party met in Buenos Aires and gave their support to Antonio Cafiero, the governor-elect of the province surrounding Buenos Aires. That enthusiasm for a moderate convinced many Argentine political analysts that a peaceful two-party alternation of power is possible here for the first time in half a century.    Finally, a hard-line former army major and a Socialist Party deputy held a first-time public debate this month, showing that Argentines are developing a tolerance for opposing ideas.    But, warns Mr. Gonzalez Fraga, &quot;all these benefits are medium and long term. In the short term, we have to live with the bad news that we have a weaker president.&quot;    For the moment, that shows up most in the debate over Argentina's budget deficit. The country has other dilemmas, such as the role of the military and the rewriting of labor and foreign-investment laws. But nothing fills the newspapers and the gossip mills now like the notion that the government is spending too much, and that the president's economists want innocent citizens to pay the bills.    For years, when Argentina's farm products earned more on world markets, the country got by with a tiny tax base made up of farm exporters. As recently as 1985, taxes on farm exports were the third-mostimportant revenue source for the government, bringing in $1.2 billion. Citizens and non-farm businesses, meanwhile, paid almost nothing. In 1984, there were only 50,000 individual income-tax payers in the whole country.    Now, world agricultural prices have fallen and the country has had three bad crops in a row. Farm-export taxes aren't nearly enough, and the government economists believe new taxpayers must be put on the books if Argentina is to shrink its budget deficit and slow its triple-digit inflation.    In mid-October, a package of new taxes was issued as a first step. But the plan still has to clear Congress. So far, everyone from union bosses to chamber-of-commerce presidents is fighting it. Peronist deputies are so opposed they say they won't even attend the sessions and make a quorum.    If the package doesn't pass before Dec. 10, when the current Congress adjourns and the Radicals lose their majority, it probably won't pass at all.    Government economists say privately that the tax issue is an example of the difficulty of rational economic policy-making. One top government economist says Argentina resists change because public opinion on economic policy froze 10 years ago when the military took over the government and banned debate. He worries that in spite of the president's message supporting the economists, the government still is uncertain whether to ram through what his team wants or do the voters' bidding.    The Peronists, meanwhile, say they don't want to push Mr. Alfonsin's government too far, even on tax policy. &quot;We think we can win in 1989,&quot; says Peronist economic adviser Eduardo Amadeo, referring to the next presidential election. &quot;But we don't want to govern a country that's a mess.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>