<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0082 </DOCNO><HL> By Paul Duke Jr.</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   NATIONAL CASH Register Co. chugged through the late 1960s with a presence in the marketplace visible to nearly anyone who shopped in a store.    But in 1970, competitors blindsided the company with a wave of sleek electronic cash registers and adding machines, making instant antiques of NCR's mostly mechanical units. Earnings plunged in 1970 and 1971, and revenue flattened. &quot;No doubt about it. We didn't react quickly enough,&quot; says Elton White, NCR executive vice president for product marketing and strategic planning. &quot;We didn't pay enough attention to trends.&quot;    The Dayton, Ohio, company, now NCR Corp., eventually bounced back, broadening its product line to include a range of computer products. But the lesson wasn't lost on NCR. To guard against future technological surprises, it began breaking up an unwieldy monolithic corporate structure and handing authority for research and product development to more nimble, smaller, independent divisions. It continues to fine tune the system today.    Technological change worries a lot of companies, and these days they're scrambling even harder to anticipate the accelerating twists and turns. Some, such as NCR and Minnesota Mining andamp; Manufacturing Co., are streamlining internal research. Others, wary of the big financial commitment that technology development requires, are joining research consortiums or hiring consultants. Even companies that don't make high-tech products are setting up technology units, aware that refinements in computers and software make electronics vital in many markets.    None of the moves is foolproof. Trying to plan for technological change &quot;is like trying to count the fish in the Gulf of Mexico,&quot; says Michael Simmons, president of Fidelity Systems Co., a unit of Boston-based Fidelity Investments set up in March 1982 to handle the mutual fund's technology needs. &quot;The situation changes long before you get the job done.&quot;    One example: A computer introduced in 1960 lasted eight to 10 years before new models superseded it. A computer introduced today might last about two years.    &quot;Technology changes so quickly that companies are aiming at a moving target,&quot; says Oscar Hauptman, an assistant professor at Harvard Business School who has studied the strategies companies use to anticipate new technology. Companies no longer have the luxury, he says, of planning years in advance and &quot;assuming the rules will be the same.&quot;    Some companies see decentralization as a key to long-range technology planning. In the years since NCR faced its cash-register troubles, the company has broken itself into 21 autonomous product-development centers. Most research is done in the centers rather than in the Dayton headquarters.    &quot;Decentralizing was very important to our strategy,&quot; says Mr. White, the vice president for marketing and planning. &quot;Changes come so fast now that we can't have white-coated guys off in a lab somewhere making product decisions.&quot;    Minnesota Mining has undergone a similar transformation in the past five years, establishing separate product divisions. One handles short-term research. Another layer of labs handles research that might produce benefits five to 10 years down the road, while a third research group watches for developments even further in the future.    Companies without high-tech products also plan for technological change. McKesson Corp., the San Francisco drug distributor, has a technology division that does everything from repairing office word processors to conducting experiments. Currently, it's testing a satellite ordering network.    Another example is Fidelity Investments, which has made the marketing of mutual funds a high-tech extravaganza. Sidestepping brokers to reach customers directly, Fidelity uses highly automated systems to swamp mutual fund holders with mail -- 200,000 pieces a day -- urging them to invest more and allowing them to buy, sell or switch investments among more than 100 funds, all over a telephone system that normally handles about 140,000 calls each a day.    Says Kenneth Sonenclar, vice president of New Science Associates Inc., a South Norwalk, Conn., consulting firm that specializes in emerging technologies, &quot;Fidelity is one of many service companies that have realized they are so affected by technology they might as well be technology companies also.&quot;    Within the Fidelity Systems technology unit is a group of about 12 scientists cut loose by the company's president Mr. Simmons to undertake advanced research and development. One project: a computer voice-recognition system developed with American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. that Fidelity now is testing with 6,000 volunteer customers.    The system recognizes the words &quot;yes&quot; and the digits zero through nine and takes 12,000 calls a day, allowing customers to get stock quotes without speaking to a human being. But Mr. Simmons isn't so sure the system will be implemented throughout the company, at least in its current form. About 60% of those who use it opt to retrieve quotes by the alternative method of tapping numbers on a touch-tone phone instead of by using the voice-recognition function. &quot;The real world exposes the flaw of the dream,&quot; Mr. Simmons says.    Still in the dream stage at Fidelity are systems that would let customers track the market even more closely than the hourly pricing now available, manage their funds through home computers and hold asset accounts with a single monthly balance sheet for checking, and credit or debit cards.    Aggressive technology-development programs can be risky. Mr. Simmons says the Fidelity research division &quot;upchucked all over the place&quot; in the late '70s when the company was trying to design the over-the-phone information systems it now has. Flawed software approaches lost &quot;millions,&quot; he says.    Other non-technology companies have seen even bigger losses when a perceived technological revolution turned out to be a ripple. Times-Mirror Co. and Knight-Ridder Newspapers Inc. last year disbanded ambitious efforts to deliver news electronically to home computers -- a process newspaper publishers feared would put them out of business some day. This threat, and the new market, hasn't yet materialized, but preparing to meet it cost Knight-Ridder about $50 million and Times-Mirror about $30 million, analysts believe.    Fear of such big losses push many companies interested in long-range technology planning toward consultants or toward multi-company ventures where risks are spread among many.    Even then, there are few bargains. Gartner Group Inc., a Stamford, Conn., computer-consulting firm, charges $15,000 a year for a subscription to one of its biweekly newsletters on advances in the industry. Microelectronics andamp; Computer Technology Corp., the high-tech research consortium started in 1983 with the blessing of federal antitrust officials, charges companies an entry fee of $250,000 plus a portion of its $75 million annual budget.    Whatever form of crystal ball a company uses to plan for the future, it can't anticipate every technological twist. An example is the sudden advance made in superconductors, materials that carry electricity with much less resistance, and much greater efficiency, than metallic wire.    Scientists have known about the existence of superconductors for years, but the materials worked only at temperatures too low to be of much commercial value. In recent months, however, superconductors that work at higher temperatures than ever before have been found, raising the prospect of widespread application for the materials.    Such a development has immense implications for companies like Minnesota Mining. If the new electrical superconductors come to market, they could make 3M's wire and other electrical-connector products the mechanical cash registers of the 21st century. At the moment, however, 3M isn't conducting any superconductor research.    &quot;We've got some people following the developments and reading the research journals,&quot; says Lester C. Krogh, 3M's vice president of research and development. &quot;But it's come on us so rapidly it's really caught us by surprise.&quot;    ---   Mr. Duke is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Dallas bureau. </TEXT></DOC>