<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): Managers' Guide---First, Ask the Right Questions:That's a Big Lesson in Managing Technology,But It's Not the Only One Du Pont Learned---By David Wessel</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DDCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   FIVE HUNDRED MILLION dollars should buy a lot of lessons in how to manage technology.    Du Pont Co. hopes so. That's roughly what it will spend this year on computers, software and related salaries, an amount greater than the sales of some Fortune 500 companies.    The people who run the chemical and energy giant, however, are just as interested in how the company is using computers as in how much they cost, and that's among the lessons Du Pont has to share.    The company, with annual sales of $27 billion, has come to see information systems as essential technology. Without exploiting computers, Du Pont won't be able to compete in science, in manufacturing or in marketing, says Alexander MacLachlan, a chemist named 18 months ago to oversee computers, engineering and research as senior vice president for technology.    Among the pros, Du Pont is regarded as one of the more successful managers of information technology. &quot;I give Du Pont very high marks,&quot; says John J. Connell, a former Atlantic Richfield Co. executive who now heads Office Technology Research Group, an association of corporate computer users. &quot;They're getting involved early. They're getting the operating people involved. For a number of years, the use of this technology has just been part of Du Pont's business culture.&quot;    Here, gleaned from interviews with those who buy, manage and use computers at Du Pont, are lessons the company has learned.    If the only question the brass asks about computers is: &quot;Why is the budget going up so fast?&quot; they don't know enough.    Four years ago, Du Pont began seminars for its top 400 executives to teach them everything (well, some things) they should have been asking about computers, but weren't. &quot;Ninety percent of what a manager can do is ask questions,&quot; says Charles Gibson of Index Group Inc., a consultant Du Pont hired to help with the classes.    Over 18 months, the company took groups of 20 or 25 executives to a conference center for three-day meetings. The point wasn't to teach them to use computers, though they did get to play with them, but rather to show them how their company and others were using this potent technology.    Raymond E. Cairns, Du Pont's vice president for information systems, told the managers that Du Pont couldn't compete if they looked at computers only as a way to cut costs and ignored ways that computers might increase revenue or market share. And, most important, he told them not to be awed by experts. &quot;There's been a snow job by the information-systems people talking in semi-gibberish,&quot; he says. &quot;If you have a plant that overruns budget by 20%, that's unacceptable performance. I feel the same about (computer) systems.&quot;    Mr. MacLachlan says he knew hardly anything about computers before he took the seminar in January 1984, when he was the No. 2 executive in Du Pont's corporate research department. He came back to his office, contemplated the time-consuming game of telephone tag he'd been playing with his staff, and ordered an electronic mail system.    The central computer staff knows best. So do the people who use computers.    Back in 1983, Du Pont scientists revolted because computers at the corporate research center, the Experimental Station, were overworked and slow. &quot;People became more expert in applications than the (Station's) computing division,&quot; says William Ripka, a chemist. The labs themselves were installing new computers that couldn't communicate with computers elsewhere at the station, and those who bought them wouldn't share them.    Du Pont told John H. Taylor, now manager of scientific computing, to fix the mess. He did what Du Pont often does: He formed a committee. After working full-time for seven weeks, the task force decided that although many other companies were decentralizing computer service, the Station should recentralize. The reorganization didn't save Du Pont a dime -- the computer budget doubled in 1984 -- but it seems to have worked. &quot;Most of us are surprised,&quot; Mr. Ripka says.    The company took computer management away from the folks who supervise such services as purchasing, phones and lawn-mowing and created a new bureaucracy that reports to a board composed of the heads of the company's dozen major research labs. This Scientific Computing Division keeps all the scientists' data on its computers, runs an electronic mail system, fields some 150 calls a day from befuddled users and provides general-purpose software.    But from the start, this new bureaucracy told the 4,300 scientists and technicians that there were some things it wouldn't do -- such as write software that only a small number of them would use. This wasn't popular, but Mr. Taylor says it was essential to restoring order. His staff helps scientists find off-the-shelf software or hire outsiders to write programs, but the scientists themselves must cope with bugs and oversee revisions.    For the most part, that division of labor works well. &quot;I'm not the least bit interested in shopping around for the best editing software,&quot; says Mark A. LaMontia, a research engineer. &quot;But I'm also not the least bit interested in having someone from Scientific Computing tell me what's the best software for evaluating thermoplastics.&quot;    Ideas for creative use of technology often come from people who don't fit the corporate mold.    Edward G. Mahler is the kind of guy who wears cowboy boots to the office, and that's not how they dress for success at Du Pont. About two years ago, when Mr. Mahler was assigned to the corporate planning staff, he decided that artificial intelligence was a promising technology that Du Pont wasn't exploiting.    So he launched a guerrilla war to promote AI at Du Pont -- without budget, staff or corporate marching orders. He found two personal computer programs that can mimic a human expert for a very specific task. But how to get Du Pont people to try them? &quot;The old-boy network,&quot; he says. Mr. Mahler and a self-styled computer missionary from Du Pont's central research staff, David Penzak, formed an unofficial AI task force. Each member had to convince his own boss to spare him for three months.    After nine experiments in various Du Pont units -- only two of which flopped -- the AI project had grown too big to hide. So Mr. Mahler briefed top management, highlighting the &quot;compelling economic returns&quot; of his experiments.    Last year, Mr. Mahler was named Du Pont's manager of artificial intelligence with a staff of 12. Today, he estimates, about 500 expert systems are in use at Du Pont. &quot;We have broken so many of the traditional Du Pont rules,&quot; says Mr. Penzak. &quot;Five years ago I would have been fired. Today, I get bonuses.&quot;    People don't want to be told what technology can do for them. They want to see for themselves.    A Du Pont unit that makes image-processing equipment recently installed its first computer-aided design machines, automating drafting that had been done by hand. &quot;A year ago, we were afraid of buying too many units,&quot; says P.M. O'Neill, manager of the unit's Eagle Run plant in Wilmington. Initially, the project managers at the plant were skeptical. But once they began to see what the new machines could do -- and how fast they could do it -- demand for time on the computers shot up, forcing Mr. O'Neill to buy more.    &quot;When people can smell it, feel it, taste it, they understand,&quot; says James R. Hogan, an Eagle Run engineer.    Sometimes. In another part of Du Pont, marketing manager Phillip M. Richardson sits with his back to a computer he hasn't touched for days. He prefers phone conversations to electronic mail, and he likes the security of paper files. &quot;They clean these things out, you know,&quot; he says, pointing over his shoulder at the blank screen.    No one managing a profit-and-loss statement will spend enough money experimenting.    Mr. Cairns, the vice president for information systems, has $10 million of venture capital in his budget for what he calls &quot;embryo businesses.&quot; Mr. Mahler's artificial intelligence program, now that it has surfaced, is among these. Last year, Mr. Cairns says, he offered to pay 100% of the cost of artificial intelligence experiments. This year, it's down to 80% and in three or four years, the corporate subsidy probably will be about 10%, he says. The game is to encourage managers to try new things by lowering risk -- in the beginning.    Sometimes these initiatives fail. &quot;If you have no fiascos, you're not pushing enough,&quot; says Mr. MacLachlan. Du Pont, for instance, has been toying with computers that combine words, sound and graphics in a single document: Write a memo to the boss, add a little noise to keep him awake and perhaps an animated graph showing the rising profits of your division. Creating these multimedia computer documents is possible, but sending them from one brand of computer to another isn't. So Du Pont is pulling back. &quot;You don't want to be too far ahead of the vendors,&quot; Mr. Cairns says.    Business managers don't have time to keep tabs on new technology. But someone should.    At Du Pont, looking ahead five years is Michael Leach's job. He shuns the trade press as too detailed, and instead reads Scientific American. He also follows science fiction writers. &quot;Things usually happen faster than they say,&quot; he says.    Last year, Mr. Leach called together 19 people from all parts of the company to gauge the status of emerging computer-related technologies in Du Pont, the four companies from which it buys computers and in general.    The resulting secret report, which Mr. Leach hopes to update every two years, was distributed to 150 Du Pont managers, including those who make the actual purchasing decisions.    Last year, he told Du Pont managers that by 1990 they should be using computers that work very fast by harnessing many microprocessors simultaneously, computers that will accurately recognize conventionally spoken human speech and reply likewise, and telephones that carry pictures as well as sound.    They also should expect international standards that will allow companies to communicate computer to computer with ease.    On the wane will be telex, computer printouts and software written to move data from one brand of computer to another.    Mr. Penzak, the computer missionary, read the report and wrote Mr. Leach: &quot;Why are you talking about the past?&quot; Mr. Penzak prefers to look beyond 1990. One of his current projects: software that will examine thousands of pictures -- of tumors, for instance -- and notice similarities among them.    Manage computer technology like you manage anything else.    Back in the executive suite, Mr. MacLachlan is preparing for the next phase in the company's evolving approach to computers: &quot;I'm happy as anything to see every person in Du Pont get a computer,&quot; he says. &quot;But I'm also concerned that people will tend to upgrade&quot; -- add a color screen, for instance -- &quot;when it may not be necessary.&quot;    Du Pont's computer missionaries have convinced managers that computers are essential, he says. That was a big step. But now the computer experts must demonstrate that they can convince managers where not to use the latest in computers.    &quot;I don't have anything but the normal management suspicions,&quot; he adds. &quot;But I've told Ray Cairns: 'You've got to keep convincing me that you're resisting things when they don't make sense.'&quot;    ---   Mr. Wessel reports on technology from The Wall Street Journal's Boston bureau. </TEXT></DOC>