<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870113-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Endless Trial:Dioxin Damage SuitTies Up CourthouseAnd Angers Judiciary---Townsfolk Fight MonsantoAs Toxic Case Drones On;Jurors Sleep Through It---Is Litigation Out of Control?---By Patricia Bellew GrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MTCCHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><DATELINE> BELLEVILLE, Ill.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The 488th day of trial resumes with a discussion of shinsplints, which follows three years of testimony on such ailments as diaper rash, halitosis, and leukemia. By the time the doctor on the stand painstakingly picks his way through a scholarly discourse on the shin's location, a delicate snore whistles through the courtroom.    Four jurors are sound asleep, including one elderly man who has donned sunglasses to block the light. One man trims his nails with a pocketknife and a woman examines the contents of her purse. &quot;Sometimes we lose one or two,&quot; a lawyer says ruefully, &quot;but this may be a record.&quot;    Kemner vs. Monsanto is breaking other records, too. The longest jury trial in the nation's history, it has held 14 jurors hostage to this sort of mind-numbing tedium since early 1984. At issue is whether 65 residents of Sturgeon, Mo., were harmed when 22,000 gallons of wood-preserving chemicals spilled from a rail car in the center of their town eight years ago. The chemicals contained minute traces of dioxin -- about a thimbleful in all.    The plaintiffs complain that their exposure to the dioxin caused a catalog of ailments, such as headaches, insomnia and depression, and heightened their risk of developing more serious ailments. They seek millions of dollars in damages from Monsanto Co., the St. Louis manufacturer of the chemicals.    Both sides are spending millions of dollars to present their cases to the jury, whose members get $5 a day for dutifully enduring it all. So far, 130 witnesses have testified and more than 5,000 exhibits have been displayed. And no one seems to know when this desperate battle will end.    Weeks and months pass in dreary monotony, as witness after witness takes the stand. The lawyers quibble endlessly while Circuit Court Judge Richard P. Goldenhersh peers impassively down at them over his half-glasses. The trial began with 12 jurors and six alternates. So far, four jurors have been excused for ill health. Only two alternates remain. The loss of three more jurors will mean a mistrial.    Until recently, the civil case attracted little attention outside Belleville, a railroaders' town 20 miles east of St. Louis. But after Kemner vs. Monsanto marked its second year in trial, lawyers and judges complained that the case was delaying other cases in one of the state's busiest courts. Advocates of court reform point to the case as an example of litigants' abuse of the courts -- and of a judiciary too timid to stop it. Kemner vs. Monsanto, they say, is litigation out of control.    &quot;It's a bizarre situation . . . and I'm appalled,&quot; fumes Morris Chapman, a prominent area lawyer. He brands the case &quot;bad public relations for the bar.&quot;    As the trial winds on, its leisurely pace belies the bitterness of the battle. Monsanto has 10 lawyers working on the case; those in court work in four-hour shifts to stay fresh. Jurors, who are not sequestered, punch in every weekday at 9:30 a.m. Frequent coffee breaks, long lunches and an occasional nap help ease the boredom.    Days off are plentiful. The judge called a two-week recess when a juror got married and wanted a honeymoon. He declared another holiday when a juror's horse dropped a foal. There was talk of an aerobics class for jurors, some of whom are flabby from inactivity, but nothing came of it. And every year, on the anniversary of the first day of trial, jurors celebrate with a cake and a group portrait.    &quot;I like to run a relaxed courtroom,&quot; Judge Goldenhersh says. &quot;I bang the gavel when I have to, but . . . when you've been in trial this long, what does it matter if you start 10 minutes late?&quot;    Employers continue to pay jurors' salaries, less the daily $5 compensation for jury duty. Among the jurors: a bank employee, a nurse, a telephone linesman and a retired security guard. The judge asked that the jurors not be interviewed or identified, but their frustration is evident. In a note that was tacked up in the jury room, a juror asks whether it is &quot;better to sleep and catch hell . . . or to stay awake listening to unproductive conversation.&quot;    Toxic-tort cases can be difficult to try because the link between plaintiffs' injuries and their exposure to a toxic substance is hard to prove. Dioxin cases are even tougher because there is little research on the long-term health effects of exposure. Thus, trials often turn into battles of expert witnesses.    Yet even the most complex cases rarely take longer than a few months to try. And Kemner vs. Monsanto &quot;is not a complex case,&quot; Judge Goldenhersh says. It is, however, a high-stakes case that both sides are determined to win at any cost.    The case didn't look risky at the start. Indeed, many personal-injury lawyers believed that it had all the elements of a multimillion-dollar verdict: Dioxin fear was running high, and all the defendants were financially strong.    But there was cause for concern. None of the spill victims appeared visibly sick. Also, the trial would require a huge investment of time and money. The plaintiffs' lawyers agreed to advance money for trial expenses in return for a 33% cut of what their clients won, a typical arrangement in such cases.    The January 1979 spill forced a two-day evacuation of Sturgeon, a hard-scrabble farm town of 900 in mid-Missouri. When residents returned, they complained of watery eyes, nausea and difficulty breathing. A powerful stench hung over the town. Then in February, Monsanto disclosed that the rail car had contained traces of dioxin. Panic swept the town.    By mid-summer 1979, 57 lawsuits had been filed by retired teacher Frances E. Kemner and other townspeople, including housewives, a cook, a janitor and the former police chief. Claiming injury to their immune systems, residents sought damages of more than $1 billion from four defendants: the railroad, Norfolk andamp; Western Railway Co.; GATX Corp., the rail-car maker; Dresser Industries Inc., which made the faulty coupling mechanism that caused the accident; and Monsanto.    The lawsuits were filed in Missouri's Boone County Circuit Court by attorney Jerome W. Seigfreid. But then a poll of potential jurors in Missouri identified a small but worrisome percentage of people reluctant to award large damages to the spill victims. Mr. Seigfreid dropped the Missouri suits and refiled them across the Illinois state line in a circuit court in St. Clair County, where Monsanto makes the wood-preserving chemicals.    For the defendants, the move was a major blow. St. Clair is known as &quot;plaintiffs' paradise&quot; because its juries have bestowed many huge verdicts in personal-injury cases. &quot;This is a county of hanging judges and juries,&quot; one area defense lawyer says. &quot;Only here, they hang companies.&quot;    To assist with the case, Mr. Seigfreid recruited Rex Carr, a silver-haired, strutting, bantam of an attorney, who has scored some spectacular trial victories, including a $9.2 million libel judgment against a newspaper for a story that was never printed. (The case was later settled for $1.4 million.)    One of the pair's first moves was to have the spill victims' 57 lawsuits consolidated into a single case to save the time and expense of trying each case separately. But even though some time was saved by establishing such facts as the circumstances of the accident, each case within the big case, in effect, had to be tried on its own merits.    Another setback for the defendants came in late 1982, when a jury in nearby Madison County, Ill., awarded 47 railroad workers who had cleaned up the spill $52 million in damages from Norfolk andamp; Western. Monsanto had been a defendant in that suit but settled before trial for an undisclosed sum. Monsanto won't say why it settled that case but not Kemner vs. Monsanto. (The railroad workers' judgment was later overturned by an appellate court and was settled, reportedly for far less than the damages awarded by the jury.)    Shortly before Kemner vs. Monsanto was to go to trial, defendants GATX and Dresser settled for $5 million. Then, a few months into the trial, Norfolk andamp; Western settled for $4 million, leaving the deepest pocket of all, Monsanto.    The plaintiffs' lawyers have built their case largely on the testimony of Bertram Carnow of Chicago, a veteran expert witness who also testified in the railroad workers' case. Dr. Carnow's fee for nearly three months of testimony: $3,000 a day plus expenses.    Dr. Carnow's team of specialists put each plaintiff through rigorous medical examinations that cost the plaintiffs' attorneys $1.2 million. Three of the plaintiffs were given the expensive and painful tests for dioxin, none of which yielded any direct evidence of the toxic chemical in their fat or blood. Nevertheless, based on other test results that Dr. Carnow said were abnormal, he testified that nearly all the plaintiffs' ailments stemmed from exposure to the dioxin contained in the spill.    Dr. Carnow's testimony mirrored his testimony in the railroad workers' case, which at times strained credulity. In the railroad case, he testified that a worker had been rendered impotent from dioxin exposure. The defense later established that the worker had fathered two children after the spill.    In Kemner vs. Monsanto, the company has argued that the plaintiffs' maladies are typical of ailments afflicting everyone at one time or another. &quot;I don't think {the plaintiffs} are lying,&quot; Kenneth Heineman, one of the defense lawyers, said in his opening statement. &quot;I think they've been scared to death by Dr. Carnow.&quot;    Monsanto's small army of medical experts also performed exhaustive tests on the plaintiffs. Boasts J. William Newbold, a defense lawyer: &quot;We had these people examined by every specialist known to mankind, including an audiologist, a urologist and an allergist. . . . We even did the inkblot test.&quot;    Monsanto has produced more than a dozen witnesses from Sturgeon, including physicians who had treated certain plaintiffs. The local doctors testified that these plaintiffs complained of similar symptoms before the spill or that their ailments are due to sports injuries or alcoholism.    Plaintiffs say some doctors refuse to treat them for fear of being drawn into the litigation. One physician who did take the stand says he agonized over the decision but felt &quot;someone has got to stand up and say there's nothing to these charges.&quot;    Monsanto had sought a mistrial last year on the grounds that no jury could make sense of the marathon trial. But the plaintiffs' lawyers assert that the company is taking a classic defense tactic -- delay -- to new extremes. Judge Goldenhersh apparently agrees. The company's tedious cross-examinations are often of &quot;questionable relevance,&quot; the judge wrote in an order denying the mistrial request. He added that Monsanto's witnesses &quot;developed alarmingly poor memories&quot; and &quot;denied saying what the record showed they had said days, hours or minutes before.&quot;    Courtroom observers say that by establishing a reputation as a fierce adversary with an apparently unlimited budget for battle, Monsanto may discourage similar cases in the future. The chemical giant faces many other toxic-tort lawsuits, including three others related to the spill in Sturgeon. And juries elsewhere have been notably generous in compensating victims of chemical exposure. A Texas jury last month ordered Monsanto to pay $107.8 million to the family of a worker who had been exposed to a toxic chemical and later died of leukemia.    &quot;Monsanto is trying to show the world how to beat the toxic-tort case,&quot; says Mr. Carr. &quot;They are going to make it so superexpensive to take a case like this to court that no one will ever risk it again.&quot;    Monsanto denies that it is stalling. Its lawyers say an effective defense requires a detailed rebuttal of all the plaintiffs' claims. Meanwhile, the company has filed a blizzard of motions seeking, among other things, to have a mistrial declared on the grounds that the case should have been tried in Missouri. Monsanto also seeks to have the judge disqualified for bias.    Unsuccessful in the circuit court, the company has sought the help of higher courts so often that it has incurred the wrath of Illinois Supreme Court Chief Justice William G. Clark. &quot;This court should refuse to be used as a pawn in such a waste of judicial resources,&quot; the chief justice wrote in an order denying one of the company's motions to dismiss.    &quot;I find this whole situation disturbing,&quot; Chief Justice Clark added. &quot;It may come to pass in this case that justice delayed is justice denied.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>