<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Proxmire Takes Aim at Takeovers</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)CONGRESS (CNG)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   During the next several months, Congress must decide what to do about corporate takeovers. I have called for a Senate vote Wednesday on a takeover reform bill. At issue is this: Are corporate takeovers uniformly healthy for America or does the system require reform?    You have carried three attacks on my position. These are: &quot;Senators Would Shoot the SEC Messengers&quot; by Prof. Jonathan Macey (editorial page, Sept. 10); &quot;Proxmire's Follies&quot; (editorial, Sept. 11), and &quot;Proxmire's Doubletalk on Takeovers&quot; by Joseph Grundfest, a commissioner on the Securities and Exchange Commission (editorial page, Sept. 16). I would like to respond to them.    It is unfortunate that Mr. Grundfest has attempted to score cheap debater's points rather than confront the real issue between us. He believes that hostile takeovers are good for the economy and should not be regulated. This is certainly a respectable view and one that I myself once held. Ironically, what helped me change my mind was a piece by Peter F. Drucker in the Journal on Oct. 30, 1984. He is perhaps our most distinguished authority on the American corporation and our modern business system. Mr. Drucker wrote:    &quot;It is increasingly hard to defend the unfriendly takeover as benefiting anyone other than the raider (and a few investment bankers and merger lawyers). Anyone working with management people knows that fear of the raider paralyzes our executives. Worse, it forces them into making decisions they know to be stupid and to damage the enterprise in their charge. A good many experienced business leaders I know now hold takeover fear to be a main cause of the decline in America's competitive strength in the world economy -- and a far more potent cause than the high dollar. It contributes to the obsession with the short term and the slighting of tomorrow in research, product development, market development and marketing, and in quality and service -- all to squeeze out a few more dollars in next quarter's 'bottomline.'&quot;    There is no convincing evidence that hostile takeovers are good for the economy and much to suggest the reverse. Japan and West Germany all but prohibit hostile takeovers, yet their economies have consistently outperformed ours. Fueled by hostile takeovers, American corporations sold $263 billion worth of debt in 1986, double the 1985 figure and five times the 1982 amount. Because of this huge debt buildup, our economy is becoming increasingly vulnerable to the next economic recession.    We are now raising more money for hostile raids than investment in new plant and equipment. These raids have resulted in a loss of 80,000 jobs, according to testimony from Thomas Donahue, secretary-treasurer of the AFL-CIO. The public clearly understands the dangers of unbridled takeover activity. A recent Harris poll revealed that 58% of Americans believe hostile takeovers do more harm than good, while only 8% say they do more good than harm. Moreover, 67% favor legislation to sharply restrict takeovers.    The Journal characterized my request for information on the risk arbitrage activities of Wall Street firms as a &quot;witch hunt.&quot; Risk arbitrage is the practice of investing in the stock of companies thought to be candidates for takeovers. There is nothing wrong with that. But some of us in Congress get a little nervous when the very investment banking firms engineering the multibillion dollar takeovers are also speculating in takeover stocks through their risk arbitrage departments. Presumably there is a Chinese wall separating merger and acquisition and risk arbitrage activities within the firm. But how effective is that wall, and how dependent have investment banking firms become on risk arbitrage activities? Surely these are legitimate questions for Congress to ask, particularly when leading investment bankers have questioned the wisdom of combining these two activities in a single firm.    What did the survey reveal? That 25 of the 31 largest investment firms acknowledged they invested in takeover targets before any public announcement of the takeover. What's more, risk arbitrage profits for these firms jumped from 12% of total profits in 1984 to 15% in 1986. Clearly, risk arbitrage is a significant and growing source of profit. With the potential for abuse increasing, Congress and the SEC must be especially alert in seeing that the Chinese wall is strengthened.    The Journal also raised the issue of my skepticism over the SEC's Office of the Economist and the studies it has produced on corporate takeovers. The Journal has accused me of &quot;bullying&quot; the SEC economists because they produced studies I didn't like. Actually, I have no quarrel with these studies. But my problem is that virtually all of the SEC studies are systematically selected to further a preconceived point of view -- that corporate takeovers are good for the economy. For example, many of them are narrowly focused on the short-term benefits to the stockholders of target companies while ignoring longer-term costs to other parties. In 1985, I asked Chairman John Shad to study the costs to American corporations of defending against hostile takeovers. He replied that the SEC didn't have enough resources.    Other respectable studies have exposed the narrow focus of the SEC economic studies. Here are just a few of the findings developed by non-Chicago school economists: Stockholders rejecting tender offers are just as well off in the long run as those who accept them; stockholders of the acquiring company suffer a loss; target companies have an average return on equity of 18%, well above the average, and companies taken over do worse, rather than better, after the acquisition.    If the Office of the Chief Economist is to be truly useful to the SEC and Congress, it should not become the captive of only one school of economic thought. It needs to give full expression to opposing viewpoints.    Sen. O. William Proxmire, (D., Wis.)   Chairman, Committee on Banking,    Housing and Urban Affairs   Washington</TEXT></DOC>