<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880526-0145 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Lawson's Lesson </HL><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> MON FRX BNK </IN><TEXT>   For the first 25 years after World War II, exchange-rate stability was achieved through the Bretton Woods system. This formed a cornerstone of the postwar economic order, not least as a force for financial discipline. But it began to break down in the late 1960s, and by the early 1970s it had collapsed altogether. Thereafter, with countries pursuing divergent economic policies, and many suffering from high and volatile inflation, a system of floating exchange rates was virtually inescapable. Indeed, many at the time believed this new flexibility to be desirable. With hindsight, some of the arguments for free floating seem much less compelling. And the belief that markets would provide a stabilizing influence, through the operations of medium-term speculators, has not been borne out.    ---   That summary of our recent experience was offered last September by Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, Nigel Lawson, in a speech to the annual meeting of the governors of the International Monetary Fund. Among those who attend IMF meetings he no doubt found much agreement; indeed, this view has recently dominated international economic management as expressed by the Plaza and Louvre accords. Yet few economists have caught up with the world's finance ministers, and even fewer politicians. So it is not surprising that the economic news in Britain these past few weeks has centered on Mr. Lawson's troubles selling this view to his cabinet superior, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.    Mr. Lawson prevailed last week, at least for now, when Mrs. Thatcher endorsed his policy of trying to stabilize the pound, rather than let the markets continue to bid it up. But the current British experience, repeating as it does American experience, has lessons for everyone in a world economy in transition.    Britain's problem is its success. Its GNP is expanding at an annual rate of 4.3%. It is the second-fastest-growing country, after Japan, in the Group of Five industrial economies. Britain is now so attractive that it's sucking in investment capital much faster than competing economies. The excitement has been growing following the historic supply-side budget Mr. Lawson delivered in March, reducing top marginal rates of income tax to 40%. Both France and West Germany maintain top marginal rates of about 56%, and France's Socialist government is pledging not to lower its rate.    With vigorous economic activity and the promise of more to come in that part of the world where money is counted in pounds, there has naturally been a surge in the demand for pounds. If the Bank of England satisfies this demand by creating more money, Sterling-M-Whatever will soar, disturbing the astrologers who follow the movements of these ethereal bodies. If the Bank of England fails to satisfy this new demand, the value of the pound will soar.    On Jan. 1 it took about 258 pounds to fetch an ounce of gold, for example, while gold trades below 245 pounds today. In the foreign-exchange markets, sterling has risen to $1.86 after having fallen, a few years ago, to almost $1.03. More recently, sterling has been advancing not only against the dollar but against the West German mark and other currencies in the European Monetary System -- to which Britain doesn't belong. Sterling-M-Whatever to the contrary, monetary supply in England is tight, relative to monetary demand, not easy.    Mrs. Thatcher, along with many others, seems to believe that it's okay to use M-Whatever in judging monetary policy, but a violation of free-market principles to use market prices. But money, issued without cost by a government monopoly, is scarcely another free-market commodity. Indeed, the free-market position is that the value of currencies ought to be stable so as to secure their ability to transmit prices accurately. And if a trading nation like the U.K. can't understand that this means stability of world as well as domestic prices, what hope is there for an insular giant like the U.S.?    After the 1983 tax cuts, U.S. economic planners faced the same dilemma Mr. Lawson faces today. With the only growing economy in the world, the U.S. was sucking in investment and the dollar was soaring. Adjustment to world price levels took the form of the devastation of the U.S. manufacturing sector, in the process giving birth to the protectionism with which we still struggle today. A dollar overvalued in terms of purchasing power parity also proved intolerable abroad, and at a meeting in September 1985 at the Plaza Hotel in New York, the U.S., abandoning the position Mrs. Thatcher abandoned last week, agreed the dollar was too strong. Unfortunately, mainly to fight the protectionism born of the strong dollar, the U.S. then embarked on talking down the dollar to cure another statistical abstract, the trade deficit. This let the dollar fall way below purchasing power parity; the G-5 met again at the Louvre, to establish the lower end, below which they didn't want to see the dollar fall.    Once the ministers identified that points existed where the dollar was too high and too low, the world had made a breakthrough on the road back to fixed rates. This is the wisdom of experience recorded in Mr. Lawson's September speech, and in Treasury Secretary Baker's speech at the same meeting calling for the inclusion of gold in a basket of commodities that would be used as an indicator in the process of economic coordination. In Paris on Friday, Mr. Baker proposed further strengthening of international coordination. Mr. Lawson reaffirmed his position Tuesday in a speech in London.    We're happy for Britain that Mr. Lawson has prevailed, and hope that his counsel will continue to allow his country to protect its supply-side surge and avoid making the U.S. mistake a second time. But we're even happier in taking his victory as a sign that yet another country is edging toward the idea that it is time to repair the world's monetary system. </TEXT></DOC>