<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870917-0133 </DOCNO><HL> The Constitution Made Our States United---By William Tucker</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT </IN><TEXT>   The other day I saw a political cartoon about the bicentennial of the Constitution. The Founding Fathers are all sitting around Independence Hall, fat and happy, while a washerwoman is cleaning the floor. One of them pipes up, &quot;Let's see now, anybody we've forgotten here?&quot;    Such criticism reflects little understanding of the Constitution or the conditions under which the delegates assembled in Philadelphia 200 years ago. The Constitutional Convention was held in the shadow of commercial chaos, political breakdown and possible armed rebellion, and ratification was by no means a foregone conclusion. When the &quot;assembly of demigods&quot; (as Jefferson called them) convened in Philadelphia, there was little agreement on what should be done. Were it not for the heroic forbearance of the Founding Fathers that summer of 1787, there might never have been a United States of America.    The most important thing to keep in mind is that when the delegates to the Convention gathered, the United States didn't exist. The official name of the governing body in America was &quot;the United States in Congress Assembled.&quot; The words meant exactly what they said. The &quot;United States&quot; were states, in the sense of sovereign powers. The Articles of Confederation -- as almost every delegate noted -- were nothing more than a &quot;treaty among the states.&quot;    Nine states still had their own navies. Congress could do nothing of importance without the unanimous approval of its 13 members. Taxes were voluntary and since some states -- notably Rhode Island -- had no intention of contributing, others were starting to ignore their obligations. More important, states were setting up trade barriers among themselves. New Jersey was the &quot;keg tapped at both ends,&quot; paying exorbitant duties to both New York and Pennsylvania to get its products to port. New York state was planning a breakthrough to the west where it would establish its own empire (which is where it got the name &quot;the empire state&quot;). Connecticut and Pennsylvania had gone to war over Connecticut's attempt to establish a colony in Western Pennsylvania.    As Alexander Hamilton said again and again, we were on the verge of becoming another Europe. Although there were no language barriers, the religious, commercial and geographic differences -- not to mention differences over slavery -- could easily have divided the country. Had we not formed a union in 1787, there is no reason why our 19th- and 20th-century history would have been free from Europe's national and &quot;world&quot; warfare.    The main reason the Convention succeeded was because the delegates were willing to hear each other out. At the very beginning they agreed that there would be no playing games of parliamentary procedure, no attempts to try to strong-arm anything past the majority. Everyone would talk until a basis for agreement was found.    The debate was tentative at first. When the subject of the president arose, an embarrassed silence fell on the Convention floor. Everyone knew George Washington would hold that office and hesitated to speak in front of him. Only after Benjamin Franklin broke the ice with a few practical suggestions was the debate joined.    As the Convention proceeded, the delegates loosened up and it soon became obvious that there were wide differences of opinion. The matter of representation in the House of Representatives was quickly settled. The new legislature was to be &quot;republican&quot; -- meaning that people elected their representatives -- as opposed to &quot;democratic,&quot; which implied more direct participation in government. When it came to the question of the Senate, however, the smaller states saw their influence vanishing.    James Wilson of Pennsylvania, Gouverneur Morris and James Madison of Virginia and other nationalists wanted to extend the proportionate representation of the House to the Senate. But the smaller states held their ground.    The debate soon became so heated that the Convention came perilously close to breaking up. By late June, almost every speaker was appending his remarks with warnings like that of Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts: &quot;The fate of the Union will be decided at this convention. If we do not do something, I doubt if Congress will meet again.&quot;    At one point Roger Sherman of Connecticut floated his proposal that the House have proportionate representation while the Senate have equal representation. Although it did not receive much attention at first, it eventually became the basis for compromise.    The complaint that the Founding Fathers didn't free the slaves or &quot;liberate&quot; women fails to understand the Constitution itself. The Founding Fathers' goal was to create a framework in which future generations could undertake their own reforms in a deliberate, dignified way.    The Constitutional Convention could not have ended slavery any more than it could have deposed the king of England. All it could have done was issue a grandiose pronouncement, at which point the South would have refused to join the union. Yet as John Fiske, the great popular historian of the 19th century, wrote, the Constitution leads almost directly to the Civil War. Once North and South were incorporated into one nation, the conflict over slavery became &quot;irrepressible.&quot;    The question was what form this conflict would take. The Civil War was finally fought over maintaining the Union. But what if there had been no Union? What if the South had been a separate nation? Would Southerners -- black or white -- have ever achieved full equality if they had been incorporated into the union as a conquered province? Or what if the war had been avoided and slavery just drifted on and on? Would the South have become another South Africa? I wouldn't bet against it.    Where the Founders' tolerance and magnanimity should really be judged is in their treatment of the future states. Several of the delegates expressed alarm that the Western territories would eventually dwarf the Eastern Seaboard. Gerry suggested rigging the system so the original 13 states would remain dominant. But Madison led a magnificent effort to forestall this shortchanging of future generations.    The greatness of the Constitution lies not in its efforts to solve every little problem of society. Its greatness is that it laid the foundation for a system in which future generations could carry out their own reforms and solve their own problems. Today, watching South Korea struggle to establish the most minimal republican institutions -- or watching France limp along with two men in charge because nobody ever drew the line between the executive and legislative branches -- we can only marvel at our forefathers' accomplishments.    Perhaps the greatest gift the Founding Fathers gave us was their willingness to abide by the will of the majority. The prototypical moment of the era came when Patrick Henry, an opponent of the federal union, found himself addressing a rabid gathering of anti-Federalists after Virginia ratified the Constitution. Political riots were not uncommon in those days, and the crowd strained for Henry to lead them into action.    The old patriot refused. &quot;The majority has made its decision,&quot; Henry told the gathering. &quot;Now as good republicans I suggest you all go home.&quot; They did.    The &quot;willingness to doubt one's own infallibility,&quot; as Benjamin Franklin put it -- that was the spirit that founded America.    ---   Mr. Tucker's play, &quot;Founding Fathers,&quot; is being performed in Jacksonville, Fla., today. </TEXT></DOC>