<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870925-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Forgotten Cause?Community FacilitiesFor the Mentally Ill AreFew and Overburdened---Goal of 1960s Loses GroundBecause of Funding Cuts,A Lack of Local Support---Daily Life in a 'Group Home'---By Clare AnsberryStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> RANKIN, Pa.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;I don't care where they put me,&quot; says John. Twiddling his thumbs, the 59-year-old man starts softly singing an out-of-tune &quot;Blue Suede Shoes.&quot; Nearby, his older brother, Lou, a skinny man with bulging eyes, says he doesn't much care either.    The brothers are used to being moved at the whim of others. As mental patients, they spent years together in a state institution. When released, they shared an apartment run by a mental-health agency. But they had to leave; they smoked in bed and often left the stove on.    Home for them now and into the indefinite future is Rankin House, a so-called group home for the mentally ill in this mill town of 2,900. Run by an Allegheny County agency, Rankin House occupies the premises of what was once a funeral parlor. Its eight mentally ill residents include 56-year-old Olivia, a mother of five; sullen and brooding Hal, 35; and 40-year-old Rene, a woman who loves grizzly bears and the Moody Blues band. Supervised by a staff of seven mental-health professionals -- at least one of whom is at the home 24 hours a day -- the residents take turns shopping, cooking and vacuuming, and learn to budget their money.    All of Rankin House's residents are considered chronic, or severely mentally ill, and most of them express a simple goal: to live on their own. For the staff, however, the objective simply is to keep them out of the state hospital or local psychiatric ward. &quot;Most will spend the rest of their lives {at Rankin},&quot; says Daniel Barkin, director of mental health for Turtle Creek Valley, an area that includes Rankin House. Rankin's residents aren't ready for the community, he explains.    And the community isn't ready for them -- either in terms of support services or acceptance. When staff member Linda Jakubek took the residents to a local church to play bingo, a woman whispered loudly, &quot;Can you believe she brought them?&quot;    When President John F. Kennedy boldly signed the Community Mental Health Facilities Act in 1963, the vision was clear. The nation's 500,000 mentally ill could leave the cold cinder-block warehouses where they languished, return to their communities and reside on their own with the assistance of local mental-health agencies.    Yet, despite the 2,200 community centers established in the last 25 years, the Camelot era's goals are far from being met. Today, as few as 5% of the estimated two million Americans who are seriously mentally ill receive any community support or rehabilitation services. The high percentage of readmissions to state hospitals -- 65% or above in many states -- and the thousands of mentally ill street people strongly suggest that the system is failing.    &quot;Things aren't working when you have to dodge people who are delusional wandering around in my parking garage,&quot; says James Finley, director of government relations for the National Council of Community Mental Health Centers. Perhaps more telling is the recent push by families of the mentally ill to make it easier to return sick relatives to institutions.    Although thousands with mental illnesses have succeeded in the community with the support of local agencies, community care of the mentally ill has in many places become a forgotten cause. The Mental Health Systems Act, which in 1980 succeeded the 1963 act, was repealed in 1981 with practically no public outcry; the repealed act had put more emphasis on preventive treatment and had authorized an increase in federal funding for the mentally ill over a five-year period.    Since the repeal, a 30% cut in federal funding has forced community agencies to pare staff and services. States still pour the bulk of their mental-health funds into huge institutions even though 80% of the mentally ill live outside such facilities. And even when state law requires community-support programs, the law largely is ignored. York, Pa., for example, got a group-home program 14 years after passage of a law that ordered it.    The persistent and perplexing obstacle for those who want to help the mentally ill is the stigma attached to chronic mental illness. Lon Krueger, a county mental-health worker, points to a pencil drawing in his office of smiling children with Down's syndrome and contrasts those children with the mentally ill. &quot;Your heart goes out to them. They're cute,&quot; he says of the children. But the mentally ill -- children and adults alike -- aren't cute. Their disability is often characterized by loud talk and strange behavior. One mother of a mentally ill child says her neighbors and relatives dismiss her son as lazy, stupid, weird and naughty. &quot;All in all, they wish he'd go away,&quot; she says.    That is why group homes and apartments for the mentally ill end up in communities like Rankin, a depressed steel town outside Pittsburgh. Middle-class suburbs nearby fight to prevent such homes within their precincts. &quot;They're afraid their children won't be safe,&quot; asserts Arlene Kanter, staff attorney for the Washington, D.C.-based Mental Health Law Project. (Rankin House's Ms. Jakubek dismisses such fears; if anything, she says, the house's residents &quot;are more dangerous to themselves than to others.&quot;)    On a recent day at Rankin House, it is 62-year-old Lou's day to shop. A staff member accompanies him to the local supermarket, but Lou is still unnerved by the prospect of shopping. He can't remember his age and begins asking whether John is his real brother. His task requires infinite concentration. For several minutes, he studies the stacks of multicolored cereal boxes to make sure he comes home with the right brand. But only once does he betray his illness, stopping in the middle of an aisle to laugh hysterically.    The next day, Rene buses tables at Goodwill Industries of Pittsburgh's cafeteria, hoping the experience may lead to a full-time job. Then she can live on her own and maybe join a health spa. &quot;I'm not ready now,&quot; she says. She still has to learn to control her budget and her temper.    Rene recalls once striking her mother for asking her to clean the kitchen while &quot;Bowling for Dollars&quot; was on television. But things are improving, she claims. She says she reads the Bible daily and watches a televised preacher. And like other Rankin House residents, she receives psychotherapy and medication at a facility in the nearby town of Braddock.    The Braddock facility is run by Judy Monahan, a mental-health professional, and operates out of a cramped, converted drugstore. Besides treatment, Ms. Monahan offers a program that teaches rehabilitation and social skills to the mentally ill. Practical matters are stressed, like what to do if all the tables at a McDonald's are dirty. (Politely ask someone at the counter to clean a table off, Ms. Monahan's clients are told.)    Ms. Monahan's experience illustrates the tremendous problem those in the mental-health field are having with funding. A federal grant that would have allowed new quarters and expanded services for the Braddock program was cut. Consequently, Ms. Monahan makes do. On a recent outing, 11 people shared two baseball mitts. Furniture is bought from Goodwill.    But Ms. Monahan can't economize any further with staff salaries, which are less than $15,000 a year. As it is, she finds it difficult to retain staff members, some of whom are working on doctorates and all of whom are laboring under heavy caseloads. (The typical Pennsylvania caseworker earns about $11,000 a year and juggles between 100 to 400 cases at any one time.)    On average, states spend much less caring for the mentally ill -- about $30.27 per capita daily -- than is spent on federal prison inmates (about $35.62). Funds for the mentally ill are typically lumped with funds for the mentally retarded. But since the mentally retarded are generally more palatable to the public and because they have a bigger and more vocal lobby, they receive the bulk of the money, even though the numbers of mentally ill predominate. Indeed, a class-action suit filed in federal court in June against Pennsylvania claims the state spent just $955 in the 1985-'86 fiscal year to help each chronically mentally ill resident while spending $6,067 for each mentally retarded person. (Pennsylvania has asked that the suit be dismissed, stating that it violates the 11th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits a state from being sued by citizens of another state or by foreigners.)    &quot;There's a gross inequity at a time when funds already are low,&quot; maintains Raymond Webb, who runs a Pittsburgh-area mental-health agency. Federal funding for his agency has dropped 60% during the Reagan administration. One federal grant for residential outpatient counseling and education was cut in half, forcing 40 layoffs.    As a result, Mr. Webb's agency no longer works with police departments on how to best handle suicide and hostage situations. &quot;We must wait until someone is so sick they're suicidal or dangerous before we can see them,&quot; he says.    At Mr. Webb's agency, Janet Marks says even those clients living on their own need constant supervision. One client came back after grocery shopping, put a frozen chicken in the cupboard and was preparing to eat the rotten meat four days later. She spent months looking for someone to fill a supervisor's position starting at $14,000 a year. &quot;All the applicants make more money than me,&quot; she says.    Another mental-health agency, plagued by staff turnover, issued a memo to a local advocacy group about the five fresh staffers on a crisis team. &quot;Please go easy with our people, because they don't know what they're doing,&quot; it read.    If staffs were larger and better qualified, there mightn't be a need for group homes like Rankin, which are the most expensive programs to run. Paul Carling, director of Boston University's Community Residential Rehabilitation Project Center, points to Dane County, Wis. Rather than use group homes, the county channels funds into an intensive caseworker program in which experienced workers seek out the mentally ill and work individually with them in their own homes. Still, he says, &quot;the big problem is lack of stable, affordable housing.&quot;    Here in Pennsylvania, Ruth Seegrist begged a state task force last fall for more structured mental-health programs. Her daughter, Sylvia, had a history of mental illness and had been in and out of several community programs. In 1985, Sylvia, dressed in army fatigues, took a rifle into a Philadelphia mall and shot 10 people, killing three. The task force was formed in response to the shooting. &quot;As parents,&quot; she asked them, &quot;can you imagine the depth of my despair?&quot;    Another mother told the panel of how her mentally ill daughter was shuffled between 42 different places and was raped in an unsafe neighborhood that, she contended, &quot;is where a good many of our resources are because it's cheaper.&quot;    With so few housing alternatives, a growing number of the mentally ill wind up in so-called personal-care boarding homes. The operators of such homes aren't mental-health professionals but are supposed to help residents with such things as hygiene. At their best, mental-health experts say, the operators of personal-care homes are well-meaning; at their worst, they can be abusive and criminal.    Few know better the lack of options and services than Regis and Trudy Knapp. Their 27-year-old son, Curtis, has been in several community mental-health residential programs but invariably gets kicked out, the last time for threatening the staff and throwing an ashtray at one of them. He now lives at home.    The Knapps handle Curt like a raw egg, afraid to upset him -- he threatened to kill them once for asking him to turn down the radio. When Curt stands in the driveway of the family's nice suburban home screaming and cursing them, they just stand by, embarrassed.    &quot;One minute he's angry and we're afraid he might hurt someone. The next minute he's calmed down and apologizing,&quot; says Mr. Knapp. &quot;It's possible he will explode. That's the fear we live with. We have no help. No one wants to help people like Curt.&quot;    More often, there simply isn't any place for people like Curt. Dozens of mentally ill could benefit from living at Rankin House; but the group home has only eight slots, and turnover is rarer than the staff would like. Observing Lou prepare a meal, Ms. Jakubek says, &quot;Ideally, maybe these people should be on their own.&quot; She adds: &quot;But in reality, with our funds and staffing, it just won't work.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>