<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871109-0016 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Summit Fever</HL><DD> 11/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   No one doubts that Caspar Weinberger's resignation as secretary of defense was primarily for personal reasons, but associates suggest that he's also relieved at not being part of the foreign policy shaping up for the final year of the Reagan presidency. The administration has contracted a bad case of summit fever.    At the Washington summit Dec. 7 President Reagan and Chairman Gorbachev will sign a largely empty agreement on intermediate nuclear forces, requiring the Soviets to move the nuclear warheads from their SS-20s to newer and better missiles. But the President is also committed to a second summit in Moscow. In preparation, the administration is not only toying with the mischievous notion of a promise-to-agree, but also making pell-mell preparations to sign a new strategic arms agreement.    Richard Perle, the departed Pentagon strategic thinker, has sketched the defense of INF: The Soviets give up more weapons than we do, and have agreed to more intrusive verification procedures. The weapons we sacrifice are of scant military utility, since political constraints prevent them from exercising on German roads or being stationed with warheads installed. The agreement is a model for arms control, showing the Soviets can be brought around if we stand fast.    Even accepting those points, what do we get out of INF that's worth the political disruption it has caused in Germany, or for the limitations it imposes on promising conventionally armed cruise missiles? More to the point, with INF the Reagan administration accepted the notion that the solution to our national-security problems lies in arms control. This unleashed a mad momentum likely to sweep away the Reagan rearmament program in general and the strategic defense initiative in particular.    For the outlines of a strategic arms accord are clear: Each side will agree to a 50% reduction in strategic nuclear missiles, and the U.S. will agree not to deploy a missile defense for 10 years, that is, before 1998. U.S. and Soviet negotiators will conspire to write provisions that will gut the SDI program while allowing Ronald Reagan to say it continues. The Joint Chiefs of Staff will run computer simulations assuming the numbers in the treaty are somehow real, and give their consent. The next President will come under pressure for yet further cuts in the strategic arsenal.    The Russians, of course, will cheat. They will hide missiles in railroad tunnels or innocent-looking garages. They will design weapons that arguably do not come under the treaty limitations. They will complete the missile defense they are even now building, which while not as capable as SDI will be quite adequate to defend militarily important targets against a second strike by the shrunken U.S. force. The U.S. will lapse into a position of strategic inferiority, as the result of trends started in the last year of the Reagan administration.    Before, during and after its summits, the Reagan administration will boast of tough verification of its arms agreement. But even now it is selling out its own position on compliance issues. On the issue whether the U.S. should abide by treaties the Soviets are breaking, it seems to have negotiated a &quot;compromise&quot; with the Congress. The compromise is that we will follow the treaties while pretending not to. Meanwhile, the administration is postponing raising compliance issues with the Soviets.    The 1972 ABM treaty requires a review every five years. Communiques announcing completion of the first and second reviews were issued on Nov. 4, 1977, and Nov. 9, 1982. The third review was due by Oct. 3, 1987. The most optimistic estimates are now that it will start sometime after the first of the year. The Reagan administration, in short, is conspiring with the Soviets to violate the review provisions of the treaty.    The symptoms of summit fever are unmistakable. Pronouncing on Soviet violations of old treaties would steal the glitter from a summit to sign new ones. With Mr. Gorbachev headed for Washington, it is considered rude to talk about the Krasnoyarsk radar, which both Houses of Congress have unanimously declared to be a treaty violation. By the way, the administration is required by law to report to Congress on Soviet compliance by Dec. 1, six days before Mr. Gorbachev's arrival.    As usual, the White House politicos are mesmerized by photo opportunities, and the State Department bureaucracy is mesmerized by doing deals. But what especially seems to be driving this process is Ronald Reagan, pushing in inner councils the same nuclear-free-world rhetoric that he used in public with the Reykjavik summit. The President doesn't seem to recognize that the inevitable result of such stargazing, aside from bewildering and alarming our European allies, will be to doom the much more realistic dream of SDI.    President Reagan came into office with the clear message that our problem is the evil empire. He will embrace Mr. Gorbachev twice in the fading days of his presidency, and leave as his legacy the message that our problem is nuclear weapons, both those that threaten us and those that defend us. </TEXT></DOC>