<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861217-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Rescue Consultant:Disaster-Relief ExpertBelieves in Self-HelpInstead of Handouts---A Veteran of 54 Calamities,Frederick Cuny Has WonNew Support for His Ideas---San Salvador After the Quake---By Paul Duke Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/17/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like schoolboys with marbles, President Jose Napoleon Duarte and a tall, beefy Texan named Frederick Cuny are on their knees, crawling over huge maps of this ravaged city and trying to assess the damage.    As they huddle two weeks after the October earthquake that killed 1,500 people here, perhaps 150,000 Salvadorans are still homeless. Water and electricity are out in many areas. Mr. Duarte and the U.S. government, which backs him in El Salvador's six-year-old civil war, are under pressure to move quickly and spend great sums to prove their effectiveness.    But Mr. Cuny thinks Mr. Duarte should use money sparingly -- and spend it mainly on self-help projects to permanently transform housing in the slums and restore public services. He also discourages handouts of bandages, clothing and tents, dismissing them as &quot;useless junk&quot; that does more for the donor than the victim.    &quot;If you give somebody a tent, they ask for other goodies,&quot; Mr. Cuny says. &quot;If you give them a hammer and nails, they build something.&quot;    Fred Cuny is a 42-year-old farm-labor organizer and city planner turned disaster-relief consultant. For years, his often unsolicited views were dismissed as wild-eyed idealism or Scrooge-like miserliness.    But now the U.S. government and others pay for his advice, and his small firm, Dallas-based Intertect, is making a profit -- an anomaly in the generally not-for-profit world of disaster aid. Over time, as Mr. Cuny has softened his preachiness, he has helped to change, in big and small ways, the response of the U.S. government and private agencies to natural disasters.    Paul Bell, a U.S. disaster-relief expert in Central and South America, says Mr. Cuny was the &quot;first person to convince the U.S. government to capitalize on self-help in relief work.&quot; Now that Mr. Cuny has logged 54 floods, famines, hurricanes, earthquakes and cyclones, he is &quot;the pre-eminent guy in the field,&quot; says Donald Krumm, the emergency-operations director in the State Department's Bureau for Refugee Programs.    Intertect itself doesn't engage in vast relief operations. Instead it is hired by governments and private agencies on a consulting basis. Mr. Cuny was dispatched to El Salvador, for instance, by an arm of the State Department, the Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance.    After the Mexico City earthquake last year, Mr. Cuny helped devise a plan to house 18,000 families. In the 1985 East African drought, he helped draft a program that fed tens of thousands of Ethiopian refugees. A decade ago in Guatemala, he oversaw a rural housing reconstruction project that used local materials and labor -- without any handouts.    Mr. Cuny recognizes that handouts may be necessary in sudden and grave emergencies, but he opposes them in general. He feels that free supplies from abroad can upset local economies -- and are often useless anyway. He prefers to take advantage of a disaster to rebuild from scratch so that tragedy doesn't strike again.    &quot;Disasters are a function of underdevelopment,&quot; says Mr. Cuny, a seventh-generation Texan with big ears, a round face and an easy laugh. Too many poor people in the Third World live in ramshackle sheds on mountainsides or flood plains. &quot;If the earthquake that hit San Salvador hit Southern California,&quot; he says, &quot;it would rattle the china -- not kill 1,500 people.&quot;    Mr. Cuny found support for this view in San Salvador. In San Jacinto, a typical poor section, streets were littered with debris from collapsed mesones -- squat mud and stucco buildings where as many as 30 families live, one to a room, around an open dirt patio. The mesones had fallen in on themselves like so many houses of cards. In prosperous areas, on the other hand, modern houses showed no sign of damage and colorful, well-tended gardens stood undisturbed.    Critics of Mr. Cuny worry that for-profit firms like Intertect may stress the bottom line more than humanitarianism in life-and-death situations. And voluntary groups defend their work against Mr. Cuny's insistence that &quot;disasters are too serious to be left to volunteers.&quot;    Says David Guyer, the president of Save the Children, &quot;I agree with Fred on most things, but I think groups like ourselves are fully able to do the work.&quot;    For his part, Mr. Cuny freely admits some limitations. &quot;I think when people are honestly critical of me they say, Fred Cuny is too dogmatic; he developed a philosophy which says don't use this, don't use that, when, of course, there are times when you do.&quot; He acknowledges that the idea of linking disasters to possible development is less applicable to refugee situations and that it won't work in the most war-torn nations where control of roads and communications is unsure.    He strongly believes, however, that the idea is workable in many lands, and holding this view, he often deals with the political and social background of disaster-struck nations. Sometimes, as in Mexico City, where Mr. Cuny was an influential voice in the government's program to expropriate land under much of the damaged housing and give it to the poor people who lived there, his ideas can lead to significant change. Sometimes, though, as in Guatemala 10 years ago, those who accept Mr. Cuny's invitation to try to better their lives can lose them instead.    Mr. Cuny's theories of disaster relief have influenced a number of private agencies. Years ago the American Red Cross routinely shipped loads of supplies to disasters. Now it lets those on the scene decide what is needed, and, lest aid be sent that might do more harm than good, it won't send even food or medicine unless the affected country specifically asks for it.    In El Salvador, Mr. Cuny's task is to help target $50 million in U.S. aid. Instead of focusing on speed in administering relief, Mr. Cuny proposes job programs that will employ people in salvage operations and restore public services. He suggests that instead of importing food and supplies to give away, El Salvador use U.S. money to help Salvadoran businesses restock their shelves.    To press his ideas, Mr. Cuny and an Intertect associate, architect Paul Thompson, climb into a battered beige rental car and race to meetings with officials of the local government, the World Bank and private groups. In some cases, Mr. Cuny wants to talk with these people before they meet with other relief officials, including some from the U.S., who have little experience in disaster relief. His fear is that the Americans might give the Salvadorans everything they want -- but, in many cases, don't need. With the support of the U.S. ambassador, Edwin Corr, who arranged the meeting with President Duarte, most of the Cuny-Thompson plan is eventually accepted.    The early years for Intertect, which was started in 1971, were hard. To keep the fledgling firm solvent one summer, Mr. Cuny used his pilot's license to dust crops from Texas to the Dakotas. He also hitched rides on relief flights to do research and met kindred spirits who questioned the standard tenets of relief. He got his first big chance to try things his way after the 1976 Guatemala earthquake, which killed 25,000 people and left nearly one million people -- almost 20% of the population -- homeless.    Intertect was brought in by Oxfam U.K., the British relief and development agency, to oversee a rural housing-reconstruction project set up by Oxfam and another agency, World Neighbors. The point of the program was to skip building the usual temporary shelter -- many of the villagers had done this themselves long before agencies arrived -- and instead teach the Guatemalans how to build safe housing using mostly locally produced materials.    The only import was corrugated metal sheets for roofing, good for earthquake-prone areas because it is lightweight and less likely to cause injury if it falls. The simplest house in the program cost $170 at the time.    A key element was that &quot;the program did not give anybody housing,&quot; says Mary McKay, who was the first director of the project for World Neighbors and now teaches development at Bethel College in North Newton, Kan. To make sure that the villagers wanted what they were getting, nothing was donated outright (though the price of some building supplies was subsidized), and all construction was done by Guatemalans.    Self-help approaches had been used before in long-term development, but disaster relief had always worked on the premise that victims were nearly helpless. The Guatemala project was one of the first to reflect the growing belief that victims often had enough spunk to take care of themselves.    For the project, Mr. Cuny put together a construction guide in comic-book style, with 22 safer-housing suggestions drawn for the semiliterate and sometimes illiterate villagers. The lightweight metal roof was one suggestion. Lowering the ceiling was another. One drawing suggested that villagers build their doors to open outward; many of the earthquake victims had been killed when overturned furniture or other debris blocked the door and heavy clay-tile roofs collapsed.    The Oxfam-World Neighbors project operated in only a handful of villages. But it caught on quickly. Close to a dozen private agencies and church groups copied it in Guatemala. The U.S. Agency for International Development borrowed part of it, buying hundreds of thousands of the corrugated metal sheets to distribute to Guatemalans at subsidized prices.    The program became a model, but it had a tragic denouement. Involving Guatemalan villagers in the program sometimes made them leaders of their communities, critics of the status quo -- and targets of repression by the military government that was then in power. Others who were there say that one Guatemalan was dragged from his house in the early morning and beheaded in front of his wife and family. They say a carpenter was so brutally beaten that his wife recognized him only by the calluses on his hands. &quot;We went too far, we were very naive, and we provoked the government,&quot; says Mr. Cuny. &quot;It backfired.&quot;    Before self-help approaches began to catch on, relief agencies came to the aid of victims of natural disasters in much the same way that they helped European refugees after World War II: huge amounts of goods from abroad and large tent cities.    The problem was that the goods disrupted the local economy or were inappropriate. Sometimes the U.S. sent tons of corn to people who didn't eat corn. And disaster victims didn't want to be moved to tent cities on the outskirts of town, where they couldn't guard what was left of their property or begin to rebuild.    Mr. Cuny wasn't the only critic of the way relief operations were handled. But he dug deeper than most, writing books and articles and doing much of the first serious research into disaster response. &quot;He has done more than anybody else to define the body of knowledge and to package that body of knowledge,&quot; says Philip Sargisson, the head of the emergency unit of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in Geneva.    Even the name of Mr. Cuny's firm, Intertect, underlines his philosophy -- and his touch of bravado. It was chosen to stand for &quot;'international architects' -- architects in the broad sense that we were going to rebuild the world,&quot; he says. &quot;I liked it because it sounded slick and technical, and it was different from something like 'Save the Peasant.'&quot; Intertect now has nine full-time employees, while 12 others are ready to go to disaster sites within a few days. Last year Intertect took in about $500,000 in revenue, but no one is getting rich: Mr. Cuny and the other principals in the firm each make about $30,000 a year.    In San Salvador today, electricity and water have largely been restored. And while no permanent housing has yet been built for the 150,000 Salvadorans made homeless by the earthquake, most of these people have moved in with relatives or built reliable temporary shelters.    Walking through the streets of San Salvador not long after the earthquake, Mr. Cuny saw huge rolls of white plastic sheeting sent by the U.S. &quot;The U.S. used to send thousands of tents,&quot; he recalled, and many wound up on tropical beaches. &quot;At least the plastic is more versatile,&quot; he said, &quot;and the people can decide for themselves what to do with it.&quot; He added, &quot;I have to take pleasure in small victories.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>