<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870112-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Tricky Ledgers:To Hide Huge Losses,Financial Officials UseAccounting Gimmicks---Farm Credit System PlansTwo Sets of Its Books;Insolvent Sandamp;Ls Stay Open---But Few Expect a Real Crisis---By Jeff Bailey and Charles F. McCoyStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT LATAMFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)PETROLEUM (PET)CONGRESS (CNG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD) </IN><TEXT>   Accounting flimflam and wishful thinking are pervading the financial system.    From the troubled Southwest to the nation's capital, government and banking officials are resorting to new extremes of balance-sheet gimmickry to avoid facing up to huge losses on loans made by banks, thrifts and federal farm lenders.    The Farm Credit System plans to keep two sets of books -- one a rose-tinted version indicating that the big farm lender doesn't need a bailout. Mexico is to get $12 billion in new loans even though it can't repay the $98 billion it already owes. And the U.S. government keeps open more than 100 insolvent savings and loan associations at a cost of $5 million a day.    As a result, tens of billions of dollars of already-deferred losses on farm, energy, real-estate and foreign loans are snowballing faster than ever. Keeping the losses from spilling across financial markets increasingly requires action by regulators, the administration and Congress. But the delaying tactics are clearly weakening the nation's banking system. And taxpayers face more and more of the cleanup cost.    &quot;We're mortgaging our future,&quot; says Frederick D. Wolf, the General Accounting Office's director of accounting and financial management. Officials at the congressional watchdog agency worry that the huge federal budget deficits will further complicate any straightforward efforts to rehabilitate the banking system.    Already, the handling of the Latin American debt crisis has hurt the U.S. economy. Servicing the debt forces the debtor nations into &quot;panic exporting&quot; that is undermining U.S. farmers and manufacturers -- at a cost of more than one million jobs, Sen. Bill Bradley estimates. The New Jersey Democrat is the author of a proposal that would encourage banks to begin writing off soured Third World loans.    Elsewhere, carrying bad loans on farm banks' books is holding down commodity prices by enabling inefficient farmers to keep producing. And interest rates are kept higher than they might otherwise be because ailing thrifts and banks are paying premiums to attract deposits.    Nonetheless, only the most bearish observers talk of a full-scale banking crisis. The Federal Reserve System ensures stability in all but the worst of potential panics. Most big banks have increased their capital. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.'s $18.5 billion fund offers an additional cushion. And fairly low interest rates, which have saved many savings and loans, seem likely for some time.    George D. Gould, undersecretary of the Treasury, says the administration has little choice but to buy time with accounting gimmicks and other forms of loss deferral. &quot;The only viable alternative is to write a big fat government check,&quot; he says.    It would be foolish, Mr. Gould asserts, to bail out problem areas such as the Farm Credit System and the thrift industry while neither the quality of management nor the extent of losses at troubled institutions is clear. He concedes, however, that a government check &quot;at the front end&quot; could, in some cases, be cheaper in the long run. And if agricultural and oil prices remain weak, he says, &quot;none of this forbearance is going to work.&quot;    This year, many economists say, commodity prices aren't likely to rebound much, and that indicates more lender losses. Moreover, a minority of analysts expect further broad price declines and a recession this year. In either case, says A. Gary Shilling, a New York economic consultant who predicts a recession and increasing loan defaults, &quot;postponement doesn't gain you anything. It just builds up to a bigger crisis.&quot;    Loss deferral and imaginative accounting have run rampant at the $70.9 billion Farm Credit System. In September 1985, when the nation's biggest farm lender was clearly endangered by agriculture's hard times, Congress and the administration fashioned a bailout so flawed that it fell apart less than a year later.    Fix No. 1 had two conflicting aims: to put the ramshackle system on rigid accounting standards so that its problems couldn't be hidden a second time; and to stall any real infusion of much-needed cash -- $2 billion to $15 billion of taxpayer funds was being discussed -- that would return the system to profitability.    The result: The Farm Credit System stoically reported $4.2 billion in losses and was soon back at the Treasury's doorstep.    Administration officials still refused to put up any money. And they were reluctant to quickly scrap the accounting discipline that they had touted only months earlier. But at a late-September meeting in a Senate back room, Brent Beesley, the man running the Farm Credit System's banking operations, made their decision easy. According to officials at the meeting, Mr. Beesley, a former thrift regulator, threatened to accelerate the system's recognition of losses if the accounting rules weren't relaxed.    Just weeks before the congressional election, such a move could have quickly rendered parts of the system technically insolvent -- roiling the bond market on which the system relies for funds and alarming the farmers who hold its stock.    Mr. Beesley now says he sought the accounting changes because, without them, &quot;it was clear that sooner or later we would need taxpayer money.&quot; He acknowledges discussing the potential of speeding up losses but denies making any threat. However, the other officials characterize his message as: &quot;Let us try some phony-baloney accounting, or we can cause chaos.&quot;    Thus was born Fix No. 2.    It also avoids any infusion of cash. But, attached to other year-end legislation, it scrapped tough accounting and created for the system a second set of books to be published as either a separate ledger or a lengthy footnote. These books will turn loan losses and some big operating losses into assets and then write them off over 20 years -- what accountants call loss amortization. However, the original books, prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, will soon show that parts of the system are broke.    A top adviser to the system now worries that lending controls will go by the boards again. &quot;They could say, 'Well heck, it's only a footnote.'&quot;    The GAO is worried, too. Charles A. Bowsher, the agency's chief, sent a rare, unsolicited letter to congressional leaders warning that under the new bookkeeping, the system could end up &quot;believing the fiction . . . turning back the clock to the earlier era of undisciplined accounting practices and loose credit analysis.&quot;    Loss deferrals also roll on at the nation's farm lender of last resort, the Farmers Home Administration. The big federal agency has about 270,000 loans totaling $29.7 billion -- with a third of them now sour. But the agency continues to lend, extending $3.5 billion in direct credit and loan guarantees last year.    &quot;Congress has clearly decided to run a form of assistance through a {lending} institution rather than confront the problem,&quot; says Craig A. Simmons, another GAO official. When the Farmers Home Administration tried to hire bill collectors to help clean up its portfolio, farm-state congressmen called the move heartless and ordered it to stop.    &quot;You can't run a lending operation like that,&quot; says Vance Clark, the agency's administrator. &quot;Collateral declines. Losses grow. Loss deferral doesn't work.&quot;    Some commercial banks are fighting the same losing battle. Tommy Bryan, the president of Guaranty Bank andamp; Trust Co. of New Roads, La., has struggled unsuccessfully for a year to find $1 million to shore up his farm and energy bank's capital. &quot;All that time, you've got problem loans chomping at your heels,&quot; he says. &quot;Pretty soon, you're going backwards.&quot;    And, in fact, Guaranty Bank's capital-to-assets ratio slipped to 2.1% on Dec. 31 from 4.4% a year and a half earlier. Regulators aren't closing the bank, though, partly because of a policy aimed at letting low-capital farm and energy banks earn their way out of trouble. Mr. Bryan isn't hopeful; without a capital infusion, that would take his bank 12 to 15 years, he guesses, adding, &quot;Earning your way out of trouble with low capital is damn hard.&quot;    Low-capital banks, by definition, have relatively few earning assets and thus do poorly. The 286 U.S. banks with capital below the required 5.5% of assets on June 30 lost money during the second quarter -- the latest report -- at a combined annual rate of $85 million, according to Federal Reserve data compiled by Veribanc Inc., a Woburn, Mass., consulting firm.    Time and commodity prices work against regulators in other ways. When the FDIC closed First National Bank of Midland, Texas, in early 1984, it estimated that it would lose a then-unthinkable $245.2 million on about $1.2 billion in energy loans and other assets that the agency assumed. But oil prices then plunged, and the FDIC's loss estimate has more than doubled to $534 million.    Other failures have grown more costly because regulators waited as deposit outflows and bad publicity withered the banks' value to possible buyers. Robert T. Parry, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, recently called for prompter bank closures to protect the FDIC from increased losses.    FDIC Chairman L. William Seidman says, however, that the insurance fund has continued to grow despite such problems. He adds that the problems require regulators to be more patient, not less.    Meanwhile, the latest Mexican-debt restructuring expands the role of the government-supported International Monetary Fund and World Bank. The $12 billion package increases the debt 12% and requires Mexico to spend much of the funds on interest payments -- the &quot;good money after bad&quot; plan that Sen. Bradley opposes. And, in a new wrinkle, it promises still more money if Mexico's economy worsens. This provision, designed to avoid a default if oil prices plunge again, flouts the banks' tradition of paring their exposure when a borrower weakens.    But regulators and big banks appear wedded to the approach, which doesn't significantly dent reported profits. &quot;Under generally accepted accounting principles,&quot; says Edmund Coulsen, the deputy chief accountant at the Securities and Exchange Commission, &quot;you can stretch the loans out for 200 years.&quot;    The thrift industry is awash in loss deferrals. Lacking money to liquidate dozens of failed thrifts, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. keeps them open, exposing itself to billions of dollars of operating and loan losses.    Before Beverly Hills Savings andamp; Loan Association became insolvent nearly two years ago, it loaded up on long-term, high-interest-rate deposits that now involve an extra cost of $25 million a year. If the California thrift were liquidated, however, the FSLIC could legally redeem those deposits for cheaper funds.    Moreover, holding onto Beverly Hills' loan portfolio -- the Sandamp;L was a big lender in commercial real estate -- amounted to a huge wager on that shaky market. The thrift's negative net worth, which roughly approximates the cost of an orderly liquidation, mushroomed to $540.2 million on June 30 from $81.1 million a year earlier. On the same wager, the FSLIC kept open First Savings andamp; Loan of Burkburnett, Texas; its negative net worth jumped sevenfold during that period to $120.2 million.    The industry as a whole is sick, too. Though it shows total capital of $50.1 billion, more than three-quarters of that is intangible assets such as good will (the price paid for a business over its tangible worth) and regulatory accounting gimmicks. Without those phantom assets, 78 Sandamp;Ls with assets exceeding $1 billion are insolvent, according to Federal Home Loan Bank Board data compiled by Veribanc.    A proposed FSLIC recapitalization would raise about $25 billion, mostly through borrowings, to liquidate failed thrifts. The debt would be repaid from the liquidation proceeds and profits of healthier Sandamp;Ls over 30 years. Bank Board officials think such a plan would work, but Bert Ely, an Alexandria, Va., banking consultant, contends, &quot;It's $17 billion short.&quot;    Borrowing heavily against its future profits, how would the thinly capitalized thrift system deal with another upturn in interest rates or some other new crisis? &quot;This isn't designed to deal with a prospective problem,&quot; the Treasury's Mr. Gould says. &quot;It's designed to deal with today.&quot; What happens when the next crunch hits? Mr. Gould replies, &quot;Maybe you've exhausted the resources of the industry.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>