<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881005-0176 </DOCNO><HL> International: Discontent Rife at Philippines' West Point --- Military Academy Reflects Army's Politicization </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> BAGUIO, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Hundreds of young men in crisp trousers and white cross-straps are marching in formation across grass cropped short as a Marine's hair. Sunlight glints off brass buttons and gold braid. If you squint, you might almost believe you're at West Point.    But this is the Philippine Military Academy, a West Point clone built 52 years ago on the advice of Gen. Douglas MacArthur. It has a West-Point-style Honor Code, a Hop Committee to plan dances, a mural in the entryway showing Gen. MacArthur in battle. Instruction is in English, and even the plumes on the cadets' red shakos are imported from the U.S.    But things change in half a century, and the academy has shifted from its U.S. origins. In recent years, the cadets have had to learn discipline and honor in the shadow of a corrupt dictatorship. Last year they watched their ex-superintendent join a losing coup attempt against the elected government of Corazon Aquino.    Years of left-wing insurgency and corruption in the Philippines have left the mood at the academy a mixture of loyalty and rebelliousness, intense pride and lingering uncertainty. Academic standards are rigorous as ever; the cadets still salute smartly and eat &quot;square meals,&quot; their spoons circumscribing perfect squares with every bite. But during the most recent coup attempt against President Aquino, they came out in support of the mutineers. They were punished -- but they still say they aren't sorry.    &quot;No, ma'am, what I did was the right thing,&quot; says cadet Augustus Caesar Esmeralda, regimental commander of the class of 1989. His marks in tactics outshone all the rest, his chest is decked with marksmanship medals. But he was the one who sat down in the academy computer center last year and drafted the class manifesto siding with the coup.    &quot;I condemn the methods, but the cause was good,&quot; he says. Such sentiments shock the many civilian Filipinos who believe the armed forces mustn't take stands on political causes, good or bad. Some even say the military academy should be abolished. Others call for a curriculum review to see if cadets are acquiring the tools for political intervention along with their marching and map-reading skills.    The calls for change reflect a broader frustration with the Philippine armed forces. The military mushroomed during the Marcos years, grew corrupt and politicized, and finally turned on the dictator and helped install Mrs. Aquino. Since then, civilians have been waiting for the army to return to the barracks.    &quot;You have a delicate balance -- the same army which supported Marcos, reshuffled, is helping Mrs. Aquino return the country to democracy,&quot; says Carolina Hernandez, a civilian military-affairs specialist. She thinks officers' training at the Philippine Military Academy is a key to getting the armed forces out of politics.    &quot;It all starts with education,&quot; she says. A typical day at the Philippine Military Academy starts with bugle call at 6:30, then calisthenics and breakfast. By 9 a.m., the cadets are off to class, batlike figures in dark, flowing rain capes, black briefcases clutched with precision in their left hands. There is an inspection after class, then a lunch of rice, diced pork rinds and stewed vegetables with chicken livers. Then, more classes. Normally, there are four exams a day. This routine typically whittles entering classes of 1,000 down to 200 cadets by the second year.    &quot;I consider myself somewhat better than the other men at our level,&quot; says Leonidas Hidalgo, a policeman's son who, like the other cadets, has shining eyes and ramrod posture. &quot;Not to be a braggart, but it's hard to stay in here.&quot;    Back when Gen. MacArthur helped design the academy, the curriculum matched West Point's, heavy on math and engineering. The idea was to turn out army engineers who would build roads, ports and bridges in America's needy new commonwealth. But the philosophy changed during the Marcos years. Mr. Marcos faced two low-grade insurgencies: Moslem secessionists in the far south, and communists closer to home.    His answer was to shake up the armed forces and ultimately declare martial law. From 1966, Mr. Marcos's first year in office, to 1986, his last, military manpower grew to 156,000 from 45,000. Mr. Marcos started letting civilians take courses at the National Defense College, then vault over lower ranks to become colonels. Businessmen, lawyers and out-of-office politicians soon recognized an army commission as a fast track to power and wealth.    Mr. Marcos also overhauled the curriculum. He felt that the army was out of touch with the disaffected masses, so he threw out engineering and math. Today, cadets learn sociology, philosophy, debate -- to help them understand the poor and out-propagandize the insurgents.    It may have seemed like a good idea at the time, but it had a side effect: As the military grew corrupt and demoralized, officer-candidates began applying social-science critiques not to the insurgents, but to the government itself. Alumni from the 1970s formed a rebel-officers movement called the Reform the Armed Forces Now Movement, or RAM, and proselytized among the cadets.    The Ramboys, as members were known, plotted against Mr. Marcos, but were discovered in 1986. That was when the Ramboys came out for Mrs. Aquino. Filipinos surged into the streets, and Mr. Marcos fell. But just because officers and cadets opposed Mr. Marcos didn't mean they stood for democracy.    &quot;A lot of men think that we need a strongman,&quot; says a frowning Lt. Mike Morales, who runs the academy's computer lab. &quot;Or maybe {that} we should . . . take people out and shoot them. That sentiment has been dying down, but there's still enough of it that I'm worried.&quot;    Indeed, a third of Filipino officers polled last year thought the military would do well to remove incompetent heads of state. Even more thought the military should take political power temporarily if doing so meant stopping a communist takeover. A large majority said communism stemmed from civilian corruption.    &quot;We can't afford to have soft dealings with the communists, because they are really in favor of violent change,&quot; says regimental commander Esmeralda. As do many cadets, he comes from a greenhouse for communism. His father is an unemployed day laborer on the dirt-poor, communist-influenced island of Negros. Yet commander Esmeralda doesn't like tenderhearted approaches to insurgency.    &quot;A middle-of-the-road approach to the problem of communism confuses military officers,&quot; he says. President Aquino has lately veered off the middle of the road, saying coming local elections in the Philippines need to be postponed to keep the poorest villages from voting communist. She has been widely criticized for the stance, but the cadets applaud her.    Constitutionalists think it's all those political science courses that are making the cadets think such thoughts. Indeed, one text, &quot;Readings in Military Sociology,&quot; has a chapter on military takeovers.    &quot;Government must be entrusted to men who are capable of self-control, honesty and hard work,&quot; it says. &quot;Where, except among soldiers, will such qualities be found?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>