<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870929-0059 </DOCNO><HL> Hobbyists as Lobbyists: Computer UsersAre Mobilized to Support Host of Causes---By Bob DavisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Tele-politics is on the rise.    Thousands of high-tech hobbyists, linked by desktop computers and modems, are blitzing the Federal Communications Commission and Congress with letters decrying an FCC proposal to raise telephone rates for computer communications. And their message may be getting through. Democratic Rep. Edward Markey of Massachusetts, chairman of the House telecommunications subcommittee, plans hearings on the fees this Friday in Boston and may seek to delay a decision on the proposed rate increase.    The protest highlights how the nation's vast computer-communications network can be used for political organizing on behalf of numerous causes. About one million hobbyists talk by computer via telephone hookups through an informal network of tens of thousands of electronic bulletin boards, most of which are run by volunteers. Hobbyists scan these bulletin boards to read messages and type in replies.    Urgent appeals regarding the rate-increase proposal quickly spread nationwide because hobbyists who use one bulletin board often copy the pleas onto different boards. Usually this ad hoc network carries messages about new computer gear. But a small number of activists, lobbyists and politicians have begun to mobilize subscribers of such computer services.    &quot;Using the new technology, activists who hit a hot-button issue for subscribers and make it easy for them to volunteer, can create an instant organization,&quot; says Larry Sabato, a University of Virginia professor.    The protest over the FCC proposal is the leading example. In June, the agency proposed to charge computer networks as much as $5 an hour for each customer to cover the cost of connecting the networks to local telephone loops. The FCC says these costs are now borne unfairly by long-distance customers. Currently, the networks pay sharply lower costs for private lines.    The proposed fees, called access charges, would be passed on to the computer hobbyists who use the networks. Total cost: about $200 million a year, according to a Commerce Department agency that opposes the plan. Network users complain that their communications costs would double. And information service companies, including Dow Jones andamp; Co., which publishes The Wall Street Journal and owns Dow Jones News/Retrieval, say the added charge would scare off customers and strangle their industry.    Most of the high-tech howling has been organized by computer. In Boston, for example, Richard tenEyck, a software designer, wrote a 12-page analysis of the FCC action, including a sample protest letter, and sent it electronically this summer to two bulletin boards. These boards, part of a grass-roots network called FidoNet, are linked to several thousand other boards in the U.S. Within three days, Mr. tenEyck's message had circulated cross country.    Electronic publishers play a crucial role, too. On Long Island, Neil Shapiro, who runs several bulletin boards for CompuServe Inc., a unit of Handamp;R Block Inc., started an electronic discussion about the FCC proposal, in which hobbyists discuss lobbying. The key, advised one activist, is to communicate to the FCC in bureaucratic jargon &quot;and make sure that we follow up with our congressmen and senators in normal English.&quot;    CompuServe, with 375,000 subscribers, and the Source, with 100,000 subscribers, have reprinted the FCC's proposal and published editorials against it. The two networks have also acted as hosts in discussions on the controversy and have prodded customers to complain. CompuServe has waived its usual fees for subscribers who compose letters on the system about the FCC proposal. Then, for 50 cents each, it prints out the letters and mails them to lawmakers. A CompuServe spokesman dubs the efforts &quot;on-line advocacy.&quot;    When a subscriber writes a letter on the Source to the FCC chairman, the company delivers copies to seven top FCC officials -- and pays for printing and postage too. &quot;We're taking advantage of a medium that lets us communicate with members and mobilize them,&quot; says a Source spokeswoman.    So far, activists have deluged the FCC with 5,000 letters. The agency has never received more than 6,000 on a telephone issue, and the comment period runs until Oct. 26. Rep. Markey, the telecommunications panel chairman, has received 4,000 letters. Democratic Sen. Daniel Inouye of Hawaii, chairman of the Senate communications subcommittee, has collected several thousand more.    The lobbying has already had some effect. FCC staffers say the proposed Jan. 1 start date for the new fee has already been pushed to the spring. An aide to Rep. Markey says he may urge the agency to shelve the matter until the FCC finishes a lengthy proceeding to redesign the telephone network. And former FCC Chairman Mark Fowler figures the opposition is so intense that the agency would probably phase in any increase over two or three years.    Computer organizing is spreading to other issues as well. Beyond War, a Palo Alto, Calif., anti-war group, says it is arranging a satellite broadcast Oct. 24 by enlisting activists over PeaceNet, a computer communications system used by 300 peace groups. On the other end of the political spectrum, the National Association of Manufacturers, a business trade group, has begun NAMnet, to keep members posted on 45 issues before Congress.    In Colorado Springs, Colo., Wayne Fisher says his underdog candidacy for city council took off when he posted his platform on local electronic bulletin boards and answered comments from voters electronically. In Iowa and New Hampshire, Democratic presidential candidate Bruce Babbitt uses computer communications to keep staffers abreast of his positions on arms control and other issues.    Predicts Roger Craver, a political fund-raiser and computer enthusiast, &quot;In five years, information utilities will be the conventional means of communications for organizing and public advocacy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>