<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880304-0094 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Jimmy Robertson </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   By and large we've taken a generous view of Pat Robertson's presidential campaign, moved by the observation that he speaks for a constituency that has real grievances and suffers real discrimination. America would be a much better governed nation if its political and educational elites understood this reality, and we keep hoping that somehow it can be pounded into their heads.    We have to admit, though, that from the first we've been put off by that Jimmy Carter grin, spreading from ear to ear at the most inappropriate moments. In the new scrutiny earned by his successes in Iowa and elsewhere, we learn that the then-Rev. Robertson in fact supported Jimmy Carter in 1976. With the campaign moving into Mr. Robertson's presumed heartland of the South, it's worth reflecting for a moment on where he would take his party and his country.    In foreign affairs, Candidate Robertson has the Carteresque tendency to think that moralism is a substitute for weaponry. He bristles with moral fervor against the atheistic communists running the Soviet Union and even China, but his inclination to back this rhetoric with defense preparedness is far from evident. Instead, in the fine print of his campaign literature, Mr. Robertson is on record as favoring a cut of $20 billion to $40 billion in the defense budget.    This of course may be only loose talk, of which the Robertson campaign has had more than its share. The rumors that Jack Kemp is soft on pornography and that someone in his family had an abortion were supposedly spread by Robertson backers without his sanction. But as we've complained earlier, his own ads distorted this newspaper's attitude toward flaky economic forecasts saying the Kemp economic program would cause a depression.    As Mr. Robertson has gained success, his sights have changed to Vice President Bush. His most spectacular charge has been that Mr. Bush blew the whistle on the sins of television evangelist Jimmy Swaggart to hamper the Robertson candidacy. We hadn't suspected that a mere vice president had that kind of power.    Meanwhile, the latest headlines say Mr. Robertson wants to drop his libel suit against former Congressman Pete McCloskey. They were lieutenants together in the Marine Corps, and Mr. McCloskey has charged that Mr. Robertson used political clout to avoid combat duty in Korea. In preparing his campaign, Mr. Robertson filed the suit to clear his name, but now wants to drop it because attending to it would interfere with his primary campaigning. Whatever the facts, the suit is at the very least a pointed reminder that Pat Robertson grew up not as a member of his disenfranchised constituency, but as the son of a U.S. senator.    This heady mixture of piety and gutter-fighting, we fear, is likely to detract from causes we would like to advance. This is perfectly illustrated by Mr. Robertson's charge that there are Russian intermediate range missiles in Cuba. It is perfectly true that the INF treaty gives us no rights to inspect for missiles in the Soviet's island satellite. And it is true that Soviet bases there are a danger to the U.S. But to pose these valid issues in the most inflammatory way, Mr. Robertson has charged that the missiles are already deployed and in place. If this is presented as the issue, the answer is no, and the valid points are lost.    In the same way, the kind of campaign Mr. Robertson has waged is a disservice to his fundamentalist constituents. We had hoped that he would be able to articulate their grievances, and make them and the political mainstream more understanding of each other. Instead, his campaign seems calculated to widen the breach, to make fundamentalists feel their views are rejected, and to encourage the establishment in dismissing those views as irresponsible. </TEXT></DOC>