<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880622-0035 </DOCNO><HL> Self-Congratulatory Words End Summit Marked by Wider Roles of Europe, Japan </HL><AUTHOR> Walter S. Mossberg and Ellen Hume (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> CANDA JAPAN EUROP FREST TAXES LATAM AFRIC FORGN </CO><IN> ECO CMD MON FRX BNK </IN><G> EXE TRE </G><DATELINE> TORONTO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Just nine months after the stock-market slide that raised fears of world recession, leaders of the largest industrial democracies expressed broad satisfaction with the state of the world economy and with their own policy-coordination process.    In a self-congratulatory, heavily backwards-looking communique concluding their economic summit here, the seven leaders declared that, over the past year, &quot;our economies have kept up the momentum of growth. Employment has continued to expand generally, inflation has been restrained, and progress has been made towards the correction of major external imbalances.&quot;    The 10-page document hailed the conservative economic policies President Reagan has championed, and Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney publicly saluted Mr. Reagan, for whom this is the last economic summit. But the meetings were marked by a palpable shift of influence from the fading U.S. administration to two other powers: Japan, whose economic muscle is finally being exercised politically; and the European Community, which is the &quot;eighth power&quot; at these seven-country summits, heading toward greater unity planned for 1992.    On the key summit issues of agriculture and African debt, the U.S. had to back off from its past positions -- even before the meetings began -- in the face of strong European views. Japan managed to tone down the hard-line American view toward the newly industrializing countries of Asia, and staged a behind-the-scenes challenge to the cautious U.S.-designed approach to handling the bank debt of large Latin nations.    During all-night wrangling over diplomatic wording, American views were never entirely discarded. And the U.S.-led consensus was never challenged on such core matters as the stability of the dollar, the need for market-oriented reforms in the internal structure of national economies, and the free flow of investment. But the onetime absolute American dominance of these annual meetings, which began ebbing last year in Venice, appears gone, unless the new president seeks and achieves a reversal at next year's meeting, which is to be held in France.    Nevertheless, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater issued a statement declaring that &quot;this summit punctuated the success of the president's economic program over the last seven years,&quot; adding that &quot;the leaders expressed personal regard for the president's success and the impact it has on other world economies.&quot;    And Mr. Fitzwater said the U.S. was &quot;happy&quot; with the final communique language on agriculture, even though it ignored the U.S. goal of completely phasing out farm subsidies in favor of the European idea that they should only be reduced, not ended.    In a brief interview with The Wall Street Journal, Treasury Secretary James Baker said of Japan's emergence as a summit powerhouse that &quot;we have encouraged it.&quot; He added that &quot;they are now the second-largest economy in the world. We are still more than twice as big as they are. We are still looked to for leadership and we provide that leadership. But we welcome Japan's participation as the world's second-largest economy. We've been working at it. It's not a competitive thing.&quot; But Mr. Baker was privately irritated this week when Japan floated a surprise Third World debt plan.    The communique declared that world economic developments &quot;are cause for optimism, but not for complacency.&quot; And the leaders pledged to continue their economic policy coordination, which they credited with helping the world bounce back from &quot;the financial strains last October.&quot;    Treasury Secretary Baker said, &quot;I do not think that inflation is going to come surging back,&quot; and a U.S. official said European leaders were much less vociferous about inflation than they had been in recent weeks.    While they pledged &quot;vigilance against any resurgence of inflation,&quot; they largely dismissed private-sector worries about inflation and rising interest rates, such as this week's increase in West Germany.    President Reagan, asked at a news conference here about whether summit leaders were concerned that higher U.S. interest rates might push the dollar too high, replied: &quot;I don't recall any conversation of that kind. All of us have been feeling pretty confident of what we're doing and the stability we have.&quot;    The communique reaffirmed the leaders' intention to work for stronger domestic demand in Japan and West Germany, slower domestic demand in the U.S., and a continuing decline in trade imbalances.    The leaders endorsed their finance ministers' declaration of last Dec. 22 calling for stability of the dollar; that policy, backed by central-bank intervention, has kept the greenback steady throughout 1988. It states that: &quot;either excessive fluctuation of exchange rates, a further decline of the dollar, or a rise in the dollar, to an extent that becomes destabilizing to the adjustment process, could be counterproductive.&quot; It was repeated word for word in the summit communique.    Although the dollar has risen 12% against the German mark and 4.4% against the Japanese yen this year, there hasn't been any concerted central bank intervention to drive it down, and U.S. officials have privately indicated that there is still room for the greenback to rise before it is considered too high under the Dec. 22 accord. The summit statement is the latest signal that, at least as of now, the governments don't consider it to be too high.    For the most part, the document clung to the script laid out by summit planners and described in advance at Washington briefings last week. The only new policy adopted was on debt relief on government loans to the very poorest countries, mainly in Africa. That compromise was worked out weeks ago, when the U.S. dropped its opposition to European plans to offer relief for these nations, and it affects only about 10% of the overall Third World debt problem.    In the end, the U.S. agreed to communique language that permits Britain, France, Germany and other nations to write off some of the $110 billion the poorest nations owe them -- a reversal of earlier American policy. In return, the communique permits the U.S. to avoid direct debt relief and substitute instead extensions of loan deadlines.    However, on the much larger and more difficult problem of the bank debt of the wealthier Third World nations, the communique repeated past endorsements of Secretary Baker's market-oriented, case-by-case plan. The American, British and German delegations deflected for now the variation on the Baker plan put forward by Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.    On the other controversial issue, the reform of agriculture trade, the communique language ignored U.S. calls for the adoption at a planned trade meeting in Montreal in December of a &quot;framework agreement&quot; calling for the eventual elimination of all farm subsidies. Instead, it fell back on mushy language adopted at a preliminary meeting last month in Paris, which called for a &quot;framework approach&quot; aiming only at reducing, rather than phasing out, subsidies. This is the European view.    Treasury Secretary Baker insisted that slight differences in the summit language from the earlier Paris language represented a U.S. victory. But British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson said, &quot;The U.S. did move importantly in the course of the summit on agriculture,&quot; though he conceded the U.S. wasn't changing its eventual negotiating goal.    Concerning other economic topics, the leaders' communique declared that:   --Efforts to restrict international investment should be resisted.    --The countries would broaden their economic coordination process through the use of commodity-based price indicators. There will actually be two indicators, both including gold but only one of them including oil. They are to be used for analysis, not as an anchor for currency.    --Henceforth, the governments would monitor internal barriers to growth, such as tax laws or regulations, as well as broad economic trends. The U.S. pledged to raise its savings rate and strengthen its competitiveness. Japan pledged to deregulate its economy and reform its tax code. Germany promised tax reform, deregulation and privatization.    --The newly industrializing countries of Asia should liberalize trade and currency policies. But, at Japanese suggestion, the language played down threats and stressed the need for &quot;constructive dialogue and cooperative efforts&quot; with these Asian countries.    --The pending capital increase for the World Bank should be supported. Most countries have already backed it, but it is in trouble in Congress.    The other summit leaders applauded the retiring American president for his free-market ideas and his role in thawing East-West relations. Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said Mr. Reagan was leaving with &quot;his leadership strong, his accomplishments most substantial, and his place in history most secure.&quot; It was a sweet moment for the man who was viewed at his first economic summit in 1981 as someone &quot;from another planet,&quot; a White House aide observed.    At his concluding news conference last night, the president took pride in that uphill fight. &quot;Our economic expansion in the United States got the ball rolling and helped crystalize the new consensus. And now everyone is part of the act . . . The economies of the summit countries have come roaring back, driven by a common commitment to replace government control with market-oriented policies.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>