<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871016-0071 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Microbe Killer Finally GettingA Chance to Prove Its Worth---By Michael WaldholzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> F ALCD LIPO RIBIAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN><TEXT>   FORD MOTOR CO. thinks it finally has the answer to a common consumer complaint -- smelly cars. Not just any smell, but the obnoxious musty odor of mold that forms in auto air conditioners, especially in humid areas. Later this month, Ford will start stocking its dealers with a spray product it has developed to destroy the mold growth without posing a toxic risk to car occupants.    If the Ford product is indeed the breakthrough that auto makers have been seeking in the war on mold, it could be the big break for Alcide, a disinfectant that has attracted considerable skepticism since it was developed 11 years ago. Alcide is a critical ingredient in the Ford mold-fighter. Despite being touted for a broad range of health and industrial applications, it is just now getting its chance for widespread use.    Alcide Corp. of Norwalk, Conn., asserts that its only product kills on contact every sort of troublesome microbe -- bacterial, fungal or viral -- yet won't harm humans. Moreover, Alcide says the product is being tested for topical use to combat dental plaque, athlete's foot, acne and herpes and other genital infections, as well as for use in contact lens solutions and for killing salmonella.    YET THE SMALL COMPANY has had trouble persuading commercial concerns to test its product, partly because of its obscure origin and the hard-to-believe claims of what it can do. Some disinfectant specialists say it appears too good to be true. &quot;If such a biocide exists, I don't know about it,&quot; says Harriet Burge, a University of Michigan researcher.    Even some who have worked with Alcide aren't certain about it. Joe Regenstein, a professor of food science at Cornell University, has used Alcide to extend the shelf life of commercial fish by killing contaminating microbes. Mr. Regenstein says Alcide's major benefit is that it is safe to eat, although the theory of why that's so remains unproven.    Many companies studying the disinfectant are reluctant to discuss their projects for competitive reasons and for fear of causing undue concern about microbial problems. Ford declined to talk about its product for almost a year, in part because it didn't want to publicize the odor problem.    Alcide is basically a formulation of chlorine dioxide. The gas is commonly known to kill microorganisms but is noxious in amounts large enough to be effective. In 1976, Connecticut inventor Howard Alliger overcame this problem by combining chlorous acid, which quickly degrades into the gas, with another organic acid. The combination apparently keeps the gas inert until it comes in contact with a microbe.    Alcide says its research shows that certain molecules common to the cell surface of microbes -- and not present on normal human or animal cells -- trigger a chemical reaction releasing the gas, which then penetrates and destroys microbial cells. Researchers elsewhere say this theory hasn't been proven.    At present, Alcide's commercial use is limited to the Ford application and to treating infections in cow udders. Concedes Eliot Siff, Alcide's chief executive, &quot;It's taking time to develop convincing evidence that it does what we say.&quot;    ---   Making Cancer Vaccines More Effective   Recent reports about experimental cancer vaccines have caused a stir in laboratories racing to perfect their own vaccines against colon and lung cancer, and melanoma, a skin cancer.    In preliminary studies, scientists using bits of deactivated tumor cells have boosted the production of tumor-killing antibodies that are part of the body's immune system. While tests of several early vaccines reduced the recurrence of cancer, scientists say the vaccines must generate more antibodies more consistently to become useful on a wide scale.    One solution under study is to combine the vaccines with substances that naturally increase the immune system's sensitivity to the presence of a vaccine. Researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York are encapsulating a vaccine against melanoma in water-filled, fatty membranes known as liposomes. In animal tests, the liposome vaccine produced &quot;significantly&quot; more antibodies than did a vaccine alone, says Philip Livingston, a Sloan-Kettering researcher.    Earlier this week, Malcolm Mitchell, a researcher at University of Southern California reported that a vaccine inserted into an experimental substance called Detox produced a strong antibody response in 12 of 17 patients tested, including partial remission of melanoma in two of the 12. Detox, a combination of several bacterial and fatlike subtances, was developed by Ribi Immunochem Research Inc. of Hamilton, Mont.    The trick to producing a cancer vaccine is identifying an antigen, part of a tumor cell that, when injected into patients, won't spread cancer but will stimulate antibodies. Antigen-based vaccines figure to be safer, but are less potent, than using whole tumor cells deactivated by radiation. Researchers at Liposome Co. of Princeton, N.J., believe their liposomes can boost any antigen-vaccine's immune response because liposomes naturally attract scavenging antibodies called macrophages. Macrophages attack and peel away a liposome's skin, exposing the antigens inserted within the membrane and alerting the immune system to the antigens' presence. </TEXT></DOC>