<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0176 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): Essay---Has Japan Paid Its Dues?It Takes More Than Money to Be No. 1---By George Anders</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN </IN><TEXT>   ARE WE SEEING a passing of the baton in world financial leadership? Will Japan overtake the U.S. for good?    There's a tempting argument that such a switch is already under way. Banking surveys now rank Japan as the world's most credit-worthy nation, ahead of the U.S. Lately the yen has seemed like the strongest major currency, as the dollar wilts. And this past spring, the nearly $3 trillion Tokyo stock market overtook its U.S. counterpart as the world's largest in terms of market capitalization.    &quot;The Japanese are here to stay,&quot; Paul Aron, vice chairman of Daiwa Securities Co.'s U.S. unit, says. Rankings of the world's top banks and securities firms are starting to look like the Tokyo phone directory. Some senior Japanese officials are amusing themselves by comparing Japan's ascendancy with the changing of the guard after World War I, when the U.S. emerged supreme and Britain began its long decline.    But the lessons of history are more complicated. True switches in financial leadership happen infrequently, and usually only after a cataclysmic event such as a war.    The Venetians were pre-eminent in the 1500s, until the Dutch built bigger fleets and circulated their thaler coins farther.    Britain's empire and stable monetary system gave it the leading financial role from the late 1700s until after World War I, when the U.S. emerged in far healthier shape than any of the European combatants.    Meanwhile, plenty of short-lived &quot;economic meteors&quot; have flashed by, most notably the surge of Arab wealth in the 1970s. At that time, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and other Mideastern nations were huge capital exporters, much like Japan. Their seemingly endless ability to buy Treasury bills, New York real estate and European equities made heads turn.    When oil prices collapsed in the 1980s, though, so did Arab financial influence. &quot;I was never taken in by the idea that we would be rich forever,&quot; Saudi Arabia's finance minister, Mohammed Ali Abalkhail, said in a recent magazine interview. These days, most oil-producing nations are retrenching, selling foreign investments to cover uncomfortably high expenses at home. Worries about Arab money taking over the world now seem ludicrous.    Of course, Japan's economy is much more broadly anchored than those of the one-product Arab nations. &quot;Japan has a huge industrial base&quot; in electronics, steel, autos and a host of other businesses, Daiwa's Mr. Aron points out. Last year, Japan's economic output of about $2.2 trillion ranked it second only to the U.S.    What's more, Japanese businesses are setting up far more manufacturing abroad, shielding themselves from exchange-rate or trade-war worries that they face when exporting from Japan.    At this stage, only the grimmest pessimist (or perhaps Lee Iacocca) could envision Japan's economy atrophying to the point that its financial strength would wither, too.    But the undisputed financial powers of their day have been distinguished by much more than just a big stack of money. With the Venetians, it was their breakthroughs in modern accounting and credit. With the British in the 19th century, it was their huge overseas empire and their ability to uphold a freely convertible gold-backed currency that the whole world wanted.    With the U.S., it's been the political and military strength to make the dollar a safe-harbor currency around the world. Interbank dealing rooms may prize the yen for its recent strength, but foreign central banks still hold most of their reserves in dollars. So do the money-changers of Katmandu, Cracow and other remote locales. Even a top Tokyo money manager concedes, &quot;The dollar is the last-resort (currency) for the Japanese people.&quot;    It's hard to identify such a sweeping comparable advantage for Japan in international finance. Japan's extraordinarily high savings rate of 20% or more has created enormous pools of capital. But in terms of offshore banking centers, new financial instruments or freedom from regulation, Tokyo still lags behind London and New York.    And perhaps the yen's surge the past two years gives undue prominence to Japan's financial strength. At a recent yen-dollar exchange rate of 150, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank towers over Citicorp as the world's largest bank. But at the early 1985 exchange rate of 250 yen to the dollar, Dai-Ichi's lead disappears.    Economists argue that on a purchasing-power basis, at least, the yen had become overvalued early this year. If exchange rates ever settle at levels that provide approximate purchasing-power parity among major currencies, Japan's financial giants may seem a little less huge.    Most tellingly, a vital aspect of a No. 1 nation is its ability to cajole, punish and lead. That's an almost impossible role for Japan to step into, says Kazuo Nukazawa, international director of the Keidanren, Japan's main business federation.    Japan's defeat in World War II had a deeply chastening influence, Mr. Nukazawa says. &quot;Many Japanese feel that ultimately, they aren't masters of their own destiny,&quot; he says. With Japan's scaled-down postwar sense of national destiny, the nation is highly unlikely to seek a global policeman's role in international affairs any time soon, even in finance.    In contrast, the U.S. seems more comfortable as a world prefect, even if it no longer towers over Japan in statistical terms. On issues such as Third World debt, for example, the main initiatives of the past few years have come from Treasury Secretary James Baker and, more recently, from Citicorp Chairman John Reed. Japan has been on the sidelines.    At the main multinational financial institutions such as the World Bank, the U.S. still plays the largest role. It's true that Japan is gaining strength and will soon rank as the World Bank's No. 2 shareholder, with a 7% stake. But the U.S., with 25% ownership, remains at the fore, says Ernest Stern, executive vice president of the bank.    Japan is contributing more senior technocrats, Mr. Stern says. But Japanese career paths, with their traditions of lifetime employment, make it difficult for top Japanese bankers to join the World Bank or International Monetary Fund in mid-career. For the time being, the U.S. and Western Europe are expected to keep providing the heads of such organizations.    This summer's efforts to patch up BankAmerica Corp. show Japan starting to take a more active role as the financial fixer of last resort. But the process remains awkward. Months of haggling have been involved over Japan's contribution. And the Japanese support has been designed as just part of an overall aid package, rather than its core.    To see how a true financial leader handles such situations, it's instructive to look at what Britain did in 1907. At that time, the young U.S. financial markets were in one of their periodic panics. Only an increased ability to convert paper currencies to gold was regarded as an adequate way to restore public confidence.    All eyes turned to the Bank of England. At the time, however, the British central bank had only 19 million of gold in its coffers -- perhaps not enough to meet America's anxious pleas.    In the end, the Bank of England engineered a bailout without touching its gold reserves. Instead, it leaned on other European nations to provide 25 million of gold for the U.S. The panic was alleviated, Britain got the credit, and other nations footed the bill.    When Japan can engineer that sort of rescue, it can make a much better claim to being the world's financial leader.    ---   Mr. Anders is a news editor in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>