<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0029 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. REJECTED a Soviet allegation that it is trying to scuttle an arms pact.    While reasserting a U.S. demand for equal numbers of shorter-range missiles in Europe, a State Department spokesman dismissed as &quot;patently false&quot; a statement by a Soviet arms official that the U.S. was trying to back away from an accord to eliminate midrange weapons from Europe. Meanwhile, Britain's Thatcher, who is to travel to Moscow this weekend, held talks about the U.S.-Soviet negotiations with France's Mitterrand and West Germany's Kohl.    Thatcher and Mitterrand agreed to reject any attempt to involve their nuclear forces in the current U.S.-Soviet arms-control negotiations in Geneva.    ---   AFGHAN JETS ATTACKED a Pakistani village, killing at least 51 people.    Government officials in Islamabad said the Soviet-made warplanes dropped bombs and napalm on the border village in what was described as the worst single cross-border raid by Afghanistan. About 105 Pakistani civilians and Afghan refugees were injured in the assault. At least 60 homes and shops as well as a school were demolished, the Pakistani officials said.    The village reportedly is used by Afghan guerrillas fighting the Kabul government, which has accused Pakistan of aiding the main rebel groups.    ---   MOSLEM KIDNAPPERS SAID an American hostage is ill and may die soon.    The Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine, in a statement to a Beirut newspaper, said Alann Steen of Boston &quot;may die within 10 days&quot; and offered to trade him for 100 Arab prisoners in Israel. Meanwhile, Tehran Radio said a pro-Iranian group kidnapped Terry Waite, claiming the Anglican envoy was a spy for the U.S. The group denied the Iranian report.    The White House said it held the captors responsible for the hostages' safety and dismissed a demand that the U.S. pressure Israel to make any trade.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that a 1983 Utah law regulating cable television is unconstitutional because it restricts broadcasts of sexually oriented material that isn't legally obscene. The decision means that states will have to look for other, narrower ways to regulate the content of cable-TV programs.    ---   Violence erupted as millions of voters in India cast ballots in three state elections viewed as a test for Prime Minister Gandhi. At least eight people were killed in Kerala and about 220 others were injured in that state and in Kashmir and West Bengal. Election results weren't expected until tomorrow.    ---   Willy Brandt resigned as chairman of West Germany's Social Democrats. The move by the ex-chancellor followed a dispute over his choice of a Greek woman and nonparty member as the Social Democrats' spokeswoman. The party's board named Hans-Jochen Vogel to succeed Brandt.    ---   Congressional investigators will travel to Paris this weekend to interview arms middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar as part of their inquiry into the Iran-Contra affair, sources said. Ghorbanifar told the Washington Times that the CIA had bungled arms transactions with Iranian representatives.    ---   Portugal will return Macao to China in 1999 under an agreement to end more than 400 years of Portuguese rule over the enclave off the coast of southern China. Macao was the last Western colony in China to have its future resolved.    ---   A Philippine army captain was arrested as the prime suspect in last week's bombing that killed four people at a military school, Manila officials said. The officer was an instructor at the Philippine Military Academy and described as familiar with explosives. Four other officers and 30 enlisted men were held for questioning in the blast.    ---   Sierra Leone's government said it was in control following an apparent coup attempt. Police sources in the West African nation said one security officer was killed in a gun battle in Freetown, the capital. A cache of arms was seized and several people arrested in the incident, which reportedly was led by senior police officials.    ---   Jury selection began in the trial of Bernhard Goetz, charged with attempted murder in the December 1984 shooting of four black youths on a New York City subway. Goetz, whose case incited widespread debate about vigilante justice, claims he was defending himself from imminent attack.    ---   New York Rep. Mario Biaggi pleaded innocent to charges of bribery, conspiracy and obstruction of justice in an alleged plot aimed at aiding a ship-repair firm. A former Brooklyn Democratic leader also entered a plea of innocent in the case.    ---   Iraq said its warplanes bombed three of Iran's offshore oil fields, the main Iranian oil export terminal at Kharg Island and a supertanker near the loading facility. There wasn't any independent confirmation of the raid, or comment from Iran.    ---   Sudan's premier demanded the immediate withdrawal of Libyan troops that had entered Sudanese territory to launch attacks on northern Chad. In N'djamena, Chadians celebrated the fall of a strategic Libyan air base in northern Chad following a weekend battle with government troops.    ---   Israeli aircraft raided a Palestinian guerrilla base near the Lebanese port of Sidon, sources said. At least one person was killed in the assault, which apparently was in retaliation for a weekend attack on northern Israel that wounded eight Israelis. </TEXT></DOC>