<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0155 </DOCNO><HL> Issue of Color:White Couples BattleObstacles to AdoptionOf Nonwhite Children---Keeping Them in InstitutionsIs Worse, Some Contend;Family's Media Campaign---Charges of Cultural Genocide---By Elliott D. LeeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In a listing of hard-to-adopt children, the description of Chuckie was measured but straightforward: &quot;Chuckie, black/white, 10 years old . . . attends a class for severely learning disabled children. . . . His agency is looking for a very special family who can be supportive and involved in {his} therapy. All families will be considered.&quot;    But all families weren't considered equally.    As a biracial child, Chuckie was classified as black -- by society and adoption officials. So when a white couple, Paul and Suzanne Tanski of Hamlin, N.Y., tried to adopt him in 1983, they were told not to bother. Chuckie's case worker explained that state policy requires making an effort to seek racially matched parents.    &quot;We were told we would be contacted after a reasonable length of time if the search didn't turn up any suitable parents,&quot; Mr. Tanski says.    Two years later, the Tanskis hadn't been contacted and Chuckie was still without a home.    In the U.S., at least 36,000 children of all races are legally free to be adopted. Like Chuckie, nearly half are black children over age five. Many are handicapped. And even though there are often white families eager to adopt them, these black children almost always spend much longer in foster care than their white counterparts. Some will never be adopted.    A growing number of critics contend that many of these children could find permanent homes if not for widespread policies against so-called transracial adoption. Though statistically insignificant, transracial adoption has become an emotional topic in the U.S. because it involves relatively new -- and to some, threatening -- notions of race and family relationships.    &quot;We consider transracial adoption a form of cultural and racial genocide,&quot; says William Merritt, a former president of the National Association of Black Social Workers. The group charges that transracial adoption robs black children of their racial identity and their ability to deal with racism, leading to psychological problems in adolescence and adulthood.    But many adoption specialists argue otherwise. &quot;We have to get beyond the myth that transracially adopted kids must inevitably have psychological problems; the truth is they don't,&quot; says Rita J. Simon, a sociologist at American University in Washington, D.C., who has studied about 200 transracially adopted families for 15 years. Her research found that transracial adoption causes no special problems and may, in fact, produce adults with special skills in bridging cultures. Most transracial adopted children appear well-adjusted, she says, with positive racial identities and a love for their adoptive families.    Buttressed by such research, proponents of transracial adoption have filed suits or lodged civil-rights complaints in at least four states in the past two years, charging that some policies and practices involving transracial adoption violate children's constitutional rights and best interests. At least 35 states have race-matching policies.    Adoption specialists say that, all factors being equal, same-race adoptions are preferable to transracial adoptions. But critics charge that such policies can be illogical. At the time the Tanskis tried to adopt Chuckie, the couple already had two black adopted daughters. They figured that would make them likely candidates to adopt Chuckie. But they were given little hope. Then last year, after the Tanskis complained that Chuckie remained in limbo, adoption officials allowed him to be adopted by his white foster parents. By that point, the Tanskis had already begun adoption procedures for another black boy, whom they have since adopted.    Adoption agencies' reluctance to allow whites to adopt black children is largely attributable to strong opposition by the National Association of Black Social Workers. The group attacks whites, and liberals in particular, for allegedly exploiting black children to make a political statement about race relations. The social workers say that whites have only noticed the needs of hard-to-adopt blacks because legalized abortion and better birth-control methods have depleted the pool of white children. Transracial adoption &quot;wasn't an issue until white babies were no longer available,&quot; says Mr. Merritt of the 5,000-member group.    Since 1972, black social workers have successfully lobbied to reduce transracial adoptions of all minority groups from a high of about 2,540 a year in 1971 to less than half of that in recent years. The group charges that the real problem facing black adopted children is a failure of society to recruit and financially support adoptive black families. Adoption agencies endorse and support black recruitment and subsidy programs, some of which have been successful. Still, many adoption officials believe there aren't enough qualified, financially secure black families willing to take hard-to-adopt children. And until there are, proponents of transracial adoption say, it is unfair to penalize needy black children by preventing their adoption.    &quot;I empathize with the black social workers,&quot; says Lee H. Wesley, the black executive director of Lutheran Community Services of Metropolitan New York. &quot;But I would much rather have transracial adoption than see kids waste away in the child-welfare system. I think that's almost criminal.&quot;    Transracial adoption may present problems that seem special in racially sensitive America. But many black adopted children and their families have found that being raised in a white family is not likely to be the root of their problems. Instead, they say, they face the common American realities of abuse, bigotry and adolescent self-discovery with normal degrees of determination, failure and success.    Many transracially adopted children say one of their biggest problems is confusion. Sandra Ililonga, who is white, black and American Indian, has fair skin and green eyes but is considered black under the U.S.'s system of racial classification. She recalls that when she was about nine years old and was living in an orphanage, she and some other children hurled racial slurs at a black man. &quot;My social worker happened to be there and told me, 'Don't call him a nigger -- you're one yourself,'&quot; she says. &quot;That was the first time I had been told that I was black.&quot;    As a hard-to-adopt older black child, she says, she didn't land with a family -- Frank and Jackie Ehlers of Chicago -- until 1966, when she was 12 years old. Because the Ehlers were white, Ms. Ililonga had to learn to separate love for her family from her mounting anger over racism. She says she was very aware that blacks and whites &quot;had to choose sides. I thought of myself as a black militant. I used to say, 'Down with honkies!' But then I'd whisper to my friends, 'All except my family.'&quot;    Now a 33-year-old computer programming student, Ms. Ililonga says she was hurt and abused -- emotionally, physically, and even sexually -- during her years in foster homes and institutions. &quot;I know from my experience the harm that living without a permanent family can cause,&quot; she says.    Six years ago Ms. Ililonga began speaking out against race-based policies in foster care and adoption. Today she is spokeswoman for the National Committee to End Racism in America's Child Care System, based in Taylor, Mich.    Of course, ending racial restrictions within the adoption system won't stop racism in society. &quot;I'm against transracial adoption,&quot; says Clara Barksdale, a white woman who, with her husband, adopted a black daughter in 1968. &quot;American society is still too racist to let a black child grow up in a white home without there being a lot of problems.&quot;    The Barksdales tried all sorts of tactics to help their brown-skinned daughter Marian, now 17, adjust to having them as parents. They lived in a racially integrated neighborhood in the New York borough of Brooklyn. They bought Essence, Ebony and other black magazines for her. They encouraged her to make black friends. Still, from the age of two or three, &quot;Marian would complain about people staring at us when we walked down the street or in a store,&quot; says Mrs. Barksdale. &quot;She always felt self-conscious.&quot;    William Barksdale, a former Episcopal priest and community worker in Harlem, and Mrs. Barksdale, an Argentine immigrant and social worker, say Marian was most confused as a teen-ager. &quot;Sometimes, she'd identify herself as Hispanic, even though she's half Italian and half black,&quot; says Mrs. Barksdale. &quot;She spent several years in therapy.&quot;    But Mr. Barksdale, a 59-year-old college professor of photography, says his and his wife's separation when Marian was eight and nine years old probably contributed to her troubles. The Barksdales eventually reunited.    Last fall, Marian dropped out of high school and moved to a girlfriend's apartment out of town. She works during the day at a McDonald's restaurant and attends high-school equivalency classes at night.    Though Marian recalls a childhood of being racially harassed by certain whites and misunderstood by some blacks, she doesn't attribute her difficulties to transracial adoption. She says she is glad she grew up in the Barksdale family, and they say they are glad they adopted her. Invariably, there would have been problems even if a black family had adopted her, Marian says.    Using that same argument, more white couples are fighting barriers to transracial adoption. In 1984, James and Jackie Haas, both white, 38-year-old special education teachers in Aberdeen, Md., were turned down in their attempt to adopt a retarded black child with mild cerebral palsy. Through lawyers and media appearances, they fought the decision by Baltimore County adoption officials. And after a tense summer at the center of the news, the Haases were allowed to adopt the boy.    &quot;When we started thinking about adoption, we never set out to adopt a black child,&quot; says Mrs. Haas. &quot;But we knew we were well-equipped to handle a mildly handicapped child.&quot;    The Haases say they received a lot of support from the people in and around Aberdeen, a racially integrated town. Among the most supportive were black residents.    Their families also backed them, though Mr. Haas's mother was cool at first. &quot;But in time she came around, too,&quot; Mr. Haas says. &quot;One day she told me she didn't know how racist she had been.&quot;    As he thumbs through a scrapbook of newspaper clippings about the adoption, Mr. Haas acknowledges the potential problems in transracial adoptions. But he feels there are families such as his that are strong enough to overcome them. Mrs. Haas says they have worked with Robbie to the point that he now tests average for his age in intellectual, emotional and social development.    &quot;The day will come when Robbie is old enough to lead his own life and we know he might want to live entirely among black people or any other people,&quot; says Mr. Haas. &quot;But he'll know that he grew up in a family that loves him very much -- and that we will always be there for him.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>