<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871014-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Broken Play: Labor Experts FaultFootball Players' Strike Strategy---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   It's time to play armchair quarterback with the National Football League strike.    Were the game plans good ones? Were the right plays called? Did one side gamble when it should have punted?    Although the final outcome is still in doubt, many specialists in labor negotiations say the owners are winning the contest. Already, the union has had to abandon one of its most important goals -- free agency or salary bidding between teams -- while receiving no concessions from the owners in return. Indeed, the owners apparently have been increasing their demands as the strike has worn on and as the union's position has weakened.    &quot;The players have been outmaneuvered,&quot; says Douglas Fraser, former president of the United Auto Workers union and now a labor studies professor at Wayne State University in Detroit. Thomas Raleigh, an independent consultant to management on labor matters, says, &quot;The owners have the financial wherewithal to ride this thing out. They have their hand on the tiller.&quot;    In many ways, the cards seem to have been stacked against the players from the start. As a smaller group, it's easier for the owners to stick together and put up a united front. Their vast personal fortunes enable them to cope with short-term financial setbacks, and contracts providing them with at least some guaranteed television revenue limit any possible losses. The crafty decision to create nonunion teams only strengthened the owners' position.    But the players didn't necessarily lose the contest even before it began, according to labor specialists. They say the union has a number of weapons it could have called upon. While none of these authorities were privy to the actual negotiations or to the options that were considered, most say the players could have mounted a more formidable attack through better tactics and better public relations.    &quot;There's a case that could have been built that would have set back management initiatives and momentum,&quot; says Dan Swinney, director of the Midwest Center for Labor Research.    Some of the consultants' advice follows:    WORK SLOWDOWN   The team owners have managed to satisfy the weekly football cravings of network television and fans by staging games with nonunion players. Instead of striking, the players never should have given up control over what happens on the field, some labor consultants say.    They say it would have been better for the players to report to work -- if only to make a mockery of the sport from within. Teams could have kicked or passed the ball the wrong way. Others might have refused to field defensive units. Or, taking a more moderate approach, players on the bench could have sat with their backs toward the game, looking at the fans.    &quot;They could have gone back to work and done things to upset the owners,&quot; an AFL-CIO official says. &quot;A slowdown would have had an impact&quot; on ticket buyers and television revenues, without hurting the players' own pocketbooks. In a work slowdown, the players still would have been paid and not every union member would have had to participate for the tactic to have been effective.    CORPORATE CAMPAIGN   Hit the owners where it hurts: in their pockets. Ray Rogers, a labor troubleshooter who helped invent a strategy by which unions financially pressure companies, suggests that the players' union could have tried to persuade many more advertisers to withdraw from sponsoring the televised games. So far, only a smattering of companies -- including Ford Motor Co., United Airlines and Chrysler Corp. -- have pulled their advertising.    Without directly calling for a boycott, some big-name players could have subtly urged fans not to buy products of companies that continue to sponsor games.    &quot;Capitalize on the rapport these star football players have with the public,&quot; Mr. Rogers suggests.    Victor Kamber, head of a labor public-relations firm, says: &quot;I would have beaten up on those television stations and those advertisers. If there's no advertisers and the networks have no ratings, the owners won't get their money.&quot;    BE REASONABLE   Fight only for demands that the membership is fully willing to support. The union's position has been eroded because more than 10% of the league's 1,500 players have crossed the picket lines. Some labor specialists say the union should have been more careful to avoid demands that many members didn't feel passionately about, such as free agency. Free agency &quot;is a great issue for civil libertarians but maybe not for the players,&quot; says Mr. Fraser. &quot;It has a nice ring to it, but I'm not too sure it rallied the players.&quot;    The union ended up retreating from what seemed like an intractable position on free agency. That's a no-no in any negotiations. But now that they have, says Mr. Raleigh, the union needs to regroup and figure out exactly what it is that the players want. Besides, he says, &quot;They're not going to get free agency. Why try to ride a dead horse?&quot;    Instead of demanding free agency, the players should have pushed for part ownership of the teams, an official at one AFL-CIO union suggests, adding that it &quot;would have been better received in the public.&quot;    BETTER PUBLIC RELATIONS   Sports figures have a natural tool: public recognition. But, labor consultants say, the football players failed miserably in that arena. &quot;They haven't done a very effective job in taking their case to the public,&quot; says Mr. Swinney, who suggests the striking players conduct tailgate parties or their own touch-football games.    Mr. Kamber says players should have been hitting the TV and radio talk shows six months before negotiations began. Mr. Kamber, who helped the union get on the Phil Donahue show three times in the 1982 football strike, says the union never responded to his offer to help this time around.    Others have suggested that the players should have taken out television and newspaper ads and, says Mr. Kamber, tried to get the story off the sports pages.    The players' sharpest public relations move so far came earlier this week when they offered to go back to work if the owners would agree to mediation of the dispute and arbitration if that failed after six weeks.    DIVIDE AND CONQUER   While players continue to cross the picket lines, the owners boast of their solidarity. The players should have tried to divide the owners by striking two or three teams at a time or only striking playoff-bound teams.    GO BACK TO WORK   Some say the players should simply forget their demands for now and get back to work. Playing without a contract &quot;may not be the worst thing to do, if not simply to buy some time to put together a real strategy,&quot; Mr. Rogers says.    Stephen J. Cabot, a management lawyer in Philadelphia, recommends that the players &quot;test the owners.&quot; Go back to playing the game for a few weeks, get some paychecks, and continue negotiating. If the two sides still can't agree, he says, the players at least are in a much stronger position: They could then walk out with a little more cash in the bank. But, Mr. Cabot says, the union would run the risk that the players wouldn't be willing to back out once playing resumed.    FIGHT FIRE WITH FIRE   The players may be ignoring their most powerful weapon: their star talent. Why not borrow a page from the owner's book and start their own replacement games?    The union could rent college football stadiums, sell tickets and maybe even sign on a television network to show the games. Labor specialists point out that the owners aren't all that necessary in the staging of sports contests.    That may be just what happens if the strike continues through the season, says M.J. Duberstein, director of research for the players' union. The union is studying whether possible legal obstacles would prevent the players from forming their own league. &quot;If the players don't come back this season that will be the end of the NFL,&quot; he says. &quot;There are enough groups that we've heard from that these players will go to another league. </TEXT></DOC>