<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880616-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: The Great American Smoke Screen </HL><AUTHOR> Alexander Cockburn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TOB </IN><TEXT>   Huey Long was wrong. Fascism won't come to America dressed as anti-fascism. It will come dressed as a health campaign. Actually it's halfway through the door already, and after the $400,000 award in the tobacco/cancer case in New Jersey we may as well flee to the hills. New York commuters have beaten up a smoker at a train station, and airlines pummel passengers with announcements of possible legal sanctions against smokers trying to take a puff in the john. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, hooped in gold braid as usual, proclaims that smokers are addicts. Donald McDonald, President Reagan's drug adviser, calls tobacco a &quot;gateway drug.&quot;    I write as someone who quit a three-pack-a-day habit five years ago and though I can't say I'd die for the right of the man next to me to blow smoke past my face, I don't greatly mind that he does. Of course the health fascists say that as a victim of my neighbor's &quot;secondary smoke&quot; I am indeed dying for his rights. But as we shall see, that's hogwash.    (Health fascism, I should add, has its appropriate antecedents. Hitler was a rabid anti-smoker and health nut, even though his doctor had him on 28 different drugs by the end of the war. He nibbled his beansprouts while ordering the construction of forced labor camps and the gassing of Jews.)    One of the reasons for the success of this propaganda is that most people attribute any defense of smokers' rights to the tobacco companies, which are down there on the bottom rung of public esteem along with dog-beaters, journalists and Gen. Noriega. The tobacco industry has obviously prospered from human addiction and suppressed or otherwise contested evidence inimical to its interests. But this does not mean we have to button up our hair shirts, join the health-fascist mobs girding for a night of the long noses, poking themselves into other people's business and otherwise setting up the conditions for a health-fascist police state, cradle to grave.    It's not as though the prodnoses care whether people die of lung cancer. The fact that about half the Fortune 500 now have drug tests for prospective employees in no way indicates that these outfits have been, all of a sudden, consumed with anxiety about the health of their employees. If moral concern drove them forward, they would be beating down the doors of the Reagan administration, asking why the past seven years have seen a pitiless assault on environmental standards, the gutting of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and, overall, a laconic corporate contempt for the health of workers, of consumers, of citizens living within range of their toxic wastes, dump sites, emissions, ventings, disposals and kindred modes of fouling the environment.    The name of the game here is productivity and profits, as was lucidly set forth in the May 20 issue of Workers Vanguard, organ of the Spartacist League. Unlike most left or liberal publications, this biweekly has taken a strong line in favor of smokers' rights and delivered hard blows against the &quot;beansprout totalitarians of Santa Barbara and Berkeley&quot; and &quot;the new generation of clean-living Yuppies . . . (who) are running point for a section of the ruling class which has decided it can improve its profit-and-loss figures by tightening up on the workforce, all in the name of 'health.'&quot; For its heterodox stand, Workers Vanguard provoked the left-wing weekly The Guardian to award it the Jesse Helms Memorial Tobacco Leaf.    Workers Vanguard stresses the point that the anti-smoking drive is just one more means, along with urine-testing and lie-detectors, of keeping workers in line. With the smoking bans, about a third of the American population and almost half the industrial proletariat will be turned into &quot;legal addicts.&quot; There's a strong class bias here too, since smoking increases toward the bottom of the socio-economic scale, disproportionately inhabited by blacks and Hispanics.    An April 1985 artilce in Health Care Strategic Management, &quot;Increasing Productivity Through On-Site Smoking Control,&quot; cited by Workers Vanguard, claimed that &quot;approximately 92 nonsmokers can accomplish the same workload as 100 smokers.&quot; In August 1986 Military Medicine claimed that smokers take 50% more sick leave, need more medical care, &quot;wasted 6% of {their} working hours to the smoking ritual,&quot; require expenive ventilation and exact &quot;a high price in employee morale.&quot;    The mention of ventilation costs inthe article in Military Medicine raisesanother bottom-line factor in the anti-smoking drive, one not often raised publicly by the health fascists. It's expensive to ventilate planes and buldings. The less people smoke, the less airlines like Northwestern will have to run their air-conditioning packs, aside from putting enough cool air in the cabin to keep pilot and crew awake (an increasingly difficult task in and of itself, since cost-efficiency schedules have these people semi-conscious from exhaustion much of the time anyway).    In new offices and institutional buildings heating, ventilation and air conditioning constitute the second-highest item in finishing the project, and hence a big target for cost-cutters. The so-called &quot;energy crisis&quot; of the mid-1970s was a marvelous excuse for the better-bottom-line brigade to cut down on the proper ventilation of new construction, thus giving rise to the phenomenon, increasingly conspicuous -- particularly to denizens -- of the &quot;sick building,&quot; in which office workers breath in endlessly recirculated chemicals, viruses and bacteria and find themselves getting ill more than they used to.    So shove workers into smaller and smaller work spaces with inadequate ventilation, often no windows, and then blame the smoker when people get unhappy or sick.    And the evidence for the ill effects of &quot;secondary smoke&quot; is pretty sketchy. A 1987 article by a West German bio-statistician, K. Uberla, in the International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health concludes, after reviewing the available studies that &quot;the volume of accumulated data is conflicting and inconclusive. The observations on nonsmokers that have been made so far are compatible with either an increased risk from passive smoking or an absence of risk.&quot;    By contrast, in 1986 11,700 people in the U.S. died from work-related injuries and 1.9 million were disabled by injuries at work. A story in the San Francisco Chronical last fall cited a report based on data from the National Safety Council and the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimating that &quot;Nearly 6,000 workers who died in the first half of the 1980s would still be alive&quot; but for the decline in enforcement of standards by OSHA.    Let's have a health crusade to apply existing Environmental Protection Agency and OSHA standards. And let's have less health fascism, which stems from exactly the same totalitarian impulse that prompted the drive, now slowed, for a national I.D. card. At least the Reagan administration turned that down after then-domestic adviser Martin Anderson told the president in a White House meeting that people might as well have numbers tatooed on their arms, a good analogy now fortten.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>