<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870617-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Black and White -- Grim Anniversary:Detroit's Racial WoesPersist Two DecadesAfter Devastating Riot---Despite Strides Downtown,Poor Inner-City BlacksAre Worse Off Than Ever---Paying a Call on 'Big Mama'---By John BusseyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   {First in a series on race relations in the U.S.}    DETROIT -- In the still-steamy early-morning hours of July 23, 1967, police raided a suspected illegal drinking club in this city's west-side ghetto. Detroit has never quite recovered from what happened next.    The raid drew a crowd. As club patrons were loaded into patrol cars, hecklers began to jeer. Then a thrown bottle shattered a squad-car window -- and the worst urban black rebellion in modern U.S. history suddenly ignited. In five days of rioting, quelled finally by federal troops and National Guard tanks, 43 people died, more than 600 were injured and entire blocks of the west side burned to the ground.    The Detroit riot and others occurring in the late 1960s shocked and alienated many but also lent force and urgency to white consideration of black America's plight. Rivers of money -- for social programs, for low-income housing, for job training, for support of the poor, for redevelopment -- were flowing into the cities then. Segregation began to crumble both in practice and in spirit.    All this helped Detroit, today the biggest U.S. city with a black majority. But it did not help enough.    Yes, the glistening towers of the Renaissance Center now rise by the Detroit River downtown, the anchor of a hoped-for renewal of the city. Yes, government and private funds have dotted other parts of the city with new housing, new freeways, new shopping centers. But these represent only one of two Detroits. The other sprawls around and between these islands of prosperity, square mile after square mile of neighborhoods marked by decay, abandonment and despair, places whose black inhabitants are worse off than they were 20 years ago.    The whites have fled in droves, taking jobs, investment and tax revenues with them. Blacks, meanwhile, have divided into two groups, the inner-city poor and the middle class that has made it, and they understand each other less and less.    They are also less inclined to blame whites exclusively for everything that has happened to a city that has been black-controlled for many years. Lingering white racism and neglect still get a sizable share of the blame, but a new mood of introspection and self-criticism is also gaining intensity here.    &quot;Ain't no white man in the world smart enough to do to us what we're doing to ourselves -- teen-age pregnancy, dope, black-on-black crime,&quot; declares the Rev. James Holley, the fiery pastor of Detroit's Little Rock Baptist Church. &quot;The white folk have left black people in charge of the plantation, and the black folk are doing as much harm.&quot;    Many still disagree with that. But walking the city's streets and talking with its people make this much clear: The resources poured into Detroit over the years have been largely overwhelmed by destructive social, demographic and economic forces. They may be beyond anyone's control, here or in other cities struggling with similar problems.    12th and Clairmont   A small park at this corner now marks the place where the riot exploded. A new shopping center and low-income housing project have been built down the street, adding a little life to the neighborhood, but it is still only a shadow of the bustling place it once was. A lot cleared after the riot is still vacant, and not far off is an abandoned building, its windows shattered and its parking lot cluttered with three overturned school buses.    Twenty years ago, Carl Perry, the black proprietor of a drugstore here, dished out ice cream, sodas and candy during the riot and hoped his business would be spared. But a market next door was torched, and his shop burned, too. Today, a graying Mr. Perry leans on a truck next to the weedy lot where his shop once stood. &quot;I lost so much -- everything,&quot; he says. &quot;Even after 20 years, it's hard to recoup.&quot;    He is worse off today than he was then, he adds. So is much of the rest of Detroit. The city's crime rate is astronomical. Black income as a percentage of white has declined since the riot instead of growing, and poverty has increased.    The 1980 census found 28% of black households in Detroit drawing public assistance and 26% of blacks living below the poverty line, up from 22% in 1970. It is generally agreed that there has been no sizable improvement since, if there has been any improvement at all. And men like Martin Brooks can tell you what has happened to the job market.    Mr. Brooks, 37, and the father of two, lives in cramped quarters with his family in a housing project. It is within sight of the Renaissance Center, but the latter's moneyed towers might as well be on the moon; Mr. Brooks, a former tutor who lost his federally financed job when budgets were cut, is unemployed, on public assistance and embittered.    &quot;In the '60s, people thought you had to sit next to a white kid at school,&quot; he says. &quot;To integrate was the goal. But integration doesn't put bucks in our pockets. The answer is developing the economic strength to determine our own future. But the commitment white America made to the spirit of Martin Luther King -- the spirit of human development -- is gone.&quot;    When the riot broke out, black unemployment in the city was around 10%. But over the years, the decline of the auto industry, along with the flight of other jobs from the inner city and cutbacks in urban federal financing, has devastated the employment base. Last year, one of every four blacks in the labor pool was out of work.    Above Mr. Brooks's apartment door is a sign that reads, &quot;Magnify the Lord Jesus Christ.&quot; Nothing will change, says Mr. Brooks, until Jesus comes again.    Incredible Shrinking City   &quot;This is Detroit,&quot; says an east-side youth worker, indicating a block much like hundreds of others in the city. On the right, a one-story brick house, its windows smashed and its door broken and ajar, stands empty. Next door is a vacant lot full of beat-up autos. Farther down the street is a spot of color -- a two-story white home with a neat fenced yard and a flower box full of pansies. But near it are more abandoned places, padlocks on the doors, plywood covering the windows.    Detroit is shrinking. In 1970, about 1.5 million people lived here, 44% of them black; today the estimated population is only one million, roughly two-thirds of it black. While there are still attractive outlying middle-class neighborhoods here, vast areas of Detroit are full of abandoned buildings. Some 30,000 have been torn down over the past dozen years, but private demolition contractors still can't keep up with the backlog, and the mayor has suggested that the city form its own crews to help.    Part of the population collapse is due to the decentralization -- as well as the decline -- of the auto business. More is due to an exodus of whites -- often to the booming suburbs -- that has robbed the neighborhoods of jobs, taxes and economic diversity.    Detroit, along with other large Northern cities, had been losing whites long before the 1967 riot, which helped speed the flight. The whites' places were being taken largely by poor blacks, many of them rural Southern migrants who went north in the '50s and '60s. Today, they and their descendants form much of the underclass trapped in the ghettos.    The white flight has been accompanied more recently by another movement out of inner cities, this one by members of the burgeoning black middle class. Though inner-city black Detroit as a whole is worse off than ever, a growing slice of that population is prospering as professionals, managers, shop owners and entrepreneurs; there is increasing black ownership of firms in the steel business, architecture, finance, cable television and auto sales.    And many of the blacks who have made it prefer to live -- and often work as well -- in suburbs near the city's rim or just beyond it. They still don't feel welcome in white-dominated suburbs such as Grosse Pointe and Dearborn but for the most part are far freer than they once were to buy and live where they please.    To some of the poor left in the decaying neighborhoods, the middle-class blacks, especially those who have moved away, are seen as selfish, uncaring and materialistic. Some members of the middle class agree.    &quot;Why are there no Martin Luther Kings today?&quot; asks Joe Madison, 37-year-old former executive secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Detroit. &quot;Because many of my generation, the buppie generation {black urban professionals}, were out developing personal success but not sharing that success with those we left behind.&quot;    For their part, however, many in the black middle class condemn what they view as a moral collapse in the ghetto and express frustration and impatience with what they see as welfare mothers who keep having babies and absent fathers who have stopped looking for work.    &quot;People have options,&quot; says Rudy Hendrix, a black father of two who owns a franchised computer store in the suburbs. Mr. Hendrix, who lives in a Tudor home in the city and who gives some of his spare time to helping Detroit youth, adds: &quot;A guy who can stand on the corner plotting how to rob someone can put the same amount of energy into getting into a work-study program to better himself. I did it. I had two paper routes, I shined shoes. Get a job. Go get a job.&quot;    The Rock House   Cradling shotguns, a dozen flak-jacketed narcotics police suddenly crash through the door of the house on MacKay Street and pin its lone occupant to the floor. &quot;Where are the guns, where are the guns?&quot; one policeman screams at him. Terrified, the man shouts, &quot;No guns! No guns!&quot; as police fan out through the trash-littered house, flipping over furniture, looking for drugs. &quot;God, what a pit,&quot; one narc mutters. Another is already beginning to count out 20-odd &quot;rocks&quot; of confiscated crack cocaine.    Over the past year, Detroit police have conducted hundreds of raids like this; but the drug problem here, as in so many cities, seems beyond control. So does violent crime, much of it drug-related.    Crime is often the first reason people give for leaving Detroit. The city has an enormous incidence of burglary, robbery and rape; and among major U.S. cities, it has far and away the highest murder rate -- 648 homicides last year. Even young children go armed here. Recently a 14-year-old boy with a .357 Magnum chased a 17-year-old rival through the halls of a high school, wounding another student in the face before catching his foe and killing him with a bullet in the head.    The violence has driven out many merchants and other businessmen, white and black. Among those who stay, some, like Pat Stanley, make their shops and businesses into fortresses and hope for better days. Mr. Stanley's 15-man wood-working plant was broken into five days in a row last summer. He has boarded up its lower windows and replaced the upper ones with bullet-resistant plexiglass. After five of his employees' cars were stolen, he put up a $3,000 parking-lot gate.    &quot;I should be concerned with profit and loss, not car theft,&quot; says a disgusted Mr. Stanley. If he had it to do over, he adds, he wouldn't do it over in Detroit.    Big Mama and Brother Bill   Twenty-two years ago, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, then assistant secretary of labor and now a U.S. senator, wrote a controversial report stating that among inner-city blacks, the traditional nuclear-family structure was crumbling. The report was furiously attacked by many black leaders. Today, in a home on Detroit's east side, it takes on a prophetic validity.    The home is Cecile Johnson's. Everyone on the block knows her as &quot;Big Mama,&quot; and the nickname fits. Mrs. Johnson is a large woman with a heart to match. She has raised five of her own children but still has a bigger family to care for than any 63-year-old needs. &quot;How many kids here?&quot; she repeats through two missing front teeth and pauses a moment to recall.    There are 11. Nine are the products of the broken marriages and out-of-wedlock births of her absent daughters, victims of drug addiction. The other two are babies -- the children of two of her grandchildren, both 17. Mrs. Johnson and her second husband, Beauford, support them all on aid payments and on his $900 monthly pension from Ford Motor Co.    As children crisscross the room, Mrs. Johnson contemplates a motherhood that seems perpetual. &quot;I've been a mamma ever since I had the first one of my own,&quot; she says with a sigh.    ---   In another part of the east side, a 45-year-old one-time pool hustler pounds the pavements, looking for kids missing from school, pleading with junkie parents. He is Bill Howard, &quot;Brother Bill&quot; to the kids at Joy Junior High School, where he is a youth counselor financed by the Urban League. He is also one man with a finger in a dike that has sprung a thousand leaks.    In a recent assessment, Detroit public-school students scored below the national norm in seven of eight categories. Of all children entering the ninth grade here, 43% don't make it through high school. Truancy is rampant at many schools.    On the phone in his cluttered office at the school, Mr. Howard is haranguing one of those truants. &quot;You've been out of school since January,&quot; he says, &quot;and all you've been doing is getting dumber and dumber.&quot; He frequently tells youngsters like this that the ghetto will never change unless they learn the white man's rules, unless they stay in school -- but he has no illusions about either the white man or the scant value that so many inner-city blacks now place on an education.    White society, he believes, has simply abandoned the idea of helping blacks help themselves (&quot;Give the black people a little cheese and butter and let them create their own job market: stealing and robbing and hustling&quot;). And his charges, who once had role models in the stable, successful black families who lived among them and heroes in the leaders of the civil-rights movement, have no one to emulate now. &quot;All they see are people like themselves, from the college of hard knocks,&quot; says Mr. Howard.    Plans and Dreams   Detroit's veteran black mayor, Coleman Young, has a poem hanging in his office. The first stanza:    Cities have died, have burned,    Yet Phoenix-like returned   To soar up livelier, lovelier than before.    Detroit has felt the fire   Yet each time left the pyre   As if the flames had power to restore.    If these verses seem to be running quite a bit ahead of the facts, there is no shortage of people at City Hall who believe a Detroit renaissance is indeed attainable. Driving a visitor around town, Emmett Moten, the mayor's apostle of development, sees not blight but opportunities. &quot;This area is going to be totally rejuvenated,&quot; Mr. Moten says again and again, waving at vacant lots, empty structures and some places where redevelopment is under way.    Detroit's past pattern of development has sometimes only contributed to the problems it faces today. For one thing, past city leaders allowed factories and warehouses to be built along its attractive river front, blighting one of its prime areas. There was little thought given then to making the city less reliant on an auto business that has since sunk into the doldrums.    At the same time, federally financed projects that were supposed to make Detroit a model city sometimes promoted the deterioration of stable black neighborhoods. Interstate 75, for example, was routed through Hastings Street, a one-time center of black business, and critics contend this speeded the neighborhood's decline. &quot;This city was devastated by urban renewal,&quot; says Erma Henderson, the black president of Detroit's city council.    The combative but popular Coleman Young, mayor since 1974, has been pushing this prescription: Build a healthy downtown core, thus attracting conventions and new jobs in finance, commerce and other non-auto segments; as more businesses open, more will come; as jobs and businesses increase, so will tax revenues, and the new prosperity will spread into the neighborhoods.    The new downtown, anchored on a redeveloped sliver of river front, has been taking shape in recent years, sprouting luxury apartments, a new hotel, a river-front plaza, office towers and other trappings of a vital modern city. Through hefty tax abatements, Detroit also has persuaded General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp. to invest more in their city auto plants. Wall Street voiced its approval last year by restoring the credit rating Detroit lost when it nearly went bankrupt in 1981.    The mayor's focus on downtown, however, alarms City Councilman Mel Ravitz and others, who are particularly irate about a tax policy that pumps certain tax revenues from part of downtown back into that same area instead of spreading them out fully. But the mayor says the long haul will prove him right. &quot;What I've been trying to do,&quot; he says, &quot;is to develop downtown to make the hard conversion from automobiles to service and high tech, which is what we must do if this city is to survive. . . . There is no other answer.&quot;    But there is another question. Will tomorrow's Detroit be able to field a trained and willing work force to do the jobs the city is trying to attract -- or will the pathology of the inner city destroy it before it can develop?    ---   At the request of a visitor, Bill Howard, the youth counselor at Joy Junior High, passes out a questionnaire in two classes. It reveals that a third of the children have been offered drugs and that two-thirds know someone their age selling them.    But the answers to other questions uncover a resilience of spirit and a determination to enter the mainstream that offer Detroit some hope for its future. Asked if they expect to graduate from high school, a surprising number of the children are positive: They write that they want to be nurses, doctors, computer programmers, soldiers.    Whom do they admire? Martin Luther King, many answer. One writes: &quot;My mother, because she is tough under pressure.&quot; These are the kinds of answers that could come from children in any school in any stable, decent community, and for a moment it is possible to forget that the moral and physical blight of the ghetto is just outside.    But suddenly it intrudes in a single line, tortuously written and full of misspellings, produced by a 15-year-old girl. Asked for her definition of the American dream, she writes: &quot;To go to school and fenisch my Schooling whithout getting prenant.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>