<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880217-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Bush Tops Dole in New Hampshire Voting; Dukakis Is Easy Victor Among Democrats </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> MANCHESTER, N.H.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Vice President George Bush, whose candidacy was being written off by some political experts and pundits, scored a stunning comeback in the New Hampshire primary.    With almost all of the vote in, Mr. Bush was leading Sen. Robert Dole, 38% to 29%.    Gov. Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts easily won the Democratic primary, with 36%, rolling up the biggest margin of victory since John Kennedy in 1960. Rep. Richard Gephardt, winner of the Iowa caucuses, beat Sen. Paul Simon for second place, 20% to 17%.    The result is that the residents of New Hampshire, who in nearly four decades of primary voting have served to winnow the political field, instead breathed new life into candidacies in both parties and all but ensured long struggles for the two nominations.    The Bush victory deprives the Kansas senator of the momentum he won with his triumph among Iowa Republicans. Missouri Rep. Gephardt's second place showing gives his drive a boost as the campaign moves into contests in the northern plains states next week and in the South in early March.    New York Rep. Jack Kemp got a much-needed shot in the arm when he finished third. Former Delaware Gov. Pete du Pont apparently edged out former television evangelist Pat Robertson for fourth place. Although these three still substantially trail the leaders, this outcome suggests that the battle on the right of the Republican Party will continue.    For the second week in a row, the Rev. Jesse Jackson sculpted a strong performance in an overwhelmingly white state. He narrowly bested Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore, 8% to 7%, for fourth place.    The primary results almost certainly will add to the bitterness of the struggle between the two GOP front-runners. In successive weeks, Mr. Bush and Mr. Dole each have defeated the other, beating back efforts to cripple their campaigns. Last night on NBC-TV, just after Mr. Bush wished his rival well, Mr. Dole snapped back: &quot;Stop lying about my record.&quot;    &quot;This disrupts Dole's momentum in a major way and re-establishes Bush's momentum,&quot; said Kevin Phillips, a Republican political theorist. &quot;Now he's well-positioned for Super Tuesday,&quot; the March 8 round of political contests in 20 states. Mr. Bush's strategists have always considered the South, where the vice president is well-organized, a redoubt of Bush strength.    With the firm support of the party establishment and an organization that began to drop roots in this state two years ago, Mr. Bush was long the favorite in New Hampshire. But once the vice president's political vulnerabilities were exposed in Iowa, where he finished behind both Sen. Dole and Mr. Robertson, his lead seemed to seep away; Mr. du Pont described the Bush campaign as being &quot;in a free fall.&quot; Some polls over the weekend even showed Mr. Dole nudging ahead.    The Bush victory highlights the popularity of President Reagan here, demonstrates the importance of organization in this state and reaffirms New Hampshire's Yankee strain of individualism.    &quot;People underestimated how popular Bush was in this state,&quot; said three-term Gov. John Sununu, Mr. Bush's chairman here. &quot;This shows that not everyone here responds to what the pollsters think and what people in Iowa say. We have corrected Iowa's mistakes.&quot;    The Dole forces, citing Mr. Bush's long presence here, attempted to portray their second-place finish as a symbolic victory. But it was clear that the Dole forces believed a win here was well in hand; campaign pollster Richard Wirthlin even forecast it publicly Monday night. Yesterday's results left them disappointed that they weren't able to take advantage when the vice president was weak.    &quot;We wanted to put a stake through Bush's heart,&quot; said David Keene, a Dole strategist. &quot;It looks like we didn't.&quot;    As the campaign moves into its next phase, Mr. Bush holds some strong cards, including a nationally deployed organization that is far more experienced than Mr. Dole's. Moreover, his resurrection in New Hampshire seems certain to give him some momentum and to help neutralize the &quot;wimp image&quot; he has been battling.    Mr. Dole, however, is expected to get a slight bump in the next week in the Minnesota caucuses and perhaps the primary in South Dakota, though Mr. Bush has run an aggressive campaign there.    The contention and personal enmity between the two candidates, already visible in debates and in their separate appearances, will almost certainly grow in intensity. Each man has been most successful when attacking the other. Last night, Mr. Dole didn't mention the vice president by name in his concession speech and, earlier, suggested he might have been &quot;too nice&quot; to Mr. Bush in the New Hampshire campaign.    Although he didn't live up to the expectations set by his strong showing in Iowa, Mr. Robertson remains a threat. He has strength in caucus states, where the intensity of his support is at a premium, and in the South. Mr. Robertson is drawing new recruits into GOP politics, skewing the political calculus. New Hampshire never was considered one of his stronger states.    &quot;We've organized every state in the South,&quot; said Constance Snapp, Robertson campaign spokeswoman. &quot;On March 9 no one will be able to call us a nuisance campaign.&quot; Mr. Robertson said he was &quot;throwing the gauntlet down&quot; to Messrs. Bush and Dole in South Carolina, adding, &quot;I'm going to beat you there. We're here to get the nomination.&quot; (Mr. Robertson plans to try to avoid a trial of his libel suit against former Rep. Pete McCloskey.)    The other two campaigns aimed at the conservative wing of the GOP, however, face big challenges. From the start, Mr. du Pont acknowledged that his campaign was aimed principally at Iowa and New Hampshire; he has little organizational structure anywhere else in the country.    Mr. Kemp, who had hoped to make his breakthrough here in New Hampshire, is in better shape than Mr. du Pont, but faces money problems, with many staffers working without pay. Mr. Kemp vowed last night to remain in the race to the convention in New Orleans this August.    Mr. Dukakis is hoping for a boost next week in Minnesota, where polls are showing him comfortably ahead. But the Massachusetts governor, who has less affinity with southern voters, is traveling today to Tampa and Atlanta before heading to Minnesota and South Dakota.    In the South, Mr. Dukakis and the other Democrats confront Mr. Jackson. Building on his strong showings in Iowa and New Hampshire, Mr. Jackson retains a core of dedicated black supporters in the South who are almost certain to provide him with a large bloc of delegates.    Also waiting for the leading Democrats is Sen. Gore, who has been picking up endorsements and support in the weeks the other candidates devoted to Iowa and New Hampshire.    Mr. Gephardt has some strength in the South, where he has spent many campaign days and where his populist appeal may strike a responsive chord, but he faces financial difficulties.    Illinois Sen. Simon has even deeper financial troubles, compounded by his failure again yesterday to top Mr. Gephardt. He must pause to hold a desperate series of fund-raisers in the next few days, has little support in the South and is not expected to make a strong showing until the primary in his home state, which doesn't come until a week after Super Tuesday.    Former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona was unable to break out of the back of the Democratic pack and will probably leave the race, perhaps as early as tomorrow.    Former Sen. Gary Hart of Colorado, who won a stunning upset here in 1984 over Walter Mondale, had a dismal showing yesterday and, even if he remains in the race, isn't considered much of a factor. </TEXT></DOC>