<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0156 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:What Went Wrong in Cuba---By Ronald Radosh</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Wayne S. Smith was present at the dawn of the Cuban Revolution in 1959, as a young member of the staff of the U.S. Embassy in Havana. From 1979 to 1982, he served as head of the U.S. Interests Section in Cuba, the equivalent of ambassador in all but title. His superbly written book, &quot;The Closest of Enemies: A Personal and Diplomatic Account of U.S.-Cuban Relations Since 1957&quot; (Norton, 283 pages, $17.95) is both a reminiscence of his years in Cuba and an intellectual analysis of U.S.-Cuban relations. Whether one agrees or disagrees with his assessments, his presentation is a model for a well-argued, incisive account of what Mr. Smith thinks went wrong.    Mr. Smith rejects the argument that &quot;U.S. refusal to accept {Fidel Castro's} economic and social reforms forced him to turn to Moscow.&quot; Once the pro-Batista former Ambassador Earl Smith was replaced by Philip Bonsal, Mr. Smith points out, the U.S. had a man of &quot;moderate instincts&quot; who sought a cordial relationship with the new revolutionary regime. Indeed, the U.S. promised to accept Mr. Castro's reforms, and even held out the possibility of economic aid.    Mr. Castro would not even listen, Mr. Smith explains, because his &quot;preconceived conviction,&quot; held against &quot;considerable evidence to the contrary,&quot; was that a confrontation with the U.S. was inevitable. Because he desired to play a world role as leader of a Latin-American revolutionary bloc, he had to move to gain Soviet help.    Mr. Smith, however, does not conclude that Mr. Castro's revolutionary goals and his antagonistic stance toward the U.S. mean that diplomacy should be scuttled. To the contrary, he argues that restraint and moderation might better serve American goals, and that in the past obstinate hostility only made matters worse. Mr. Castro's policy of exporting revolt and supporting armed struggle, Mr. Smith says, only took place after Cuban overtures for a live-and-let-live policy were rebuffed, such as after John F. Kennedy's death. When it comes to key trouble areas, Mr. Smith most often puts the blame for failed relations on the U.S.    Hence, in Angola, Mr. Smith argues, the U.S. erred when it saw Cuban military aid to Angola exclusively as a response to the demands of Mr. Castro's Soviet masters. Mr. Smith discounts the views of other Cuba experts who analyze Mr. Castro's actions differently, and who point out that whatever Mr. Castro's reasons for African intervention, his plans dovetailed neatly with Soviet goals in the region.    And when strongman Haile-Mariam Mengistu seized power in Ethiopia, the U.S. reacted badly, Mr. Smith believes, by cutting off aid, which only served to push Ethiopia irrevocably in Moscow's direction. Mr. Smith does not seem to consider that, like Mr. Castro, Lt. Col. Mengistu may just have had an agenda impervious to U.S. influence.    On the topic of Nicaragua, Mr. Smith's argument parallels that made by Shirley Christian in &quot;Revolution in the Family.&quot; He chastises Zbigniew Brzezinski and his aide Robert Pastor for failing to act to remove Somoza from power before the Sandinista revolution. Their commitment to a policy of nonintervention, he says, was meaningless. Since the dictator had survived on the basis of U.S. support, the U.S. was intervening when it failed to force him out in favor of moderate factions.    Mr. Smith's position is that the U.S. should have resisted Mr. Castro and the Sandinistas as they grabbed for power, but once they were in power, it should not have tried to oust them via covert and often immoral actions. Instead, the U.S. should negotiate with Mr. Castro and the Sandinistas and thereby moderate their policies.    Mr. Smith, who resigned in protest against Reagan administration policies toward Cuba and Central America, criticizes Alexander Haig for seeing Cuba solely within the context of East-West relations and for asserting that Cuba was &quot;the source&quot; of the turmoil in Central America. He sees Mr. Haig's tough line toward Cuba as particularly self-defeating. Thus Mr. Smith charges that the administration lied when it justified its rejection of Cuban overtures for negotiation in 1982 by saying that Cuba had not stopped sending military aid to Salvadoran rebels via Nicaragua. Yet, a few pages later, Mr. Smith admits that the Cuban suspension of arms shipments to Nicaragua in 1981 was a &quot;major concession&quot; brought on by Mr. Haig's hard-line policy. Mr. Smith cannot have it both ways. If this assessment is correct, then Mr. Haig's firm posture paid off, and caused the Cubans to back down. Mr. Smith's critique would have more merit had he argued that the Reagan administration failed to proceed to negotiate after Mr. Castro made a major concession.    Mr. Smith may be correct that Mr. Castro would use a normalization of relations with the U.S. to loosen his bonds with the Soviets, but he cannot prove it. He succeeds in showing the many times U.S. policy makers missed opportunities for a &quot;modus vivendi&quot; with Mr. Castro, but he also offers much material that shows how Mr. Castro refused to meet the U.S. halfway. Yet Mr. Smith ignores his own examples and portrays Mr. Castro and the Soviets as benign recipients of an unjustly harsh American program for hegemony in Cuba. One finishes his book with awareness of how U.S. policy has often failed, but without certainty that following the author's path would have accomplished anything better.    ---   Mr. Radosh writes frequently on U.S. foreign policy in Latin America. </TEXT></DOC>