<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880523-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- The Dukakis Circle: On Economic Matters, Candidate Gets Advice Starting at Harvard --- High-Tech Executives Play Role, Too, in Urging Him To Take Bolder Stands --- Taxes and Attention to Trade </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> BOSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   There's little avant-garde about stodgy Michael Dukakis -- except the economic advisers around him. One of them is tinkering with a plan to finance a new health-care trust fund with a value-added tax. Another wants to repeal the Sherman Antitrust Act so as to let U.S. electronics industries work together to take on the Japanese. A third proposes to create an Office of National Economic Security, which would compete openly inside the White House with the Council of Economic Advisers.    Gov. Dukakis's economic advisers are an eclectic group, with strong ties to Harvard University and to the world of high-tech. They advocate policies far more daring than those the cautious candidate espouses on the campaign trail.    Their ideas also are more politically risky; almost all of the Dukakis advisers believe that new taxes are needed -- taxes to raise revenue, taxes as instruments of broader economic and trade policy. And although the Massachusetts governor says one &quot;shouldn't exaggerate&quot; the influence anyone has on him, these economic thinkers would form an influential circle in a Dukakis administration.    The leading figures in the group include academics such as Harvard's Lawrence Summers, who doubts the U.S. can resolve the budget crisis without a tax increase, and Robert Reich, who wants to ease antitrust laws for failing industries that agree to modernize. Some are prominent in Greater Boston's high-technology sector, including George Hatsopoulos, the chairman of Thermo Electron Corp., who advocates consumption taxes, and Joe Henson, the president of Prime Computer Inc., who talks of repealing antitrust laws. Others are Carter administration alumni like Roger Altman, a former assistant secretary of the Treasury, and Hale Champion, a former undersecretary of health, education and welfare.    What they share is a more venturesome approach to economic policy than is offered by the people who advise George Bush. &quot;This is a group that's open to new ideas, a group that's not as constrained by orthodox economics as the Bush people,&quot; says Pat Choate, an economist at TRW Inc., who isn't a Dukakis insider.    Many of the Dukakis thinkers are frustrated that the candidate himself hasn't gone much beyond a narrow economic program that stresses &quot;good jobs at good wages.&quot; His most daring initiative has been a plan -- which most of them are privately skeptical about -- to fight the deficit by getting greater compliance with existing tax laws. His advisers want Mr. Dukakis to be bolder in the final weeks of the primary campaign and to sketch how he would reshape the American economy.    But Mr. Dukakis, burned by his unkept promise not to raise taxes, a pledge made in his 1974 gubernatorial campaign in Massachusetts, isn't eager to show many of his economic-policy cards before the election. And some of his advisers' own ideas would be good political targets for conservatives.    The men around Mr. Dukakis are &quot;clearly a pro-tax group,&quot; says Harvard economist Lawrence Lindsey, who has advised Vice President Bush's campaign. Paul Craig Roberts, a supply-side economist, says: &quot;Their solution is always to have the government do it. They're willing to violate private property rights to achieve what they think are public purposes.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis's principal economic theme in his campaign for the Democratic nomination has been that the government needs to be a partner in reviving industries. In an interview he says, &quot;A great deal of what I think about economic issues comes out of my experiences&quot; as governor. And now that he is so close to the nomination, he obviously is reluctant to make major adjustments in his campaign style or strategy.    Though many of his initiatives in Massachusetts have been innovative, Mr. Dukakis, who has stressed competence and integrity rather than issues in nearly all his campaigns, is cautious and controlled in public. And he is far more comfortable talking about retraining and redevelopment than he is, say, about restoring exchange-rate equilibrium.    &quot;More than most campaigns, economic thought in the Dukakis campaign comes from the top,&quot; says Mr. Summers, the Harvard economist. &quot;This is not a campaign that is looking for things to sign onto. He is his own principal economic policy maker.&quot;    Yet Mr. Dukakis has surrounded himself with people who have drafted plans that would alter the structure of the economy and transform the way U.S. businesses do business. Even if Mr. Dukakis, as president, were to fill high-visibility economic posts such as Treasury secretary with established political figures, this group would be the economic idea-generators of a Dukakis administration.    These advisers combine a traditional Democratic interest in economic tinkering with a traditional Republican respect for the markets and incentives.    Mr. Reich, a lecturer in public policy at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, has floated the idea that the government might subsidize, or offer tax credits to, corporations that do advanced design and manufacturing work. He has thought about a possible requirement that the highest-valued steps in the production of certain goods be undertaken in the U.S. He would like to eliminate the interest deduction for funds used to accomplish hostile takeovers. And he wants to ease antitrust laws for high-tech joint ventures.    Herbert Stein, who was the chief economic adviser to President Nixon, says that Mr. Reich is &quot;certainly not in the mainstream of economists.&quot; For his part, Mr. Dukakis describes Mr. Reich's ideas as &quot;thoughtful and well worth thinking about.&quot; The governor has adopted Mr. Reich's notion that mature U.S. industries facing unfair trading practices abroad might be given limited protection under the condition that they modernize and restructure themselves. Thus far, however, he has shied away from many of Mr. Reich's other ideas.    Mr. Henson of Prime Computer in Natick, Mass., advocates a gasoline tax at the pump as high as 50 cents a gallon, higher taxes on liquor and tobacco and a value-added tax that would include rebates to lower-income taxpayers.    Robert Reischauer, another Dukakis adviser and an economist at Washington's Brookings Institution, believes excise taxes should be raised &quot;modestly,&quot; and he is looking at the idea of using a value-added tax to pay for a health-care trust fund. He also thinks that the tax base should be broadened by making the more generous health-insurance benefits subject to taxation.    Mr. Summers of Harvard has advocated limiting the deductibility of advertising, taxing portfolio interest of foreigners and adding taxes on transactions in financial markets. &quot;We need to make those who have enjoyed the party -- the top 1% of the population -- pay for it,&quot; says Mr. Summers, who served in the Reagan administration as a domestic-policy economist. &quot;And we need to preserve initiative for savings and investment.&quot;    Mr. Hatsopoulos of Thermo Electron in Waltham, Mass., is also the chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. He believes some tax changes are needed in order to encourage long-term U.S. investment.    His plan: The U.S. should tax nonprofit entities such as pension funds for their short-term equity investments (but retain tax exemption for long-term equity investments). The revenue, he says, should be directed into tax relief for those who invest for the long term.    Many of the economic thinkers around Mr. Dukakis stress investment. The programs that emerge from the Dukakis circle often are packaged as &quot;investments&quot; rather than as new spending initiatives, and often they involve incentives rather than direct government spending.    Mr. Summers, for example, advocates making the research and development tax credit, set to expire at the end of the year, a permanent part of the tax code.    Alan Webber, the managing editor of the Harvard Business Review, wants a new investment tax credit to replace the one eliminated by the tax overhaul of 1986; he believes its provisions should cover &quot;human investment&quot; -- programs such as training workers. &quot;You say to companies that it's their job to give people skills,&quot; he says. &quot;But why not say it's in the country's interest to give people skills?&quot;    To shore up America's trading position, Mr. Webber advocates setting up an Office of National Economic Security inside the White House to be a &quot;countervailing talent pool&quot; to the Council of Economic Advisers. Such an office would coordinate national economic strategies. &quot;This is not government-dictated planning,&quot; Mr. Webber says. &quot;It's using government as a productive partner -- a catalyst -- instead of a drag on the line.&quot;    Another longtime Dukakis adviser, Ezra Vogel, a Harvard expert in Asian industrial societies, believes that antitrust laws are at the heart of the U.S. competitiveness crisis. &quot;The antitrust laws grew out of an era where there wasn't an international economy we were worried about,&quot; says Mr. Vogel, who accompanied Gov. Dukakis on a two-week trip to China and Japan in 1985. &quot;We haven't adjusted to the new era.&quot;    Prime Computer's Mr. Henson goes so far as to advocate a comprehensive revamping of antitrust legislation and the repeal of the Sherman Antitrust Act so as to allow companies to cooperate, short of price fixing. &quot;The Japanese can orchestrate planning for entry into markets, and they can share data -- with intimate government cooperation and even funding,&quot; he says. &quot;We should think about that for ourselves.&quot;    Former Ambassador Henry David Owen, who prepared the annual economic summits from 1977 through 1980, calls for a compact among the U.S., Japan and West Germany that would require the U.S. to cut spending and probably raise taxes, while the two other nations take steps to expand fiscally.    Most of the Dukakis advisers believe there is a role for government to play in business, particularly in the revitalization of important industries.    &quot;There ain't no laissez faire around here,&quot; says Mr. Champion, who currently is Mr. Dukakis's chief of staff at the governor's office. &quot;That doesn't mean you get into everything. But in our system, government is the place to go if you can't get help otherwise -- and that option is open to business.&quot;    Mr. Altman, the former Carter administration official, is now vice chairman of the Blackstone Group, an investment boutique. He believes the federal government should build on the example of a consortium set up by major semiconductor companies and the Pentagon to restore U.S. competitiveness in random access memories in computers. &quot;There are areas where government can be a constructive force rather than dozing on the sidelines,&quot; he says. &quot;If {an} administration wants to make it a priority, it can organize itself to promote trade.&quot;    All of the Dukakis advisers agree that in the next several weeks the candidate must begin to broaden his outlook and rhetoric on economic affairs. At the same time, they warn that he must avoid making promises. He has managed to get through most of the primary season without making major commitments to various interests and constituencies, but he still faces considerable pent-up demand for new programs.    &quot;People's desire to have government do things is growing faster than people's desire to pay for them,&quot; says Mr. Champion, who was director of finance for Gov. Edmund G. Brown Sr. of California before moving to Harvard's Kennedy School. &quot;And that's a dangerous condition for a new president.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>