<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870924-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Veiled History:Investors Aren't ToldIf Their StockbrokersHave Records of Fraud---In Kobrin Case in New Jersey,Clients' Losses Are LinkedTo Lack of a Notice Rule---No Relief From the NASD---By Stanley PennStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Salvatore Mendola has a gripe.    The 58-year-old resident of Parlin, N.J., a house-foundation waterproofer and occasional investor, opened a brokerage account in 1981 with the newly created firm of Kobrin Securities Inc., in East Brunswick, N.J. He says Kobrin's vice president and chief salesman, Armand DeAngelis, promised him: &quot;If you lose one dime, I'll write you a personal check.&quot;    Six years and 350,000 dimes later, Mr. Mendola still hasn't seen the check. He is miffed by the failure of securities regulation to offer him protection or redress.    He feels he should have been told of the history of Kobrin's founder and president, Barrett Kobrin, who had been convicted of fraud involving stock-price manipulation at another securities firm. The Securities and Exchange Commission knew it. The National Association of Securities Dealers knew it. But Mr. Mendola didn't know it. Nobody told him or any of Kobrin's other customers.    Nothing in the securities law, in fact, obliges anybody to do so. And the Kobrin case, some legal specialists suggest, offers a good example of this and other weakness in securities regulation at a time when the stock market has once again attracted a large following of individual investors.    Mr. Mendola took his complaints about the Kobrin firm to an NASD arbitration panel in 1982. Without giving a reason, the arbitrators rejected Mr. Mendola's complaint in 1984. Yet a New Jersey grand jury last April indicted both Mr. Kobrin and Mr. DeAngelis for fraudulently mishandling customers' accounts. The indictment lists Mr. Mendola as one of those defrauded. A trial date hasn't been set.    New Jersey's Bureau of Securities, headed by James McLelland Smith, has also brought a civil suit against the firm and nine individual defendants, including Mr. Kobrin and Mr. DeAngelis. The suit accuses them of giving customers false stock quotations, among other misdeeds. Messrs. Kobrin and DeAngelis deny any wrongdoing in the criminal and civil cases.    It remains unclear whether the NASD arbitrators knew of Mr. Kobrin's earlier criminal conviction and if so whether it was relevant. But Kobrin's customers were certainly ignorant of it, and some securities-law specialists say there isn't any good reason why customers should be kept in the dark about such matters.    &quot;When customers open an account, they should be told that certain disclosures relating to the business and past conduct of the broker-dealer have been made to the SEC and are available to the customer on request,&quot; says Donald Langevoort, a Vanderbilt University law professor and former SEC lawyer.    Ira Lee Sorkin, a New York lawyer who formerly headed the SEC's regional office here, says, &quot;It's an issue that needs to be examined.&quot; He adds, &quot;It would be a very simple process to promulgate a rule requiring the brokerage firm to alert a new customer that the firm's principal, or the broker he is dealing with, was convicted of securities fraud.&quot;    The federal Commodities Futures Trading Commission, for example, is required to reject any applicant for a commodities brokerage license who has a felony conviction. The securities law also prohibits regulated investment companies -- mutual funds -- from hiring anyone as an officer or investment adviser who has been convicted of a crime involving financial services in the previous 10 years.    Some people in the securities business argue that brokers like Mr. Kobrin, once having paid their debt to society, would be unfairly penalized by being required to inform customers of their convictions. &quot;It's sort of like Hawthorne's novel, 'The Scarlet Letter,' with a big A&quot; -- for adultery -- &quot;on you for the rest of your life,&quot; one expert says.    Securities law does require brokers with criminal convictions to file that and other details of their backgrounds with the SEC. An SEC official says that the agency's information is available to the public and that customers, in their own best interest, should investigate the credentials of a broker with whom they plan to do business. &quot;You can't look to the SEC or federal regulation to specially mandate the answer to every question you have,&quot; the official says.    But individual investors find it hard to accept that the screening job is theirs. &quot;When you buy a house, you don't check to see if the builder has a criminal record,&quot; says Elaine Flaster, of West Orange, N.J., a former Kobrin customer. &quot;You assume the business is operated in good faith.&quot;    &quot;I always thought you have to have a clean record to sell securities,&quot; says Doris Williams, a former Kobrin customer in Point Pleasant Beach, N.J.    Anthony Petruzzi, of Middlesex, N.J., another former customer, says &quot;The average investor makes the erroneous assumption that the government is protecting the investor. You assume {brokers} have been checked out before they're allowed to sell securities.&quot;    Kobrin Securities, now in liquidation, seems destined to find its place in the annals of Wall Street on the defendant's side of a footnoted vs. &quot;We have the look of a boiler-room type operation,&quot; its own legal-compliance officer complained in 1984.    Mr. Kobrin's brush with federal securities law grew out of his activities as a broker in Maplewood, N.J., in 1970 and 1971. On charges of taking part in a fraud of selling shares at greatly inflated prices, costing the public hundreds of thousands of dollars, Mr. Kobrin was placed on probation for two years and fined $7,500 by a federal judge in New York.    In a 1978-79 administrative proceeding, the SEC's enforcement division pressed for Mr. Kobrin's permanent expulsion from the securities business. The division argued that stock manipulation of the kind he had been engaged in went to the heart of the securities laws. The division also said the law directed the SEC to act on the belief that past misconduct raised a risk of future misconduct that might justify expulsion.    But Edward B. Wagner, an SEC administrative law judge, said that Mr. Kobrin hadn't been a central figure in the fraud and that this was his only act of wrongdoing. A six-month suspension, Mr. Wagner ruled, &quot;will best serve the public interest.&quot;    That was in 1979. Two years later, Mr. Kobrin started Kobrin Securities and applied to the NASD for membership. An NASD spokesman says the association then asked the SEC if it objected. &quot;The SEC gave us the green light,&quot; the spokesman says.    Among Kobrin's most aggressive salesmen was Armand DeAngelis. &quot;Armand started out courting my daughter. That's how we met him as a stockbroker,&quot; says Mr. Mendola's wife, Minnie Mendola. &quot;He was a charmer. He had a fur coat, fur boots, all kinds of jewelry -- very impressive for a 27-year-old boy.&quot;    Warren Sandy, Kobrin's legal-compliance officer, was less impressed. In the memo to Mr. Kobrin in which he likened the firm to &quot;a boiler-room operation,&quot; Mr. Sandy referred specifically to &quot;the visual appearance of our sales group.&quot; In a later memo, he urged that Mr. DeAngelis be fired. Despite his image, Mr. DeAngelis, who earned $2 million in commissions in 1983 and 1984, was a highly conservative investor -- in his own account. He had at least $500,000 in municipal bonds.    Some Kobrin employees who weren't even licensed brokers were pressed into service touting stocks to customers. One such employee, Linda Groves, testified in state court in New Jersey that Richard Kobrin, a supervisor and brother of Barrett Kobrin, had her pushing shares of Energy Recovery Systems Inc., which she sold to 40 customers in 1984 at 37.5 cents a share. The stock now is quoted at three cents bid in the over-the-counter market. Mr. Kobrin denies any wrongdoing.    As for the firm itself, in its four-year existence it underwrote 16 new issues of &quot;penny stock&quot; for a total of $26 million. It opened 23,000 customer accounts and recorded more than 100,000 individual transactions.    More or less typical of Kobrin's underwritings was the 1983 public offering of Universal Marine andamp; Shark Products Inc., of Rumson, N.J., a company that, Kobrin's sales agents told customers, seemed to have found a cancer cure secreted in the bodies of sharks it hunted and killed. From an offering price of 10 cents a share, Universal's stock soared to $1.37 a share before sinking to zero bid. In a 1985 investigative report, New Jersey's securities bureau found that Universal was unprofitable, had no cancer cure and consisted of one employee, its president.    In a civil suit brought by the securities bureau in state court in Middlesex County, N.J., losing customers told their stories. Mae J. Ross, a 65-year-old widow, testified that she had succumbed to Mr. DeAngelis's &quot;repeated pressure&quot; and put $7,000 of her $90,000 into shares of EES Inc., an electrical contracting company. She said Mr. DeAngelis told her that the price &quot;would at least double in the first month.&quot; The stock now is quoted at zero bid in the over-the-counter market, with trading dormant.    Mr. Mendola testified that Mr. DeAngelis put him into EES, too. &quot;He told me that I couldn't lose because he controls the stock,&quot; Mr. Mendola testified. Mr. Mendola said he still refused to buy the shares. But without telling him, Mr. DeAngelis sold Mr. Mendola's holdings in International Harvester (now Navistar International Corp.) and Jiffy Johns (now Advanced Energy Corp.) to buy EES anyway, according to Mr. Mendola.    In 1982, Mr. Mendola stopped doing business with Kobrin and filed his claim with the NASD to recover losses that he estimated at $35,000. The arbitrators of his complaint were Kenneth M. Socha, a New York securities lawyer; Thomas Levis, managing director of Investors Co., New York, and Charles P. Stevenson Jr., president of Stevenson Capital Management Corp., New York.    The arbitrators decline to discuss the specifics of the case. Mr. Stevenson says only that &quot;arbitration is a narrowly focused event. The arbitrators have to stay within the boundary of what's being presented to them.    &quot;In retrospect, it looks like the arbitrators made a dumb mistake.&quot; But he adds, &quot;I don't think we did.&quot;    Most of Kobrin's clients are likely to recover little. Barrett Kobrin's net worth is undetermined, but Kobrin Securities, now in liquidation, had assets of $20,000 -- in furniture.    A New Jersey court has frozen $70,000 of Mr. DeAngelis's assets. &quot;Mr. DeAngelis is broke,&quot; says his attorney in the civil litigation, Tom Spies, of Roseland, N.J. &quot;He's not been able to pay our bills. He's trying to get a public defender to represent him in his criminal case.&quot;    Yet, according to evidence that state investigators have filed in court, Mr. DeAngelis liquidated $500,000 in municipal bonds and deposited the proceeds in a Florida bank in June 1985, shortly after New Jersey started civil proceedings against him. Some of his money may have gone to the Cayman Islands; investigators found that his fiancee had purchased $34,000 in cashier's checks, some of which were cashed there. </TEXT></DOC>