<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871203-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Seagram Scion:He Has Style Galore,But Can the Boss's SonRun a Liquor Empire?---Today, Edgar Bronfman Jr.Dotes on Wine Coolers;His $100 Million Gamble---An Early Fan of Bruce Willis---By Alix M. FreedmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> VOFOOD andamp; BEVERAGES, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB) </IN><TEXT>   Edgar Bronfman Jr. was at a loss for words. Appearing before a Seagram Co. sales meeting in Dallas, Mr. Bronfman didn't quite know how to introduce his important dad, who was about to make a speech. There are so many ways to think of the man.    &quot;I could call him father,&quot; Edgar Jr. began. &quot;I could call him chairman. Or I could call him the other Edgar, which, even for me, is a little much.&quot; Finally, the younger Mr. Bronfman hit upon a way to sort out this confusion of Edgars. He would call his father &quot;Edgar World,&quot; he said, while reserving for himself the title &quot;Edgar U.S.A.&quot;    &quot;Edgar Jr. is deferential to his father, but he really takes himself for modern-day royalty,&quot; says a former Seagram marketing executive who attended the gathering. &quot;Why would anybody, knowing that most of the company is scared to death of the family -- and a little nauseated -- position himself in that fashion?&quot;    He is young. He is inexperienced. He didn't go to college. If he weren't Edgar Bronfman Jr., there isn't a chance in the world that he would be, at the age of 32, the head of the House of Seagram and his father's designated successor.    Edgar Sr. is the chairman and chief executive officer of a $3.34 billion public corporation, and in a position to call the shots. Putting close relatives in important jobs is still possible when you control a company, which the Bronfmans do with their 38% of Seagram's shares. Seagram is known for hard liquor-VO, Chivas Regal, Seagram's 7, Seven Crown, Crown Royal-190 brands altogether, and it sells 150 brands of wine. But it also produces natural gas in the North Sea and the Gulf of Thailand and derives most of its earnings by far from holdings in Du Pont Co.    As for Edgar Jr., his main interest these days is Seagram's Golden Wine Cooler. He has spent $100 million trying to make the company's new line of sweetened, flavored, carbonated, wine-based beverages a success. (That is the most money ever lavished on a new Seagram product.) He hired the brand's TV pitchman, Bruce Willis, who stars with Cybill Shepherd on the ABC television series &quot;Moonlighting.&quot; He selected the exact shade for Seagram's Natural Peach. If he drives admen at Ogilvy andamp; Mather crazy rejecting ideas for commercials, well, he is the boss. And the agency speaks of him in only the most glowing terms.    Young Edgar's playground is also a proving ground. Through coolers, he wants to show that he has earned the mantle he wears. He wants to prove that show-business flair and a hip sense of style can produce profit as well as panache. He wants to show his numerous critics that there isn't anything wrong with putting one's son in high places if the young man can rise to the occasion.    Nothing in his youth ever suggested that Edgar would run the company's multibillion-dollar U.S. liquor business from a corner office atop its Park Avenue headquarters in Manhattan. (Seagram used to own the Seagram Building, which was designed by Mies van der Rohe, but sold it in 1979.) In his teens, young Edgar was &quot;rebellious, overweight and very show-bizzy, with a gold medallion hanging from his neck,&quot; recalls David G. Sacks, Seagram's president. He displayed no interest in the business founded in 1928 by his grandfather Samuel Bronfman.    Instead, he played producer, investing some of his father's money in a string of movies and plays, most of which flopped. Against his parents' wishes, he eloped at the age of 24 with a beautiful actress and model he was introduced to by singer Dionne Warwick. (In October, Sherry Bronfman gave birth to the couple's third child.) In New York and Los Angeles, he hung out with the entertainment jet set: Miss Warwick; David Puttnam, the producer and, by 1987, the former chairman and chief executive of Columbia Pictures Industries Inc.; and James Goldman, the writer of &quot;Lion in Winter.&quot;    Five years ago, however, with assurances that he could leave if he hated it, Edgar Jr. let his father persuade him to join the company. Two years later, Edgar Sr. put him in charge of the House of Seagram, the company's principal marketing and distilling business, which contributes about 50% of the Seagram's revenue. (He has nothing to do with Seagram's international operations, the Du Pont holdings, and the company's wines other than coolers.)    Last year, Edgar Sr. anointed Edgar Jr. heir apparent by disclosing (in a Fortune magazine interview) his preference for his younger son. In doing so, he passed over his son Sam, who had asked to join the company in 1979. Samuel Bronfman, 34, is the president of Seagram Classics Wine Co. and lives in San Francisco. He admitted that he was &quot;chagrined&quot; about being passed over. Miffed, too, was Edgar Jr.'s uncle Charles, the co-chairman of Seagram Co. He is in charge of the company's Canadian operations and is Seagram's liaison to Du Pont. He was somewhat more outspoken, asserting publicly: &quot;Obviously, both my brother and I realize that any succession is determined by the board, not by Edgar and not by me. . . .&quot;    If his route to the top is a sore subject for Edgar Jr., he shows no sign of it. Tall, lean and sandy-haired, with hands that fold easily in his lap, he says he plans to turn Seagram into &quot;the best adult-beverage company in the U.S.&quot; He wants to make the company a broad-based beverage business, not just wines and spirits. He conspicuously omits the word alcoholic from his references to drink. &quot;I intend,&quot; he adds, &quot;to be here for a very long time.&quot;    But Edgar's effort to prove he isn't just a rich kid is a huge gamble for a company that earned just $103 million from its $3.3 billion wine and spirits empire last year. (Although Seagram earned $423.5 million in 1986, about $320 million came from its 22.6% stake in Du Pont.) After a two-year boom, demand for youth-oriented wine coolers is slipping. Nevertheless, Edgar has scored by bringing Seagram in just 18 months from fourth place in the category to a tie for first with E andamp; J Gallo Co., whose Bartles andamp; Jaymes brand had been the leading seller. It looks as though Seagram will be in first place for the year.    &quot;Coolers are what Edgar has chosen as his moment of truth,&quot; says Paul Gillette, the publisher of the Wine Investor. &quot;It's the whole Hemingway thing from start to finish, with Edgar getting into the bullring in the noonday sun.&quot;    Skeptics abound, as market researchers downgrade forecasts for the $1.6 billion cooler market. &quot;Until now, Edgar Jr. has been riding the wave (of a cooler boom), and it's been very good for his ego,&quot; says Tom Pirko, the president of Bevmark Inc., a Los Angeles consulting firm. &quot;But ultimate profitability will be tough. He is heavily committed to a product -- and a category -- that has seen its high-water mark.&quot;    None of which seems to faze Edgar Jr. It certainly hasn't undermined his supreme self-confidence nor diminished his soft-spoken imperiousness. Malcolm End, a senior vice president of Ogilvy andamp; Mather, recalls that at a recent meeting, Mr. Bronfman rejected four of five proposed commercials, stating simply: &quot;I consider these inadequate. I don't want them.&quot; He pronounced the packaging for the original Seagram Cooler &quot;trash,&quot; according to Jerry Mann, the executive vice president of sales at House of Seagram. The green packaging, suggestive of refreshment, a la ginger ale, evidently wasn't upscale enough, so he had it redone.    Some see young Edgar as a bit of a bully. At the recent sales meeting, a minion questioned his plans to unveil a new gin-and-orange-juice concoction, the name of which is being kept secret. Despite Edgar's explanation that this would be a new product, the salesman speculated that it would cut into sales of Seagram's gin. (Black gin-buyers particularly are said to be accustomed to adding their own fruit juice.) The salesman asked whether the young executive had researched the question.    &quot;Let me put it this way,&quot; Mr. Bronfman responded icily. &quot;One of us is right.&quot; End of discussion. (The product is expected shortly.)    &quot;He has wonderful social graces, but he believes that because he's Edgar Bronfman Jr. and has the power of Seagram, he can do exactly as he pleases,&quot; says Michael Mondavi, himself the son of Robert Mondavi and managing partner of Robert Mondavi Winery. A former executive adds: &quot;He is a genius and a brat. The way he accomplishes things in the company is not by managing but by his relationship with his dad.&quot;    None of Edgar's critics suggest, however, that he is either lazy or stupid. Two years ago, he launched a major House of Seagram reorganization, repositioning brands to avoid competition among them. At the same time, he sloughed off 94 people from a payroll of 646. He also ended relationships with a number of distributors, saying he would do business only with those who &quot;treat Seagram brands importantly.&quot; Then, last May, he got rid of an additional 75-odd employees in the name of centralizing House of Seagram sales and marketing strategy at headquarters, while giving greater authority to the sales force in the field.    Since the latest reorganization was announced, about a dozen marketing people have left the company in disillusionment.    At the same time, he has fostered risk-taking in Seagram's cautious culture, sanctioning such heresies as a new ad campaign for Chivas Regal. It will soon replace one that has endured, with great wit, for a quarter-century.    In December 1985, armed with an alsoran product, Edgar decreed that Seagram would wrest leadership in coolers from Gallo. Five months later, by driving his marketing and sales staff relentlessly, he rolled out a new premium wine cooler called Golden. He still contends that Seagram will break even on its cooler investment by the end of next year and will have built, in the process, a $750 million business.    Meanwhile, Edgar has behaved more like a brand manager than a top executive. He pushed for and gave final taste approval to hot new flavors like wild berry. He oversaw details down to the color of his peach cooler, making sure it had the right pastel tones -- &quot;a little more sophisticated than a hot, bright color,&quot; he says.    Lacking any training for his job -- no M.B.A., no long years of corporate dues paying, no marketing experience -- the man whom one Seagram insider calls &quot;a dream yuppie&quot; relies heavily on creative flair, on a grasp of popular culture and artistic detail geared more to Hollywood than to a multinational.    His biggest coup was signing Mr. Willis of &quot;Moonlighting&quot; to push Seagram coolers before the TV actor (who is now also in the movies) was a big star. Indeed, most of Seagram's top brass had never heard of him. Seagram executives and their admen were glumly screening casting tapes one Friday afternoon when Mr. Bronfman suddenly scribbled a note to Jed Bernstein, an Ogilvy andamp; Mather vice president. It said, &quot;Get me Bruce Willis. . . . &quot;    As Mr. Bernstein recalls it, &quot;I told him, 'Edgar, youdon't really want to do that.' He said, 'Yes I do.'&quot;   By Monday, the deal was done. It didn't hurt that Edgar knew Mr. Willis's agent -- and spent big. Mr. Willis's three-year contract is reportedly worth up to $6.4 million, making him one of television's best-paid pitchmen.    &quot;To make a Bruce Willis choice that early,&quot; contends Thom Mount, a movie producer and former colleague of Mr. Bronfman's, &quot;you have to have a thoroughgoing grip of what is going on in the streets of America. Edgar knew that here was someone that most of America would think was cool.&quot;    Those who have thought about it seem to agree that tapping Mr. Willis was a masterstroke. But some question the cost. Says the former marketing man: &quot;On the one hand, Edgar has the insight to tap a personality before he becomes legendary; on the other hand, he is willing to pay a king's ransom to get what he wants. That sums him up a nutshell.&quot;    Mr. Bronfman was headstrong early on. One of seven children, he had a childhood swathed in privilege. He attended New York's Collegiate School. He spent weekends at his family's Westchester estate. Classmates still remember his birthday parties, including one at a bowling alley rented for the occasion where Edgar, a fifth-grader, bought cigarettes from a vending machine on the sly.    Edgar balked at following in his father's footsteps, while his elder brother, Sam, obediently took the path laid out for him-prep school and then on to his father's alma mater, Williams College.    In 1975, newspapers reported the kidnapping, ransom and ultimate release of 22-year-old Sam Bronfman. The two men charged in the case accused Sam of arranging his own abduction to extort money from his father. Edgar Bronfman paid -- and ultimately recovered -- $2.3 million. The men were acquitted of kidnapping but convicted of extortion; no charges were brought against Sam Bronfman. The Bronfmans won't discuss the episode, but Robert Kasmire, who at the public-relations firm Adams andamp; Rinehart represents Seagram, says, &quot;The kidnapping was a very painful experience for the family. Nobody talks about it. . . . They are trying to put it in the past.&quot; But Edgar Sr. clearly hasn't gotten over it. To this day, in his Who's Who biography, he omits all mention of having children -- for security reasons, Mr. Kasmire says.    &quot;(Edgar Jr.'s) siblings went out of their way to please their parents, to live up to what they wanted,&quot; says Mr. Sacks, Seagram's president. But young Edgar's life took a decisive turn when, at age 14, he refused to go to summer camp. He managed to avoid that fate because he found on a hall table a movie script that had been sent to his father. He read it and then persuaded his father to do likewise. The elder Bronfman ended up investing $450,000 in making the film &quot;Melody,&quot; and the younger Bronfman got to spend the summer doing menial work on the set. By age 17, Mr. Bronfman Jr. had produced his own first, albeit unsuccessful, film, &quot;The Blockhouse.&quot;    Undaunted, he set out to make his mark in show business. &quot;What I wanted to learn was how to get ahead in a world in which I had no control,&quot; he explains. He adds: &quot;My parents always told us that with the advantages we would have, by dint of who we were, came a responsibility to do something. I have very little sympathy for the children of wealthy parents who are given a great deal of advantage and who relinquish that advantage.&quot;    Well out of show business now, he still has the reflexes. Mr. Bronfman recently distributed special music videos -- not the usual free cooler samples -- to 175 employees, thanking them for the success of the new product. He is sorry to admit he didn't have time to write lyrics for the song performed on the tape by a pop group.    (In his office is a framed gold record of Miss Warwick's hit album &quot;Friends.&quot; He wrote the lyrics to one of the songs she sings, &quot;Whisper in the Dark.&quot; Sample: &quot;I want to hold your body next to mine. I want to hurry love and take my time.&quot;)    Most signs of youthful rebellion have faded. Edgar now golfs occasionally, drinks fine wines and lives in a town house on New York's Riverside Drive. He wears Giorgio Armani suits and alligator loafers and brushes off any initial misgivings he might have had about corporate life. &quot;Coming to Seagram was like coming home,&quot; he says. Says Mr. Sacks, &quot;Now, except for the Italian clothes, he is much more like his father.&quot; As company president, Mr. Sacks, who is currently recovering from a heart attack, is said to have the role of keeping Edgar Jr. on the straight and narrow while also serving as a credible, conservative spokesman with the financial community. Edgar Sr. these days is engrossed in his work with the World Jewish Congress, of which he has been president since 1979. He is said to be relatively uninvolved now with day-to-day business at Seagram. He wasn't available to be interviewed for this story.    Edgar admits that failure in coolers would call his business judgment into question. But father and son, who have lunch together regularly, don't show any inclination to back away from their fling at nepotism on a grand scale. &quot;My father always taught me to believe in my right to be wrong -- and I do,&quot; says Edgar. &quot;I make a decision, and I don't look back.&quot;    Says Irving S. Shapiro, the former chairman of Du Pont and a former Seagram director, &quot;If he weren't the boss's son, he would be another guy in the organization fighting his way up. The jury is still out on this kid.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>