<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Intellectuals Deserve More Thought</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In order to prove his thesis that intellectuals are evil, liberal and hypocritical, Paul Johnson (editorial page, Jan. 5) starts by cleverly but incorrectly defining intellectuals as being distinguished from pragmatists. In fact, intellect means &quot;the capacity for knowledge&quot; and &quot;the ability to reason as contrasted to the ability to feel or will&quot;; pragmatic means &quot;dealing with facts and actual occurrences.&quot; Thus a person can be intellectual and pragmatic, intellectual and not pragmatic, and maybe even pragmatic and not intellectual.    J. Peter Singer   San Mateo, Calif.   ---   If Mr. Johnson would risk corrupting his soul by taking a course in deductive logic, he would learn that universal conclusions cannot be drawn from a few examples. His claim that Shelley, Freud and Marx represent intellectuals generally is tantamount to saying, &quot;Waldo is a dog. Waldo kicks over his water bowl. Therefore, all dogs kick over their water bowls.&quot; It doesn't take an evil intellectual to see the fallacy of this reasoning.    Even when a scholar leads a controversial personal life, that fact does not render his or her theories less beneficial. Perhaps Freud was a creep; his model of human nature would still be a valuable instrument of healing.    Scholarship is potentially dangerous only because knowledge is power that can be used for benevolent or malicious purposes. I therefore prefer to regard academe with the same cautious enthusiasm befitting, say, nuclear energy, the presidency or the Catholic Church. Used responsibly, any of them can be tremendously helpful.    Intellectuals serve a vital function. Aside from passing on our cultural heritage, they remind us that we choose our actions. When we stifle independent thought, we grow susceptible to Mr. Johnson's claim that some actions (in his view, capitalist exchange) would just happen without the intrusion of manipulative thinkers. This denial of responsibility has characterized atrocities; advocates of racism, patriarchy and genocide have all claimed to enforce &quot;nature's&quot; plan. I agree that thought unchecked by experience is hazardous. In the wake of the redundant destruction of Nagasaki and the cannibalistic mania of My Lai, however, action without reflection poses a greater threat to our world.    Susan E. Ware   Dallas   ---   Mr. Johnson's reflections on the exploitative talents of Shelley, Marx and Freud deserve attention. But there's no urgent need to leap over to the anti-intellectualist fervor of Spiro Agnew. The alternative is not between a conservative pragmatism that cares for people and a ruthless left that wants its ideas to dominate. Liberal humanists fight the daily battle to defend human freedom and development from oppressive forces of either right or left. It's the mad polarizations of extremists that threaten us all.    Rev. Gary W. Schwartzkopf   Jersey City, N.J.   ---   What about our intellectual Founding Fathers: Samuel Adams, Jefferson, Franklin and their colleagues? Surely they &quot;imposed their ideas&quot; on the colonists. Those who liked what they said, stayed; many others left for Canada. Mr. Johnson advises your readers to beware of committees, conferences and leagues of intellectuals. We might still be living either under the Articles of Confederation or more likely under foreign domination were the American colonists to have heeded Mr. Johnson's advice.    Of course people must always come before ideas. Unfortunately we disagree among ourselves as to which ideas will prove helpful or dangerous. Condemning ideas categorically would bring us back to anarchy; would Mr. Johnson prefer that to living under a Constitution promulgated by intellectuals?    Lawrence A. Benenson   New York   ---   If a man is flawed and he uses his intellect in the service of his flaw, it is the flaw, not the intellect, that is at fault; his intellect should not be blamed for his inability to practice what he might preach. Mr. Johnson does well to submit that Samuel Johnson and John Maynard Keynes were among the many intellectuals who did not succumb to their desire to push others around. He might have included Socrates, Kant, Darwin, Shaw and Einstein. He might have done even better to remember the scores of anti-intellectuals -- mad kings, avaricious businessmen, lying presidents -- whose damage far exceeds that perpetrated by the petty domestic tantrums of Shelley, Marx and Freud.    Boman Desai   Chicago   ---   The essence of Mr. Johnson's article was distilled by cartoonist Charles Schulz. On my wall is a &quot;Peanuts&quot; pennant which shows Linus, blanket in hand and thumb in mouth, exclaiming: &quot;I love mankind. . . . It's people I can't stand!&quot;    Erwin L. Williams   San Rafael, Calif.   ---   Does Mr. Johnson somehow imagine that the Holocaust or the atrocities in Cambodia were committed by hordes of disaffected graduate students? Of course not; these unspeakable crimes were committed by ordinary people who had abrogated their responsibility to think. If people no longer accept responsibility for their actions they deserve what they get, though their victims do not. To avoid this fate we must all become intellectuals.    Chris Truax   Goleta, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>