<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870811-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Regulatory Reactionaries Have a Dubious Case---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 08/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)AIRLINES (AIR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC) </IN><TEXT>   President Reagan's original chief economic adviser, Murray L. Weidenbaum, now works quietly in his office on the campus of Washington University in St. Louis. He teaches, labors over a book recommending economic policies for the post-Reagan years and runs his &quot;Center for the Study of American Business&quot; (CSAB). Never far from his thoughts is a movement he and the CSAB helped foster: deregulation of the American economy.    In the past decade, Congress has let loose of economic controls it once exercised over a string of major U.S. industries. Airlines, railroads, trucking, banking, intercity bus lines, communications, oil, gas and broadcasting are among the major industries now freer to decide how and where they will do business and how much they will charge.    In none of these cases has deregulation been total. In some, such as banking, it has come partly through industry use of loopholes in existing rules. But in nearly all cases the relaxation has been sufficient to allow -- or maybe force is a better word -- the return of competition. One result has been lower prices. Cheaper fuel costs after oil-price decontrol in 1981 were a major boon to motorists and truckers. Air travelers save $6 billion a year from air-fare deregulation, a Brookings Institution study estimates. Other decontrolled industries have followed a similar pattern.    No one has been able to measure with any certainty the total benefits to the U.S. economy of the entire broad range of deregulatory actions. But it is easy to find economists who agree with Prof. Weidenbaum that they have been huge. By unleashing competition, deregulation forces technological and managerial innovation. That means productivity gains. Productivity gains are the source of expanded economic wealth and, hence, higher living standards. The current economic recovery, now in its fifth year, is one of the longest in the nation's history. Deregulation is not the only reason, but it is one of the most important; some economists argue that it is the most important.    There are folks abroad in the land who would like to reverse the deregulatory trend. The crusty old Interstate Commerce Commission, given up for dead with the partial deregulation of rail and trucking, recently returned from the grave to disapprove the merger of the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe railroads, which had already been partly implemented. A group of bulk shippers, led by the coal industry, has mounted a drive in Congress to force the railroads to give them the same rates as non-bulk shippers; if they succeed, and the railroads lose the business they have been wooing away from trucks, the bulk shippers could end up paying higher, not lower, rates.    There have been renewed cries for airline reregulation, coming partly from people who don't pay their own money to fly. A Federal Communications Commission proposal last week to regulate only long-distance telephone rates, not profits, drew fire from self-described consumerists appalled at the idea that a telephone company might be rewarded for improved efficiency. The new banking bill that passed Congress last week contains a moratorium on further deregulation of financial services to give Congress more time to study the issue.    If you ask the questions right, it's possible to get poll results showing some limited popular support for reregulation. Frustration with airline crowding and delays is one of the primary sources of discontent. But deregulation is to blame for those problems only in the sense that lower fares have made it possible for many millions more people to fly, thus overburdening airports and the air-traffic control system.    A few other troubling straws are in the wind. A CSAB report in April prepared by Research Associate Paul N. Tramontozzi and Associate Director Kenneth W. Chilton reveals that the staffing and funding of federal regulatory agencies is rising once more after five years in which cuts about equaled increases. An 11% real increase in funding was voted for this fiscal year and an additional 4% boost was budgeted for fiscal 1988. However, much of the change results from the beefing up of the regulatory powers of bank deposit insurance agencies that does not reflect a clear reversal in regulatory philosophy.    Groups pressing for significant economic reregulation, such as the Teamsters union in the trucking industry, should be warned that they are up against a powerful, historical movement. Mr. Weidenbaum, whose CSAB has been at the center of the deregulation movement from the beginning, describes its origins and motivating forces in the just-released 10th anniversary issue of Policy Review, the Heritage Foundation quarterly. There are two remarkable things about the economic deregulation of the past decade, he writes. For one, it has been bipartisan, with support from both Republicans and Democrats. Second, it demonstrated the power of ideas -- brought forth and developed by economists, political scientists and legal scholars -- to overwhelm entrenched economic and political interests.    &quot;For 90 years,&quot; writes Prof. Weidenbaum, &quot;from the establishment of the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1886 to the passage of the Toxic Substances Control Act in 1976 -- government regulation of American economic activity continuously expanded and created in its wake powerful constituencies.&quot; But sometime in the early-1970s, various streams of economic and policy analysis began to come together, showing the amount of economic waste generated by regulation, the tendency of regulatory bodies to be captured by the industries they regulate and the resulting costs to consumers.    One impressive example was the discovery that it cost more to fly 300 miles from Seattle to Portland on a federally regulated interstate airline than to fly 500 miles from San Diego to San Francisco on an unregulated intrastate carrier. Economist George Stigler won a Nobel Prize in 1982 for his research showing how and why regulated industries &quot;capture&quot; their regulators, thus gaining protection from competitive forces.    The news that economic regulation serves the interests of big companies came as something of a shock to the corporation-baiters of the American political left. Ralph Nader, even though he remained unrelenting in his push for environmental and other forms of social regulation, joined the economic deregulation movement. Having been bumped from an airline flight at some point in his travels, he was especially interested in forcing the airlines out into the cruel, competitive world. So was Jimmy Carter, whose Southern populist upbringing had made him suspicious of big business. The regulatory Civil Aeronautics Board was phased out in 1978.    This produced a remarkable coalition of the populist left and the free-market right. Ronald Reagan, when he came into office in 1981, hastened to make use of this happy alliance as part of his four-part program of economic deregulation, tax reform, sound money and reduced growth in federal spending. To one degree or another, he accomplished all four goals. His choice of Murray Weidenbaum, a leading proponent of economic deregulation, as his chief adviser, was no accident.    Now, six years later, a reactionary movement has gained a small foothold. But with no serious intellectual support, its arguments boil down to special pleading. How far it can go on so little remains to be seen. </TEXT></DOC>