<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880219-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Japan Is Right on South Africa </HL><AUTHOR> Willy Stern </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC JAPAN </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As anti-apartheid activists in the U.S. Congress threaten to punish countries still trading with South Africa, Japan can serve as a catalyst for true reform there by sticking to the principles of free trade. Japan, South Africa's main trading partner, should take the lead in seeing that reform there is advanced by opening up the market and demonstrating to blacks that apartheid and not capitalism is their ultimate enemy.    Japan became South Africa's largest trading partner last year, with two-way trade of $4.27 billion, up from $3.59 billion in 1986. Japanese products enjoy a high profile in South Africa, with Toyota, Nissan and Mazda accounting for nearly half the auto market, and brand names such as Sony, Seiko and Nikon having become status symbols.    The increase in trade is bringing unwanted attention from abroad, and Foreign Minister Sosuke Uno has called for voluntary restraints. Yesterday, Shoichiro Toyoda, president of Toyota Motor Co. and head of the Japan Auto Manufacturers Association, said Japanese auto makers will voluntarily curb exports to South Africa. Japan already has some restrictions on trade with South Africa. Direct investment, for example, has long been outlawed and commercial loans are restricted. In 1985, Japan banned exports of computers to South African security forces, and a year later imports of South African iron and steel were forbidden.    Yet the failure of these measures, as well as the more drastic approaches taken by other nations (sanctions have resulted in only a marginal slowing of the South African economy), has led to a reappraisal of policy. It is now more widely accepted in some policy circles that nations can continue to trade with South Africa while at the same time actively aid the cause of black rights. Although this proposition might be hard to sell to a Democratic-controlled Congress in Washington, it is in the best interests of both Japan and reform-minded South Africans.    This becomes more clear when the two basic alternatives for South Africa's future are considered. The first is an open society based on democratic foundations and incorporating Western norms of individual freedoms, a free-market economy, open elections and a just legal system. The second -- which seems more likely if punitive sanctions are pursued -- is a society structured on neo-Marxist principles. The features of this latter South Africa would include a totalitarian political system and an economic policy tending toward wealth redistribution rather than wealth creation. Assuming that the first alternative is the more desirable, the immediate challenge facing policy makers in Japan and the West should be to figure out how best to push for reforms that benefit the black majority.    The open-society alternative cannot be achieved without high and sustainable economic growth rates -- rates that must be sufficiently high to demonstrate to South African blacks in a tangible way that a free economy benefits them. Without the foreign capital supplied by nations such as Japan, leading anti-apartheid South African economists agree that the economy cannot grow at more than 3% a year, a rate that would fall far short of the development requirements of South Africa's diverse and exploding nonwhite population. (More than half the black population is under age 16. Without foreign capital, real growth rates are sure to be inadequate to absorb the 250,000 new black job seekers coming onto the market each year.)    If Japan and the rest of the industrialized world are sincere in their stated intent to help South Africa plot a peaceful course into the future, then they must stop isolating an economy where real gross domestic fixed income has fallen 8.2% in real terms in the past five years. South Africa's reform-minded white leaders are crying out for foreign credit, foreign investment and a removal of the threat of sanctions. Although economic growth is most crucial for the black majority, in the long run the white minority's own freedoms also depend on South Africa's economic survival.    The potential for Japanese leadership in this area should not be underestimated. Now that the U.S. and Europe have largely pulled out of South Africa, Japan through its business presence can show the value of a market-oriented approach to political reform. The alternative is to feed the siege mentality of white South Africans and allow them to close off their country to the kind of outside influences that have helped further the reform process thus far.    Punitive sanctions are intended to send a signal to Pretoria, but South Africans sadly jest that Pretoria turned off its receiving equipment long ago. But that listening equipment probably would be tuned in very quickly were talk to begin of getting into South Africa rather than getting out.    ---   Mr. Stern, a Tokyo-based correspondent, recently finished a six-month reporting stint with Business Day in Johannesburg, where he was arrested by the South African government for a violation of the State of Emergency press regulations. </TEXT></DOC>