<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881031-0156 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Racial Politics </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Since the Democrats are waving the bloody shirt of race in this presidential campaign, we're only too happy to agree that there is a problem. The problem has almost nothing to do with George Bush's TV ads, however, and everything to do with the monopoly hold on black voters by a single party, the Democrats, and a single philosophy, Great Society liberalism. This is the real scandal of racial politics, circa 1988.    Our own view is that the politics of race has become too polarized along party, and philosophical, lines. In one sense, of course, the allegiance of blacks to the Democratic Party is perfectly understandable. Hubert Humphrey fought his party's Southern wing to give political clout to the civil-rights movement in the 1950s, while the Great Society ratified many of the movement's ambitions. But it is now 20 years later.    In many respects the measures Mr. Humphrey and his allies pressed helped blacks in making enormous strides. The enfranchisement of black voters and the destruction of Jim Crow laws created the opportunity for the majority of blacks who are now prospering as part of the middle class. Yet the Great Society has also clearly failed the other part of the black population that it once promised to liberate as well -- what is now called the &quot;underclass.&quot; Neither the traditional black leadership nor its Democratic allies have shown any understanding of what to do about it.    Indeed, their response has been to refuse even to debate the problem. To demand more affirmative action, though all the evidence suggests this helps those blacks who need it least. To demand more federal spending, though welfare's destructive impact on incentives is by now well known. Those few who dare to speak about the problems of the black family or the necessity of individual responsibility -- a Tom Sowell or a Chuck Robb -- are ridiculed as Uncle Toms or closet racists.    Jesse Jackson, it should be said, has not always been a constructive influence. Though he serves as both a role model and inspiration to many blacks, his status has given him a kind of moral veto over any debate about these issues within the Democratic Party. And his doctrinaire support of a left-wing agenda has kept him from even considering any reform of the Great Society status quo.    When the black tenants of a public-housing project in Washington, D.C., announced they were becoming owners at a ceremony last week, Mr. Jackson might have attended and hailed their achievement. Instead, he held his own press conference and denounced the Reagan administration. Mr. Jackson says his message is &quot;empowerment,&quot; but it sounds like more client-of-the-state dependency.    Republicans have missed their own opportunity. Though Jack Kemp and others have a message that appeals to many blacks, most GOP leaders refuse to use it. And though George Bush began his campaign with fanfare about courting blacks, we haven't noticed a speech or appearance toward this end since midsummer. Mr. Bush hasn't even taken the easy step of campaigning for Alan Keyes, the black Republican running for the Senate in Maryland. The chance to stump for an agenda promoting low-income opportunity -- including education choice or a major welfare reform -- has also been missed.    Certainly there are enough signs that blacks themselves have begun to recognize their political predicament. When a renegade NAACP chapter in Columbus, Ohio, endorsed George Bush last week, a member explained that black allegiance to the Democratic Party has been &quot;totally unproductive.&quot;    The Joint Center for Political Studies, meanwhile, recently released a poll showing that black support for Michael Dukakis is well below what it was for Walter Mondale in 1984. Among blacks under age 30, only 64% are supporting Mr. Dukakis compared with 84% for Mr. Mondale. In what must be a sign of complete frustration, 1% plan to vote for Lenora Fulani, an independent candidate with ties to black separatist Louis Farrakhan.    The obvious point is that the black vote, like the white vote, is not monolithic. And the opportunity clearly exists for a politician or party that understands this. Certainly the U.S. has made its greatest strides in racial harmony when leaders in both political parties have felt they had a stake in promoting black opportunity.    The destructive alternative is for both parties to persist in treating blacks like the Democrats' private constituency. In that event, blacks will have cause to be angry both at Republicans who ignore them, and at Democrats who believe blacks can be bought off with more government programs. Race will become less a polarizing issue -- and less an opportunity for demagoguery -- only when it stops being part of partisan debate. </TEXT></DOC>