<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Cultural-Exchange Czars Sing Same Old Songs---By David Bar-Illan</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   The arrival of the Bolshoi Ballet at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York last week brought back memories of the first appearances in America by Soviet artists more than 30 years ago.    We who attended those performances are not likely to forget the experience. It was less than three years after the long nightmare of Stalin's tyranny. The new Soviet rulers were releasing and rehabilitating thousands of political prisoners. &quot;De-Stalinization,&quot; &quot;internal reforms&quot; and &quot;coexistence&quot; were the buzzwords of the new regime, and a program of &quot;cultural exchange&quot; enabled Americans and Russians to view and hear each other's artists for the first time in decades. Hope and euphoria were everywhere. Concerts would end with audiences and performers cheering and applauding each other for 15 to 20 minutes, as if proclaiming to themselves and to the world: Thus we shall conquer differences, thus we shall make enmity melt, thus we shall have peace.    The euphoria did not last long. It soon became clear that culture, like everything else in the Soviet Union, was an instrument of the state. After the U.S.S.R. severed diplomatic relations with Israel in 1967, American artists who were in any way identified with Israel were gradually blacklisted by the Soviets. Most, like Leonard Bernstein, Zubin Mehta, Itzhak Perlman, Pinchas Zuckerman and Isaac Stern, were undisputed leaders in their field. All had enjoyed great success with Soviet audiences and critics.    Incredibly, the West acquiesced. The Soviets were allowed to determine cultural-exchange eligibility not on artistic merit but on ethnic affiliation and personal association. Music, the most nonpolitical of the arts, became a Soviet instrument of reward and punishment.    The obverse was just as alarming. The only Soviet artists allowed to appear in the West were those &quot;reliable&quot; enough to be approved by the party. When the greatest Russian instrumentalist, cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, ran afoul of the KGB for befriending dissident writer Alexander Solzhenitsyn, he was forbidden to travel abroad and excluded from Russia's major concert halls. Scores of others suffered similar fates.    Assuming, correctly, that the West would do nothing to violate the sacred cow of cultural exchange, the Soviets went even further. They demanded control over the advertisements in the playbills at theaters in which Soviet artists appeared. In one incident in Los Angeles in 1975, the theater manager was forced to tear out &quot;offensive&quot; advertisements -- one advertising a book by Mr. Solzhenitsyn, another a concert by Soviet emigres -- minutes before the performance. At Lincoln Center in New York and Kennedy Center in Washington similar ads were simply turned away.    Several newspapers published letters from Beverly Sills and me that protested the imposition of censorship in our democracy by a foreign power. I felt that under such conditions cultural exchange was not only useless but dangerous.    But even these gross offenses were not as intolerable to me as the punishments meted out to individual artists for political &quot;heresy.&quot; In the early '70s, Soviet dancer Valery Panov was penalized for expressing his desire to emigrate to Israel. He was fired from the Kirov Ballet of Leningrad, forbidden to perform anywhere, and consigned to an apartment so tiny that he could not practice in it. I could not help imagining how I would feel if I were deprived of access to a piano. It would be tantamount to an artistic death sentence.    Outraged, I joined a committee for Mr. Panov and his ballerina wife. We collected 6,000 signatures from artists throughout the West and tried to turn their case into a world-wide &quot;cause celebre.&quot; When Carnegie Hall announced an appearance of the Leningrad Philharmonic, we bought 100 tickets in the front of the auditorium. They were filled with activists who, seconds before the conductor appeared, got up and walked out, carrying a banner that said &quot;Free the Panovs.&quot; (I vehemently oppose disturbing concerts, but I see nothing wrong in silent protest.)    Ten years later I met one of that orchestra's musicians in Oslo. He told me, &quot;We felt you were fighting for all of us, not just for the Panovs.&quot; It took three years of such protests to get the Panovs released.    Now there is a new cultural agreement between the superpowers, and again there is some relaxation in the Soviets' attitude toward artistic activities. Movies, books, plays, operas and ballets whose themes were considered heretical and decadent are now deemed acceptable; writers and artists formerly boycotted and persecuted, especially those no longer alive, are enjoying a modicum of approval, and prominent Soviet defectors have been ostentatiously invited to appear in the motherland.    This is a limited and carefully controlled liberalization that has to do not only with the desire to placate the West and pave the way to unfettered trade relations, but with the need to assuage the frustrations of Soviet artists and intellectuals stewing at the sight of colleagues in other Communist Bloc countries enjoying greater freedom of expression.    But despite all this, nothing substantive has changed either in Soviet cultural-exchange policy or in State Department acquiescence in it. Western artists on the Soviet blacklist have yet to be invited to appear in the Soviet Union, and &quot;unreliable&quot; Soviet artists still cannot appear in the West. The only discernable change is that the Soviet performers who appear in the West are watched even more carefully by the KGB to prevent defections.    Today's &quot;Panovs&quot; include the brilliant pianist Vladimir Feltsman who, in punishment for requesting an emigration visa six years ago, had been allowed neither to perform in major Soviet cities nor to tour abroad. A year ago the U.S. ambassador in Moscow invited him to play at the embassy, but the long arm of the KGB reached there too: The piano was vandalized hours before the scheduled concert. As in the case of the Panovs, a consistent international campaign on his behalf, as well as a personal crusade by Rep. Jack Kemp, finally helped, and last week Mr. Feltsman received permission to leave.    Others have not been as fortunate. Alexei Magarik, a young Moscow cellist, was sentenced to three years in the gulag for teaching Hebrew. Needless to say, he has not been allowed to take his cello with him. The first violinist of the Lithuanian Symphony, Carmella Raiz, was dismissed for applying to leave. Meita Leikina, who sent the family violin to his violinist daughter in Israel, was thrown into a psychiatric hospital for four years. Emanuel Tvaladzo of Tbilisi was sentenced to eight years in jail for playing with an unofficial &quot;human rights&quot; orchestra. For them, too, nothing has changed.    By definition, an artist is a free spirit to whom any form of repression is anathema. That is why so many of the leading Soviet performers have defected or, whenever possible, emigrated. Among them are some of the world's greatest artists: dancers Natalia Makarova, Rudolf Nureyev, Mikhail Barishnikov and Alexander Goudonov; pianists Vladimir Ashkenazi, Bella Davidovich and Andrei Gavrilov; violinist Gideon Kramer, cellist-conductor Mstislav Rostropovich, conductor Maxim Shostakovich (son of the great composer) and countless others. Every orchestra in the West boasts Soviet musical emigres who have chosen to live in personal and artistic freedom. Indeed, the only positive result of cultural exchange is the enrichment these artists have brought to the West.    But the price we have paid for this privilege has been high. Much too high. By allowing the relationship to continue on Soviet terms, we have given implicit approval, a tacit license, to the trampling of human and artistic rights by a repressive, totalitarian regime.    Cultural exchange can do nothing to ease tensions between the superpowers for the simple reason that people-to-people programs have little impact in countries, such as the Soviet Union, where people have no say in shaping the policies of their government. All cultural exchange has done is give the Soviets hard currency and international respectability.    We in the West are so anxious to avoid bestowing such respectability on the government of South Africa that we do not invite South African orchestras and ballet troupes to our shores; and we ostracize Western artists who appear in South Africa, even if they insist on appearing only before desegregated audiences. There is no reason we should treat the Soviets differently. Not until they clean up their act.    ---   Mr. Bar-Illan, a concert pianist, directs the Jonathan Institute, a private anti-terrorist group based in New York and Jerusalem. </TEXT></DOC>