<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880715-0156 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Waste-Disposal Quagmire </HL><SO> </SO><IN> ENV </IN><G> ERG </G><TEXT>   Re your June 16 page-one article &quot;Energy From Garbage Loses Some of Promise as Wave of the Future&quot;: The Environmental Protection Agency's position is that incineration/energy recovery technology has minimal public-health risks where facilities are properly designed, well operated and carefully maintained. Last summer we issued technical guidance on appropriate air-pollution controls, including good combustion conditions, particulate removal and acid gas scrubbers. All of the 16 state incinerator air permits either drafted or granted since last summer have required these controls. We are planning to propose final air regulations for public comment in 1989.    The incinerator-ash issue has been more troublesome in that existing federal laws aren't clear on how such ash is to be managed. We therefore support the Luken-Whittaker ash bill in the House, which would clarify the legal status of ash and provide basic technical requirements.    Municipal solid-waste landfills will continue to be needed for direct garbage disposal, or for the residuals from incineration or recycling. The EPA will soon propose new landfill regulations for comment.    Even though incineration and landfilling will continue to be needed, the country should be moving rapidly toward adoption of increased recycling programs. We have called for a national goal of 25% reduction of waste bound for disposal within the next four years. The U.S. currently recycles no more than 10% of household trash. While the 25% goal is not one to be rigidly adhered to by each state or every community, it is a tough but realistic goal for the nation as a whole.    In addition to recycling, increased attention to reduction of wastes at the source would be helpful. Specifically, we would encourage businesses and governments to pay closer attention to packaging, materials selections and other aspects of waste generation. Failing this, I anticipate increasing governmental pressure at all levels to mandate source reduction or materials banning.    Source reduction, recycling, incineration with energy recovery and landfilling will all be elements of integrated solidwaste planning. The exact mix of these elements should be determined by state and local conditions and planning.    J. Wintson Porter   Assistant Administrator   Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response   Environmental Protection Agency   Washington   ---   We, in Broward County, Fla., have been wrestling with the problem of solid-waste disposal for well over 10 years. Being I am the mayor of the city of Hallandale, one of the communities considering the compost alternative to incineration, and the chairman of the Broward County Water Supply Advisory Board as well as an environmentalist, I am going bananas trying to balance giving our residents a reasonable cost-effective method of waste disposal, protecting the water supply and not further ruining the atmosphere.    The article points out the necessity for reducing the waste stream but that does not go far enough. Too many state legislatures are controlled by lobbyists and don't have the guts to put in mandatory bottledeposit and recycling legislation. This would not only substantially reduce waste but also cut down on littering.    Costs of disposal of solid waste have increased dramatically the past few years and will continue to escalate as greater steps must be taken in landfills to protect water supplies and in removing pollutants from smokestacks at a greater degree to protect the atmosphere. Dumping in the ocean must also be halted.    Arthur J. Sony Rosenberg   Mayor, City of Hallandale   Hallandale, Fla.   ---   Proper waste disposal comes down to protecting public health and the environment. No matter how we do that, it is going to cost something. Instead of relying on a single solution, communities around the country have found that they must blend three or four elements into an integrated waste-management system. These include efforts to produce less trash, as well as recycling, waste-to-energy facilities and modern landfills.    Each town or city must choose the right mix of such components. For example, well-run recycling programs may reclaim as much as 25% of a community's waste stream and ultimately lessen its disposal bill. Waste-to-energy plants reduce the remaining garbage by another 90%, which leaves a relatively small amount of ash residue for deposit in sanitary landfills. And because such plants produce steam that can be used to generate electricity, part of their construction and operating costs is offset by energy sales. Even so, the main benefit of building these plants probably lies in relieving the garbage-disposal crisis: They extend the life of existing landfills or postpone the need for new ones.    Does our industry's future hinge on how to dispose of combustion ash that may contain toxic heavy metals? Waste-to-energy plants do not create such metals, which come packaged in the trash that Americans throw away. But we do have a solution: Bury the ash in landfills that are built to ensure ground water protection.    Jack Lyman   Director   Resource Recovery Programs   National Solid Wastes Management Association   Washington   ---   Your excellent article on garbage burning correctly points out that cities are turning away from incinerators because of high economic risks. However, as chair of the Public Works Committee when the item was heard, I must point out that San Francisco's proposed incinerator project wasn't killed by the opposition of those who live near the proposed site.    In fact, San Francisco dropped its proposed resource-recovery facility because, as analysis by the Environmental Defense Fund pointed out, the project did not make economic sense in the face of soft energy prices and potentially expensive ash disposal. The project's private sponsors could not give us contractual assurances with respect to these risks.    Bill Maher   Member, Board of Supervisors   San Francisco</TEXT></DOC>