<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0172 </DOCNO><HL> Retire Life Tenure for Justices---By Philip D. Oliver</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   The commemoration of the bicentennial of the Constitution and the controversial nomination of Robert Bork to the Supreme Court combine to make this an appropriate time to re-examine the anti-democratic phenomenon of judicial life tenure. A constitutional amendment is needed to end this system at the institution where it is most harmful -- the Supreme Court.    The Constitution should be amended to give Supreme Court justices staggered, 18-year terms. Since there are nine members of the court, one seat would become vacant every two years, assuring each president the right to appoint, with Senate approval, two justices (four if the president were reelected). Whenever a justice, for whatever reason, failed to complete his term, the president would name a successor, but that successor would serve only the unexpired portion of the term for which his predecessor had been appointed. To ensure that justices would never tailor their decisions in an attempt to retain their positions, reappointment would be barred.    Such a constitutional amendment would benefit our political system in two important ways.    First, justices' retirement decisions no longer could be made with a view to influencing appointments to the court. Under the present system, a justice can choose when to retire, a choice that allows him to influence indirectly the selection of his successor. A justice contemplating retirement need only speed up his retirement a bit if a president whose views he shares is nearing the end of his presidency, or postpone it until after the next election if the current president would be likely to appoint a new justice with views incompatible with his own.    The purpose of life tenure is to protect the independence of justices in deciding cases while they are on the court. Justices properly should have no role in selecting their successors. It is impossible to be certain, but if one makes the reasonable assumption that most justices care about the court's future course of decision, such a role is not infrequent.    The best documented case in recent years of a justice who attempted this involved Chief Justice Earl Warren, who despite being a Republican, identified more closely with the views of President Johnson than with those of Richard Nixon, who seemed likely to win the 1968 election. In the summer of 1968, he met with President Johnson and, according to a memorandum of the meeting, indicated that &quot;he wanted President Johnson to appoint his successor, someone who felt as Chief Justice Warren did.&quot;    In 1974-75, Justice William O. Douglas clung to his seat despite being in extremely poor health, and was quoted as having told a friend: &quot;I won't resign while there's a breath in my body -- until we get a Democratic president.&quot;    In 1929, concerned about the court's future if the &quot;progressive&quot; wing of the court was strengthened by newly elected President Herbert Hoover, Chief Justice William Howard Taft concluded that despite being &quot;older and slower and less acute and more confused,&quot; he &quot;must stay on the court in order to prevent the Bolsheviki from getting control.&quot;    On the present court, it is likely that both Justice Thurgood Marshall, 79 years old, and Justice William Brennan, 81, neither of whom is in robust health, would have retired already if a liberal Democrat, rather than Ronald Reagan, were in the White House.    If the proposed amendment were adopted, a justice could no longer time his retirement to coincide with the term of a president with similar views. While he could resign before completing his term and the president then in office would appoint his successor, the successor still would be required to leave the court at the end of the 18-year term to which the initial justice had been appointed. This would ensure that all justices would be limited to 18 years of influence, direct (by serving) or indirect (by influencing the selection of his successor).    The second major advantage of the proposed amendment is that it would balance the influence of the political process on the court.    Although the federal judiciary is insulated from the political process, its members are determined through that process. The naming of a justice to the Supreme Court is an important political act, and it has important political effects. Presidents almost invariably choose justices from their own parties. When voters select a president, they select the person who, in addition to many other duties, will fill any vacancies on the Supreme Court. But the voter's choice is reduced to a gamble, because under the present system it is (at best) a random chance that determines which presidents will leave a mark on the court.    There is no triumph of logic in a system under which President Carter had no appointments in a four-year presidency, while President Nixon named four justices in 5 1/2 years and President Taft made six appointments in a single four-year term. If every elected president entered the White House with the power to name two full-term justices, each presidential election would be of roughly equal importance in shaping the court.    What about protection of the court's independence? While this is an important concern, we must remember that the appropriate degree of judicial insulation is itself a matter of debate. (If maximum insulation were the only goal, a vacancy on the court could be filled by the remaining justices, instead of allowing the president and the Senate -- &quot;mere&quot; politicians -- to select the new justice.) Thomas Jefferson, who did not find his way into our history books through advocacy of tyranny, was &quot;bitterly critical&quot; of life tenure for federal judges.    Life tenure underscores the anti-democratic nature of the judiciary. Moreover, it goes against two centuries of development of American democracy. Under the original Constitution, for example, while voters chose their representatives through direct elections, this was not the case with senators or presidents. Prior to adoption of the 17th Amendment in 1913, senators were chosen by state legislatures. Although the Constitution has not been amended to provide for direct elections of presidents, the electoral college lingers largely as a quaint method of counting the people's votes.    The practice of the states is also instructive. In reaction to the colonial system of a judiciary that served at the pleasure of the crown, most of the original 13 states provided life tenure for their judges, as did most states admitted before 1830. Today, however, all but Rhode Island limit judicial terms.    The proposed amendment would have little effect on the independence of the court. Eighteen years is a very long term. Federal judges who currently lack life tenure -- those of the Tax Court and the Court of Claims, for example, whose terms last 15 years -- seemingly exercise independence. Since reappointment would be prohibited, a justice would have no incentive to try to gain reappointment by tailoring decisions to the president's wishes. If there is serious concern that justices might decide cases with an eye to post-court appointments, there are several ways to eliminate this possibility. For example, justices could be guaranteed a position on the Court of Appeals, the second-highest level in the federal judiciary. Or, there could even be a requirement that a justice must be old enough at the time of appointment to be at least 65 years old when his term ended.    The system of government established by the Constitution has worked well for two centuries, and changes should not be made lightly. At the same time, the Constitution is too important to be enshrined on the lazy assumption that a good system can never be improved. The proposed amendment is appropriate because, while protecting the Supreme Court's independence, it would eliminate the improper influence and random chance inherent in the present system.    ---   Mr. Oliver is a law professor at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock. This is adapted from an article that ran this spring in the Ohio State Law Journal. </TEXT></DOC>