<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871215-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Summit Score: Reagan 3, Gorbachev 1---By Zbigniew Brezinski</HL><DD> 12/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Last week's summit was a Soviet defeat thickly veiled as a victory. The appearance of victory was generated by Mikhail Gorbachev's personal impact -- his obvious intelligence, dynamism, mastery of the issues and a certain public charm.    This personal impact helped to create a public-relations success, one that over time -- provided the warm afterglow is not spoiled by some Soviet action -- could help the Soviet Union gain two important goals: First, it could generate the impression that a genuine breakthrough in relations has been achieved merely by a relatively limited arms-control agreement; and second, it could help transform the American image of the Soviet Union from that of an enemy to a friendly rival. Since the accomplishment of these goals would certainly foster Soviet foreign-policy objectives, this prospect should not be dismissed either as unimportant or irrelevant to an assessment of the summit. Score 1 for Mr. Gorbachev.    Nonetheless, the fact remains that for Mr. Gorbachev the summit was essentially a success of personal style, while for Mr. Reagan it was a victory of real substance. Whether or not one likes the agreement the two leaders signed on intermediate-range nuclear forces, the fact remains that the zero-zero formula was one first proposed by Mr. Reagan and categorically rejected by the Soviets, who subsequently failed in their effort to link it in negotiations to an abandonment of the strategic defense initiative. Nevertheless, it was zero-zero that the Kremlin eventually accepted. Score 1 for Mr. Reagan.    On negotiations on strategic-arms reductions, much remains to be done, and only small progress was made in Washington. It is uncertain that the treaty will be ready by early next summer, in time for Mr. Reagan's provisionally scheduled visit to Moscow. The innovative and admittedly precedent-making verification provisions for the INF accord simply will not suffice to ensure U.S. security in any Start agreement. Even if the Soviets were to succeed in cheating on the INF treaty -- and there is some room for that in the agreed verification provisions -- the result could not be decisive to any imaginable military conflict. The Soviets could not win any war by suddenly unveiling hidden SS-20s.    The same cannot be said of Start. Significant evasion of the agreed cuts could have decisive strategic consequences. It literally could mean the difference between defeat and victory, between destruction and survival. There is no way to get around that crucial reality, and hence the verification provisions will have to be watertight. They will have to involve much closer scrutiny of production and deployments; much tighter, more frequent and more intrusive inspections; and closely supervised destruction of existing warheads. Such an arrangement will be difficult for both countries to negotiate and also for both to accept.    Moreover, Start negotiations will also pose the question of vulnerability even in the absence of cheating. How to configure respective forces so that neither side feels vulnerable will be more difficult with reduced numbers. The issue is already beginning to surface along with the question of what is the minimum number of Tridents with which the U.S. is likely to feel secure under a Start agreement.    Nonetheless, some progress was registered in Washington, and here, too, it was rather weighed in Mr. Reagan's favor. While the Soviets continue to wage a campaign against SDI, with the usual support from various U.S. arms controllers and the Democratic presidential hopefuls, the summit provided more than a hint that the Soviets eventually will go for a Start agreement even without a formal U.S. concession on SDI. Instead, the Soviets will rely on Congress to kill the program -- particularly after the Soviets hold up any implementation of Start cuts on the grounds that the U.S. SDI program is violating the ABM agreement. But it was the Soviet fear of the SDI that pushed the Start negotiations forward and the vague compromise formula adopted in Washington still represents a softening in the Soviet position. Score 2 for Mr. Reagan.    On other issues, there was even less progress, but what little there was inched again toward U.S. positions. On conventional arms Mr. Gorbachev admitted that there were &quot;asymmetries&quot; that would have to be corrected and that the zero-zero INF formula -- in other words, equality -- might be the basis for an agreement. On Afghanistan, he conceded that a pro-Soviet regime could not be the eventual outcome and indicated a 12-month period for a Soviet withdrawal, the shortest Soviet offer to date, provided the U.S. were to help the Soviets maintain a diluted version of the current communist quisling regime in Kabul. Neither of the above went beyond tantalizing hints, but they did point to the possibility of future Soviet concessions. Score 3 for Mr. Reagan.    These gains were won because over the past several years the U.S. side refrained from negotiating with itself and from devising ever new pre-emptive concessions designed to gain a &quot;compromise&quot; with the Soviets. Instead, Mr. Reagan made it clear that SDI was his favorite strategic child, U.S. aid to the Afghan rebels steadily increased, and lately more public emphasis has been placed on the need to match the INF agreement with timely reductions in conventional arms. Moscow thus came to recognize that if there was to be a bargain, it would have to abandon the high-handed posture it adopted in the earlier phases of the negotiating process.    There are important lessons contained in this experience but they should not lead to smug self-satisfaction or passive rigidity in further negotiations. On the contrary, now may well be the time for the U.S. to put before the Soviets reasonable proposals regarding both cuts in conventional arms in Europe and an eventual settlement for Afghanistan. As Mr. Gorbachev came around eventually to accept the zero-zero formula for INF, he may also eventually nibble at U.S. proposals on these two important issues.    On conventional forces, the need is for a militarily stabilizing reduction that is politically understandable and appealing to the West European public. This clearly points to a proposal aiming at some reductions in tanks, pointing perhaps first to &quot;thin-out&quot; zones and eventually to a tank-free zone in a specified area in Central Europe. On Afghanistan, the absolute right of the Afghan people to a government of their free choice is not incompatible with a proposal for the formal neutralization of the country -- even if that proposal includes U.S. guarantees that under no circumstances short of renewed Soviet invasion would the U.S. take advantage of the understandable hostility of the Afghan people toward Moscow.    Whether Moscow would accept such proposals depends in part on Soviet historical self-confidence. The Soviet ego is not in very good shape right now and that is encouraging. It means that the Soviets may be more keen on a period of international decompression and even accommodation. Their domestic mood is certainly that of uncertainty and unease.    When I told one leading Soviet official attending the White House dinner for Mr. Gorbachev that &quot;perestroika&quot; may end up being no more than a &quot;peredyshka&quot; (a breathing-spell), which in turn may end up for some as a &quot;posadka&quot; (Russian slang for sitting in jail), and for a few even as a &quot;perestrelka&quot; (slang again for a thin-out by shooting), my Russian interlocutor quietly and somewhat sadly responded, &quot;Well . . . perestrelka is probably no longer possible.&quot;    His reaction was typical of the new Soviet attitude. It is more self-critical than ever before. For example, I have been attacked often by Soviet media for my alleged anti-Sovietism. And it is true that I have written that the Stalinist system was institutionalized criminality and murder, that collectivization produced mass famine, that the terror caused endless suffering and countless deaths, and that the Soviet system has been brutally inefficient. Today, the Soviet press, taking the lead from Mr. Gorbachev, almost every day is saying these very same things, confirming foreign indictments so virulently rejected even just three or four years ago.    Indeed, deep in their hearts the Soviets know that the Reagan-Gorbachev meeting was in fact a meeting between the leader of the world's most advanced society and the head of the most advanced of the world's developing countries. And they fear that the gap could widen still. This is why the Soviets so took heart in Mr. Reagan's unnecessary and certainly premature absolution of the Soviet Union as an expansive state and why they so delighted in Mr. Gorbachev's personal success. It helped to obscure the gnawing realization that in the nonmilitary competition between America and Russia, Russia is steadily losing.    Domestic uncertainty thus enhances the Soviet desire for some international accommodation. That is why a strategically designed combination of toughness and flexibility should characterize U.S. policy in the next phase. It should be designed to explore Soviet willingness to accommodate on a wider front, without undue haste and without concentrating only on the nuclear dimension. If Mr. Reagan fashions and pursues such a more comprehensive approach, he stands a chance to run up the score even higher.    ---   Mr. Brzezinski, national security adviser from 1977-81, is affiliated with Columbia University and the Center for Strategic and International Studies. </TEXT></DOC>