<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881003-0209 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: Before Spending $3 Million on Leadership, Read This </HL><AUTHOR> Jack Falvey </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   General Motors recently discovered it lacks management leadership. In order to correct this deficiency, it has invested $3 million-plus on a program called &quot;Leadership Now.&quot; Unfortunately for GM, it soon will discover that it cannot spend its way to instant leadership. Calling in the industrial witch doctors to rerun sensitivity-training games out of the 1960s isn't going to save GM or any other company.    Leaders are not developed through behavioral-science exercises or by reading the tea leaves of attitude surveys or by Outward Bound-type nature adventures. Can you picture Roger Smith dangling at the end of a rope off a cliff somewhere? (Properly harnessed and belayed, of course.) What GM is trying to purchase can't be bought.    Developing leaders in business is as difficult as breeding rabbits: You locate a couple of healthy ones and, under the right conditions, given the proper time period, you will have all the additional ones you could ever want.    If you assign your best junior talent to work with your best unit leader, in 18 to 36 months you will have another potential top unit leader. Identify your best leaders. Match them with your best upcoming talent. Give nature and 18 to 36 months of real business operations time to work, and that's all there is to it.    No one knows how far down in the organization GM will have to go to find leadership breeding stock, but that's what must be done. Most organizations bring in reasonably high-quality entry-level talent. What they fail to do is assign the best to the best and then promote the best that results.    Going at it remedially won't work no matter how creative the exercises, the name of the program or the budget committed. &quot;Leadership in Five Years&quot; would be a better name for the GM program.    Because the U.S. acted as supplier to the world for almost 20 years after World War II, two generations of &quot;managers&quot; were kept busy simply filling pipelines at any and all costs and prices. This led to the managerial &quot;rule&quot; that the bottom line was what business was all about. The numbers people have now discovered (GM evidently is one of the last to make the discovery) that there is far more to management than what shows up on a spreadsheet. Strong leaders in corporate America have become an endangered species. Enter the trainer-witch doctors with their instant programs. Fortunately, most companies can't afford the fees, but heaven help those who work for the ones that can.    Building party-game simulations and case studies, when the real work to be done is all around, should be grounds for managerial malpractice indictments. Exposing people to any form of physical or psychological risk or danger can never be justified in the name of management development. &quot;Trust falls&quot; (allowing yourself to fall backward off a platform into the arms of fellow management trainees) bears no relationship in any way to building real trust relationships. It takes time and repeated positive performance in real situations of consequence to build real trust. Simulated exercises build simulated trust. What good is that?    For years leadership has been developed on the factory floor with the progression of a foreman, assistant foreman and a third man. This gives the best talent the opportunity to learn through a master apprentice, extended-assignment program. Georgia-Pacific develops branch managers by matching high-potential people with their top managers as assistants until full management jobs open up. Gillette -- in some of its divisions -- and many consumer package-goods companies have jobs called &quot;assistant to the regional manager&quot; (1 year) and &quot;assistant district manager&quot; (18 months), making use of field sales groups to build leaders. Even the Boy Scouts know enough to have assistant patrol leaders and junior assistant scoutmasters to keep a steady flow of talent coming through their system. They and the U.S. Army are perhaps the only ones that can justify Outward Bound-type adventure training.    The instant-results school of management has had its way for far too many quarters. The good news is that most of this phony management training is confined to a few hundred fat-cat outfits run by quantitative technocrats that view their people as &quot;human resources.&quot; People are not human resources. They are individuals. They deserve solid professional management and leadership. They deserve to be told what is expected of them. They deserve to be rewarded when they produce and are encouraged to try some better approaches when they fall.    Leadership requires a never-ending search for good people for every position. It means investing time, attention and all the resources possible working with and rewarding the very best that you find through thorough searches. Simply taking the time to say &quot;please&quot; and &quot;thank you&quot; to those who work for you as a manager is an important step.    It would be nice to write a best-selling book about all this, but after the first 1,000 words, there would be nothing more to write. The business schools haven't been able to teach leadership because it can't be taught in a classroom. And declaring leadership, or quality, or customer service to be a worthy and vital goal has little to do with making progress in these areas. There are no instant answers. If you think you have found one, you can be sure that you have made an error.    But, fortunately, leadership can be learned. Do you have any junior leaders in your organization? Reward them by sending them to work with your best people and they will reward you with more leaders. There is no mystery to developing leadership skills and future business leaders. The mystery is how some of these magic programs are sold to some of our largest companies. Growing leadership talent is not a black art and does not require the services of industrial witch doctors.    ---   Mr. Falvey is a writer and speaker living in Londonderry, N.H. </TEXT></DOC>