<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870610-0154 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:A Local Approach to Credible Nuclear Deterrence---By Frederick Bonnart</HL><DD> 06/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROPNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Europeans are becoming ever more aware of what they are about to lose in the zero-solution deal with the Soviet Union for intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) in Europe. The understanding at Reykjavik between President Reagan and General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev was for the elimination from Europe of all Soviet SS-20 and all U.S. Pershing 2 and ground-launched cruise missiles (GLCMs), keeping 100 warheads each in Soviet Asia and in the U.S. After a good deal of doubt in the European capitals this has been agreed upon, subject to conditions, by the meetings of NATO's defense ministers in the Nuclear Planning Group and, later, the Defense Planning Committee last month. Now that, after considerable hesitation, Chancellor Helmut Kohl has announced the support of the West German government, final NATO approval no doubt will come at the meeting of NATO's foreign ministers in the North Atlantic council to be held -- again and perhaps significantly -- in Reykjavik tomorrow and Friday.    The U.S. now is trying to be doubly reassuring. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in a speech on the eve of the defense ministers' meeting that, with some 4,000 nuclear weapons in Europe, consisting of nuclear-armed aircraft, submarines and tactical nuclear weapons, there was no question of Europe being &quot;denuclearized.&quot; Also, he went on, with more than 330,000 U.S. troops stationed in Europe &quot;the idea of a Europe 'decoupled' from America is as absurd as it is wrong.&quot;    Maybe so, but all the troops may not be there forever and how many constitute a credible guarantee for the release of U.S. nuclear weapons by an American president? The submarines, aircraft and tactical weapons were there before the SS-20s, and apparently were needed then. They have been modernized since, as has the Soviet arsenal.    The SS-20 buildup most certainly was aimed primarily at Europe -- although secondarily at Asia -- and purposely not at the U.S. It was a move in a carefully thought-out game of chess, intended to isolate Europe from the U.S. As this did not work, the Soviet Union loses nothing by now agreeing to their elimination. NATO, however, stands to lose a great deal.    This game of chess is based on one fundamental concept that is accepted by both sides. That is, that for the West, nuclear weapons exist for one purpose only: to deter war and prevent intimidation. They are essential for NATO for three reasons: the overwhelming conventional might of the Soviet Union, the Soviets' geopolitical situation on the Eurasian mainland and their doctrine of eternal conflict between communism and capitalism that must be resolved by victory. Doctrines are susceptible to change and the current leadership in the Soviet Union has intimated such changes but, so far, they are a long way from implementation. However, nothing has been done about reducing the powerful Soviet conventional strike forces in the West and withdrawing them from their forward positions in Eastern Europe; the many proposals heard during the current Gorbachev peace offensive merely would serve to reinforce Soviet military power. And nothing at all can be done about the geopolitical situation, unless and until Japan and China become credible military powers in the East, and the Europeans unite into a cohesive political unit in the West. But all this is a long way off.    In the meantime, a supreme commander in Europe (SACEUR) must be in a position to convince a potential aggressor that the risks of attack are incalculable. The capability to detonate a nuclear weapon -- however small, however carefully clear of civilian populations or installations -- when his defenses are at ultimate risk, means that no one can assess the consequences in escalation. This is the significance of NATO's basic strategic philosophy of the flexible response. Sheltered by it, the European democracies can stand up to any attempt at domination -- as they were unable to do after the war, with the well-known consequences to East Europe.    SACEUR's nuclear weapons range from battlefield or tactical nuclear weapons, such as nuclear artillery, short-range missiles and bombs on fighter-bomber aircraft, to the intermediate-range nuclear forces -- the short-range (300 to 600 miles) INF (SRINF), and long-range (600 to 3,000 miles) INF (LRINF). The battlefield weapons inhibit concentrations of troops and armor. SRINF can reach out to high-level command posts, forward missile bases, communications centers, airfields, logistic installations and massed reinforcements in the rear of attacking forces. But the LRINF, the Pershing 2 and GLCM have another, more fundamental purpose: Based in Western Europe they can strike similar targets, including strategic missile sites but also population centers and the whole governmental infrastructure in the western U.S.S.R. They counter the Soviet nuclear threat and become, effectively, a European strategic deterrent.    It is these that are now about to be removed. The action is likely to leave Europe with a hole in its defenses. This has been made clear time and again by this one man on whom, ultimately, rests the defense of Europe: the SACEUR.    Although it perhaps may seem radical, it would not only preserve existing deterrence strength but, at the same time, it would reinforce alliance cohesion and bring practical expression to Europe's burning urge for self-determination. NATO now should decide to establish a common, truly European, nuclear force. This could be technically similar to the Pershing 2 and GLCM that are about to be withdrawn but, instead of being American, it should be provided by the two European nuclear powers in the alliance, Britain and France. The weapons should be funded by NATO as a whole and consequently would be owned and controlled by it. The releasing authority would be the North Atlantic Council, and the operational authority would be vested in the SACEUR. Britain and France still would retain control of their own separate national deterrent forces, West Germany would keep its special non-nuclear status and, as basing would be in the countries that already have accepted Pershing 2 and GLCM, there would be no problem about deployment. At the same time, a considerable cut -- perhaps as much as one-half -- should be offered on a reciprocal basis for these and all other nuclear weapons.    As the weapons would be truly European, the link between anti-American and anti-nuclear feeling would be broken. France, without necessarily relinquishing its special position, would be drawn closer to the military structure. The non-nuclear European countries, being part-owners, would feel more in control of their own destinies. There could even, in due course, be a European SACEUR.    In the U.S., Congress and the people would see a greater European contribution to its own defense and the transatlantic link would become firmer. Simultaneously the resulting greater sense of European involvement would strengthen the European pillar of the alliance and a main step would be taken on the road toward European political integration. But the most important immediate result would be the maintenance of the defenses and the credibility of deterrence in Europe.    ---   Mr. Bonnart is editor of NATO's Sixteen Nations, a Brussels-based publication. </TEXT></DOC>