<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880616-0034 </DOCNO><HL> High Court Rules Fired CIA Employee Can Sue Agency for Violation of Rights </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT PD LABOR FORGN EUROP JAPAN SUN </CO><IN> NUK SCR LNG </IN><G> SUP EXE ERG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled 6-2 that the Central Intelligence Agency and other national security agencies can be sued by employees who claim they were fired in violation of their constitutional rights.    The ruling involves a federal district court suit by a former CIA covert-electronics technician who was fired as a security risk in 1982 after he told CIA officials he was homosexual. While the man still must prove that his constitutional rights were violated, the ruling giving him that chance is a victory for gay rights and civil liberties groups. Moreover, the case is likely to remain important because it may lead to a court ruling on whether the Constitution protects against discrimination based on sexual orientation, an issue on which there have been few rulings.    In a decision written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the high court rebuffed the Reagan administration's arguments that the CIA and other intelligence agencies enjoy absolute immunity from court review of decisions to fire employees for security reasons.    The 1947 law that created the CIA says its director may fire an employee when he thinks it &quot;necessary or advisable in the interests of the U.S.&quot; The directors of the Defense Intelligence Agency and National Security Agency have almost identical authority, and the secretary of state's is similar.    The high court said the 1947 law doesn't insulate the CIA from claims that decisions to fire employees were based on discrimination, invasions of privacy or other constitutional issues.    The justices emphasized that only constitutional challenges to firings may be handled by federal courts. CIA firings, unlike challenges to regulatory decisions, can't be challenged simply as improper administrative actions.    The Supreme Court decision partly reversed the ruling of a federal appeals court here. Both that court and the district court had ruled that CIA firing decisions could be challenged as routine administrative actions, without raising constitutional claims.    The justices rejected those rulings, but ordered the district court to consider whether the former CIA worker's constitutional rights were violated.    Justices Sandra O'Connor and Antonin Scalia dissented. Justice Anthony Kennedy didn't participate in the case, which was argued before he joined the court.    Uranium Production   The high court unanimously reversed a federal appeals court ruling that would have required the Department of Energy to restrict enrichment, or processing, of imported uranium.    The high court, in a decision written by Justice Harry Blackmun, said the government is only required to curtail enrichment of foreign uranium if it is clear that such a step would help the viability of the domestic uranium production industry.    The decision is a defeat for U.S. uranium producers, who have pressed for federal curbs on use of foreign uranium to produce nuclear fuel for U.S. nuclear power plants or other reactors.    The case began when domestic uranium mining companies challenged the energy department's interpretation of a federal law intended to protect the U.S. from becoming dependent on foreign uranium. U.S. companies argued that if the department found that the domestic industry wasn't &quot;viable,&quot; the law automatically required restricted use of foreign uranium. But the department concluded in 1986 that curbing foreign uranium wouldn't help the U.S. industry, and that the restrictions weren't required.    Federal district and appeals courts, both in Denver, sided with the industry; the energy department appealed. Yesterday, the high court sent the case back to the district court to decide whether the agency correctly exercised its discretion in refusing to restrict foreign uranium.    The department's action was challenged by Western Nuclear Inc., a Phelps Dodge Corp. unit; Uranium Resources Inc.; and Energy Fuels Inc., a unit of JRA Enterprises Ltd., a limited partnership.    Unregistered Securities   The justices ruled 7-1 that sellers of unregistered securities, if sued by investors over a loss, may defend themselves by asserting that the investors were equally at fault because they knew the investments weren't registered.    The justices also ruled that an individual, who didn't sell unregistered securities, but promoted them, may be liable to investors who lose money if the promoter's motive was financial gain for himself or the seller.    The ruling resolves two complex questions on a part of federal securities law that allows investors to sue sellers of unregistered securities to recover their investment, minus any income earned. Federal law makes it illegal to sell or deliver a security that isn't properly registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission.    In an opinion written by Justice Blackmun, the high court threw out the ruling of an appeals court in New Orleans. The court had ruled that sellers of unregistered securities weren't entitled to defend themselves against lawsuits by saying their accusers were equally at fault. The appeals court also said promoters of securities may sometimes be liable to investors, but it used a different standard than the high court's.    The legal issues arose in an unusual dispute over oil and gas leases in Oklahoma, but the questions come up frequently in a variety of securities cases.    The high court sent the case back to the New Orleans appeals court to sort out the evidence and resolve the dispute involving Billy Pinter and his Black Gold Oil Co. He sold shares of oil and gas leases to California real estate investor Maurice Dahl, who in turn touted the venture to 11 friends and relatives. The interests later proved worthless, and the investors sued Mr. Pinter. Under yesterday's ruling, Mr. Pinter may now try to prove that Mr. Dahl should share the blame and liability.    Hague Pact   The high court ruled that, where state law allows, a foreign company may be sued through a U.S. subsidiary, without following the procedures of a 1965 international agreement on notifying foreign companies of lawsuits against them in the U.S.    The justices ruled 9-0 that Volkswagen AG, the West German manufacturer, was properly notified of a suit filed against the company by a Chicago man. The man's parents were killed in a collision while driving in their 1978 VW Rabbit.    The papers were served on an Illinois company authorized by Volkswagen of America, the company's U.S. subsidiary, to receive legal documents in that state. Volkswagen argued that the 1965 Hague agreement required that the legal papers be served in Germany through an official government agency and translated into German. Volkswagen's view was backed by the Reagan administration and the governments of France, West Germany, Japan and Great Britain.    But in an opinion by Justice O'Connor, the high court said Illinois law properly permitted the case to be filed there and didn't require overseas notification.    Sun Oil Case   The justices rejected procedural arguments by Sun Exploration and Production Co., a Sun Co. unit, in a dispute in the Kansas courts over royalties with holders of several thousand natural gas leases in Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana. In an opinion by Justice Scalia, the high court ruled that the Kansas courts may apply that state's limit on the length of time in which suits may be filed against Sun -- five years -- and needn't follow the time limits of the other states. The high court also said the Kansas courts may set the interest rate on unpaid royalties and needn't be bound by Texas, Oklahoma or Louisiana law. The decision arose from a class-action suit filed against Sun in Kansas, where some leases are located. </TEXT></DOC>