<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870722-0141 </DOCNO><HL> Last Stand:Malaysian Tribe FightsTo Preserve Forests,Win Native Rights---Penans Attack Logger Camp,Block Roads in Sarawak;Local Scandal Aids Cause---Blowguns and Poison Darts---By James P. SterbaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MARUDI, Malaysia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   He wears John Lennon spectacles and looks frail in rare photographs. He suffers from malaria and says he has survived three snakebites. The few outsiders who have met him say he talks like a naive idealist out of the 1960s.    Armed with a spear and a flute, however, Bruno Manser, a 32-year-old Swiss artist, has also roamed Sarawak's remotest jungles for 2 1/2 years as a fugitive. He has been befriended and protected by the region's last known tribe of nomadic hunters and gatherers, the Penans. He has compiled a dictionary of their language and folk tales. And he has enlisted in their fight to save their tropical rain-forest homeland from logging-company chainsaws and bulldozers.    Officials in Sarawak, a state that is dominated by timber politics and money, have denounced Mr. Manser as a &quot;Communist&quot; and a &quot;Zionist.&quot; Malaysia's largest newspaper, the New Straits Times, ridiculed him in an elaborate April Fools' Day spoof. Local environmentalists refrain from publicly supporting him for fear of being branded accomplices of an &quot;outside agitator&quot; and &quot;outlaw&quot; -- his visa expired Dec. 31, 1984.    Despite his notoriety, Mr. Manser is only a bit player. But the battle he has joined for native rights and forest preservation is taking center stage in Sarawak.    The fight has escalated in recent months as the Penans (pronounced peenahns), armed with blowguns and poison darts, spears and a few shotguns, have blockaded logging trails and tried to stop loggers from sawing down the huge tropical hardwoods -- some 150 feet tall -- that dot their high-country hunting grounds.    In April, more than 100 Penans besieged a lumber camp near Long Layun in the upper Baram River watershed. Since then, Penans have blockaded 12 lumber roads, preventing trucks from carrying out logs. And members of other tribes in the region have joined their fight.    State officials and the local press have tried to play down the confrontations. But some federal officials in Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, are sympathetic, possibly because of embarrassment over a scandal involving timber riches accumulated by politicians who rule Sarawak, the country's biggest but least developed state.    The scandal broke because of a bitter feud between the state's chief minister, Taib Mahmud, and his uncle, Abdul Rahman Yakub, a former chief minister and governor. The two men, who identify with the ethnic Malay minority here, have successively ruled Sarawak for 17 years.    The names of the people who get timber concessions have long been shrouded in secrecy. But to score points against each other in a state election campaign last spring, each man disclosed lists of who got concessions when the other was in power. As many suspected, the lists included mostly political cronies, wives, daughters and other relatives in a Marcosian web of front companies and foreign bank accounts. Lumber merchants estimate that at current prices, 25 concessions awarded to Mr. Rahman's friends and relatives are worth more than $4.2 billion in logs.    The concessions are free, granted as political patronage. Concessionaires quietly sell or subcontract their tracts to logging companies, mostly owned by ethnic Chinese, for under-the-table millions. The state is then paid a royalty based on the amount of wood extracted. The natives who live in the forests get next to nothing.    Malaysia has been the world's biggest exporter of tropical hardwood logs. Half go to Japan, and the rest go to Taiwan, South Korea, the U.S. and a few other countries. At logging rates estimated at more than 180 acres an hour, mostly in Sarawak and Sabah on the island of Borneo, Malaysia's hardwoods will be gone by 1996, according to Ismail Salleh, a university economist.    The destruction of tropical rain forests -- and the resulting loss of plant and animal species -- has become a cause celebre among international environmental groups. But Brazil's jungles and Africa's animals get much more attention than the rain forests of Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines.    Local environmental groups are fledgling, with little influence. And local governments like to keep them that way.    With 48,612 square miles, Sarawak is a little smaller than New York state. Some 80% of its 1.5 million people live in rural areas. Borneo's natives make up nearly 40% of the state's population. They are called Dayaks, a collective name for two dozen indigenous tribal groups, including the Ibans, Bidayuhs, Kenyahs, Kayans and Penans. Most live in communal longhouses along rivers and were converted to Christianity by missionaries years ago.    Those living in up-river high country depend on forests and streams for game, fish and wild fruit, and they practice swidden, or slash-and-burn, agriculture on hillsides. The government says swidden farming is destroying the forests. It has been trying to lure its practitioners down river into modern development projects such as oil palm and rubber plantations.    But Evelyne Hong, a social researcher in Penang, defends swidden farming as an ecologically sound form of crop rotation, given poor forest soil. She says that it destroys only 1/50th of the forests that logging destroys each year. After clearing two or three acres, families practicing swidden plant rice and vegetable crops for one or two years and then move on, allowing the soil to regain nutrients for 10 or 15 years before returning to grow another food crop.    &quot;Ironically, this attack on swidden is led by planners, policy makers and bureaucrats who are the very people responsible for the wholesale logging of tropical forests, causing massive erosion, depletion of precious topsoil, ecological disruption and climatic imbalances in the environment,&quot; she writes in a new book, &quot;Natives of Sarawak: Survival in Borneo's Vanishing Forests.&quot;    Logging damage has incensed many Dayaks in recent years, especially since the logging companies have moved into precipitous mountain areas. The recent money revelations have fueled cries of &quot;Dayak nationalism&quot; among native leaders who have traditionally fought among themselves. In April, Dayaks doubled their number of seats in the state legislature to 15, making them the biggest single party in the 48-member body.    Logging Site 21 of Rimbunan Hijau Timber Co. is situated about 40 miles into mountainous jungle from the Rajang River in central Sarawak. It consists of three shacks occupied by Iban families, whose men cut trees with chainsaws. Logging provides jobs for 9% of the state's labor force.    The steep surrounding hillsides sport reddish-brown cuts in all directions. They are made by huge bulldozers that move off the main logging road to retrieve logs, cutting their own horizontal switchback trails into the hillsides.    Nearby residents say that the sputtering chainsaws and roaring bulldozers scare away the wild pigs, monkeys, birds and other animals they eat. Friendly orangutans are long gone. Thousands of the gentle, red-haired apes used to inhabit Sarawak's forests. The state's current estimate is 250.    What the bulldozers expose is old, crumbling sedimentary strata -- sandy soil, shale and clay layers. When exposed to tropical downpours, which are frequent, these layers literally dissolve. Erosion is swift. Deep gullies appear in the trails. Even main arteries, on which 40-ton trucks carry 40 tons of logs each to river tugs and barges, wash out regularly.    The eroded sediment ends up in streams, then rivers, turning water that was once the color of weak tea into a thick liquid the color of coffee with too much cream. The people who live here say that their fish, a prime source of protein, die and that drinking the water sometimes makes them sick.    Despite complaints, the technique of using bulldozers to get logs off forested mountainsides doesn't bother state officials. In fact, the man who pioneered the technique, James Wong, is a state official -- the minister for the environment and tourism.    Jalong Sepang is a 23-year-old Kenyah, the seventh of nine children born at Long Anap, a longhouse in hill country that has yet to be logged. After studying for three years at a technical institute in Kuala Lumpur, he returned to Marudi to look for work.    Long Anap has 30 &quot;doors&quot; -- one-room apartments built on stilts in a long, connected row -- and about 250 residents. Last December, officials from Samling Timber Co. visited to announce that they held the logging concession for the area and were about to begin work. They invited the chief of Long Anap and chiefs of 11 nearby longhouses -- all state appointees -- to a meeting. Most of the chiefs can't read, but after a friendly talk, 10 of them signed or put their thumbprints on an agreement saying that they wouldn't interfere with the loggers. The agreement also bound the chiefs not to complain or seek compensation for water pollution, erosion, damage to the jungle or the disappearance of wildlife.    In return, the timber company promised to pay small sums for any damaged fruit, coffee and cocoa trees, provided they once bore fruit. The company also offered each longhouse $800 annually for Christmas celebration money.    &quot;Two trees are worth that much,&quot; says Mr. Sepang, who joined the Sahabat Alam Malaysia (Friends of the Earth) office in Marudi, which has a staff of four to monitor both Sarawak and Sabah.    Five of the chiefs say that they have pulled out of the agreement. An &quot;action committee&quot; has been formed to keep the loggers out. Company lawyers say that they weren't legally bound to offer the longhouses anything since they have a valid concession from the state.    In 1973, nine Iban families -- including Sadam Nayawai, then 19 years old, his parents and his new bride -- agreed to leave their longhouse near Binatang to participate in one of the state's first big resettlement projects. They joined some 3,000 others in creating a 60,000-acre oil palm plantation out of swampy, low-land jungle east of Bintulu along Sarawak's north sea coast.    In return for clearing the land, planting the palms and nurturing them into production, each family was promised 15 acres of productive palms, 10 acres of other crop land, housing, electricity, a clean water supply and other amenities. The first phase took six years, during which able-bodied hands were paid $3 a day.    When the palms began bearing oil nuts in 1979, the families were paid $16 a ton to harvest them and $5 as a year-end bonus. After the first year, the bonus stopped.    Poor soil fertility and low world palm-oil prices turned the project into a money loser. When it came time, in 1983, to give deeds to the palm and crop land, the families were told to wait. Last summer, plantation managers cut harvesting pay to $6 a ton. Mr. Nayawai says that he and his wife can't harvest enough to support his three children and aging parents. &quot;It's bitter work,&quot; he says.    In September, the plantation workers went on strike. There were riots, and oil palms were set on fire. Some 2,000 workers were fired. Poor Indonesian Moslems from Sulawesi, called &quot;Bugis,&quot; were happy to take their jobs. About 1,000 Ibans and other workers drifted back to their longhouses or took up residence in squatter slums in Bintulu and Miri. But an additional 624 of them, including Mr. Nayawai, refuse to leave the plantation and have sued to get their promised land.    Word of the resettlers' plight has spread far up the Baram River, to the longhouse of Jalong Sepang and into the forests where the Penans roam. Many up-river residents have come down to the coastal towns, gotten laboring jobs, tasted the luxuries of the cash economy and stayed. But many return to their longhouses and forests.    The nomadic Penans travel with the ripening cycle of wild jungle fruit. They eat the fruit, and it attracts animals like wild pigs, which the Penans kill with silent blowguns and poisonous darts.    In the early 1970s, a French writer named Mady Villard spent time with a four-family Penan group in their forest. She described it this way:    &quot;The trees are gigantic, their trunks often covered with parasitic flowers, their branches arching far overhead, stopping the rays of the sun. . . . Full of secrets and moving colors, the atmosphere here is almost as in our cathedrals. . . .    &quot;But above all, here is the kingdom of the Penans, who circulate within it like swift and elusive ghosts, always ready to vanish at the smallest alarm.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>