<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Keep Broker-Client Disputes Out of Court---By G. Richard Shell</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SUPREME COURT (SUP)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The Supreme Court will hear arguments today in one of the most important securities-law cases of the current term: Shearson/American Express vs. McMahon. At issue is whether thousands of legal disputes that arise each year between securities investors and their brokers will be decided by courts or by private arbitrators. Regardless of which way the court decides, McMahon should spark Congress and the Securities and Exchange Commission to reexamine and reform the rules governing securities arbitration.    In McMahon, plaintiffs Eugene and Julia McMahon sued their Shearson broker in a New York federal district court alleging that the broker &quot;churned&quot; their accounts to generate excessive commissions, made false statements about various investments and failed to disclose certain important facts about their investment options. They also claimed that Shearson and its broker violated section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 -- that statute's major anti-fraud provision -- and the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). The McMahons asked $5 million in punitive damages in addition to their actual losses. Shearson argued that the case should be dismissed because Mrs. McMahon had signed a standard customer-broker contract calling for arbitration of all disputes.    Disgruntled securities customers such as the McMahons have become increasingly aggressive in their use of federal statutes, including RICO, to sue brokers and dealers. Unlike conventional securities laws, RICO permits a private plaintiff to recover triple his actual losses as well as attorneys' fees. Although Congress probably never intended RICO to apply in conventional securities disputes, about 40% of all RICO cases are brought against brokers who have no connection with racketeering. The threat of multiple damages under RICO has added a note of urgency to the industry's longstanding call for arbitration of customer claims.    Courts have given a confusing array of responses to requests for enforcement of arbitration clauses in securities cases. The Supreme Court, for example, has refused to allow arbitration of claims under the Securities Act of 1933 but has permitted arbitration of international securities cases under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Lower federal courts, meanwhile, have divided sharply over whether to permit arbitration of the RICO and section 10(b) claims at issue in McMahon. Although it is difficult to draw definite conclusions from recent Supreme Court opinions, it seems likely the court will resolve McMahon in favor of arbitration.    Not everyone is pleased with this prospect. Lawyers representing securities purchasers charge that industry-sponsored arbitration of customers' claims will be a black hole into which federal statutory rights will go, never to return. (Unless the arbitrators are bribed or completely exceed their authority, an arbitration award is immune from later review by a court under the strict standards of the Federal Arbitration Act.) Futhermore, critics charge that arbitration takes place primarily before fact finders appointed by the various national stock exchanges or the National Association of Securities Dealers. And finally, arbitration clauses are standard in the industry, giving investors few realistic choices if they prefer to litigate in court.    These fears regarding arbitration are overstated. The present system is both practical and economical. Litigation of even the simplest civil case in court often lasts four years and costs more than the dispute is worth. It is clear that the securities industry needs some alternative to formal litigation. Statistics from the Securities Industry Conference on Arbitration show that most cases are disposed of the same year they are filed, that roughly half of all customers who arbitrate their securities complaints are awarded damages, and that the awards equal about half the amount requested. In addition, the Uniform Code of Arbitration governing most securities proceedings has been approved by the SEC and calls for panels with a majority of &quot;public arbitrators&quot; from outside the industry unless the customer requests otherwise.    However fair the present system may be, it will require reforms if it is to serve as the court of last resort for important federal statutory rights. Customers have a legitimate concern that their rights may be compromised in the existing arbitration scheme. Moreover, McMahon is unlikely to resolve all the questions regarding arbitration of securities claims. Claims under the Securities Act of 1933 for example, probably will remain nonarbitrable even if the court permits arbitration of RICO and section 10(b). For these reasons, prompt legislative and regulatory action is needed to establish an effective, unified securities arbitration system.    First, Congress should make all securities claims subject to voluntary, contractual arbitration under the Federal Arbitration Act. Case-by-case judicial rulings making some, but not all, customer claims subject to arbitration is a prescription for continued confusion and high legal costs.    Next, the SEC should adopt regulations that guarantee &quot;free choice&quot; to investors who do not wish to sign &quot;take-it-or-leave-it&quot; arbitration clauses. Congress and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission have provided such protection to investors in the commodities markets, and securities investors should be entitled to similar treatment.    Third, the Uniform Code of Arbitration should be amended to give customers a role in selecting their arbitrators. The American Arbitration Association has used this procedure successfully for decades. Why not the securities industry?    Fourth, the Uniform Code's term &quot;public arbitrator&quot; should be redefined to exclude lawyers and others who work for firms that serve the securities industry as advisers. Under the present system, a stock exchange may appoint as a &quot;public arbitrator&quot; a lawyer from a New York or Chicago law firm that represents brokerage companies.    Finally, the Code must ensure that arbitrators make a good-faith effort to follow federal law when customers raise federal statutory claims. Arbitrators should be required to sign a sworn statement to this effect when they submit their final decision.    An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. The securities industry would be wise to intensify its efforts at training brokers to be more circumspect in their advice. In the meantime, arbitration may be the only practical alternative for resolving the thousands of customer complaints that are made every year in the securities business. But the process must inspire public confidence if it is to be entrusted with important federal statutory rights.    ---   Mr. Shell is an assistant professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He is co-author of an article on arbitration in the spring issue of the Securities Regulation Law Journal. </TEXT></DOC>