<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0026 </DOCNO><HL> Aquino Says Coup Attempt Is Repulsed,But Groups of Rebels Continue Holdout---This article is based on reportsFrom Matt Miller in the PhilippinesAnd Robert S. Greenberger in Washington</HL><DD> 08/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   Philippine President Corazon Aquino said an attempted coup by about 300 soldiers had been repulsed, but groups of rebels continued to hold out.    &quot;I'd like to tell our people that first of all I am all right and {armed forces chief} Gen. Fidel Ramos is on top of the situation,&quot; Mrs. Aquino said in a radio address early this morning, Manila time. &quot;In a few hours we can resolve this,&quot; she added.    An armed forces spokesman quoted the leader of the rebellion as saying the assault was launched by disgruntled junior officers upset by the government's handling of the continuing communist insurgency in the Philippines, according to a report from United Press International.    Military spokesmen in Manila said the rebels were led by Col. Gregorio Honasan, an officer closely associated with opposition leader Juan Ponce Enrile, the former defense minister.    This was the bloodiest and most serious of several coup attempts against Mrs. Aquino since she assumed the presidency in February 1986.    In Washington, the State Department said it was confident Mrs. Aquino could deal with the coup attempt and reaffirmed U.S. support for the Philippine president.    Analysts in Manila and Washington said they believe that Mrs. Aquino's government isn't in jeopardy of being toppled in the short run. However, there is continuing concern that economic, political and military problems could become destabilizing forces in the long term.    The rebel troops attacked the Malacanang presidential palace in Manila and the state-owned broadcast station in suburban Quezon City before dawn. The attack on the presidential palace was quickly repulsed, and the mutineers broke off their attack on the broadcast station by about 8 a.m. today, local time (8 p.m. Thursday, EDT).    After those attacks were repulsed, some of the rebel troops were entrenched inside Camp Aguinaldo, Manila's major army camp, while others occupied part of Manila's Villamor air force base, where the air force headquarters building is located.    Reuter reported that renegade troops also were holding as hostages several senior officers at the Camp Olivas army base in Pampanga, north of Manila. The report was attributed to Brig. Gen. Teodoro Barangan.    A UPI report said a rebel spokesman claimed in a radio interview that the renegades had entrenched themselves at a total of at least eight military bases.    It was unclear whether the rebels were supporters of deposed President Ferdinand Marcos, although Reuter reports indicated that Gen. Ramos had described them as such and United Press International reported that police said the rebels were loyal to Mr. Marcos.    In Hawaii, Mr. Marcos said he wasn't in touch with the rebels. &quot;I promised the American government I would have nothing to do with destabilization attempts . . . I intend to implement that promise,&quot; he said.    State Department spokeswoman Nancy Beck said in Washington that Mr. Marcos is &quot;well aware of U.S. support for the Aquino government and our strong views about any efforts to destabilize it.&quot;    Casualty reports varied widely, with some saying at least six people were dead, while UPI said at least 29 had been killed. One report said many of the casualties appeared to be civilians caught in the fighting.    Mrs. Aquino said she would summon the cabinet to a special meeting today, and she canceled a planned trip to central Luzon.    The coup attempt followed a one-day general strike on Wednesday that was called to protest increases in fuel prices. Mrs. Aquino reduced the increase prior to the strike, but it proceeded anyway. Philippine police opened fire on demonstrators in Manila during the strike, and officials said six demonstrators were injured and more than 100 people arrested.    The labor unrest continued yesterday, with transportation in the capital impaired and some shops and businesses remaining shut, but it was less severe than on Wednesday.    Persistent labor unrest is one of several factors that could weaken Mrs. Aquino's government in the long run.    The president has made progress in some areas. The Philippine economy has strengthened markedly this year, morale among the military is improved -- although some unease with Mrs. Aquino's government continues -- and the strength of the communist insurgency appears to have reached a plateau at about 24,000 troops. Moreover, even though the glow of the revolution that deposed Mr. Marcos 18 months ago inevitably has faded, Mrs. Aquino retains enormous personal popularity.    Nevertheless, analysts worry that the Philippines' surging birth rate, labor unrest and the inability of the government to come to grips with such issues as land reform could hamper the economy's future. And, they add, the communist New Peoples Army may be biding its time, waiting for Mrs. Aquino to pass from the political scene.    Analysts say the labor unrest is heavily influenced by the communists and in part reflects a new strategy by them, developed when a cease-fire ended last February, to broaden their activities.    At the same time, there are strains in the relations between the military and Mrs. Aquino's civilian government. Some military leaders complain that the government is ineffective in dealing with the problems of the economy and the insurgency. They also believe the civilians haven't given them sufficient credit for their role in bringing down the Marcos regime, and they complain that civilians aren't willing to consider them equal partners in the government.    &quot;In my view, there isn't a major threat of a successful coup at this time,&quot; said Richard Kessler, a senior associate at Washington's Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, who currently is in Manila. &quot;But there is a danger that a coup will come in a few years if the economy doesn't turn around, or if the new Congress proves incapable of developing effective legislation,&quot; he added.    In general, Mr. Kessler said, &quot;There is a greater sense of disenchantment than there was a year ago over the political issue of governance. It's not that things are worse; in fact, they're better. But people felt after the February revolution that they had accomplished something. Now, some people feel that things are slipping back.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>