<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870415-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Safe Harbor of Chapter 11 Also Has Its Hidden Shoals---Many Firms Found Protection, butAt Cost of Management Control---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 04/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TX TEX MAN WIX LTV RAHBANKRUPTCIES (BCY) </IN><TEXT>   Texaco Inc.'s bankruptcy-law case in terms of sheer size -- both the $18.38 billion of the company's assets and the potential $10.3 billion liability it seeks to avert -- is unprecedented. But as an instrument of corporate strategy, it's not.    Continental Airlines, Manville Corp., Wickes Cos., LTV Corp. and A.H. Robins Inc. are among the major U.S. concerns that have sought the shelter of the federal Bankruptcy Code in recent years. The step protected each of them from imminent disaster but exposed them to heated controversy and unforeseen troubles that for some have all but stripped management of corporate control.    Texaco Chairman James W. Kinnear said he hadn't any doubts that the company's decision to file for bankruptcy protection was the right one, but he conceded the process wouldn't be &quot;a walk in the park.&quot;    Indeed, if the experiences of the following concerns provide a glimpse of what's ahead for Texaco, Mr. Kinnear may find it more like running a gantlet than a pastoral stroll.    Continental Airlines   Continental Airlines' controversial use of Chapter 11 to break labor contracts transformed its parent company, Texas Air Corp., into the largest airline in the free world.    While operating under the bankruptcy court's protection, Continental used its rock-bottom labor costs as a weapon, slashing fares and carving out a growing market share as a low-cost, full-service airline. Continental's reorganization plan didn't dilute shareholder equity; no creditors received Continental stock. And by placing only the Continental unit under the court's protection, Houston-based Texas Air was able to continue its aggressive financial maneuvering to raise funds for further expansion.    Though the move was a stunning financial success, it carried big costs as well. Continental earned the undying enmity of the airline industry's labor unions, who helped spark a federal investigation into allegations of unsafe operating practices and later helped block Texas Air's bids to buy other airlines. And while creditors ended up receiving full payment of their debts, the handling of the case in federal bankruptcy court led to charges of judicial favoritism.    Although Continental had losses of about $500 million since the airline industry was deregulated in 1978, the carrier wasn't in danger of running out of jet fuel when it filed for Chapter 11 in September 1983. The airline had $50 million in cash, and Frank Lorenzo, Texas Air's chairman, said at the time: &quot;It wasn't a problem of cash. Our sole problem was labor.&quot;    By using federal bankruptcy law to abrogate union contracts, Continental swiftly established the lower labor costs that unions had refused to grant in earlier negotiations. About two-thirds of Continental's 12,000 employees lost their jobs, and those who were called back to work suffered 50% reductions in their pay. Service was chaotic at first, but steep fare cuts helped woo a skeptical public back to Continental. Doubts about any airline's ability to fly through a Chapter 11 proceeding began to fade as travel agents, fuel suppliers and others began to resume business with Continental, which slowly began to expand its post-bankruptcy flight schedule.    But the dispute with Continental's unions refused to fade, and their strike, called during the Chapter 11 filing, took on an increasingly ugly tone. A bloody, rotting elk head was hurled through the window of the home of a Continental pilot who refused to honor picket lines; a firebomb was thrown into the yard of another pilot. Striking pilots arrested in San Antonio, Texas, were found to be carrying pipe bombs and a map to the homes of Continental pilots who were still flying.    Moreover, union pilots throughout the industry compiled allegations of safety problems caused by Continental's new bargain-priced flight crews. The Federal Aviation Administration conducted a painstaking audit of Continental safety practices that one FAA investigator alleged was turned into a &quot;cover-up&quot; when his initial findings were withheld and a less critical report was released. The airline, however, continues to charge that the audit itself was a politically motivated response to union pressures.    Creditors, after initial qualms about Continental's ability to withstand the acrimonious labor dispute, were calmed by the airline's increasing profitability. Continental filed a reorganization plan last summer that paid off $650 million in long-term debt in full, just as the carrier was chalking up a $65.1 million third quarter profit, the largest in its 52-year history.    Its growing operating success provided Texas Air with the platform to stalk other airlines. While angry unions helped fend off Texas Air for a while, Mr. Lorenzo finally bought Eastern Airlines early last year. Then Texas Air acquired People Express Inc. and its Frontier Airlines unit, folding them into Continental along with New York Air, another low-cost Texas Air unit. Continental's fleet now includes 317 airplanes, and its 28,000 employees represent the largest low-cost labor force in the industry.    But the controversy over the original bankruptcy refuses to fade. The federal bankruptcy judge who handled the case, Glover T. Roberts, agreed to leave the bench to join Continental's law firm a few days after the plan of reorganization was approved. A die-hard group of union employees, who are still fighting to regain their lost jobs and back pay, have told another court they want to review whether the judge's rulings were influenced by his prospective employment.    Manville   Manville's bid to evade a flood of asbestos-related lawsuits through a Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law filing didn't come close to accomplishing what the big building and forest products concern envisioned when it filed on Aug. 26, 1982.    The Denver-based company's controversial filing -- made when Manville had a seemingly healthy net worth of $1.1 billion -- was intended to let it easily grapple with a seemingly endless stream of lawsuits from workers claiming death or disease from exposure to asbestos, a mineral once widely used in piping and insulation. Manville believed it could estimate future asbestos claims, set aside money to cover them, and emerge bulletproof from future lawsuits in about 1 1/2 years.    Instead, Manville is still under the bankruptcy court's control; its complex reorganization plan was approved in December by most classes of its creditors and U.S. Bankruptcy Court Judge Burton Lifland in New York, but Manville can't emerge until appeals to the plan, which are expected to be taken all the way to the Supreme Court, are exhausted.    The appeals are by a group of asbestos victims and by Manville holders of common stock. The shareholders stand to see their stake in the company diluted as much as 98% under the plan.    Fashioning an acceptable reorganization plan took Manville a tortuous 4 1/2 years of negotiating, marked by a high degree of acrimony because of the controversial nature of its filing and the fact that asbestos victims weren't receiving any money from Manville in the meantime.    In the process of reorganizing, Manville's chairman agreed to retire, its president resigned after a dispute with creditors, and it turned over the right to name two of its directors to a group of plaintiffs' attorneys, who also have a say in naming the rest of the board.    But looming over everything are the big payments Manville must make to the two trust funds that are the keystone of its reorganization plan. Manville will set up a $2.5 billion trust to pay personal injury claims over the next few decades with about $615 million in insurance proceeds, $200 million in cash, receivables and a note, and 24 million new common shares.    In addition, Manville also has to funnel to the trust 20% of its profits and make $75 million-a-year payments on a $1.8 billion bond starting four years after it emerges from the bankruptcy court's protection. And because the personal injury trust will hold about 80% of Manville's common, it can still liquidate the company if funds don't prove adequate to pay claims.    Asbestos-related property damage claimants will be paid through a separate trust, which Manville will set up with $125 million in cash, any insurance proceeds that exceed the $615 million earmarked for the personal-injury trust, and any profit over the 20% not needed by the other trust.    Bankruptcy attorneys, professors and participants say Manville grossly misjudged the complexity of using the bankruptcy court to grapple with toxic torts litigation, a novel attempt. In doing so, Manville had to negotiate with more than twice the number of creditor groups than most Chapter 11 filings -- not only commercial creditors and shareholders, but also about 20 representatives for plaintiffs, another dozen or so representing co-defendants and a representative for future claimants. The company also failed to realize the constraints under which it would have to operate, and the compromises that would be necessary to fashion a plan, the observers say.    Wickes   For Wickes, a Santa Monica, Calif.-based retailer with $4 billion in annual sales, its Chapter 11 filing on April 24, 1982, was deemed the only way to save the company -- or the parts of the company a brash, new management team wanted to save.    Working on a relatively fast track, management under its chairman and chief executive officer, Sanford C. Sigoloff, was able to seize the initiative from creditors and pushed a lumbering Wickes through the bankruptcy proceedings in just 33 months -- an amazing schedule considering the complexity of the case and the fact that Wickes was, at the time, the second-largest bankruptcy proceeding in U.S. business history in terms of total assets.    The proof of a high degree of success is that less than five months after emerging from Chapter 11, a slimmed-down Wickes agreed to buy the consumer and industrial products division of Gulf andamp; Western Inc. for $1 billion, and has been buying and selling companies ever since.    Shareholder equity after the reorganization rose to about $375 million, compared with a negative $250 million during the proceedings; pre-Chapter 11 holders of common stock saw their equity stake reduced to 15% of the total shares outstanding. The company's stock price has been mired for the last few years at around $3.50 to $4.50 a share.    Despite the fact that Mr. Sigoloff and much of the same management team he brought to Wickes previously had taken another company, Daylin Inc., through Chapter 11, the chief executive concedes he wasn't really prepared for the physical and psychological toll exacted by the filing. For one thing, new management didn't at first realize how much of a basket case Wickes really was: suppliers refusing to ship new merchandise without cash in advance; antiquated information processing systems; bankers pushing for immediate repayment of debt.    &quot;You start these things with youthful enthusiasm,&quot; Mr. Sigoloff says. &quot;But initially, I hadn't any true understanding of the complexity of the situation.&quot;    Most of the time and effort of the management team was directed at the legal, financial and strategic decisions about the bankruptcy case itself. Operations were left to managers of about 40 divisions, but they were kept on a short leash and many were fired if they didn't seem to be in command of their units. The company's total work force was reduced to about 28,000 from 40,000 with a lean corporate staff of about 125, down from a peak of 400 during the bankruptcy proceedings.    However, Mr. Sigoloff -- who put his personal reputation on the line by making television commercials for several Wickes divisions -- argues that Wall Street makes an arbitrary distinction between the work that goes on while a company is under Chapter 11 protection and that of a healthy company. &quot;It's identical under Chapter 11, except you have a lot more people to please,&quot; he adds.    Central to the Sigoloff plan at Wickes was persuading creditors to approve a reorganization plan quickly, before Wickes became too healthy and the creditors' demands too high to satisfy without selling most of the profitable divisions. Creditors concede that Wickes hired some of the best specialized legal and financial talent available and kept control of vital data and the timing of various events in the proceedings.    Despite the fact that Wickes kept the upper hand in the courts and in negotiations, there were many frustrations. The company found it impossible to meet creditors' always-escalating demands for information, and was frustrated late in the game by creditor infighting that threatened to tear at the heart of a carefully constructed reorganization plan. Wickes's management did contingency planning for a possible liquidation, and several times came close to going that route before successfully emerging from Chapter 11 on Jan. 26, 1985.    &quot;Some of the grades we had to climb were a lot steeper and lengthier than I thought they'd be, but I never doubted we'd do it,&quot; Mr. Sigoloff said then. &quot;But we sure got tired sometimes.&quot;    LTV   LTV's Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law filing last July 17 has enabled the steel, energy and aerospace concern to slash costs and transform itself into the most efficient of the nation's major steelmakers. It has also meant the insolvency of the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. and could ultimately hasten the troubled steel industry's shakeout.    The primary benefit -- and perhaps the major significance -- of LTV's filing is the shedding of its massive unfunded pension liabilities. Prior to its filing, the nation's No. 2 steelmaker had scant hope of meeting the retirement promises it had made to thousands of workers and retirees.    In January, LTV terminated its major pension plans, saddling the federal pension agency with an estimated $2.3 billion bill. Dumping the shortfall on the agency, which insures the retirement benefits of some 38 million Americans through employer-paid premiums, cuts LTV's total labor costs per steelworker from more than $23 an hour to around $20. That action, coupled with other cost savings obtained through the bankruptcy courts, has given the steelmaker a major competitive advantage over the rest of the industry.    In 1986, Dallas-based LTV took $1.18 billion of special charges related to the termination of the plans; its total net loss for 1986 was $3.25 billion -- one of the largest annual losses ever reported by a U.S. company -- after special charges of $3.24 billion. During the Chapter 11 proceedings, the value of its stock has dipped as much as $307.5 million, or to $1.125 a share from a closing price of $4.375 the day before the filing in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.    Peter F. Marcus, PaineWebber Inc.'s steel analyst, estimates that the bankruptcy-law filing will enable LTV to cut the pre-tax cost of shipping steel by nearly a fifth -- from around $460 to $380, or about $60 a ton below the cost of other major steelmakers. Though off-loading its pension obligations represents the biggest benefit, LTV is also wresting other important savings. It has escaped from long-term contracts that forced it to accept iron ore and coal at prices well above market.    Competitors say that LTV's bankruptcy-law filing has only deepened the competitive pressures within the industry and could encourage other steelmakers to follow the company's example. &quot;The LTV bankruptcy is especially threatening to the other major steel companies,&quot; says PaineWebber's Mr. Marcus.    LTV's bankruptcy filing has certainly helped it amass cash. Its cash and cash equivalents swelled to a whopping $612.4 million by year's end, up from a mere $11.9 million as of Dec. 31, 1985. Because of the filing, LTV isn't required to accrue interest on its unsecured debt, which pared its interest and corporate expenses to $197.5 million in 1986 from $301 million in 1985.    For the most part, LTV's aerospace and defense unit -- its only consistently profitable business and the one around which LTV plans to reorganize -- has been unaffected by LTV's bankruptcy-law filing. Within days of the filing, LTV gained court approval to operate the unit &quot;in a normal and regular manner of business&quot; on both its pending contracts and on any new contracts.    In most bankruptcy-law reorganizations, requests to pay so-called &quot;pre-petition debt&quot; run into opposition from creditors, but LTV's motion didn't garner a single objection.    Outside the steel industry, meanwhile, corporations increasingly fret that the pension agency has become a dumping ground for troubled companies' underfunded pension plans.    In Washington, the LTV bankruptcy-law filing may spark other important changes. It has put the issue of employee health and pension benefits squarely before Congress and the Reagan administration, touching off a number of pension-related bills. And it has also forced the White House to take initial steps toward dealing with the pension agency's growing deficit, which now stands at more than $4 billion.    A.H. Robins   A.H. Robins's 1 1/2 years under Chapter 11 have produced some financial benefits for the Richmond, Va., pharmaceutical concern. But as the company says in its 1986 report to holders published last month, the road to reorganization has been &quot;difficult and often frustrating.&quot;    Earnings have risen steadily since the bankruptcy-law filing in August 1985. In 1986, they rose to $82 million, or $3.38 a share, from $76 million, or $3.12 a share, in 1985. The company had a loss of $462 million in 1984.    The Chapter 11 filing froze the 6,000 claims pending against Robins filed by women who used its Dalkon Shield intrauterine contraceptive device and blamed it for such ailments as spontaneous abortions, pelvic inflammatory disease and uterine perforations. Before Robins sought bankruptcy-law protection, it and its insurer had paid about $520 million to dispose of 9,450 cases and claims. Several hundred thousand Dalkon Shield-related claims have been filed against the company since the bankruptcy-law case began.    Robins succeeded in keeping the bankruptcy-law case in its home town, before a judge who lives in the same neighborhood as the company's chairman. But the case and the judge still have provided some rough surprises for company executives.    Intense scrutiny of company operations from various lawyers opposing Robins forced officers to admit making $11.4 million in unauthorized payments, sell certain assets, realign its legal staff several times and reduce top executives' salaries.    In the aftermath, the judge, Robert R. Merhige Jr., has kept Robins officials on a short leash. Angered by the company's misdeeds and frustrated that the bankruptcy-law case hasn't been resolved, he ordered appointment of an examiner to monitor the company's activities and to negotiate a reorganization plan. He also warned the company's president that he would be held personally responsible for future wrongdoing by management.    Shortly after opposing lawyers discovered the improper payments, for instance, Robins fired its outside bankruptcy counsel. The firm it hired as a replacement was temporarily disqualified from the case last October after claimants' lawyers discovered that the firm represented Robins's insurer on some unrelated matters. Judge Merhige said the situation posed a potential conflict of interest since the insurer, a unit of Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co., is also a creditor in the bankruptcy-law case. Later, the firm was reinstated after agreeing to drop Aetna as a client.    Such episodes have lowered employee morale and made running the company much more difficult, executives say.    Worse yet, Robins now faces the very situation it entered Chapter 11 to avoid -- losing control of its destiny. With the appointment of the examiner, Robins lost considerable freedom to manage its own affairs. And when talks between Robins and American Home Products Corp. officials in February failed to produce a definitive buyout agreement and plan for bailing Robins out of its status under bankruptcy law, the judge gave the examiner the authority to negotiate on Robins's behalf with all future suitors. He also stripped Robins of authority to comment on the progress of the case.    Robins's holders haven't fared well during the bankruptcy-law case. The shares plunged to about $5 from almost $11 when the company filed under Chapter 11. Before American Home's $2.5 billion proposal, the stock would trade in the high single digits and spurt to the low teens temporarily, just before and shortly after the company disclosed earnings.    But when American Home's bid was announced -- signaling that the drug company felt confident it could afford the tort liability claims -- the stock shot up to a high of about $24.50 a share. These days, it trades around $20 a share.    Ultimately, Robins managers may lose control of the 121-year-old family-run business. Judge Merhige now appears to endorse the idea of a buyout, much like that American Home proposed, to resolve the bankruptcy-law case. To that end, he ordered the examiner, Ralph R. Mabey, to announce in February shortly after the American Home deal fizzled, that prospective purchasers can expect &quot;substantial cooperation&quot; from the court and &quot;the significant parties in the case.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>