<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880617-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Southern Cafeteria Chains Plot Expansion Into North </HL><AUTHOR> Marj Charlier (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> PICC LUB PAMX CAF </CO><IN> RFD </IN><TEXT>   Cafeterias have a regional identity problem.    In the South, big cafeteria chains have flourished, beneficiaries of a culture that emphasizes family-style eating, after-church family outings and conservative spending.    In the North, however, cafeterias have such a negative image that chains are nearly nonexistent and even individual outlets are rare. Michael Luther, a 26-year-old Connecticut Yankee recently transplanted to Texas, says he'd quit dating a woman who wanted to go to a cafeteria for dinner.    But that poor image and scant presence may change. Cafeterias have become so widespread in the South that the chains now have to look northward for growth opportunities. Only a handful have taken the leap so far -- often in areas barely beyond their traditional bastions -- but most chains have serious plans for Northern growth.    Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc., based in Baton Rouge, La., has ventured into California and is scouting for sites in the Washington, D.C., area. Luby's Cafeterias Inc., San Antonio, Texas, is targeting the Midwest after recently inching out of its Deep South stronghold into Arizona. Pancho's Mexican Buffet Inc., Fort Worth, Texas, is buying land in Denver and Colorado Springs, Colo. Furr's/Bishop's Cafeterias L.P., Lubbock, Texas, says it wants to try Chicago, New York and New Jersey in a couple of years.    Cafeteria operators are convinced that their convenience (the typical patron is out the door in about 20 minutes), prices (the average meal costs about $4.50) and wholesome food are amenities Northerners of all ages want. &quot;There's an increasing need for an alternative to fast food for families,&quot; says John Hunt, a food analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co.    While the chains' cafeterias still have trays and stainless-steel serving counters, they don't match the low-rent image that the term conjures up for most Northerners. They offer dozens of entrees that are cooked just minutes before they're served, plus fresh vegetables, salads and desserts. They have restaurant-style dining areas, with tables and booths of various sizes. Their staffs circulate to refill diners' water glasses and coffee cups and to clear tables when customers are finished.    But some skeptics say the chains have little chance of succeeding in the North, where they will face higher labor and real-estate costs (important because cafeterias have low margins and depend on high volume) as well as different tastes and life styles. Which is why the chains are proceeding gingerly, initially moving into locations with a more Southern atmosphere while also adding services to appeal to Northern sensibilities.    &quot;We're going to try anything and everything until we find what the consumer wants up there. We're going to sell cafeterias to America,&quot; says Michael Levenson, chairman of Furr's/Bishop's, whose 152 outlets include 26 Bishop's cafeterias in the Midwest, the only established chain of any significance outside the South.    Cafeterias actually originated in New York City, but they nearly died out there and throughout the North after the Depression, when land values and labor costs surged. Stuck with the image of low-class, cheap dining halls where bums hung out, they lost customers to diners and delis. &quot;Cafeterias are dinosaurs in New York,&quot; says Fred Sampson, president of the New York State Restaurant Association. The same is true in most parts of the North.    In the South, however, labor rates were low and there was a dearth of established restaurant chains to provide competition for the middle class after World War II. Sprawling Southern cities could accommodate cafeterias' big buildings and parking lots economically. Soon, cafeterias spread through the region. They began providing fresher, more varied food and dashed their frumpy image by adding colorful carpets, hanging plants and tasteful wood trim.    &quot;We created an atmosphere where bums weren't comfortable,&quot; says Ralph Erbin, chief operating officer of Luby's, one of the oldest and most profitable of the Southern chains.    Luby's, Piccadilly, Furr's, Pancho's, Morrison Inc. and Wyatt Cafeterias Inc. are household names in the South. Their cafeterias feed up to 2,500 people a day -- perhaps twice the volume of comparable restaurants -- in each of about 950 eateries.    To make inroads in the North, however, the companies will have to give Northern consumers more of what their faster-paced life styles require. So the chains are adding takeout counters and phone-in service. They're doubling the number of service lines to shorten queues and offering children's plates to attract families.    They're also adapting their menus. Piccadilly is lightening up on its Cajun spices outside its home base of Louisiana. Luby's added more fruit and fish in health-conscious Arizona. And Furr's is considering adding salad bars to lure young professionals to its Midwestern cafeterias.    If all else fails, there's always camouflage. Luby's excised the word &quot;cafeteria&quot; from billboards advertising its new stores in Arizona, fearing that retirees and snowbirds from the North wouldn't even try Luby's if they knew what it was.    Still, getting Big Mac eaters to convert is proving to be a chore. When Piccadilly realized many California customers didn't even know how cafeterias worked, they produced brochures with pointers on, among other things, how to pay.    Piccadilly has tried a health-oriented &quot;Fresh Approach&quot; television campaign in two California cities, Modesto and Fresno. But the company isn't sure how the ads are doing: In questionnaires intended to find how consumers learned of the new cafeterias, the company forgot to include TV ads as an option they could check off. &quot;We're infants at this,&quot; admits Brian Von Gruben, marketing vice president. </TEXT></DOC>