<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880310-0077 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Super Politics </HL><SO> </SO><IN> MON </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   As a political offensive, protectionism is dead.    Bob Dole tried to score in the South Carolina caucuses Saturday by cheerleading for passage of the textile bill. Richard Gephardt ran with his Asia-bashing amendment and the threat of high U.S. tariffs from Iowa to New Hampshire and across the South. He ridiculed anyone whose policies advocated keeping markets open: &quot;The Establishment game on trade, played by editorial writers and Wall Street, by most Republicans and too many Democrats is a loser.&quot; If protectionism were a winner, we'd have found that out on Super Tuesday. Protectionism, in the collective judgment of more than 13 million voters, is a loser.    The first question to ask now about this issue is will the voters' judgment penetrate the shield that protects Washington from incoming reality? For just as Richard Gephardt's campaign was going off the rails, a reporter in Washington covering the congressional trade bill would have had to visit an astounding 17 subconferences to discover the measure's contents. The main reason for that many subconferences is to accommodate all the narrow, protectionist claims the Members are entering on behalf of lobbies, corporations and other special-interest groups.    We don't hold out much hope that the congressmen carrying trade water for the special interests will be deterred by Tuesday's vote. But surely the vote gives the Reagan White House the opportunity to announce that it intends to veto the 1988 trade bill, no matter what the thing looks like. Currently, administration operatives still flit from subconference to subconference, hoping, they say, to strip out the worst provisions so the President can sign an &quot;acceptable&quot; bill.    Signing this &quot;acceptable&quot; bill primarily will legitimize and keep alive the ghost of Richard Gephardt. The protectionists will return to present the next President with another assault on the world's economy. We now know that it is politically possible to stand up to this bunch. George Bush just proved that.    Indeed, with his 16-0 primary win on Tuesday, George Bush surely will attract much inquiry into what else he has proved. Political victories always are explained in part by the opposition's mistakes, but surely Mr. Bush deserves much credit for this week's result. Bob Dole is a substantial opponent. Moreover, Mr. Bush apparently survived the trial by ordeal that the media now deem mandatory for major candidates.    It was variously charged that the vice president was a wimp, a preppie, was tainted by Iran-Contra (maybe the people truly upset by Iranamok vote in the Democratic primaries), and is a man who leaves no policy footprints. This, in any event, was the standard Beltway indictment. Perhaps what Mr. Bush has proved is that Washington inquisitions aren't so fearful and powerful after all for most voters.    One piece of conventional wisdom, shared now by many conservatives, is that the presidency of Ronald Reagan is badly adrift. A corollary is that associating too closely with the Reagan legacy might carry liabilities. But Mr. Bush ran mainly as a vice president loyal to that legacy. His overwhelming victory may have a simple explanation: Many voters simply want more Reaganism. That's a thought to send more than a few Washington residents into cold showers.    If a genuine liability was exposed Tuesday it is the belief that a candidate can build his agenda around polls or press clippings. No serious person believes that Dick Gephardt or Bob Dole are protectionists. But the consultants claimed to have found a current of resentful or disaffected Americans roiling around this issue, and when Mr. Gephardt peaked in Iowa we began reading that his trade-bashing commercials were succeeding.    We doubt that many people have won the presidency by trimming and tailoring their politics the way you would outfit a Barbie Doll. The successful candidate for high office must have some credible, discernible core of beliefs. Messrs. Gephardt and Dole ultimately failed that test. Jesse Jackson, in some complex way, passes the test for many voters. We'd say the jury is still deliberating on Mike Dukakis and Al Gore.    George Bush, after a long career, has achieved credibility with a large constituency. His victory puts some largely irrelevant Beltway obsessions on the shelf. At this point in the campaign, Vice President Bush has an unusual opportunity -- the freedom to start creating the large issues that will form the basis of his own agenda. </TEXT></DOC>