<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870529-0010 </DOCNO><HL> Anti-Takeover Move WillRequire Borrowing MostOf the $3 Billion Needed---By Judith Valente and John KotenStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AEG BAAIRLINES (AIR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON) </IN><TEXT>   Directors of embattled Allegis Corp. took another step to ward off takeover threats by tentatively approving a plan to pay a $60-a-share distribution to stockholders.    Allegis said that it would need to borrow practically all of the $3 billion that the distribution will cost -- raising its total debt to about $5.2 billion. It said it doesn't plan to sell any of its existing business units to pay for the proposed transaction.    The travel company's stock reacted strongly. Its shares jumped $8.375 a share to $87.50, yesterday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. Volume totaled 3,275,000 shares, making Allegis the third-most-active Big Board issue. But some analysts said the company's move didn't resolve questions about Allegis's vulnerability to a takeover or about the wisdom of the company's long-term strategy.    Although Allegis said the recapitalization plan had been under study for two months, the announcement came just two days after Coniston Partners disclosed that it owned 13% of Allegis shares and planned to wage a fight to gain control of the Allegis board. The New York investment firm said it planned to break up or sell Allegis.    Allegis directors apparently were under pressure to move quickly. Coniston was expected to begin as early as next week to solicit shareholder consent to remove most of the Allegis board.    In New York, Keith Gollust, a principal of Coniston, said the firm is studying the Allegis recapitalization plan and would offer public comment later. He said Coniston continues to believe that Chicago-based Allegis would be worth more if it were split into separate companies. Allegis owns United Airlines, Hertz Corp. and a chain of Westin and Hilton International hotels.    Richard Ferris, chairman, has repeatedly insisted that the best course for the company is to pursue its long-term strategy of molding its subsidiaries into an integrated world-wide travel company.    But some holders, including Coniston, have insisted that the strategy won't pay off as well as an immediate breakup of the company, which some analysts have estimated could raise as much as $120 a share.    &quot;The $60-a-share payout doesn't really settle that question at all,&quot; said one analyst. Some Wall Street traders attributed yesterday's jump in Allegis stock to the notion that the proposed payout merely eliminates some of the risk of holding the shares -- setting a floor on the value of the stock. &quot;This may be only the first step,&quot; said a trader.    In approving the recapitalization plan, Allegis directors took a step that contradicted, in part, the board's statements a few weeks ago in rejecting a bid by the pilots union to buy United Airlines. The Allegis directors said at the time that operating the carrier with heavy debt would be risky in the highly competitive airline industry.    In taking on the additional $3 billion of borrowings, Allegis and its United Airlines unit would become one of the most debt-laden companies in the airline industry. Although comparisons aren't totally fair for a variety of reasons, the debt of Allegis would exceed that of Texas Air Corp., the largest U.S. airline. Texas Air has been the subject of criticism for its high debt, but unlike United can compensate for the high carrying costs because it has much lower wage scales.    It wasn't immediately clear whether the recapitalization plan also violated certain maximum debt provisions of the company's recent aircraft financing arrangement with Seattle-based Boeing Co., which was designed to serve partly as an anti-takeover measure and involved the issuance of $700 million of notes.    The recapitalization plan, which requires final board approval as well as a shareholder vote, would wipe out Allegis's shareholder equity. Allegis wouldn't give details on the full financial impact of the plan, saying it would provide further information later.    It also didn't say how it would structure its proposed borrowing, but did say it may refinance some of its existing debt.    Meanwhile, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said in New York that, because of the proposed recapitalization, it would study the debt of Allegis and its subsidiaries for possible downgrading. Moody's said its review would focus on the impact of the potential increased borrowings, including the strain they would place on the cash flow of the company's operating units.    Some analysts said that the recapitalization program illustrated the lengths to which Allegis management appears willing to go to pursue its existing business strategy. In addition to the Boeing accord, its other takeover defenses include a so-called poison pill plan and golden parachute plans for top officers. The company also is said to have actively considered options ranging from a management-led leveraged buyout, the sale of a majority interest in Allegis to Boeing or another company and additional agreements with major suppliers along the lines of the Boeing agreement.    The company has taken such steps apparently out of a lack of confidence in the support of its holders. In an informal survey of major Allegis holders by this newspaper in the past few days, a majority said they probably would support the bid by Coniston to unseat the Allegis board.    For instance, an official with a Canadian investment firm that owns more than one million Allegis shares said, &quot;I'm in favor of anybody who teaches those guys that the shareholders are in charge, not management.&quot; Regarding Coniston's solicitation, the official said, &quot;We loved it.&quot;    A spokeswoman for FMR Corp., which holds 1.3 million shares, said that FMR officials had sent letters of complaint and had conversations with Allegis management to no avail. In protest against the company's policies, FMR withheld voting on Allegis management's nominees for directors at the company's annual meeting last month. FMR is the holding company for Fidelity Management andamp; Research Co., the investment advisers to the Fidelity group of funds.    The shareholder hostility has somewhat mystified the Allegis board. In a recent interview, one Allegis director noted that the company had been repeatedly criticized in the past for paying too much for acquisitions. He said he found it amusing that analysts were now saying the company would realize major gains if those same assets were sold.    In a statement announcing the recapitalization, Allegis said that the plan &quot;is based on the board's conclusion that it is necessary to provide shareholders with a substantial increase in the near-term value of their investment. The board believes that the proposed recapitalization would do so while permitting shareholders to benefit longer term from the integrated travel services concept.&quot;    The company didn't say when the distribution might occur.    Meanwhile, in a taped telephone message to the pilots last night, the union leadership reiterated its intention to pursue purchasing the airline &quot;by every means available.    &quot;The recapitalization program announced this afternoon appears to be another step in Mr. Ferris's attempt to pursue his ill-conceived strategy of an integrated travel services company. We oppose and will continue to oppose this strategy,&quot; the taped message said.    ---   Laurie P. Cohen and Alex Kotlowitz contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>