<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Iraq Renews Attacks on Iran TargetsIn Gulf, Creating Perils for U.S. Navy---By Tim CarringtonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Iraq renewed attacks on Iranian shipping facilities, ending a 45-day reprieve from direct aggression in the Persian Gulf and creating new perils for the much-expanded U.S. naval presence there.    Iran struck back with a heavy artillery bombardment.    According to reports from the region, Iraq mounted air strikes Saturday on Iranian oil terminals at Sirri Island and Lavan Island in the southeastern gulf and on an offshore platform farther north; and yesterday, Iraq planes attacked the Kharg Island oil terminal.    Lloyds of London reported that in the Sirri Island attack, a moored storage tanker was hit and set ablaze.    Iran's Tehran radio, monitored in London, said that in retaliation for Iraqi &quot;atrocities&quot; Iranian artillery had shelled industrial targets in Basra, Iraq's second-largest city, and military targets in the port of Um Qasr.    Oil traders expected the markets to take in stride the news of renewed hostilities in the region. Kharg Island, they noted, has been an Iraqi target for years -- and a far less significant one than oil tankers.    Despite the violence, the U.S. Navy on Saturday proceeded with a new convoy operation, escorting a pair of Kuwaiti oil tankers north through the Strait of Hormuz.    Since July, when it began escorting Kuwaiti tankers through the gulf, the U.S. has urged Iraq to stick to a policy of restraint. U.S. officials had feared that stepped-up Iraqi attacks would bring new Iranian aggression in the gulf, possibly drawing U.S. warships into a direct confrontation. The U.S. urgings were bolstered by a July 20 United Nations Security Council call for a cease-fire in the seven-year Iran-Iraq war.    U.S. officials were disappointed but not surprised by the Iraqi strikes. On NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press&quot; yesterday, Undersecretary of State Michael Armacost said: &quot;I find it deplorable, but I also say that in terms of their interests, it's understandable.&quot;    Late last week, a naval officer serving the U.S. joint chiefs of staff remarked: &quot;We're sort of on borrowed time with Iraq's forbearance.&quot;    These and other Reagan administration officials say that the pause in direct shipping attacks in the gulf has served Iran's needs but not Iraq's. Iran, which refused to abide by the cease-fire, continued ground attacks, where it has a decided advantage because of its access to a vast population willing to seek martyrdom for the cause. But Iraq, so long as it lived by the ceasefire, was deprived of its military trump card: a technologically superior air force capable of significantly damaging Iranian oil facilities.    The halt in Iraq's tanker strikes helped Iran to export oil to garner the hard currency it desperately needs to rebuild its weapons arsenals. &quot;Iranian exports through the gulf are as high as, or higher than, they've been since 1979,&quot; said James Placke, the deputy assistant secretary of state for gulf policy from 1982-86 and currently a consultant.    Meanwhile, Pentagon intelligence reports show that Iran is buying large amounts of arms and ammunition from such suppliers as China and North Korea. This could suggest that Iran envisions mounting a major ground offensive some time after November, when heavy rains would hamper Iraq's air force.    Late last week, Iranian officials floated the suggestion that they may be willing to agree to the cease-fire after all. While some U.S. officials saw this as encouraging, several said the statements may have been designed chiefly to forestall Iraqi attacks.    In the past, Iran countered Iraqi attacks by blasting the defenseless tankers of Kuwait. Iraq doesn't operate ships in the gulf, and Kuwait was viewed as a logical proxy because it has given billions of dollars to aid Iraq's war effort.    Kuwait no longer is the easy target that it was, however. Currently, Kuwaiti tankers fly American flags and travel in the company of U.S. warships. Thus far, Pentagon officials say, Iran has avoided direct attacks on U.S.-flag ships, preferring to drop mines that can't be attributed firmly to anyone.    The Defense Department's Central Command said the latest U.S. convoy cleared the Strait of Hormuz early yesterday morning. Two Kuwaiti tankers, recently Americanized to be the Chesapeake City and the Surf City, were escorted by the USS Reeves, a missile-carrying cruiser, and the USS Hawes, a frigate.    During passage through the strait, U.S. fighters from the aircraft carrier USS Ranger provided air cover. Currently, the Ranger is operating in the North Arabian Sea.    Inside the gulf, helicopters from the USS Guadalcanal flew along the channel that the convoy will travel to clear it of mines. The recent round of Iraqi strikes was concentrated east of the route the convoy is likely follow to Kuwait, where the two tankers are scheduled to take on oil cargoes. &quot;The Iraqi attacks haven't caused any interference,&quot; a Defense Department official said.    The renewal of gulf hostilities might have a more significant effect on world oil markets except for the vast, continuing overproduction of petroleum, particularly among some members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    Last week, OPEC officially acknowledged that the cartel's production had reached as much as 1.2 million barrels a day over the current 16.6-million-barrel ceiling. And some industry sources estimate that the excess production currently totals three million barrels a day or more. </TEXT></DOC>