<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880824-0087 </DOCNO><HL> All Eyes Are on MITI Research Wish List --- Proposals Reflect New Japanese Industrial Strategies </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Kreider Yoder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> ELE ARO CON TEX EDP </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This is prime season for MITI-watching.    Every August, Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry sends budget proposals to the Finance Ministry. Many items on this year's wish list, ranging from computers that mimic the brain to new-fangled aircraft, will reappear in April as increased funding for existing projects or as national research programs.    &quot;It's a critical time at MITI,&quot; says a MITI official.    It is also a critical time for the West to keep its eyes on MITI. New MITI policies often reflect new strategies in Japanese industry. Past budget proposals translated into programs that bolstered Japanese competitiveness in semiconductors, fiber optics and supercomputers. This month's policies could help Japan challenge the U.S. in important future technologies.    &quot;It's something people ought to be paying a lot more attention to,&quot; says Charles Cook, vice president in Tokyo for Monsanto Electronic Materials Co. Like many U.S. businessmen here, Mr. Cook believes foreign companies should be &quot;putting in place what's necessary to capitalize on&quot; MITI projects.    MITI won't release full details of its budget proposals until tomorrow. But officials eagerly discuss their pet plans in hopes of garnering the kind of public support that persuades Finance Ministry bureaucrats to dish out funds.    A sampling of this year's technology proposals: Artificial Intelligence. Some Japanese computer experts feel Japan lags the U.S. in creating machines that mimic patterns of human thought rather than merely repeating simple calculations like today's computers do. MITI wants Japan's computer experts to convene next year to study promising new approaches, such as computers using optics or biological matter, and &quot;neural-network&quot; computers, which attempt to duplicate nerve patterns in the brain. Such study groups often lead to government-industry consortiums to develop technology.    Superconductivity. MITI wants to boost research on superconductors, materials that conduct electricity with no resistance. A recent MITI report calls for &quot;aggressive&quot; research to refine superconductors, devise ways of mass producing them, and to strengthen development already under way on superconducting power plants, transistors and computer chips. Much of the new funds will go to the brand-new laboratories at Tokyo's International Superconductivity Technology Center. &quot;We want to make this the Mecca of superconductivity research,&quot; says Kensuke Yamamoto, a MITI official overseeing superconductivity policy.    Hypersonic Planes. Ever since President Reagan in February 1986 called for U.S. development of an &quot;Orient Express,&quot; a futuristic aircraft that would fly from New York to Tokyo in two hours, MITI's aerospace mavens have been itching to get Japan into the action. MITI is expected to request initial funds for a 40-billion-yen ($30 million) eight-year project to help Japanese companies develop engines and airframe materials. Companies such as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. and Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co. are likely recipients. Though MITI officials vow that Japan doesn't plan to go it alone in hypersonic planes, some Western observers warn that Japan could challenge U.S. leadership in aerospace. But Japanese skeptics say the Finance Ministry may reject the project as too risky.    Deep Underground Construction. With land prices sky high, MITI wants Japan to move to what it calls the &quot;new frontier,&quot; deep underground. MITI wants to develop efficient methods to cut and maintain 150-foot-high domes more than 150 feet under cities. (Tokyo's subways are 30 to 60 feet deep.) Inside the caves would go electric-power generators, water-treatment plants and factories. The ministry wants to fund a feasibility study next year and start a seven-year national project in 1990. The project could give an edge to Japanese construction companies, which already have some of the world's best conventional tunneling technology.    Biotechnology. MITI will request about two billion yen ($15 million) for the Human Frontiers Science project, which will give grants and fellowships to scientists around the world for biological research. The objective is to establish Japan as a nation that doesn't just take the research of others but does its bit to support the world's scientific work.    Textiles. Japan's textile mills are battered by foreign competition. MITI wants to build &quot;resource centers&quot; to help textile concerns develop the technologies and marketing techniques to fight back.    The ministry's proposals are a product of the policy-making machine that grinds into action around April, when each MITI department submits project ideas that bureaucrats have hashed out with their contacts in industry and universities. Early this year, for example, officials in the industrial-electronics division began sounding out industry experts for ideas on future computers that approximate human traits such as learning and reasoning. While Tokyo University, Fujitsu Ltd. and others are developing neural-network machines on their own, the industry and MITI want Japan to pool its efforts to identify the best technology.    By June, &quot;neuro-computers,&quot; as the Japanese call them, were on MITI's master list of projects to hone into budget proposals. Into August, bureaucrats responsible for electronics cajoled other MITI officials into backing their pet projects, and ironed out financing. By mid-August, the proposal was finished.    On Aug. 31, MITI will submit the neural-network proposal to the Finance Ministry along with dozens of other proposals. Japanese companies and academics have been deeply involved in the process. Thus when the Finance Ministry approves the plan by late December -- as it is expected to -- companies and influential professors will be fully on board. When the project starts in April, the organization probably will include such computer heavyweights as Fujitsu, NEC Corp. and Hitachi Ltd.    &quot;By the time the proposal meets the light of day all the companies have had their say,&quot; says an American businessman in Tokyo. Foreign businessmen should develop rapport with MITI and get involved early on in the project-creation process, he says. &quot;You have to get in at the beginning before the local industry gets lined up.&quot;    But foreign companies largely stay outside the budget process, often by choice. MITI is increasingly willing to let Japanese subsidiaries of foreign companies participate in its research.    Many American businessmen here complain that although their U.S. home offices fear Japanese competition, they tend to ignore MITI's technology policy and decline chances to join the government-industry process that has helped hone Japan's competitiveness. MITI has invited foreign companies to join Japan's superconductivity research lab, for instance. But only W.R. Grace andamp; Co. has shown interest, and no foreign company has joined. </TEXT></DOC>