<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871016-0115 </DOCNO><HL> What About Shareowners' Responsibility?---By John G. Smale</HL><DD> 10/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Widespread hostile takeover activity has made maximizing immediate shareholder value appear to be the basic purpose of a business enterprise. Some defend hostile takeovers as adherence to free enterprise -- as reliance on market forces to structure and restructure our economy. But this emphasis will, if not appropriately curbed, have just the opposite effect.    From the perspective of someone whose company has been in business for 150 years, I can say that by focusing on the short term, our publicly held business enterprises will see their competitive position decay, their resiliency in difficult times undermined, and their standing in our society compromised.    There is, of course, nothing new about a corporation's fundamental responsibility to its owners. What is new is the role of what I'll call the &quot;temporary&quot; owner, whose sole interest is that of a speculator looking for the &quot;fast buck.&quot;    In sharp contrast to the traditional shareholder, &quot;temporary owners&quot; play a role that can lead to the acquisition of corporate assets through creative financing -- for the purpose of reaping a quick profit. This often results in the breakup and/or the forced assumption of major debt by the corporation under attack.    This process produces, in my opinion, a distortion -- and a serious one -- of the role of business in our society.    That role is to provide goods or services the society wants at the lowest possible cost. It does this in a competitive marketplace -- a marketplace continuously evolving in terms of technology, consumer needs, competitive skill and economic circumstances. Over time, how well a company does depends importantly on how vigorously it prepares for the future. That preparation often involves decisions and investments that have short-term adverse consequences.    And that's one of the things that should concern us about hostile takeovers: managers making expedient decisions to run up the price of their company's stock in order to try to prevent the takeover of their company.    It is difficult to generalize about hostile takeovers and forced leveraged buyouts because each situation has its own unique elements. It's clear, however, that opportunity exists for manipulation to produce profits for speculators without consideration of the real interests of the corporation's long-term investors, its employees, or the communities in which it operates.    It is also clear that hostile takeovers do not do what the speculators say they will do. Research by scholars such as Michael Porter of Harvard Business School suggests they do not usually bring better management to poorly run companies, do not create additional wealth in our economy, and do not even, over time, necessarily provide a good mechanism for shareholders to realize full value for their shares.    Historically, it was considered highly desirable to have a strong balance sheet, a balance sheet with no more than a reasonable amount of debt. This enabled the corporation to withstand economic downturns, and gave it the financial resources to make major investments, all to the advantage of shareholders. Now, some argue that corporations are &quot;underleveraged.&quot;    But an argument can be made, as well, that it is not a healthy thing that corporate debt has grown over half a trillion dollars in the last four years -- from 37% of U.S. corporate net worth in 1983 to 53% last year, a record debt ratio.    Until recently, putting a significant part of a company's profits into investments for future growth was considered essential -- the driving force of future profit growth. Now, it is argued that companies should cut investments to provide shareholders quick returns. For example, oil companies have been attacked for using profits to search for new oil reserves. Even more ominous for the ability of American business to compete technologically is what I've heard from other chief executive officers about cutbacks in research and development resulting from takeovers or resistance to attempted takeovers.    Historically, temporary fluctuations in the market price of a company's stock did not drive decisions on how the company should be structured. Now, some argue that if the total value of all of the company's stock is less than the price that could be paid for its various parts, the corporation should be effectively liquidated.    Hard to measure, but nonetheless important, is the damage that overemphasis on short-term results can bring to the attitudes of our society toward corporations. Corporations are citizens -- paper citizens to be sure -- but citizens nonetheless. A corporation exhibiting little concern for the rest of society or for its own future risks the disfavor of our citizens.    A corporation's success over time is almost totally dependent on its ability to attract and retain good people as employees -- good people in terms of their talents, their integrity, and their willingness to sacrifice at times for the good of the company. But for a corporation to expect this kind of commitment and dedication from its employees, it must reciprocate. It must evidence a greater breadth of purpose than short-term maximization of per-share stock price.    There can be little argument about the obligation that those who manage and govern corporations have to the shareholder. But what about the shareholder's obligation? In fact, doesn't ownership itself imply some responsibility if our economy and our society are to be healthy?    Here, an examination of the history of my company is, I think, helpful. Procter andamp; Gamble, founded in 1837, pre-dates over 99% of the business corporations in this country. It has seen public attitudes and expectations concerning corporations shift with economic and political circumstances over the years.    Our beliefs about the responsibilities of ownership are based on the attitudes of our founders and their successors -- owners of a family business. Through their actions, the Procters and the Gambles demonstrated time and again three aspects of responsibility, which are still a part of this company's character.    They were generous with their time and money to help those less fortunate and to build a thriving community. They planned the business for the long term, and they were mindful of their employees.    The company has always been an industry leader in employee benefits and has, today, the longest-running continuous profit-sharing plan in existence.    Early in the 1920s, the company implemented a plan, revolutionary for its day, of selling direct to retailers. The resistance of wholesalers to this idea, coupled with a national financial crisis and recession, resulted in a one-year loss to the company of more than $30 million. That was an amount about equal to what the company had earned in its previous five years.    You can imagine how Cooper Procter, the corporation's chief executive at the time, felt about this. He knew it would adversely affect the value of the company's stock in the short run. He wrote his niece at the time: &quot;My own judgment and prestige will suffer. . . . I cannot help it. . . . In the long run, the present plan will work for the advantage of the average stockholder who held this stock as an investment and not as speculation.&quot;    Cooper Procter was right, of course. The decision worked to the advantage of the stockholder, because the decision had fundamentally made the company more competitive.    We feel very deeply our obligation to the owners of this company, both individual owners and the institutions who own large numbers of shares. We have the fundamental obligation to enhance the value of their ownership over time.    Importantly, we feel responsibility for our own employees and retired employees who constitute by far the largest single group of shareholders. This company doesn't have a pension plan. It has profit sharing. And the vast majority of the company's profit-sharing plans are held in Pandamp;G stock. Furthermore, 16,000 of our some 44,000 U.S. employees purchase additional Pandamp;G stock each month through a payroll deduction plan.    For the most part then, the employees of this company -- management and workers alike -- have their financial well-being tied to Pandamp;G stock. And over time, it's worked out pretty well. In the past 35 years, for example, an investment of $100 in Pandamp;G, with simple reinvestment of dividends, would have grown to $6,977 -- an amount 75% higher than from a similar investment in the stocks included in the Dow Jones Industrial Average for those years.    We have no crystal ball. We don't know what the future will bring. We do know, however, that the principles that have guided the conduct of this company's business in the past have served its shareholders, its employees, the communities where it operates, and consumers throughout the world -- and served them well. We intend to continue operating on the basis of those principles in the future.    I believe the basic business system in this country has worked well. It has been, by and large, efficient. It has produced the world's highest standard of living for our citizens. We must be very sure that in an environment of expediency -- with some willing to manipulate corporate structure for quick profits -- we don't end up compromising the basic strength of this unique business system.    ---   Mr. Smale is chairman and CEO of Procter andamp; Gamble Co. This is adapted from his remarks at the company's shareholder meeting Tuesday, where an anti-takeover measure was approved. </TEXT></DOC>