<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880816-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN PRAISED Bush, saying he played a major role in the administration.    In an address that was preceded by a five-minute ovation, the president told delegates to the Republican National Convention in New Orleans that &quot;George was there&quot; playing &quot;a major role in everything we've accomplished.&quot; Reagan's speech was a sentimental farewell to the Republican Party and a summary of what he said were improvements his leadership has brought to the economy, defense and foreign affairs. The vice president is to arrive from Washington today.    Bush is scheduled to disclose his running mate Thursday, but unconfirmed reports suggested he might name his choice tomorrow night instead.    ---   MOSCOW SAID it wouldn't tolerate continued Pakistani aid to Afghan rebels.    The Kremlin warned it would &quot;take such measures as are necessitated by the situation&quot; if the aid doesn't cease. Meanwhile, Afghan guerrillas, increasing pressure on the Soviet-backed regime in Kabul, captured a district near the capital. Rocket attacks on Kabul killed at least six as Afghan President Najibullah spoke to reporters and claimed that his troops had recaptured a provincial capital from the rebels.    The U.S. said the withdrawing Red Army is leaving behind as many as 30 million mines, and that the explosives could delay refugee resettlement.    ---   Defense Minister Rabin toured the Gaza Strip and said his order indefinitely confining 650,000 Palestinians to their homes signaled Israeli determination to crack down on protesters. In the West Bank, a Palestinian protester was killed by troops. Separately, two Israeli fighter jets collided in a training exercise, killing both pilots.    A PLO spokesman said the organization's executive panel has approved establishment of a provisional government for the West Bank and Gaza Strip. PLO officials also traveled to Egypt for talks with President Mubarak on Jordan's decision to transfer West Bank responsibilities to the PLO.    ---   South Korean riot police used tear gas and beatings to disperse thousands of students attempting to march to the border with North Korea. At least 1,300 were arrested. President Roh, who earlier had proposed a summit with North Korea's Kim Il Sung, said student protests must be halted to prevent disruption of the Olympics.    ---   Nicaraguan rebels are retreating to bases in Honduras and their leaders are blaming Congress for not providing enough supplies. All except 2,000 are believed to have left Nicaragua. Contra leader Enrique Bermudez said on clandestine Liberation Radio, however, that the fight against the Sandinista government will continue.    ---   Opposition groups in Burma called for continued anti-government protests, but travelers returning from Rangoon reported calm in the capital. Officials in Thailand said Burma had closed a border crossing between the two countries. Last week's bloodshed, in which at least 95 were killed, ended with the resignation of leader Sein Lwin.    ---   Defense officials said Adm. Crowe, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is unlikely to change a Navy board's recommendation that a single USS Vincennes officer be lightly reprimanded in the downing of an Iran Air jetliner. The officer, who wasn't named, would be reprimanded for misinterpreting radar data, the officials said.    ---   Dukakis proposed the creation of a cabinet-level post to direct U.S. space efforts. The Democratic presidential nominee, on a visit to Worcester, Mass., said the nation's space program had &quot;lost its sense of purpose&quot; during the Reagan administration. He also said he backed continued development of a permanent manned space station.    ---   A Namibian radio report said military officials from South Africa, Angola and Cuba met along the Angola-Namibia border to discuss monitoring of a cease-fire in the 13-year-old war in Angola. No details were disclosed. The first phase of the truce plan, announced last week, calls for withdrawal of South African troops by Sept. 1.    ---   AIDS claimed about 13,000 lives in the U.S. last year, which would make it the 15th leading cause of death among Americans, the National Center for Health Statistics reported. The survey, the first that included AIDS in the agency's annual summary of disease, indicated that AIDS claimed more lives than did birth defects last year.    ---   China plans to give workers a large pay increase and link future raises to the inflation rate in an attempt to quell growing unrest in its cities, according to sources who attended a meeting of top government officials. The sources said the plan, a step back from recent policies, was a victory for Communist Party leader Zhao Ziyang.    ---   Died: Enzo Ferrari, 90, sports car builder, Sunday, in Modena, Italy. . . . Barry Bingham Sr., 82, former owner of the Louisville Courier-Journal, in Louisville, Ky. </TEXT></DOC>