<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0032 </DOCNO><HL> Politics '88 (A Special Report)---The Marathon Men:In the Race for the Ultimate Prize,It's on Your Mark, Get Set, Raise Money---By Brooks Jackson</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   To get to the White House, follow the rules: Spend lots of time being nice to rich people, especially New Yorkers and Californians. Photocopy your checks in alphabetical order. And look for loopholes.    At least since the Civil War, the road to the White House has been paved with money. Modern campaigns cost tens of millions of dollars, but it must be raised and spent under intricate rules that are supposed to prevent scandals.    The rules work, up to a point. Nobody has recently been caught paying hush money with leftover campaign cash from a White House safe, as happened during the Watergate scandal. Nor has anyone been caught selling off government oil reserves to a millionaire who picked up the markers of the president's political party, as happened in the Teapot Dome scandal of the 1920s.    But the rules also make presidential campaigning a bureaucratized, regulated business run by lawyers, accountants, and political marketers. Here is how the system works:    Rule 1: Find Some Fat Cats, Quick    Starting a presidential campaign requires an immediate jolt of big money. Long before a candidate declares for the White House, there are staff people to hire, offices to rent, telephones to install, computers to lease, airline tickets to buy, and lots of stuff to print.    Vendors want deposits or payment up front. Federally regulated telephone companies and airlines can't legally give credit to candidates anymore. Businesses all over Iowa and New Hampshire have learned, to their sorrow, that U.S. senators will write rubber checks when infected by White House fever. Federal Express kept Vice President Bush waiting for weeks before agreeing to set up a charge account.    The law forbids donors from giving more than $1,000 each, or $2,000 a couple. So candidates look for a chief money collector with lots of rich friends. Vice President Bush would have been perfect for the job if he weren't running himself. Sen. Robert Dole, after years on the tax-writing Finance Committee, seems to know half the corporate CEOs in the country. So the Bush and Dole campaigns are well fixed. But others need outside help.    Democratic hopeful Bruce Babbitt, from a wealthy family himself, tapped a rich Chicago commodity trader, Richard Dennis, to scout up donations. Gov. Michael Dukakis landed Robert Farmer, a fellow Harvard man who made a fortune publishing training materials for corporate managers. Sen. Albert Gore's chief fundraiser, Washington real estate developer Nathan Landow, shopped around for a presidential aspirant to back while claiming the ability to scare up $4 million from personal contacts.    Rule 2: Go Where The Money Is   A modern presidential campaign is designed to suck money out of New York and California and spend it in Iowa and New Hampshire. In the 1984 election, New York and California supplied nearly one-third of all donations exceeding $500 to presidential candidates of both parties. Those two states plus Texas and Florida supplied 49%, though the four together contain only 29% of the U.S. population.    Texas used to supply even more money before the slump in the oil industry. On the other hand, well-heeled Massachusetts, ranked seventh last time, most certainly will move up because of its prospering economy and the White House bid of its incumbent governor, Mr. Dukakis.    Candidates spend as much of their time campaigning for dollars in the money states as they do campaigning for votes in the early-primary and caucus states. Sen. Paul Simon's chief fundraiser, former Rep. Bob Edgar, calls New York, California and Illinois -- Sen. Simon's home state -- his &quot;first tier&quot; states. Florida, Texas and the lobbyists' haven, Washington, D.C., are &quot;second tier.&quot;    &quot;For every two days you spend in California, you spend a day in Texas,&quot; Mr. Edgar says. Sen. Simon makes at least one trip a month to New York, California and Illinois. Mr. Edgar estimates his candidate spends half his campaign time scouting for money.    Rule 3: Tap Federal Subsidies   Even conservatives who despise the idea take federal campaign subsidies. Candidates can get U.S. Treasury checks matching every dollar raised from a private donor, up to $250 a donor. But taking the subsidies means agreeing to spending limits.    Donation limits apply to everybody, but those who take subsidies must also agree to spend no more than about $28 million (depending on an inflation adjustment) to get their party's nomination. It is legal to spend any amount if it all comes from private donors. But just raising $28 million would take the equivalent of 28,000 people all writing $1,000 checks, or 280,000 giving an average of $100. So nearly everyone accepts the subsidies. The only major candidate to try the no-subsidy, no-limit route before this campaign was John Connally in 1980.    The subsidies produce some queer economics. Reacting to a news story suggesting their campaign was broke, Jack Kemp's campaign manager Charlie Black recently issued a news release insisting &quot;the Kemp campaign is not in the red&quot; -- even though it had only $407,000 in cash to cover $1.4 million owed to banks and vendors. Mr. Black's statement pointed out that future subsidies amounted to a hidden asset. He said donations already received would qualify the campaign for $3 million to be paid next year.    Raising small donations requires expensive, computer-addressed mass mailings. But candidates will gladly spend $1 to raise a $1 donation, because it can be &quot;matched&quot; with the additional $1 in federal money. A big list of small donors is also especially valuable late in a campaign, when it can be milked again and again for additional gifts. Too many &quot;maxed-out&quot; donors, who have given the legal limit of $1,000 each, can become a dead asset when their money is spent and more is needed.    Rep. Kemp, incidentally, is pursuing more small donations than his rivals because he has a relative shortage of rich backers. Republican Barry Goldwater did the same thing for the same reasons in 1964, as did Democrats George McGovern in 1972 and George Wallace in 1976 and Republican-turned-third-party candidate John Anderson in 1980.    Rule 4: Flash a Big Roll   Against all reason, money has become the measuring stick by which the media judge candidates during the early going, before anybody votes in primaries or caucuses.    In truth, while having no money is fatal to a campaign, spending a lot of it doesn't affect presidential voters very much because the races are dominated by lavish television, magazine and newspaper coverage. At the end of 1975, Jimmy Carter had eked out less than $1 million, far behind Sen. Henry Jackson's $2.6 million and Gov. Wallace's nearly $3 million. Running for re-election in 1980, Mr. Carter outspent Sen. Edward Kennedy $722,272 to $215,050 in the crucial Pennsylvania primary, where he hoped to deal the challenger a fatal blow. Mr. Carter lost anyway. The same year, Mr. Connally spent $13,698,056 to win a single Republican convention delegate.    Nevertheless, until the first votes are cast in Iowa and New Hampshire next year, reporters have little to count but the money. Consequently, candidates contend to have the healthiest bank balance &quot;showing&quot; on their reports. &quot;The first 'primary' was June 30, and we won,&quot; declares Mr. Farmer, Gov. Dukakis's fundraiser. On that cutoff date for disclosing campaign funds, the Dukakis campaign had raised a total of $4.6 million, outdistancing the nearest Democratic rival by more than $1 million. Reporters quickly began treating Gov. Dukakis as the frontrunner, though he still trailed Jesse Jackson in public-opinion polls.    Rule 5: Get Used to Bureaucracy    Gone are the carefree days of cash-filled briefcases. Presidential campaigns these days have to be run like any regulated business, with yards of red tape to deal with.    The Bush campaign employs about a dozen staff aides just to telephone donors who failed to list their occupation or employer, information that campaigns must put on disclosure reports. And when preparing an application for matching funds, the Bush staff takes more than 100 different steps to verify each check submitted to the Federal Election Commission's green-eyeshades brigade. Every check must then be copied, in alphabetical order, to facilitate the commission's spot-checking for accuracy.    The FEC wasn't always so fussy. In 1976 the presidential campaign of Pennsylvania Gov. Milton Shapp got $299,061 from the Treasury based on fraudulent applications that weren't uncovered until too late. Gov. Shapp later repaid the money, and some campaign workers were convicted of criminal charges.    Rule 6: Cheat   Candidates who take subsidies next year can't legally spend more than about $780,000 in Iowa or $465,000 in New Hampshire. There are limits for all other states, too, but they are high enough that they don't matter. The state limits are a colossal legal and accounting nuisance; the FEC regularly recommends that they be abolished, and Congress is expected to rescind them the next time it gets around to amending the law. Meanwhile, though, nearly everybody cheats. Jimmy Carter, Edward Kennedy, Ronald Reagan, Walter Mondale -- all have been cited.    Mr. Mondale's 1984 campaign was by far the most flagrant. &quot;All activities around New Hampshire probably cost us $2 million,&quot; boasts Robert Beckel, who was a top staff operative in the campaign; the limit at the time was $404,000.    The Mondale campaign used a lot of legitimate loopholes. It bought television time on Boston stations and charged 90% of it off against the Massachusetts limit, even though the only viewers who mattered resided in New Hampshire. Mr. Beckel describes other tactics that seem questionable but weren't challenged by FEC auditors. Out-of-state printing, postage and telephones were targeted on Iowa or New Hampshire but charged to the states where they originated. The campaign was caught and fined when it charged $56,000 worth of rental cars off against the budgets for Massachusetts and Minnesota even though they were actually used in Iowa and New Hampshire.    The winner in the general election used some creative methods, too. Ronald Reagan's campaign registered voters for the general election campaign using $2 million charged to his uncontested renomination. The staff of the election commission challenged that and recommended that $778,000 in federal subsidies be repaid to the Treasury. But the auditors were overruled by a 4-to-1 vote of the commission, in which all Republican members sided with the president.    In the current campaign, questions have been raised already about various gimmicks used to finance the search for Michigan delegates by Messrs. Bush and Kemp and by Pat Robertson. More questions are sure to arise as the campaign heats up. Equally sure is that the FEC won't be able to do much until long after the election is over.    &quot;I think this whole FEC thing is a sham,&quot; declares Mr. Beckel, reflecting a widespread attitude among presidential campaigners. &quot;If you're not finding every loophole that's available, you're not doing your job.&quot;    ---   Mr. Jackson is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>