<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870126-0045 </DOCNO><HL> The Pacific:The Soviets' Big Fish---By David Knibb</HL><DD> 01/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> PORT VILA, Vanuatu  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Soviet Union is about to sign its second fishing pact with a small Pacific island nation. In late 1985 its agreement with Kiribati raised international concern, but that contract lapsed without renewal in October. Now the Soviets have agreed with the South Pacific republic of Vanuatu on a fishing deal that is far more dangerous.    Negotiators have resolved all points but fees, and on that issue their differences are said to be minor. If they settle this last point, the Soviets will gain not only the right to fish in the Coral Sea, only 1,054 miles off the coast of Australia, but to establish ground facilities at Palikula on the big island of Espiritu Santo, maintain and replenish ships in that port, and ferry crews to it from the Soviet Union by Aeroflot charters. This will extend Russia's presence from Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam, into the Pacific by 6,200 miles.    This is precisely the sort of advance the U.S. hoped to thwart by negotiating a tuna treaty only three months ago with the 16 island nations of the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency. That agreement ended years of rancor between Pacific islanders and American fishermen, which many believed had led to the Soviets' initial success in signing an agreement with tiny Kiribati. Euphoria prevailed last October on the eve of concluding this U.S. multilateral fishing treaty when word came that the Soviet-Kiribati contract would not be renewed because of an impasse over fees.    With the benefit of hindsight, it is not only obvious now that such self-congratulation was premature, but also that the Soviets probably abandoned their contract with Kiribati because they were about to land a better one with Vanuatu.    The president of Kiribati, Ieremia Tabia, had granted the Soviets a one-year right to fish in the 200-mile exclusive economic zone around his remote atolls but had denied them the much-coveted port access they wanted. When it came time to renegotiate, President Tabia rejected their renewed request for shore facilities. No wonder the Soviets were willing to let such an agreement lapse, claiming the fees were too high, when Vanuatu offered them a land base at a better location. Kiribati is isolated in the Central Pacific. Vanuatu sits in the heart of Melanesia, midway between New Caledonia, Fiji and the Solomon Islands. Australia's Foreign Minister William Hayden predicts that once the Soviets come ashore &quot;they will do things that have nothing to do with commercial purposes&quot; (e.g., set up stations to intercept telecommunications and increase political activity in the area).    Vanuatu's foreign minister, Sela Molisa, dismisses such concerns. He points to the collapse of the Soviet-Kiribati pact as proof that the Soviets' interest is purely commercial. Why else, he argues, would they refuse to pay Kiribati more in license fees than the fish in those waters were worth?    Aside from ignoring the obvious answer that his country has offered the Soviets port access, Mr. Molisa is also blind to the other reasons why the Soviets were delighted to swap Kiribati for Vanuatu. Known as the New Hebrides before independence from France and the United Kingdom in 1980, the 80 islands of Vanuatu lie next to the troubled French territory of New Caledonia. A fishing agreement gives Moscow a base to track French warships entering or leaving their naval port at Noumea, as well as a chance to exploit political tensions that threaten New Caledonia.    The Soviets may also be able to capitalize on the anti-Western tilt of Prime Minister Walter Lini's government in Vanuatu. Dismissing Australia's concerns about the Soviet pact as &quot;paternalistic,&quot; Mr. Lini has proved to be an enigma in South Pacific affairs. He has turned Vanuatu's capital of Port Vila into a successful offshore banking center as well as the regional headquarters for the U.N.'s Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the Asian Development Bank. With a steady stream of business and government visitors, his young nation seems to be making strides toward economic self-reliance.    On the other hand, Mr. Lini early on raised eyebrows by recognizing Cuba and, more recently, Nicaragua. At the last meeting of the South Pacific Forum, he urged member nations to join him in supporting a number of radical causes outside the Pacific, such as recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization.    If the Soviet agreement makes &quot;a substantial contribution&quot; to Vanuatu's economy, as Foreign Minister Molisa predicts, what effect will this have on a young nation that still depends on foreign aid for nearly half its income? How much independence of any kind is gained if Vanuatu comes to rely on its Soviet contract for support?    The issue here is not whether Vanuatu has the right to choose a commercial partner. Rather, it is whether little Vanuatu has the resources, will and experience to control and avoid manipulation by its vastly bigger new partner. Vanuatu certainly has a right to contract. But it also has a duty to appreciate the consequences, particularly in view of its relative inexperience, of being the first place in the South Pacific to invite the Soviet Union to come ashore.    ---   Mr. Knibb is a free-lance journalist who specializes in Pacific affairs. </TEXT></DOC>