<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881103-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Morning of Prosperity in America --- Own Data Misled Stagnation Prophets </HL><AUTHOR> Albert Wohlstetter </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> ECO </IN><TEXT>   Is it true that U.S. &quot;average family income in real terms is right where it was 20 years ago?&quot; Have the &quot;poor been getting poorer, the rich richer, with the middle class squeezed in between?&quot;    Such statements are made not only by politicians, and will not end with the current campaign. For years some economists have been writing about two related specters: a general stagnation or reduction of incomes, and/or increased polarization of poor against rich, or non-whites or disadvantaged against whites and the advantaged. Bennett Harrison and Barry Bluestone, for example, in 1982, said: &quot;Since 1973, there has been virtually no real income gain. Thus even before the 1980s began, the American standard of living no longer placed us first among the developed nations of the world.&quot; They cited, as surpassing the U.S. in per-capita gross national product by 1980, West Germany, France, Belgium and Denmark among others. In their latest book they argue that, since the 1970s, government policies of deregulation, privatization, union-bashing and the like have created a civil war among corporations that has brought about &quot;declining average living standards and growing inequality&quot; and &quot;the polarization of our society.&quot;    Similar views of the rise and fall of the U.S. underlie proposals to &quot;manage&quot; international trade and capital flows, and to reduce defense commitments to allies. They explain why in a recent nationwide survey most respondents believed that economic competitors such as Japan or Germany &quot;pose a greater threat to U.S. national security than do military adversaries like the Soviet Union.&quot;    Yet in fact, U.S. per-capita real GNP from the late 1940s to 1987 has grown at about 2% a year, its historic rate since 1870 -- &quot;fast&quot; for a long-term sustained rate, according to Irving Kravis, the pioneer authority on international income comparisons. Theorists of stagnation and de-industrialization have been misled by the statistics they cite.    Impressions of stagnation or even decline frequently stemmed from focusing on the period from 1970 or 1973 to 1981 when the U.S., like the other market industrial countries, was slowed by the oil shocks of 1973-74 and 1979-80. Also, they depend on a version of the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index, which, among other things, seriously overstates inflation, in particular housing costs, and therefore understates economic growth. The Current Population Reports used the corrected index from 1983 on, but not for the earlier years. Therefore its tables in constant dollars -- of family income, or income to persons, or wage and salaries -- underestimate growth from any base year prior to 1983.    Statements that other major industrial countries have surpassed the U.S. in per-capita GNP are beset with even more statistical problems. They rely on exchange rates that are both volatile and depend only on those goods and services traded internationally. A more appropriate standard would be purchashing power parities (PPPs), including the full range of goods that determine purchasing power and living standards.    Broadly speaking, from the end of the 1940s to 1973, the ruined economies of Europe and Japan recovered and went a long way toward catching up. With our extensive help, they grew at a rate that was unprecedented for them or for any other country. Since the start of the oil shocks and breakup of the Bretton Woods system in 1973, only Japan has been growing more rapidly than the U.S. Even Japan's GNP growth rate has slowed down from about 10% to 4% a year and its per-capita GNP from 8.4% to 2.9%. In 1987, U.S. per-capita GNP (measured in PPPs) exceeded that of all but a few small countries -- some very small, such as Kuwait and Qatar; on the latest OECD measurements, it exceeded that of Japan by 41% and West Germany by 35%. (U.S. total GNP is much larger than that of any other country, nearly triple that of Japan and more othan five times that of the Federal Republic.)    Even if our allies were to achieve about the same per-capita GNP as the U.S., it is by no means clear that this would be bad from the U.S. standpoint. Why should faster growth by our trading partners lead to a slowdown of U.S. rates of growth, rather than an opportunity for better markets, more rapid exchange of advanced technology and an increase in the ability of the U.S. to realize more of its growth potential? Our helping them to catch up fed the great expansion of international trade and investment after World War II, and the &quot;Golden Age&quot; of rapid growth that included the U.S. Trying to stop their catching up in per-capita GNP would spread &quot;beggar-thy-neighbor&quot; policies of the kind that worsened growth rates for almost everyone in the interwar period.    Even if U.S. growth is healthy enough, what about its distribution? This question faces another set of statistical hurdles. To begin with, income-distribution comparisons have frequently relied on statistics about money income to families, rather than the more comprehensive and much less rubbery figure of money income to all persons. A substantial and increasing number of persons receiving income live outside of families as defined by the census. Moreover, families have been decreasing in size -- because of a decrease in the number of children and an increase in the fraction of families headed by one person -- and increasing in number. As a result, family income or household income figures are very misleading.    Also, census money-income figures leave out payments-in-kind by employers, such as contributions to health insurance, pension funds, etc., and payments-in-kind by governments, such as the means-tested subsidies for rent, food stamps or school lunches and especially Medicaid; or the non-means-tested government in-kind transfers that are mainly Medicare.    U.S. per-capita money income before taxes -- as reported in the Bureau of Census Household Surveys and deflated by the latest, corrected Consumer Price Index -- increased by 61% from 1967 to 1987. That is an annual rate of 2.4%. Adjusted roughly for private and government payments-in-kind, which have grown more rapidly than personal income in cash, the rate might be about 2.8%.    (The Census Household Surveys collect no information on income to households or to families or to persons after taxes. Census analysts have simulated the effect of taxes in special studies beginning in each year from 1980 to 1986. These studies concern households, an even more rubbery unit than families, and inferring the effects of taxes on money income to families and persons is precarious. In each of the seven years, however, taxes reduce the share in aggregate cash income of the highest fifth of households and raise it for the other fifths, especially the lowest.)    The final and least noticed statistical problem is that assertions about worsening or stagnation of incomes frequently cite nothing more than medians. They may compare the median, say, among blacks with a median, say, among whites. At best they compare a single summary number, purporting to measure inequalities within each distribution. But such summary numbers lose almost all the information needed to compare two income distributions at the low, middle and high ends.    If one compares low, middle and high incomes in 1987 with 1980, 1973 and 1967, there is no evidence of the polarization that is now a stereotype. On the contrary, there have been improvements all along the distribution, but especially at the low end. This is illustrated in figure 1, &quot;Income Growth Since 1967,&quot; showing gains from the base year 1967 at various percentiles of real cash incomes to persons. (See accompanying illustration -- WSJ November 3, 1988) (These gains at various percentiles reflect only part of the 61% improvement in per-capita real money income. The rest is due to more people -- particularly women -- entering the work force and earning income.)    The top curve shows that 1987 real money income to persons at all percentiles was substantially higher than in 1967. The 1973 and 1980 curves show that much was lost between those two years -- the effect of the shocks and recessions beginning in 1973. During the 1980-87 period, median- and high-income earners merely recouped what they lost in the previous seven years. However, gains in the 1980s were much sharper in the lower half and especially the lower third.    Between 1967 and 1987, income improved at the 10th, 20th and 30th percentiles. In the middle, from the 40th to the 70th percentiles, the improvements were about 10%. Above the 70th percentile, the gains averaged between 15% and 20%. This runs counter to the stereotypes.    So also for how real money incomes of non-whites have fared compared with whites at the low, middle or high ends of the distribution. Figure 2, &quot;White and Non-White Incomes,&quot; shows the ratio of the income of whites and non-whites at various percentiles of each distribution. The movement, especially at the low end, represents continuation of a trend found in &quot;Race Differences in Income,&quot; a late-1960s study by Sinclair Coleman and myself for the Rand Corporation.    Real money income of non-white persons as a whole is less than that of whites at all points in the distribution; of course, there is continuing discrimination and continuing disadvantage in schooling and other preparations for earning income. However, contrary to the impression current since at least the Kerner Commission in the mid-60s, non-white real money incomes have been gaining on white incomes, and much more rapidly at the low end. The trend is even more pronounced for blacks, as opposed to other non-whites. Most of the improvements at the low end have been in income to black women compared with white women. And women of all races have increased money income compared with men, especially at the low end.    While these trends upset the stereotypes, they conform with common sense. They are intuitive. At the low end of the distribution, real cash income supports of various sorts tend to even out differences among races or between the sexes, but it's much harder for those who are disadvantaged to get an equal chance for high incomes -- these are affected by years and quality of schooling, by positions in information networks about jobs, etc.    In sum, both the improvements in income to persons and their distribution bear out neither the thesis of stagnation nor decline in income. Nor any increased polarization in the distribution of income. Quite the opposite.    ---   Mr. Wohlstetter, the well-known strategy analyst, directs research at California-based Pan Heuristics. This article is an offshoot of an larger essay he is preparing for The New Republic on recent assertions of American decline.    (See related story: &quot;The Poor Are Trickling Upward&quot; -- WSJ Nov. 3, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>