<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890913-0096 </DOCNO><DD> = 890913 </DD><AN> 890913-0096. </AN><HL> Red Square Scare:@  As Coup Talk Sweeps@  Moscow, How Firm@  Is Gorbachev's Grip?@  ---@  Wild Rumors Add to Anxiety@  Over Strikes, Nationalism@  And Worsening Shortages@  ---@  Big Test Looms Next Week@  ----@  By Peter Gumble@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/13/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> VOLGOGRAD, U.S.S.R.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On an evening pleasure cruise along the Volga river, the mood was anything but festive.    Instead of dancing to the blaring disco music, most of the 100 or so passengers, Soviet officials in their 20s, sat on deck in small groups and fretted over the hottest topic in the country these days: the possibility of impending political disaster.    &quot;Do you think civil war is going to break out?&quot; Stepan Kisilyov, a senior correspondent for the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda, asked Viktor Goncharov, a newly elected member of the nation's parliament.    &quot;I just don't know,&quot; Mr. Goncharov replied grimly. &quot;It depends on the army.&quot;    &quot;You can't count on them,&quot; interjected a friend who serves in the armed forces. &quot;All the officers who support perestroika have been discharged.&quot;    Suddenly, the prospect of Mikhail Gorbachev's great reform experiment collapsing, perhaps in a river of blood, no longer seems beyond question. Over the past two months, the nation's mood has turned very dark as dozens of long-standing problems have spiraled, apparently out of control.    For the first time, the Soviet media are openly speculating about the prospect of a Kremlin coup. The doomsday talk has grown so rampant that last weekend Mr. Gorbachev himself, fresh back from his summer vacation, felt compelled to deny rumors about &quot;the threat of a coup or even civil war,&quot; accusing both radicals and conservatives of spreading alarm.    The seriousness of these rumors may be put to a test next week when the Communist Party's Central Committee meets. The Soviet leader is expected to address the thorny &quot;nationalities&quot; problem, and possibly use the occasion to fire some of his outspoken opponents in the Politburo. Should Mr. Gorbachev successfully take control of his critics on both the left and right, he could emerge with his own centrist standing strengthened. But should he prove unwilling or unable to take on his critics, some analysts say he could be weakened, perhaps irremediably.    Despite glasnost, the policy of greater openness, the government's inner machinations remain hidden, making any realistic evaluation of the chances of a coup impossible. There are no overt signs that conservatives are openly plotting, and nobody knows what the military top brass or the KGB security police -- the two institutions that could play key roles in any power shift -- really think of Mr. Gorbachev.    Both have reasons to be unhappy: The army has been forced to undertake wrenching change, including the demobilization of 500,000 officers, as it implements unilateral cuts in conventional arms. And the KGB, still the most secretive and feared body in the country, is under intense pressure to open up its activities to public scrutiny, something no intelligence service in the world does willingly.    At the same time, Mr. Gorbachev remains widely popular, though less so than he is in the West. Public support for his sweeping program of change, however, is being sorely tested by the country's worsening problems.    In almost every republic, latent ethnic tensions have exploded into the open, and hundreds have been killed in race riots in the south. Moldavia, Azerbaijan and the runaway Baltic republics have been plunged into political turmoil as nationalists have put themselves on a collision course with Moscow.    On top of this, ever since the coal miners of Siberia and the Ukraine stopped work in July and won major concessions, political strikes have become a potent weapon used by a variety of groups with grievances. The miners' strike, which ended when the Soviet leadership caved in to all their demands and made perhaps rash promises of quick improvement, cost the country millions and reinforced the reformers' fears.    Now, in the nation's republics, opponents of the present system are also learning to organize. Strikes by ethnic groups have paralyzed Moldavia and Azerbaijan in recent weeks, and they may catch on among the numerous other nationalities with grievances, including Crimean Tatars, ethnic Germans and Abkhazians, a minority that lives in Georgia.    &quot;The miners' strike is the first warning bell that we're moving toward a disaster,&quot; says Abel Aganbegyan, a leading Soviet economist. He cites the precedent of Poland, saying that strikes by Solidarity there destroyed the economy. The U.S.S.R. can't afford a similar experience, he says, adding that drastic measures are needed.    Violent crime, racketeering and gang warfare are on the rise, too.    Most troublesome for the Soviet leadership is that the economic reforms it started to implement two years ago have not only failed to improve living standards, they have even made some things worse. Almost every week, another household item joins the list of goods in short supply. The latest nationwide shortage is of tea, a beverage Russians traditionally consume in vast quantities.    Many seem close to despair as the economy continues to deteriorate. Tass news agency estimates that 1,000 out of the 1,200 goods that make up the standard Soviet &quot;basket of consumer goods&quot; are now in short supply.    A visit to a grimy supermarket in the center of Volzhsky, an industrial town near Volgograd, shows why disgruntlement is on the rise. One morning, the wire baskets arranged along the sides of the dimly lit store are empty but for dirty jars of pickled green tomatoes and small cans of herring in a sickly tomato sauce. At the meat counter, there is no meat or sausage, just two small gray chickens and lumps of lard. The store has no fresh vegetables, no salt, no washing powder and no sugar. There are some glasses of yogurt, but it is old and turning yellow. A middle-aged man with a string shopping bag walks in, wanders around grumbling and walks out again without buying anything.    Suddenly, a blue truck drives up and delivers some boxes. As they are unloaded at a desk near the cashier, a line quickly forms around the desk, even though people don't know what the boxes contain. As a woman unpacks them, they crane forward and see that they are filled with filter cigarettes -- yet another commodity in short supply here. The first man in the line buys 30 packs, cramming them into the pockets of his suit.    &quot;Our way of life is horrible and abnormal,&quot; one Moscow pensioner wrote to a newspaper in the capital recently. &quot;It has never been like this before. . . . Even during such a terrible time as the war, we were not so afraid of tomorrow.&quot;    As internal political tension mounts, the debate is now focusing squarely on Mr. Gorbachev himself. Soviet intellectuals have fretted about the future of Mr. Gorbachev's reforms ever since he started implementing them. But their talk about civil war, even if it remains just talk, marks a new and dangerous low point. Many believe that the reformers in the Kremlin are losing control.    The present black mood contrasts sharply with the jubilation many felt at the opening of the first democratically elected Soviet parliament last spring, which heard unprecedented criticism of the system and numerous calls for more rapid change. But some of the most ardent supporters of reform soon grew disillusioned when they realized they were in a distinct minority.    Since then, a group of reformist parliamentarians has been formed under the leadership of Kremlin maverick Boris Yeltsin, in effect a political faction of the type banned since the days of Lenin. This splintering of party unity has emboldened Mr. Gorbachev's critics. On a visit to the U.S. this week, Mr. Yeltsin went so far as to predict that Mr. Gorbachev has only six months to a year to show progress, or else he will face &quot;a revolution from below.&quot;    Several Western analysts here also believe that the disillusionment has been partly fueled by the crackdown in China following Mr. Gorbachev's visit there. &quot;Events in China came as a shock,&quot; says one European diplomat. &quot;They showed that reforms often don't work, that they can be reversed.&quot;    So far, Mr. Gorbachev seems unwilling to follow the example of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping and start a retrenchment. Visiting a Leningrad factory in early July, he told the workers there, &quot;If I were faced with the choice of returning to the old system of leading and running the country, I would immediately resign.&quot;    And in his televised speech last weekend, the Soviet leader again pledged to forge ahead with his plans for reform, promising that &quot;the Soviet Communist Party will be able to fulfill its role as society's political vanguard.&quot;    But as the list of problems has grown, even Mr. Gorbachev's confidence has failed to reassure those who fear an impending crisis. He himself has acknowledged that life has grown worse, not better for people during perestroika, and said that &quot;society feels the utmost importance of the present moment.&quot;    Public fears have been further inflamed by ominous statements from people such as Yegor Ligachev, a conservative rival of Mr. Gorbachev, who has become a figurehead for those Soviets who fear that perestroika and glasnost have already gone much too far.    &quot;Nationalists and separatists of various hues are actively working to disunite and weaken the leadership,&quot; Mr. Ligachev said in one recent Soviet television interview. &quot;We must take measures . . . to guarantee the security of our country.&quot;    Mr. Ligachev didn't elaborate on the measures he had in mind, although he said they should be political and not dictatorial. His statement came amid a fierce Brezhnev-style propaganda campaign in the Communist Party daily Pravda that has painted grass-roots political movements in the Baltics and elsewhere as antidemocratic forces bent on destroying the Soviet state. The harsh tenor of the rhetoric caused many to wonder whether it had been launched without Mr. Gorbachev's supervision.    Other conservatives have been even more explicit. A Communist official in the Ulyanovsk region in Central Russia last month issued a withering attack on the nation's elected parliament, the centerpiece of Mr. Gorbachev's political reforms, and called for a nationwide party purge. Justifying his call for a purge, Oleg Kasarov wrote: &quot;There were also purges under Lenin. . . . For many years we took from Lenin only what was convenient. Isn't this also happening in the era of perestroika?&quot;    Even more ominous, some writers have begun to draw parallels to the ouster of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in 1964. A recent article in Moskovskaya Pravda asked bluntly whether such a move could be repeated today. &quot;To call things by their names instead of hiding behind euphemisms, it is ultimately a question of a political coup, the removal of the leadership headed by Gorbachev, or at least making that leadership change course in running the country,&quot; Nikolai Mikhailov wrote.    Although he concluded that the new spirit of democracy and pluralism in the nation could act as a safeguard against another coup, Mr. Mikhailov conceded that many of the conditions leading to Mr. Khrushchev's downfall are present today.    &quot;The situation in 1989 is immeasurably more acute than it was 25 years ago,&quot; he wrote. &quot;In 1964 we had no inkling of the present inter-ethnic conflicts and ecological problems, the scale of today's inflation, the situation that exists on the food and commodity market, the burgeoning of organized crime, corruption and so on.&quot;    Another article, in the weekly Argumenty I Fakti, even went so far as to describe the stages leading to civil war. Leningrad author Sergei Andreyev suggested that nationalist turmoil and strikes in industry could be followed by widespread riots and the creation of vigilante groups by highly placed opponents of perestroika. Ultimately, responding to growing calls for law and order, the Soviet leadership would have to impose martial law and send tanks into the streets, he wrote.    Soviet reform-minded intellectuals are now desperately thinking through ways to prevent disaster. One possibility, aired by Andranik Migranyan, a researcher at a prestigious Moscow think-tank, would be for parliament to grant Mr. Gorbachev extraordinary powers to suspend the constitution and form a &quot;national salvation committee&quot; -- a step the Soviet leader shows no inclination to take.    Until recently, much of the talk of political disaster had been among intellectuals. But now it is starting to catch on among ordinary men and women too. The refrain to one of the most popular songs on the Soviet charts these days, by the group DDT, goes: &quot;We're anticipating civil war.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>