<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870126-0084 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   It is a Senate committee hearing on the administration's proposed budget for the Department of Education, a budget that is some $5 billion below last year's level. Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) is outraged, naturally. But so is Sen. Pete Domenici (R., N.M.), a conservative Republican who is a prominent &quot;hawk&quot; on the deficit. Secretary of Education William Bennett presents the administration's case calmly and cogently, defending the budget on both economic and educational grounds. His arguments obviously fall on deaf senatorial ears. Neither Democrats nor Republicans are even listening. It is a lost cause.    Question: Why on earth did the White House send such a budget to Congress when it must have known beforehand that it had no chance of being seriously considered, much less accepted? The answer to this question helps explain why the Reagan administration, in its sixth year, is so hopelessly stuck in the mud. It is an administration without an agenda.    To some degree, this is the price of success. That is certainly the case with regard to economic policy. The cuts in tax rates, together with a more relaxed -- more realistic is a better term -- monetary policy, have given us an economy about which the overwhelming majority of the American people feel pretty good.    True, serious problems remain. The budget deficit is too high, the trade deficit is far too high, and our manufacturing sector is still suffering from the absurdly strong dollar created by monetary policy in previous years. But while these are of authentic concern to economists and of demagogic concern to politicians, they have little impact on the popular majority. For most people, the key indicators are low inflation, a tolerable -- and, one may hope, declining -- level of unemployment, and a buoyant stock market. This combination will always inspire confidence, and there is overwhelming evidence that the popular verdict on President Reagan's economic policy is favorable.    Ironically, if predictably, this success leaves the administration on the defensive, since its liberal critics can now focus their dissenting energies on social policies affecting those portions of the population who, for whatever reason, are faring poorly. The popular media are pleased to sharpen and dramatize this focus, since sanctimonious compassion has always been a key element in their professional self-definition.    So we can expect that this Congress will busy itself with &quot;liberal&quot; legislation addressed to &quot;social issues,&quot; and one can fairly predict, on the basis of experience, that these new programs will be expensive and ineffectual. Housing for the homeless will soon turn into slums, while the very prospect of such housing will increase the population of the homeless. &quot;Worker retraining&quot; programs, of which there are already many in existence, will continue to have an indifferent success. Catastrophic medical insurance -- in itself a perfectly sensible idea, will be &quot;liberally&quot; designed as to create immense future problems for the health-services sector.    While liberal Democrats are demonstrating their elective affinity for popular, ill-designed social programs, the Reagan administration will be mute, or at least tongue-tied. It knows that there are important human problems that have remained immune to the general economic revival, problems that require an imaginative and sympathetic response by government. It just feels helpless before them.    If the Reagan administration seems incapable of bold action in the area of social policy, it is not because it is &quot;mean-spirited&quot; or &quot;lacking in compassion&quot; or committed to some kind of &quot;social Darwinism&quot; that permits only the fittest to survive. It is because it has quite mindlessly submitted to the tyranny of the budget.    This is a trap into which Republican administrations, with their &quot;businesslike&quot; way of thinking, are always likely to fall. All such administrations are haunted by the reproachful specter of an unbalanced budget and thus allow little time or space for the political imagination to survive, not to say flourish. As a result, Republican administrations are forever denying themselves any interesting initiatives in social policy, because such initiatives always cost some money.    Instead, they send to Congress &quot;responsible&quot; budgets, drawn up by the Office of Management and Budget on the premise that the quest for a balanced budget must take priority over any considerations of social policy. Somehow or other, the fact that Congress will then rip this budget to shreds seems irrelevant. OMB and the White House can always take consolation in &quot;having done the right thing,&quot; even if they have accomplished nothing. Just as liberal Democrats don't mind throwing money at social problems, even if nothing is accomplished, so conservative Republicans nourish their self-esteem with imaginary budget cuts. Both are convinced that they &quot;have done the right thing.&quot;    The tragedy of all this is that there are many social policies that could be properly sponsored by the Reagan administration. Yes, they would cost money. But the Democrats in Congress are going to spend that money in any case, on policies of dubious worth. Why leave this initiative to them, as their exclusive political property?    And, yes, the deficit is indeed a real problem. But it is silly for the White House to agree to an implicit separation of powers by which the administration takes responsibility for cutting the budget while Congress has the responsibility to spend new money on social programs. If the deficit is to be seriously addressed, Congress will have to assume an equal responsibility with OMB. It isn't likely to do so as long as political capital is to be earned by demonstrating &quot;compassion&quot; in the face of a &quot;stony-hearted&quot; administration.    It might be said by way of rejoinder that congressional liberals will blithely enact all proposed social policies that are popular and then cut the military budget drastically. This is possible, but unlikely. It is a lot easier to form a congressional majority against drastic cuts in defense than against relatively modest expenditures on particular social programs.    The only way to cope with bad initiatives in social policy is by proposing better ones. If the total expenditures end up too large, as will inevitably be the case, then let the argument rage about the relative merits and relative priorities of these policies. That would be infinitely better, from the point of view of the Reagan administration, than having the debate center on one set of social policies as against no set of social policies.    And there really are initiatives waiting to be seized. For instance, there are the problems of the elderly -- a major constituency that Republican administrations have either ignored or casually offended. Why should there be any restriction on incomes earned by those who receive Social Security, when private pensions aren't restricted? This restriction was originally imposed on Social Security by the trade unions, which always have an interest in artificially limiting the labor force. But trade unions are much weaker politically than they used to be, while the elderly are far more influential politically. The repeal of that restriction would be legislatively feasible -- how many congressmen would dare vote against it?    One can appreciate why a Democratic administration, with its close ties to the unions, should dodge this issue. But why is it that no Republican administration has ever proposed it?    Well, every time the idea is floated, the Treasury and OMB step in to point out that it would cost the government $1 billion to $2 billion in revenues, because there are many elderly who continue to work while disqualifying themselves for Social Security. But this argument is absurd. It ignores the fact that many senior citizens now collect Social Security while working for untaxed cash income. It also ignores the fact that any economy is enriched by the employment of skilled, older people and that current law denies us the use of a valuable human resource.    Indeed, still focusing on the elderly, one can contemplate a more radical proposal. Though poverty among the elderly has sharply declined in recent years, about 10% still exist below the poverty line and are dependent on welfare. What is the point of having elderly people on welfare rather than on Social Security? Why not raise Social Security payments so that the Reagan administration can proclaim proudly that it has abolished poverty for our older citizens?    Again, the answer is that the Treasury and OMB would have an apoplectic fit as they looked at the expenditure -- quite large indeed -- that would be required. But that money will be spent by congressional liberals in any case, on less worthy programs, and to their own political benefit. Why not preempt such social expenditures? There is, after all, a triple benefit in establishing a legislative priority for the elderly: Congress cannot deny it, no new social problems are created through a distortion of economic incentives, and the elderly have shown themselves capable of political gratitude.    Against this, it will be said that any such initiative would be &quot;irresponsible,&quot; since it would ignore the budget deficit. This is a false conception of responsibility. It is an apolitical conception, in circumstances in which politics dominates. If the White House persists -- as Republican administrations have in the past persisted -- in thinking like accountants, while congressional liberals think politically, it is pursuing a losing strategy. The deficit will have to be addressed by Congress as well as by the White House. And Congress won't do it so long as it has no hard political choices to make.    To put it another way: If the White House positions itself, through its budgets, to take exclusive responsibility for the deficit, Congress will happily add to that burden. But if the White House's budget should have more political appeal and less financial rectitude, Congress just might find it convenient to get serious about the deficit.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>