<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870413-0033 </DOCNO><HL> Bankruptcy Option:Texaco Files PetitionFor Chapter 11 as TalksWith Pennzoil Collapse---Largest Such Case ComesAs 2 Sides Are Said to BeAt Least $2 Billion Apart---Woes for Both Sides' Holders---This article was prepared by Allanna Sullivan,Thomas Petzinger Jr. and Matt Moffett</HL><DD> 04/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TX PZLPETROLEUM (PET)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY) </IN><TEXT>   Wild teen-agers with a death wish have been known to play a game called chicken. Two cars race toward each other at high speed. The driver who veers away first loses.    For the last seven days, Texaco Inc. and Pennzoil Co. were engaged in a corporate version of chicken. But in this game nobody veered away, causing a corporate collision of historic proportions.    Yesterday, Texaco filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, setting in motion the largest case by far in bankruptcy-law history. At the time of the filing, Pennzoil and Texaco apparently remained at least $2 billion apart in their efforts to settle their litigation over the contested ownership of Getty Oil. Texaco remained unwilling to pay much more than $2 billion, and Pennzoil was unwilling to accept anything less than $4 billion or $5 billion.    The filing occurred at 11:20 a.m. in the Larchmont, N.Y., home of Howard Schwartzberg, the only U.S. bankruptcy judge currently sitting in White Plains, N.Y., where Texaco has its headquarters. Only 20 minutes earlier, the judge was notified that Harvey Miller, a prominent bankruptcy lawyer on retainer by Texaco, was on his way to the judge's house, intent on having the company's Chapter 11 petition signed immediately.    James W. Kinnear, who became the president and chief executive officer of Texaco barely three months ago, announced the Chapter 11 filing in an overcrowded, overheated conference room in midtown Manhattan at 3:45 p.m.    &quot;Out of necessity,&quot; he said, &quot;we've prepared for this decision for months. Still, when a decision had to be made, it didn't come easy.&quot; Visibly weary following a seven-hour board meeting that stretched late into Saturday night and a meeting of at least five hours yesterday, Mr. Kinnear said, &quot;This process has been enormously painful. I love this company.&quot;    He heaped blame on Pennzoil, charging that it wouldn't negotiate reasonably and that it had fanned anxiety among Texaco creditors and business partners. Essentially, he accused Pennzoil representatives of outright lying. By publicly denying the existence of meaningful settlement talks in recent days, he said, Pennzoil had made the business and financial worlds all the more wary of dealing with Texaco.    &quot;Pennzoil has turned the knob one too many times,&quot; Mr. Kinnear said. &quot;Texaco's ability to finance our business has virtually ceased.&quot; In an interview later he added: &quot;The board took definitive action rather than let the company die by inches.&quot;    Pennzoil wasn't bashful in its assessment of Texaco either. &quot;It was a totally irrational act,&quot; said Joe Jamail, Pennzoil's chief trial lawyer. Baine Kerr, one of the company's top negotiators and its recently retired president, derided the filing as a misguided litigation tactic. &quot;In my judgment,&quot; said Mr. Kerr, &quot;they're simply trying to misuse the whole bankruptcy process.&quot; Far from refusing to negotiate reasonably, Mr. Kerr said, Pennzoil made two settlement offers on Saturday.    Pennzoil's surprise at the action suggested that it had viewed Texaco's longstanding Chapter 11 threat as nothing more than a bluff. Early yesterday afternoon, before his public announcement of the action, Mr. Kinnear and his wife, Mary, met at a Manhattan hotel with J. Hugh Liedtke, Pennzoil's chairman and chief executive. As Mr. Kinnear recalled it in an interview, Mr. Liedtke looked at him and said, &quot;I didn't believe you'd do it.&quot;    Both companies moved to put the best face possible on the action. Texaco said that only Texaco Inc., the parent company, and two finance units -- Texaco Capital Inc. and Texaco Capital N.V. -- were named in the Chapter 11 petition. These corporations account for only 4% of Texaco's revenue. Thus, practically all of Texaco's operating units will be free to carry on business as usual, said Alfred C. DeCrane Jr., the company's chairman. &quot;They will continue to meet all obligations.&quot;    In addition, Texaco said, it could well be sprung from Chapter 11 if it reaches an out-of-court solution to the case. &quot;The fastest way out of bankruptcy,&quot; said Mr. Kinnear, &quot;is settlement.&quot;    Pennzoil, for its part, insisted that it could still collect the full judgment. &quot;I see no reason why we shouldn't be able to collect everything,&quot; said Pennzoil's Mr. Kerr.    But although opinions vary widely on the likely outcome and even the mechanics of Texaco's reorganization proceedings, many experts agree that no one -- except the lawyers -- will emerge a winner, and perhaps least of all Texaco and Pennzoil.    Texaco employees could be called upon to share some of the burden. Mr. Kinnear called layoffs unlikely, at least if the company's wary trade creditors resume extending credit. As for pension payments, Texaco, with large unfunded retirement funds, may have to seek bankruptcy-court approval to maintain benefits or fund contributions at their full level.    Texaco shareholders will certainly suffer. Texaco acknowledged that indefinite suspension of its common-stock dividend is a foregone conclusion. Its stock price is almost certain to tumble this morning, analysts say, to about $26 from its recent, very depressed level of about $32. Later in the day, however, it may begin to recover, they say. While the Texaco board had authorized a Chapter 11 filing earlier as a contingency, the decision to go ahead yesterday was apparently made somewhat less painful by the board's belief that small-time investors have already been chased out of the stock.    Pennzoil shareholders are likely to receive a rude shock of their own this morning, particularly because recent settlement speculation inflated the company's stock price by several points, to well above $90.    Pennzoil now finds itself in the unhappy position of having won a legal judgment that has already survived the most detailed appellate review it can receive but is every bit as unsecured as Texaco's due bills for drilling mud and paperclips. Pennzoil lawyers have expressed confidence that they will emerge with a valuable settlement in any Texaco reorganization. They have also insisted that there is a chance that Texaco's entire Chapter 11 case will be thrown out. But if the case plays all the way out, Pennzoil will have to wait -- years, perhaps -- along with other creditors and hope for a settlement that favors it.    Yesterday was one of the few times that Mr. Liedtke, who is Pennzoil's founder as well as its chairman, may have misjudged the timing of a deal. Over and over he has proved himself as a wartime general. But the role of peacetime general was altogether different.    From last Tuesday onward, settlement discussion occurred either in person or by telephone almost daily. Mr. Liedtke knew time was short for Texaco. Its day-to-day financing and operations were beginning to fall apart, with some of the biggest banks and oil companies in the world beginning to doubt its ability to meet its obligations. Texaco made Pennzoil a half-dozen offers. Some dealt with a side issue: Giving Pennzoil enough &quot;security&quot; while Texaco was making its appeals so that Pennzoil wouldn't attach liens, seize assets or make any other moves that would weaken Texaco's ever more delicate financial condition.    At one point, Texaco offered roughly $100 million -- nonrefundable, in cash -- for a promise that Pennzoil wouldn't seize any security until the appeals were exhausted. Offers were presented to settle the entire case: One involved a cash payment to Pennzoil, believed to total about $2 billion; another called for a payment of preferred stock in exchange for certain Pennzoil assets; under another, the contested Getty Oil assets would have been divided.    Mr. Liedtke played the pressure game beautifully, holding out for more, letting Texaco do most of the offering. It appears that he held out for the last, big, final number yesterday. In a sense, he had no choice, having declared as recently as two weeks ago that there was &quot;no way&quot; the case could be settled &quot;in the $2 billion range.&quot;    In the end, an offer appreciably higher than that never came. Fearful of opening for business today without a settlement on either the security issue or the whole case, Texaco filed its Chapter 11 petition.    &quot;We were quite simply forced to make a Chapter 11 filing,&quot; Mr. Kinnear said yesterday.    How the 85-year-old former Texas Co. changed overnight from mighty multinational to debtor in possession is indeed a case of high-pressure confrontation.    Pennzoil won a verdict of $10.53 billion, including $3 billion in punitive damages, in November 1985, when a Houston jury found that Texaco had unlawfully interfered with a binding merger agreement between Pennzoil and Getty Oil. The following month, a state-court judge formally entered a judgment for $11.1 billion, a figure that included interest.    Texaco quickly won a federal-court order blocking Pennzoil from installing liens or demanding a $12 billion bond, and for more than a year the companies held sporadic settlement talks while Texaco pressed forward with its appeals. In February, a Texas court of appeals knocked off $2 billion in punitive damages from the judgment, bringing the total to $10.3 billion, including interest.    By then, Texaco knew that it was fighting for its life. Mr. Kinnear led the battle. On Jan. 8, only eight days after becoming chief executive, he made an offer to purchase Pennzoil's oil and natural-gas assets for preferred stock valued at somewhat less than $1 billion. It was a low offer, and by some estimates it didn't even reflect the value of the assets Texaco would acquire.    But within two weeks, Texaco had reason to fear that it wouldn't escape from the case at such a low price. For on Jan. 12, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments on a year-old federal-court injunction that had prevented Pennzoil from taking any action under Texas law to secure its judgment and that had spared Texaco from having to post an appeals bond equal to the amount of the judgment plus interest and costs -- a figure of about $12 billion.    Texaco knew it was at risk; the lower federal courts had erected the injunction on a novel legal theory. But the arguments before the Supreme Court went much worse than Texaco had expected. Some of the justices didn't appear at all convinced that federal courts should invade the jurisdiction of the state courts.    Texaco decided to begin preparing for exposure to the Texas rules. It started harvesting cash from all possible sources -- selling receivables, for instance, and pledging stock in foreign units to obtain new credit lines. The company's cash swelled to more than $2 billion from the usual level of less than $1 billion. This, the company reasoned, would help insulate it from a sudden withdrawal of credit if an adverse Supreme Court decision touched off panic among lenders. It would also give the company a cash infusion before any Chapter 11 filing.    Then, on March 31, Mr. Liedtke stood before a capacity crowd of New York security analysts and declared, &quot;If anyone thinks this case is going to be settled in the $2 billion range -- there's no way.&quot; Texaco, which had two representatives in the audience, immediately interpreted the comment as an invitation for an offer in that range. Debate raged within the company and the board over whether Texaco should match what was perceived as an opening bid by Mr. Liedtke. Some executives were appalled at the idea of paying more than $2 billion to settle a case in which Texaco passionately believed that Pennzoil was entitled to $500 million at most -- if anything at all.    On Sunday, April 5 -- eight days ago -- a litigation committee appointed by the board held a meeting to make recommendations. It consisted of Messrs. Kinnear and DeCrane; Frank T. Cary, a retired chairman of International Business Machines Corp.; Robert A. Beck, a chairman emeritus of Prudential Life Insurance Co. of America; and Thomas S. Murphy, the chairman and chief executive of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. The committee was told by Texaco's lawyers that the soonest the Supreme Court would rule would be the following day but that that wasn't likely. A ruling probably wouldn't come before late April, they thought, because of a scheduled court recess.    The Texaco lawyers were wrong. The Supreme Court took away Texaco's protection from the bond and lien rules the next morning -- Monday, April 6.    By that afternoon, the Texaco board had been assembled -- some by phone and others in person -- to approve steps that the litigation committee had set out only hours earlier. Three settlement offers were approved. Authority was also granted to formulate offers on the bond and lien issue. And the litigation committee was authorized to file for Chapter 11 if that became necessary.    After the board meeting, Mr. Kinnear called Mr. Liedtke requesting a meeting in Houston, and Mr. Liedtke agreed to attend. That evening and the following morning, two Texaco jets flew to Houston with Messrs. Kinnear, DeCrane and their entire litigation and settlement staff on board. Retired Chairman John McKinley would join them later in the week.    At 2 p.m. Tuesday, Messrs. Kinnear and DeCrane joined Messrs. Liedtke and Kerr in a suite at the Lamar Towers south of downtown Houston. Over the course of a cordial meeting, the three settlement proposals that had been authorized by the board a day earlier were presented.    Under one plan, Texaco would have sold Pennzoil the three-sevenths interest in Getty Oil that Pennzoil had arranged to obtain more than two years earlier. The price would have been the same figure of more than $3 billion to which Pennzoil and Getty Oil had agreed in principle.    Texaco had issued a similar settlement offer at least once before in unsuccessful settlement talks, but this time Texaco offered to take into account the reasons for which Mr. Liedtke had previously rejected the proposal. He had complained that Texaco had sold many of the assets and enjoyed the benefit of billions of dollars of cash flow from Getty's oil and gas reserves. Thus, Mr. Kinnear said, Texaco this time would agree to throw in three-sevenths of its Getty Oil cash flow, as well as three-sevenths of the proceeds Texaco had received from selling Getty assets, with any disputes to be settled by arbitration. The proposal was rejected.    Texaco also offered to give Pennzoil less than $3 billion of preferred stock, which was understood to have carried voting rights, in exchange for Pennzoil's sulfur business. Depending on how that business was valued, the proposal had a value of less than $2 billion, perhaps much less. It, too, was spurned.    Finally, Mr. Kinnear offered cash -- about $2 billion. Again Mr. Liedtke said no.    On Tuesday and in succeeding talks on Wednesday and Thursday, the top executives continued to devote the majority of their time to the issue of settling the whole case. But they also discussed ways of settling the bond and lien issue to resolve the immediate crisis facing Texaco. The security discussions were also carried out in more detail in separate talks between Richard Brinkman and Norman Luke, the top financial officers of Texaco and Pennzoil respectively.    On Tuesday, Texaco presented a variety of proposals for securing Pennzoil's judgment. One was a promise that Texaco's net worth would be maintained at a certain level, believed to be equal to the amount of Pennzoil's judgment. Another was to give Pennzoil $100 million for a promise to forswear filing any liens or demanding a bond. If Pennzoil's $10.3 billion judgment survived all appeals, the $100 million would be Pennzoil's to keep.    As the meetings continued, Texaco's financial position went from precarious to devastating. Creditors were growing alarmed over a possible Chapter 11 filing. Meanwhile, Mr. Jamail, Pennzoil's lead trial lawyer, was making public statements suggesting that no meaningful settlement talks were under way -- which, according to Texaco's Mr. Kinnear, increased the anxiety level of the business and financial markets. Pennzoil's insistence that no action was occurring was &quot;false,&quot; Texaco's Mr. Kinnear declared yesterday, &quot;and unsettled the credit and financial markets.&quot;    Texaco's problems were far greater than previously reported. Following the Supreme Court judgment on Monday, Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. and other banks told Texaco that they would cancel a $1 billion receivables-financing agreement if Pennzoil filed liens against more than $500 million of Texaco assets. At the same time, Pennzoil was publicly demanding some form of security for the entire $10.3 billion judgment. On Wednesday, the banks told Texaco that they would no longer purchase receivables at all -- no matter what. Executives began worrying about a &quot;run&quot; on Texaco debt -- a situation in which an action by Pennzoil would trigger defaults under one set of debt securities that would trigger defaults under still more debt securities.    Chase Manhattan Bank asked for time deposits to cover routine &quot;daylight overdrafts.&quot; Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. also demanded time deposits as security against any daily transactions. Bank of America refused to wire certain funds without first receiving wire-reference numbers proving that Texaco had incoming funds to cover the transactions. Banks in Japan, Italy, West Germany, the Netherlands and elsewhere began refusing to engage in foreign-currency transactions.    The oil patch was no more understanding. Some trade creditors and business partners who were owed money by Texaco -- and who also owed money to exaco -- quit paying their bills to Texaco.    Sonatrach, the Algerian national oil company, canceled future deliveries of crude oil and natural-gas liquids indefinitely. Challenger Petroleum refused to sell any more oil to Texaco than Texaco was selling to it. Citgo threatened to quit doing business with Texaco altogether. Occidental Petroleum demanded cash up front for a cargo of crude, and British Petroleum refused to accept an order for fuel oil. Atlantic Richfield Co. balked at doing business without special safeguards. And there were others.    Texaco's crude-oil supply was growing so short that by late in the week, it was investigating whether it might have to close a major refinery somewhere in the U.S.    With its business falling apart, Texaco continued importuning settlement on the bond and lien issue as well as the entire case. On Thursday, another meeting of the top executives was held in Houston's Remington Hotel. By Friday, Texaco had made another offer to settle by purchasing Pennzoil assets -- this time its oil and gas assets, for preferred stock totaling more than $3 billion. (The assets probably have a value of $1 billion or more.) On the security issue, Texaco offered to provide a $1 billion letter of credit that would have secured that much of Pennzoil's judgment and would have been returned to Texaco if the company ever got the judgment reversed.    By the end of the week, Mr. Liedtke had encouraged Texaco to begin making offers in the range of $4 billion to $5 billion, a suggestion that Mr. Kinnear politely declined. Friday evening, the entire Texaco contingent flew back to Texaco headquarters in White Plains, where a board meeting was to begin Saturday afternoon.    Early that morning, two offers arrived from Pennzoil, one involving cash and securities and the other a more complex approach. The amount isn't known, except that it was in the range of $3 billion to $5 billion. Texaco remained unwilling to exceed $2 billion or perhaps a few hundred million more than that.    For more than seven hours, until 10:30 p.m., the meeting dragged on, with only a break for sandwiches. The company's bankruptcy counsel made extensive presentations. Every option other than a bankruptcy-law filing was explored. Mr. Kinnear returned home as a birthday for his daughter, visiting this country from Brazil, was coming to a close. He insists that he slept well Saturday.    Before he left the office, Mr. Miller, the company's bankruptcy counsel, was asked to call the bankruptcy-court clerk to figure out which judge to file the petition with. Exactly 12 hours later, Mr. Miller was ringing the doorbell of Judge Schwartzberg's residence in Larchmont.    Yesterday, James Shannon, a city of Houston worker who sat on the jury that delivered the verdict against Texaco, was asked whether he had any regrets about his role in triggering the series of events that culminated in Texaco's bankruptcylaw filing. &quot;Hell no,&quot; he replied. &quot;The evidence we used to render the verdict is still as valid and intact as it was then.&quot;    Mr. Shannon criticized Texaco's legal maneuvering to escape from the judgment. &quot;To me,&quot; he said, &quot;what they've done since they lost the verdict has been at least as bad as what they did to earn the verdict.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>