<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861216-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/16/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REGAN AND SHULTZ ARE SLATED to testify on the Iran-Contra affair.    The White House chief of staff and the secretary of state are to appear today before the Senate Intelligence panel, which is conducting hearings on covert sales of arms to Iran and the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels. Regan was described as &quot;itching to testify publicly,&quot; but the panel will hold closed sessions. Separately, CIA chief Casey was taken to a Washington hospital for observation following &quot;a minor cerebral seizure.&quot; Meanwhile, two Reagan officials confirmed that the CIA gave Iraq data about Iranian defenses while Tehran was buying U.S. arms.    Switzerland agreed to a U.S. request to freeze at least two bank accounts linked to the Iran-Contra operation. It was Bern's first action in the case.    ---   A special panel recommended pay raises ranging from about $50,000 to $75,000 for congressmen, federal judges and cabinet officers beginning early next year. Reagan will decide whether to accept or revise the recommendations, and any salary increases would be included in the budget to be sent to Congress next month.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that a federal law barring corporations from spending money directly in election campaigns violates the First Amendment rights of nonprofit political and ideological groups. The law requires firms to establish political action committees to engage in campaign fund raising.    ---   The U.S. agreed to reduce its voting power in the World Bank to enable Japan to assume a larger share in the 151-nation organization, the bank said. The change is contingent on agreement by members to a proposed change in the institution's charter to allow the U.S. to retain veto power over major policy changes.    ---   Pakistani rioters looted shops, banks and homes and set them ablaze throughout Karachi. Authorities said at least 125 people have been killed and about 480 injured in three days of ethnic violence, which was prompted by government searches for drugs and weapons in Pathan neighborhoods.    ---   The Philippine government threatened to arrest former President Marcos if he returns from exile to attend the funeral of his sister, who died Sunday. A Manila spokesman said Marcos &quot;can be a destabilizing factor.&quot; Separately, the army reported its first clash with communist rebels since a 60-day truce began last Wednesday.    ---   The Reagan administration has moved a step closer to proposing a plan that would insure Americans against the cost of catastrophic illness. HHS Secretary Bowen presented his plan to Reagan and a group of cabinet members and received a generally favorable response, White House aides said.    ---   The aircraft Voyager flew over Hawaii on the second day of its attempt to fly around the world without stopping or refueling. Mission operators said the plane, which damaged its wings on takeoff Sunday, was in good condition and would proceed with what is expected to be a 10-day flight.    ---   A U.S. judge in Tennessee awarded seven fundamentalist families more than $50,000 in damages for having to send their children to Christian schools to avoid public school textbooks that offended their religious beliefs. The judge ruled Oct. 24 that the local school board had denied the families' civil rights.    ---   A majority of the Senate urged Reagan to place the U.S. back under the limits of the unratified SALT II arms treaty, which the White House breached last month. In a letter, 57 of the 100 members of the Senate that convenes next month said the U.S. action was an &quot;open invitation to the Soviets&quot; to violate the pact's numerical limits.    ---   Britain's Thatcher is expected to come under criticism in Parliament this week because she reportedly favors a U.S. airborne-radar system for the Royal Air Force. Supporters of Britain's Nimrod radar airplane raise the prospect of lost jobs if the U.S. system is chosen.    ---   Two bombs exploded early today at French-owned businesses in Barcelona, Spain, injuring 19 people. Police said no one immediately claimed responsibility for the attacks, but Basque separatists were suspected. France recently has cracked down on Basque exiles in its southwest region.    ---   Vietnam's Communist leader blamed the party and the government for economic policy failures. Speaking at the opening of a party congress in Hanoi, Truong Chinh said it was time to &quot;purify&quot; both of them. Meanwhile, diplomatic sources said Chinh and other top Vietnamese officials will resign during the session, which closes Thursday.    ---   A bomb exploded inside a car at the Provins, France, home of former French Justice Minister Alain Peyrefitte, killing his driver. Peyrefitte, who is currently mayor of Provins and a member of Parliament, wasn't in the vehicle. The Direct Action terrorist group claimed responsibility.    ---   The Central African Republic opened its trial against former Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa, who returned to the country Oct. 23 from a self-imposed exile. Bokassa, who had been sentenced to death in absentia following his 1979 ouster, faces 14 charges, including murder and cannibalism.    ---   Anti-apartheid groups proceeded with plans for a Christmas campaign against South Africa's six-month-old state of emergency, despite last week's renewed crackdown by Pretoria. The groups urged the closing today of beer halls in black townships for 10 days, but dropped a call for a consumer boycott of white-owned stores.    ---   The Soviet Union signed two of three treaty protocols barring the use and testing of nuclear devices in a South Pacific zone established last year by 13 nations in the region. The third protocol applies only to the U.S., Britain and France. The White House reportedly is studying the pact. </TEXT></DOC>