<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0018 </DOCNO><HL> Trade Bill Clears3 House Panels,Goes to Floor---Measure Intended to ForcePresident to RespondTo Unfair Competition---By Monica LangleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN LABOR JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Comprehensive trade legislation cleared three congressional committees and now goes to the House floor.    The sweeping trade measure, which has been a top priority of the Democratic-controlled Congress, is intended to make the president take stronger and more frequent action in response to this nation's trade woes. The legislation would require the president to retaliate against certain unfair trade practices by foreign countries. It also would set up regulatory and enforcement mechanisms to ensure better treatment of U.S. businesses in international commerce.    Despite the relatively quick committee action, the trade package's fate depends on how Democrats resolve a simmering feud on the House floor. There is a deep division over trade within the Democratic party.    Some Democrats want to load up the legislation with measures to help import-battered industries and organized labor. They see the certain presidential veto of such a bill as a way to keep trade a political issue for the Democrats in 1988. Other Democrats, led by House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, want a workable bill that gives President Reagan no choice but to sign a Democratic trade initiative.    The bulk of the comprehensive measure was approved 34-2 by the Ways and Means Committee, which voted to require presidential retaliation against certain unfair trade practices by foreign countries. The legislation also would improve benefits to workers displaced by imports and provide new sanctions against imports that are subsidized or dumped at less than fair value.    Separately, as its part of the trade legislation, the House Energy and Commerce Committee approved 26-15 its package giving the president authority to restrict certain foreign acquisitions. That measure also would authorize negotiations to gain access in foreign markets for U.S. telecommunications equipment.    In a close vote of 21-20, the Commerce Committee also approved an amendment requiring disclosure of foreign investment in the U.S. Opponents said the measure would discourage foreigners from buying stocks in the U.S.    A third part of the legislation, approved 35-15 by the House Banking Committee, includes the establishment of an international authority to deal with Third World debt. Treasury Secretary James Baker opposed this provision, calling it a &quot;clear bailout of commercial banks by the public sector.&quot; The banking package also would require the U.S. to deny primary dealer status to a securities firm in a foreign country if that country doesn't allow U.S. firms equal access to its markets.    Rep. Rostenkowski called the Ways and Means Committee's action &quot;historic&quot; and noted its bipartisan support. The committee made few changes in the chairman's proposal, which he had already revised in order to meet objections by the Reagan administration that it was too protectionist.    &quot;Our chances of having a trade bill signed have escalated greatly,&quot; said Rep. Bill Frenzel (R., Minn.). &quot;That is a probability now, not just a possibility.&quot;    The most controversial issue is yet to be voted on, however. That is a proposal by Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) to force retaliation against countries that have huge trade surpluses with the U.S. Rep. Gephardt decided to postpone offering his amendment until the entire House takes up the trade package.    Yesterday, Mr. Gephardt, a presidential aspirant, criticized the Ways and Means bill for its &quot;lack of a results-oriented standard to determine whether we're making progress in clearing away unfair trade practices of foreign countries.&quot;    The Commerce Committee approved an amendment to ban the importation of digital audio-tape machines for one year unless they have special encoding devices to prevent unauthorized taping by consumers. The measure, backed by the recording industry, passed 24-18. It is aimed at protecting music copyright holders.    &quot;It seems a very strange notion that consumers should be allowed the right to steal,&quot; said Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), the amendment's sponsor.    The Commerce Committee package would authorize specific negotiations over access of telecommunications equipment and services into foreign markets. If negotiations failed, the president could take reciprocal action.    The measure also would give the president authority to restrict foreign acquisition of U.S. businesses if such acquisitions would &quot;threaten national security or impair essential commerce.&quot; The provision is directed at situations similar to the recent proposed merger of Fujitsu Ltd. and Schlumberger Ltd.'s Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. unit. The proposal, which was eventually called off, caused concern among U.S. officials, although they had little legal authority to block it.    The disclosure provision would require foreign investors to report to the Commerce Department any significant interest in a U.S. business or real estate. Holdings of large blocks of corporate securities of over $10 million in one company also would have to be reported.    &quot;I don't believe this will cause an exit of some $60 billion to $80 billion in capital, as some have maintained,&quot; said Rep. John Bryant (D., Texas), sponsor of the amendment. &quot;That claim is provided by those who buy and sell stock and make commissions doing so. . . . This amendment doesn't discourage foreign investment; it just lets us know who owns what.&quot;    The Ways and Means Committee package would require the president to retaliate against certain unfair trade practices, but give him discretion in deciding the form of retaliation. It also would allow him to waive retaliation if it &quot;is not in the U.S. national economic interest.&quot;    The legislation would make foreign violations of workers' rights an unfair trade practice against which the president could order trade retaliation. A violation of workers' rights would include denying workers the right to associate, to organize and to bargain collectively. Failure to establish minimum wages and work hours and to set occupational safety and health standards could also be deemed unfair trade practices.    The measure would increase retraining benefits for workers whose jobs are lost because of imports. It would set up a voucher system for payment of these benefits.    The committee toughened provisions for dealing with foreign companies that repeatedly &quot;dump&quot; goods -- selling them at unfairly low prices -- in the U.S. It provided for expedited action on dumping complaints against foreign companies and took steps to make it easier for U.S. companies to bring civil suits against foreign manufacturers.    Unlike the Reagan administration's trade package, the Rostenkowski bill wouldn't require a domestic industry seeking protection from imports to show a reasonable likelihood that it would be fully competitive after such relief. The Ways and Means bill would authorize the administration to provide relief even for a dying industry.    The House Banking Committee voted to create a so-called international debt facility, a multilateral debt-management authority that would purchase debt of less developed countries from commercial banks. The authority could enter into negotiations with debtor countries to restructure their loans to ease current debt-service burdens and thereby increase their ability to buy imported goods. The facility could sell these loans in a secondary market or assist the banks in voluntarily disposing of their Third-World loan portfolios.    In a letter to Banking Chairman Fernand St Germain (D., R.I.), Treasury Secretary Baker said of the proposed facility, &quot;By raising expectations of debt forgiveness, the proposed legislation could also undermine efforts now under way within debtor countries to adopt reforms which are essential to stronger, sustained growth.&quot;    The provision barring foreign firms from becoming primary dealers in U.S. government securities unless their governments give U.S. companies the same right in their countries is aimed at Japan. The Federal Reserve Board recently accepted two Japanese firms as primary dealers; other Japanese firms seek such status.    The bill would require the Treasury secretary to establish objectives for the U.S. trade and current account deficits and to set exchange-rate targets to achieve them. Treasury Secretary Baker opposed it, stating in his letter, &quot;Such a requirement for a market-sensitive measure like currency exchange rates could trigger large-scale speculative capital flows that would seriously disrupt international financial markets.&quot;    Separately, the House unanimously passed a resolution expressing the sense of the Congress that the president should take strong action against Japan's apparent violations of the U.S.-Japan semiconductor trade agreement. The Senate has overwhelmingly passed a similar resolution. </TEXT></DOC>