<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0062 </DOCNO><HL> Paul Simon Pins His Presidential AspirationsOn His Liberal Policies and 'boy scout' Image---By Joe DavidsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   {This is the sixth in a series of personal profiles of 1988 presidential candidates.}    MAKANDA, Ill. -- Near Sen. Paul Simon's rural home here, Southern Illinois University students staged Paul Simon and Abraham Lincoln look-a-like contests. Mr. Simon, who is accustomed to jokes about his fuddy-duddy appearance, took news of the contest with good cheer, even when told the winner had two earrings in his left ear.    The association with his hero, Honest Abe, is pleasing to Mr. Simon, a Democratic presidential hopeful building a campaign based on an image of integrity and consistency. More than any other Democrat, the 58-year-old Mr. Simon makes a virtue of his virtue.    In fact, Todd Domke, a longtime Simon acquaintance who is now a Republican political consultant, uses the term &quot;virtucrat&quot; to describe Mr. Simon. The candidate, he says, wants &quot;to be liberal in a totally principled way,&quot; because he thinks &quot;being virtuous is a victory in itself.&quot;    To be sure, Paul Simon is also a genuine politician, willing to play the game even when the game turns rough. He has made a name throughout his career as a good-government reformer, but in 1972 was Chicago Mayor Richard Daley's unsuccessful candidate for the Illinois gubernatorial nomination. When his 1984 Senate campaign against incumbent Charles Percy turned nasty, Mr. Simon gave as good as he got. As Mr. Simon says in &quot;The Glass House,&quot; the 10th of his 11 books: &quot;There are soft spots in the armor of even the best.&quot;    But the bottom line is that Mr. Simon is running for president as the boy scout who adheres to traditional liberal policies and solutions. He calls for the government to take an active role in creating jobs. He puts a high priority on civil rights. He calls for cuts in defense spending. A man of undeniable intellect and integrity, the question he faces is whether this persona fits the mood of the country and the requirements of the job in 1988. Brookings Institution political scientist Thomas Mann, a Simon admirer, says the fundamental issue about Mr. Simon is &quot;how well do his ideas fit the future?&quot;    And for all his sterling reputation, there's some question about how effective he would be at working with other politicians. Back in his days in the Illinois Legislature, Mr. Simon received the &quot;best legislator&quot; award from the Independent Voters of Illinois a record seven times. But he also received a &quot;Benedict Arnold Award&quot; from fellow lawmakers for a magazine article he co-authored about corruption in the Legislature. And the one time he sought a leadership job during his 10 years in the House of Representatives -- running for budget chairman late in 1980 -- he was soundly defeated when many of the colleagues he thought had promised to support him voted for others.    As a president, Mr. Simon says, he would no more compromise his principles than he would dream of discarding the old-fashioned fashions that are his political calling card. With his bow ties and dark-rimmed glasses, Sen. Simon tells voters, he isn't &quot;a slick, packaged product,&quot; but someone &quot;you can trust.&quot;    He learned an important lesson about devotion to principle, he says, from his father, who was a Lutheran minister and missionary. Back in World War II, when the family lived in Oregon, the elder Mr. Simon went on the radio to speak against the internment of Japanese Americans. &quot;That made me unpopular for a while at school,&quot; the senator says, &quot;but it taught me something about values.&quot;    The senator's brother, Arthur, who is also a Lutheran minister, recalls growing up in an atmosphere where religious faith and social justice were inextricably bound. Says Ruth Simon, the senator's mother: &quot;We tried to train the boys from little on that they are not in the world for the world to serve them. But we are here to serve God through serving others.&quot;    That upbringing, the senator says, &quot;helped mold me&quot; on one of his most passionate commitments, the issue of civil rights. In 1948, as student body president of Dana College in Blair, Neb., Mr. Simon pushed the student government into passing a resolution calling for integration.    Later, he and his wife, Jeanne, whom he met when they both were members of the Illinois House, listed NAACP membership in their official biographies during the 1950s -- a time when such a step was hardly popular in southern Illinois. (Mrs. Simon, an attorney and forceful political personality in her own right, has already served notice that she doesn't want to be known as &quot;First Lady&quot; if her husband wins; &quot;president's wife&quot; would do nicely, she says.)    The Simon family was traditionally Republican; the elder Rev. Simon, who grew up in Wisconsin, regarded himself as a LaFollette Progressive. But when the family moved to Illinois, the senator says, it found a &quot;reactionary&quot; GOP far removed from progressive traditions. Led by his father, the Simons turned Democratic.    As the oldest of the Democratic presidential contenders, Mr. Simon is also the only one who is truly a child of the Depression. During his formative years, his father's salary was $65 a month; things were only a little better when his mother was able to get seasonal work in a cannery. That helps explain his adherence to the kind of government-jobs programs that in recent years have fallen out of political favor.    From an early age, Mr. Simon displayed a keen ambition. &quot;He was in grade school when he talked about owning a weekly newspaper and going into politics,&quot; recalls his brother. And that is what he did, dropping out of college at age 19 to buy a newspaper in Troy, Ill., near St. Louis.    As a publisher, Mr. Simon distinguished himself for his willingness to take on the prostitution, gambling and corruption that were common in southern Illinois at the time. He recalls confrontations with advertisers, including one car dealer who pulled his ads when Mr. Simon refused to lay off an anti-gambling crusade. Nonetheless, Mr. Simon's newspaper career flourished; his one paper eventually grew to 14, and by the age of 27 he had won a seat in the state Legislature and the beginnings of his political reputation.    His 1972 gubernatorial race took a little of the luster off his reputation -- and taught him a little more about politics. Mr. Simon was hardly the first reform-minded Illinois politician to make common cause with the Chicago Democratic machine -- Gov. Adlai Stevenson and one of Mr. Simon's political idols, Sen. Paul Douglas, were others. But maverick Democrat Dan Walker ran an aggressive campaign painting him as a machine hack, and unexpectedly defeated him for the nomination.    Today, Sen. Simon explains his alliance with the machine as &quot;practical politics,&quot; adding, &quot;In politics, you try to build coalitions.&quot; And he says he learned a valuable electoral lesson: &quot;The reality is if someone starts shooting at you, you should start shooting back.&quot;    When he ran for the Senate against Mr. Percy, both men stumbled into the gutter. Sen. Percy, for example, tried to paint Mr. Simon as being soft on Ayatollah Khomeini, while a Simon fund-raising letter, which Mr. Simon says he never saw, placed Mr. Percy in a league with anti-Israel &quot;guerrilla bands or hostile Arab states.&quot;    The Simon campaign also benefited from an independent-expenditure campaign against Sen. Percy financed by Michael Goland, a California real estate developer who was later fined for illegal campaign advertising. Mr. Simon says he twice wrote to Mr. Goland asking him to stop the negative advertising, but he did little to publicly disavow it until late in the campaign.    Mr. Simon's ignorance of the campaign letter may have resulted from the disorganization that tends to dog his political efforts. His Senate race went through four campaign managers, and his young presidential campaign is already on its second boss. That raises some questions about how well a president Simon would be at matching the right person with the right job.    Sen. Simon has shown himself willing to take some stands that are unpopular among the very liberals he is counting on to rally to his banner. For instance, to address the federal deficit, he champions a balanced-budget constitutional amendment, which is anathema to many Democratic Party activists. He has also backed a subminimum wage for young people.    On the other hand, Mr. Simon has reversed his position on federal funding of abortion; earlier in his congressional career, he supported the Hyde amendment banning such funding. And while he doesn't like current campaign financing methods, he admits in his book, &quot;The Glass House&quot;: &quot;If Jane Green calls, and she has made a thousand-dollar campaign contribution, I usually make myself available. I hardly suggest that this is right; but it is the reality of the situation. . . . I listen to donors.&quot;    A President Simon might also be the most published chief executive since Theodore Roosevelt. He continues personally to write a newspaper column for home-state papers, and in his free time, &quot;he's either writing a book or reading one,&quot; says Ray Johnsen, a college friend and longtime Simon staff member. Among his books are an account of President Lincoln's days in the Illinois Legislature, a biography of Elijah Lovejoy, an abolitionist editor who was lynched for his views in 1838, and a how-to manual for Protestant-Catholic marriages written with his wife, who is Catholic.    ---   IN BRIEF   Paul Simon   -- 58 YEARS OLD   --MARRIED 27 YEARS, TWO CHILDREN    -- ATTENDED UNIVERSITY OF OREGON, DANA COLLEGE   -- DEMOCRAT OF ILLINOIS   Illinois state representative 1955 to 1963; state senator 1963 to 1969; lieutenant governor 1969 to 1973; U.S. congressman 1975 to 1985; U.S. senator since 1985.    U.S. political system's greatest accomplishment in his lifetime: &quot;Clearly, the advances in civil rights -- the elimination of legal segregation in the United States.&quot;    System's greatest failure in his lifetime: &quot;Our failure to deal with our federal financial problems.&quot;    Greatest influence on his political thinking: His father, a Lutheran minister and missionary, &quot;who stood up for what he believed . . . I would also have to say Abraham Lincoln, former Sen. Paul Douglas of Illinois and Hubert H. Humphrey as well.&quot;    American conservative he most admires: Sen. Alan Simpson of Wyoming. </TEXT></DOC>