<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880407-0123 </DOCNO><HL> ATandamp;T Poised to Push Computer Strategy --- But Telecommunications Blend Poses Risk </HL><AUTHOR> Janet Guyon (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> T SUNW MSFT </CO><IN> TEL EDP </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After four years as the laughing-stock of the computer industry, American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. appears to be doing several things right.    Its Data Systems Group has cut losses, signed up the industry's hottest workstation vendor as a partner and, for the first time, has its own national sales force. Most importantly, with its partner, Sun Microsystems Inc., ATandamp;T is finally executing a risky strategy aimed at control of the next major computer standard.    But appearances can be deceiving. To be a credible computer vendor, computer executives say, ATandamp;T has at most two years to succeed where it failed so far -- in selling computers at a profit. &quot;ATandamp;T has a chance to be a major computer company,&quot; says W. Michael Blumenthal, chairman and chief executive officer of Unisys Corp., a supporter of ATandamp;T's standardization strategy. &quot;But so far, they have shown every evidence of not realizing how to become one.&quot;    ATandamp;T's computer woes illustrate the difficulties of capitalizing on the often-predicted blending of the computer and telecommunications industries. Like International Business Machines Corp., ATandamp;T wants to become one of a few powerful companies that will emerge to move and manage huge flows of information across boundaries and time zones. For these companies, industry specialists say, the fattest profits will be in selling companies and governments gear and services to run and build their own global information networks.    To compete in such markets, ATandamp;T, IBM and others are embracing some unfamiliar technology. Just as ATandamp;T has dabbled in computers, IBM has expanded in communications, not always successfully. Vittorio Cassoni, the genial, Italian-born former Ing. C. Olivetti S.p.A. executive who now heads ATandamp;T's Data Systems Group, says blending technologies will force customers to plan their computer and network purchases together. This will give the vendor that offers one-stop shopping a competitive edge and provide ATandamp;T a chance for growth in computers, he says.    Just now, though, the two industries are more apart than together. Some analysts contend, moreover, that ATandamp;T can do better computerizing its phone network than creating its own line of computers. Olivetti, 22%-owned by ATandamp;T, already makes and develops ATandamp;T's workstations and personal computers. Former executives predict that unless ATandamp;T buys a computer company, its Data Systems Group will end up a marginally profitable distributor of other companies' technologies.    Their skepticism reflects the telecommunications giant's computer performance thus far. Until last year, ATandamp;T's Data Systems Group racked up steadily growing losses on shrinking revenue, culminating in a pretax operating loss of $1.2 billion in 1986, including a $400 million write-off related to inventory and other items. The loss looked especially bad in a year of strong profits for the computer industry. While Mr. Cassoni trimmed last year's loss by 70% from a year earlier through bookkeeping changes and some cost-cutting, revenue from outside customers dropped 4% in a banner year for the rest of the industry.    Industry sources say unit sales of ATandamp;T's personal computers fell about 16% last year to approximately 120,000, while sales of the 3B minicomputer line to outside customers fell about 20% to 7,600. Mr. Cassoni won't comment on the figures, but says revenue for all products and services picked up in the second half, rising 20% from the 1987 first half.    &quot;Last year was the year to establish a credible basis for growth&quot; by cutting employment, reorganizing and revamping the Data Systems Group's product line, Mr. Cassoni asserts. &quot;To plan for revenue growth in a year like that would have been irresponsible.&quot; This year, he wants revenue growth of 20% from outside customers.    Such goals echo past promises. &quot;When ATandamp;T split up and said they would be a serious computer vendor, I thought 'Hooray, IBM is going to have some serious competition,' &quot; says Rule Johnson-Morris, director of office automation at Lintas: New York, an advertising agency. &quot;It never happened. Why should it be any different in the next five years?&quot;    Mr. Cassoni has been fighting this &quot;show me&quot; attitude since he arrived from Olivetti in October 1986. The industry dismissed Mr. Cassoni's strategy as more empty ATandamp;T talk until January, when the company agreed to spend more than $300 million for 20% of Sun Microsystems. The alliance with Mountain View, Calif.-based Sun may allow ATandamp;T finally to regain control of its important Unix computer operating system. ATandamp;T developed Unix almost two decades ago, but licensing to outsiders created many versions, each requiring different applications software. A &quot;standard,&quot; united Unix could free customers who are locked into proprietary systems sold by IBM and Digital Equipment Corp., because, unlike those, Unix can run on almost any hardware.    ATandamp;T hopes that once Sun, ATandamp;T and Microsoft Corp. come up with a united version of ATandamp;T's Unix operating system next year, customers will buy ATandamp;T Unix minicomputers as building blocks for widescale networks that also use ATandamp;T phone services. ATandamp;T and Sun are expected to announce soon a plan for a software program to make Unix easier to use. The minicomputers replacing ATandamp;T's 3B line are scheduled to be launched in the second half of 1989. They will run on Sun's Sparc microprocessor, a powerful chip that Sun hopes will become the heart of a new family of business and technical computers made by many manufacturers. ATandamp;T's partner, Olivetti, is expected to adopt Sparc.    But to sell the new line, ATandamp;T and Sun must get enough other vendors to adopt their Unix and Sparc to spur software houses into writing programs that customers want to run on the new machines -- a campaign opposed by several big Unix computer makers. Without broad industry support, ATandamp;T and Sun also will face opposition from computer distributors.    ATandamp;T does have a powerful ally in the U.S. government, which plans to award in September the first of several multibillion-dollar purchases requiring compatibility with ATandamp;T's Unix System V version. Commercial customers, however, aren't yet buying the Unix pitch. &quot;The whole world going to Unix makes an interesting academic debate,&quot; says Matthew Fitzsimmons, a ComputerLand Corp. franchisee in White Plains, N.Y., who also heads a study group of computer purchasing executives. &quot;But when it gets down to what I'm going to buy, Unix doesn't have much influence,&quot; he says.    Even if the Unix campaign works, Mr. Cassoni faces obstacles. Most members of his top team are ATandamp;T veterans whose experience is in phones, not computers, departed executives say. &quot;Mr. Cassoni strikes me as a very competent executive, but you need several layers of competent executives,&quot; says Mr. Blumenthal of Unisys.    Moreover, a successful Unix campaign, because it would free customers from buying specific hardware, would cut hardware margins, forcing ATandamp;T to sell more computers and turn to systems software, applications software, systems design and service for higher profit margins. Mr. Cassoni wants to boost revenue from such items from 8% of his total today to 15% in the next few years and to 20% by the end of the 1990s.    Mr. Cassoni, whose accent and double-breasted suits make him an anomaly in ATandamp;T's executive ranks, has won the respect of ATandamp;T's board and top management, who gave him control of a 1,000-member computer sales force. He also is benefiting from his connection to Olivetti. To bolster ATandamp;T's computer profits, Olivetti agreed to cut prices of products it supplies to ATandamp;T when that company is forced to reduce prices to customers, departed executives say. Previously, Olivetti refused to make such cuts, forcing ATandamp;T's computer business to absorb the shortfalls.    Still, how Mr. Cassoni will produce big profits remains murky. ATandamp;T says Mr. Cassoni initially predicted profitability from computers this year, but now he says this won't come until late 1989. Asked for an explanation, he testily replies, &quot;We aren't behind schedule at all . . . . We are right on track.&quot;    Analysts say the Data Systems Group also must ct developments further by buying still more technology. &quot;ATandamp;T is going to realize that making its own hardware isn't where the value is at all,&quot; says Michael Murphy, editor of the Caifornia Technology Stock Letter, who predicts ATandamp;T will leave the computer hardware business next year. &quot;If ATandamp;T stepped back and looked at it, the place for them to make money is in licensing and controlling Unix, then networking everything under it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>