<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0061 </DOCNO><HL> With Ex-Executive of Embattled Thrift---By Leonard M. Apcar and John E. YangStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The chief Texas savings and loan regulator co-owns a small real estate concern with a former top Sandamp;L executive who has been accused by federal officials of looting his institution.    State records also show -- and L. Linton Bowman III, Texas Sandamp;L commissioner, confirmed -- that he owned shares in a small Texas thrift while he was a state regulator and later sold them at a profit to a thrift chairman who resigned last year under pressure from federal officials.    As commissioner since 1983, Mr. Bowman has supervised the Texas thrift industry during a period in which it has incurred huge loan losses triggered by a declining economy and unsafe lending practices that regulators say bordered on fraud.    In an interview, Mr. Bowman said he hadn't done anything illegal. But he acknowledged that his ongoing real estate venture with a former chairman of troubled Vernon Savings andamp; Loan Association gives the appearance of a conflict of interest. As for his stock ownership in the thrift, where he worked before becoming deputy commissioner in 1980, Mr. Bowman noted that he had fully disclosed it when he was appointed to the $77,250-a-year commissioner's job and listed it in annual reports to the state.    Mr. Bowman's personal dealings with two officers of Texas's most troubled institutions raise questions among industry officials and federal regulators about whether those dealings impaired his ability to act independently as a regulator.    Critics of Mr. Bowman say he was slow at cracking down on Vernon's high-flying lending practices that have saddled federal regulators with an institution where 96% of its loans are in default. In response to a question about Vernon, Mr. Bowman said Friday he wished he'd intervened more quickly at several Sandamp;Ls, including Vernon. &quot;On every one we have taken down you wish you had been there sooner,&quot; he said. &quot;The problem is you have to make a case stand up in court.&quot;    Mr. Bowman, 58 years old, set up Cottonwood Investments Inc., an Austin, Texas-based real estate company in 1980 with Patrick G. King, who was then a colleague of Mr. Bowman's at the Texas Sandamp;L Department, and J. Douglas Nichols, an Austin home builder. Mr. King later left the department to join Vernon Savings, where he eventually became chairman. (Mr. Nichols later left Cottonwood, leaving Messrs. Bowman and King as the co-owners.)    When Cottonwood was founded, Mr. Bowman was deputy Sandamp;L commissioner and Mr. King was director of supervision. Mr. King was later promoted to deputy Sandamp;L commissioner when Mr. Bowman was tapped to become commissioner. After going to work for Vernon, Mr. King eventually held several top posts including director, president, chief operating officer, vice chairman and, finally, chairman. He was pressured by federal regulators to resign last year, according to federal officials familiar with the Vernon case. Mr. King couldn't be reached for comment.    Last March, Vernon was seized by federal thrift-industry regulators. In a lawsuit in federal court here, federal regulators allege that Mr. King and six other former Vernon officials &quot;looted, dissipated and wasted&quot; Vernon's assets, which regulators say were used like a personal piggybank to finance a yacht, California beach home, a hunting club and a fleet of private aircraft. The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., which is now operating the thrift as Vernon Savings andamp; Loan Association F.S.A. seeks $540 million in damages.    State records show that Cottonwood is still an active corporation with Mr. Bowman as president and Mr. King as secretary and treasurer. Mr. Bowman said the company initially built condominiums in the Austin area and sold them for profit of nearly $100,000 that all three original owners shared. Mr. Bowman says Cottonwood currently owns only four rental units in two Austin duplexes.    Mr. Bowman said he discussed trying to sell the Cottonwood property and liquidating the company with Mr. King several times while Mr. King was at Vernon because Mr. Bowman was concerned about the appearance of a conflict. But Mr. Bowman said only one of the units is rented now and it won't sell. &quot;The deadest thing in Austin in '84, '85 and '86 was apartments and condominiums,&quot; he said. However, the property isn't listed for sale. &quot;I can't sell them until I get some renters,&quot; he added.    The Bowman stock holdings stemmed from his years at Mutual Savings andamp; Loan of Greenville where he was executive vice president and managing officer. Mr. Bowman and his family sold their stock in the Greenville, Texas, Sandamp;L in 1983 shortly after he became commissioner. The buyer was a another small North Texas thrift controlled by Edwin T. McBirney III, a young real estate entrepreneur who wound up merging six thrifts into Sunbelt Savings Association of Texas, one of the state's largest and now among the most troubled. Mr. Bowman says he sold his shares and those held by his wife, daughter and son for a profit of about $144,000.    Mr. Bowman said he wasn't involved in the negotiations over the stock purchase. And he denied that his private transaction with Mr. McBirney's thrift compromised his ability to act independently in supervising Sunbelt. As Sunbelt's troubles grew, federal regulators asked Mr. McBirney, who was the thrift's chairman, to step aside, though he remains its largest shareholder.    Paul Coggins, Mr. McBirney's attorney, said the transaction was a merger of two institutions, rather than a deal between Messrs. Bowman and McBirney, and affirmed that Mr. Bowman, a minority shareholder, wasn't involved in any of the negotiations. Mr. Bowman was paid the same price as all the other holders for his stock, Mr. Coggins said.    When state regulators held a hearing on the merger, Mr. Bowman disqualified himself and the session was conducted by Mr. King, Mr. Coggins said. Mr. Bowman's holdings in Mutual were disclosed to state and federal regulators before they approved the transaction, according to Mr. Coggins.    Mr. McBirney's thrift paid Mr. Bowman in cash and a five-year note, Mr. Bowman says. But he immediately redeemed the note for 50% of its value because he didn't want to be a creditor of an Sandamp;L he regulates. &quot;It wasn't ethical,&quot; he says &quot;I do not want to do business with a state-chartered Sandamp;L.&quot;    Mr. Bowman said that when he sought the deputy commissioner appointment in 1980, he told state officials that his thrift was seeking permission to issue stock and that he intended to exercise his right to buy shares. &quot;It's all I ever worked for,&quot; he said. If the state objected, he said he told them they shouldn't consider him for the deputy slot. &quot;You can see why with the deputy job paying a $46,000 a year salary,&quot; he added. </TEXT></DOC>