<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880715-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Political Conventions: The Thrill Is Gone </HL><AUTHOR> Vermont Royster </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   So here we are once again at the season of the quadrennial political conventions. The Democrats convene first in Atlanta and then the Republicans in New Orleans. Should be an exciting summer, right?    Not likely. These political conventions are no longer what they once were; they are really no more than party pep rallies. We already know who the Democrats will nominate for president -- Gov. Michael Dukakis. For the Republicans it will be Vice President George Bush.    There may well be, of course, some arguing -- or at least speeches -- about the platform the candidates supposedly will stand on as they run. There could be some stirring of the pot by the Rev. Jesse Jackson, but all that will be much ado about nothing. Nobody pays any attention, or ever has, to the formal platforms. The candidates will build their own when the campaign gets under way.    For all these reasons the TV networks this year sensibly will offer no gavel-to-gavel coverage. If the newspapers, as has been their wont, use much costly newsprint for columns of coverage, the readers will do much skimming. Barring something unexpected, the word for the summer gatherings this year will be -- boring.    It has been more than 30 years since any national political convention performed the function it was designed for. Originally, conventions were supposed to be gatherings of the party faithful to get together, argue the merits of the potential candidates (sometimes vociferously) and bargain with their votes (sometimes doing deals) to choose the standard bearer.    Nowadays that function is usurped by the many state caucuses and primaries where the rank-and-file voters (sometimes in small numbers) elect and instruct the delegates whom to choose. This is supposed to be more democratic -- which perhaps it is -- and to result in nominees who will be better candidates and better presidents if elected.    All the same, the old-fashioned system came up with Abraham Lincoln, Grover Cleveland, Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt and Dwight Eisenhower. Even the list of chosen candidates who lost the general election wasn't without notables -- William Howard Taft (who had been president), Charles Evans Hughes, Wendell Willkie, Thomas E. Dewey, Adlai Stevenson and Hubert Humphrey.    The last time the choices were made the old-fashioned way was in 1952, and exciting conventions they were. When the Democrats gathered, the leading candidate was Estes Kefauver, senator from Tennessee, catapulted to fame by his crime-investigating committee. He led on the first ballot. But the party professionals, including outgoing President Harry Truman, didn't think he would make either a strong candidate or an able president.    So that year the convention reached out for a man who was a reluctant candidate and little known to the general public, Gov. Adlai Stevenson of Illinois. He won on the third ballot.    As you know, he was defeated in November by a man who had never before been elected to any office and who had been a reluctant candidate. In 1948, Gen. Eisenhower had said, &quot;My decision to remove myself from the political scene is definite and positive,&quot; pointing out that having spent all his adult years in the military didn't &quot;fit&quot; him for &quot;the most important job in the world.&quot;    Eisenhower was literally pushed into entering the fray by Gov. Thomas E. Dewey and others determined to stop Sen. Robert Taft, known as &quot;Mr. Republican,&quot; the otherwise leading candidate. Ike didn't resign his command of NATO until June 1, before the July convention.    All of us in the press gallery knew that if the delegates voted their hearts the nominee would be Taft. But Dewey and his mentor, Herbert Brownell, waged a campaign throughout the convention that &quot;Taft couldn't win.&quot; It was successful because if there was one thing the delegates wanted after the years of Roosevelt-Truman Democratic dominance it was a winner. And whatever his drawbacks, Eisenhower was a public hero whom the people trusted.    The day the convention opened, the New York Times counted 530 votes for Taft, only 74 short of victory. But the real fighting came even before the first ballot over the Dewey-Brownell so-called &quot;fairplay&quot; amendment, which provided that delegations that failed to get a two-thirds vote by the Republican National Committee could not thereafter vote on the sitting of other disputed delegations.    It was during the debate on this motion that Everett Dirksen delivered his stirring oration against Dewey, pointing his finger at him and saying that Dewey &quot;had a habit of winning conventions and losing elections&quot; and that again he would &quot;take us down the path of defeat.&quot; The Taft delegates booed Dewey, now shrunk down in his seat.    But all this was to no avail. The fairplay motion won and for all practical purposes the nomination fight was over. On the first ballot Ike won 595 votes to Taft's 500 -- Taft then surrendered.    Even so, the fighting wasn't over. Eisenhower still badly needed the Taft supporters, many of whom were outraged, for the November election. There thus followed the summit meeting between Taft and Eisenhower in which the general in effect accepted all of Taft's positions on domestic policies and much of his views on foreign affairs.    This in turn was followed by the imbroglio over Richard Nixon's supposed slush fund, which the vice presidential nominee ended with his famous Checkers speech.    All this, then, made the 1952 conventions memorable for those of us there. They are rivaled only by the Democratic convention in 1948 when President Truman, sorely beset within his own party, kept the press waiting until the wee hours of the morning to announce that he was calling Congress back into special session and thus roiled the political waters.    Since then only habit has taken me to conventions. The nominees were chosen before I could even get there.    This year I'll be a stay-at-home. I probably won't even watch the evening television unless Jesse Jackson takes the podium. For the rest, I'll rely on Albert Hunt and his Wall Street Journal team to tell me in the morning if anything exciting happened.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>