<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0099 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Scientists Progress in CreatingMore Valuable Farm Animals---By Jerry E. BishopStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   GENETICALLY ENGINEERED animals may be patentable, as the U.S. Patent Office recently decided, but they're not easy to come by. The first one made its appearance in 1981, after scientists in Ohio managed to introduce a rabbit gene into a mouse embryo. The result was the birth of the world's first &quot;transgenic&quot; mammal, a mouse that produced a rabbit blood protein as part of its normal physiology.    In the six years since, scientists have made remarkable progress in genetically altering animals. More than 100 different &quot;foreign&quot; genes, including human and virus genes, have been transferred to mice, the favorite laboratory animal for genetic research. Foreign genes also have been introduced into sheep, pigs and rabbits. Attempts to achieve a transgenic cow may succeed any month now.    And the scientists are rapidly moving toward introducing new genes into livestock species that will enhance their value. Certain genes, for example, might produce more meat or milk per pound of feed. Until now, most genetic engineering in animals has had scientific rather than economic motives.    NEVERTHELESS, animal genetic engineering is still in the laboratory stage, continuing as a delicate procedure in which chance plays a big role. With animals the scientists are attempting to do something that is ethically forbidden in humans. This is to introduce a new gene into the germ cells -- the sperm or egg cells -- that not only will be incorporated into the animal's total genetic makeup but will be passed on to future generations. In human gene therapy, which scientists hope to achieve soon, the new gene is introduced only into a few cells of the bone marrow or liver. This implanted gene can't be passed on to progeny.    The technique as practiced at Ohio University's Edison Animal Biotechnology Center in Athens, where scientists produced the first transgenic mouse, is known as micro-injection. Working with microscopes, the scientists inject a submicroscopic snippet of DNA, a string of molecules composing the desired gene, into a fertilized egg cell at a precise moment during the early hours of embryo formation, explains Thomas E. Wagner, who heads the center.    Specifically, drugs are used to induce the female to produce a large number of ova or eggs. The ova are artificially fertilized with sperm from a male donor and extracted. When a sperm injects its single set of chromosomes -- its genetic material -- into the egg, a seemingly miraculous series of events begins. The egg cell, which carries a normal double set of chromosomes, ejects one set. The sperm chromosomes slowly move toward the egg's remaining set of chromosomes. Eventually, the two sets of chromosomes fuse to produce a one-cell embryo with a normal double set of chromosomes, half from the male and half from the female.    THE PROCESS, Dr. Wagner says, takes about seven hours. In the midst of it, scientists inject the new gene. The foreign gene might just sit there had not nature, over the eons, evolved a remarkable genetic repair system. Sperm often are three or four weeks old by the time they fertilize an egg cell, and their chromosomes may have been damaged, fragmenting the genecontaining DNA. The egg cell is able to splice these fragments together just before fusion, thus insuring a normal offspring.    The hope is that as the egg cell repairs the sperm's damaged DNA, it will splice in the newly inserted foreign gene. If it does, the gene then becomes a part of the embryo's basic genetic makeup. The next step is implanting the embryo into a surrogate mother.    The procedure, however, isn't yet very efficient. In mice, an average of about eight live animals are born for every 20 micro-injected embryos. However, the newly inserted gene functions in only about one-third of those.    WITH EVERYDAY farm animals, the efficiency is far lower. In pigs, only about 10% of the transferred embryos lead to live born piglets, and only a third of those carry a functioning new gene. And researchers have yet to produce a transgenic calf despite scores of attempts.    Deciding which genes to engineer into farm animals is another question. For example, much attention has focused on the gene that produces the hormone that stimulates growth, the idea being that faster growing or bigger animals might be desirable. But Dr. Wagner, for one, suggests it may not be desirable to have an animal constantly producing growth hormone throughout its life. He notes experiments in which animals were most efficient at converting feed to protein when given growth hormone injections only between the fifth and twelfth weeks of life. Thus, he says, it may be better to insert a gene into the animal that &quot;turns on&quot; the growth hormone gene at the right time and then turns it off. Such genes are regulatory genes, ones that control the genes that actually produce the proteins used by the animal's body.    By focusing on putting the engineering regulatory genes into animals, researchers might be able to come up with hogs or cattle that produce more lean meat and less fat, rather than just being bigger, Dr. Wagner suggests. Researchers are also scouting for genes that enhance the immune system and which would make farm animals more resistant to disease. Genes that make tissues invulnerable to viruses also are candidates for genetically altered animals.    Regulation of reproduction is another potential use of genetic engineering, Dr. Wagner says. &quot;The Chinese pig produces an average of 20 piglets per litter, whereas American pigs produce only 10 animals per litter,&quot; he notes. &quot;What's the gene that does that?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>