<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0087 </DOCNO><HL> 3,000 Days of Ayatollah Khomeini---By Khosrow Fatemi</HL><DD> 04/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><TEXT>   The Islamic Republic of Iran is 3,000 days old today. It was established on Feb. 11, 1979, a month after the shah left the country and two weeks after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned from 15 years in exile. These 3,000 days have brought much suffering to Iranians, suffering that can be calculated in human, economic and sociopolitical terms.    The principal feature of the ayatollah's regime has been Iran's war with Iraq, which began in September 1980 and nearly seven years later shows no sign of ending. Although the war was started by Iraq, it is Ayatollah Khomeini's adamant opposition to a cease-fire or peace that has been the main cause of its prolongation. The ayatollah's approach to the war is to use antiquated military tactics such as human-wave attacks that result in a large number of casualties.    Most observers put the number of Iranian fatalities at 600,000 and the number of injuries at more than 1.5 million. In other words, for each of its inglorious days, the Islamic Republic has cost Iran 200 lives and 500 injuries. These numbers reflect only the Iranian side of the conflict and do not include Iraqi casualties, which are estimated to be one-half of Iran's. Their inclusion would increase the daily toll of the ayatollah's war by 100 deaths and 250 injuries.    The human suffering perpetuated by the ayatollah is not limited to that brought about by his war with Iraq. The Islamic Republic has also been implicated in several terrorist attacks on Western embassies and commercial centers around the world. Included in this category are 292 U.S. Marines and tens of other Westerners killed by terrorists trained and financed by the ayatollah and his associates in diplomatic guise.    Estimates of the number of executions in Iran for the ayatollah's 3,000 days range from a few thousand by Amnesty International (which footnotes all its figures by saying that its estimates are understated because of lack of reporting) to more than 100,000, which is the number given by Iranian opposition groups abroad. My own research indicates a figure of about 60,000, which would average out to 20 executions a day.    Finally, since the 1979 revolution, more than two million Iranians have been made homeless by the war and forced into internal migration to other parts of the country. In addition, another 2.5 million Iranians, resentful of the ayatollah's drive to return Iran to medieval morality and intolerant of his tactics, have been forced into exile, mostly in Europe and the U.S. Every day of the Islamic Republic has forced 667 Iranians out of their homes and another 833 out of their homeland.    The ayatollah's government claims that the cost of the war to the Iranian economy has been more than $300 billion, or $100 million for each one of the Islamic Republic's troubling days. This is for a country with a gross national product of about $183 million a day. In other words, every day, the Islamic Republic wastes more than half of Iran's total production in its war with Iraq.    The gravity of the situation becomes even more apparent when these figures are combined with other economic problems that the ayatollah's government has created for Iran. Among them is the continuing recession. The country's GNP reached $67 billion in 1977 and has since remained at about that level in real terms, while the annual rate of inflation has averaged between 20% and 25%. Another economic offshoot of the ayatollah's regime is unemployment, which was close to zero at the time of the Islamic revolution but is currently estimated at between 30% and 40% of the total labor force. Underemployment is also a problem.    The ayatollah's only economic promise has been to reduce Iran's dependence on imports and oil exports. Yet, according to the International Monetary Fund, Iran's imports reached $15 billion in 1984 (the latest year for which data are available), compared with $14 billion in 1977, the last peaceful year of the shah's reign. The country's non-oil exports, which were more than $600 million in 1977, dwindled to less than $260 million out of a total of $13.2 billion in 1985, according to the IMF.    Another severe blow to the country's economic performance and development has been the emigration of more than 2.5 million Iranians since the start of the Islamic Republic. The impact of the shortage of human power is exemplified by the number of Iranian physicians at home and abroad. Before the Islamic revolution, there were 25,000 doctors in Iran for a population of 35 million -- that is, one doctor for 1,400 people. (By comparison, there is about one doctor for every 500 people in the U.S.) Today, there are 13,000 physicians for a population of 40 million, or one doctor for 3,077 people. Since the formation of the Islamic Republic, more than 15,000 doctors have emigrated, retired or died, and fewer than 3,000 new doctors have completed their studies because of the frequent closure of the universities.    Similar shortages exist in other professions, especially management and economics. There is also a shortage of university professors.    In sociopolitical terms, Ayatollah Khomeini has transformed the world's perception of Iran into that of a nation of terrorists and barbarians. Under his guidance, the Islamic Republic has replaced Iran's educational system with superstition and the teachings of the Middle Ages, converted Iranian women into second-class citizens, and brainwashed Iranian youths into martyring themselves in the ayatollah's &quot;holy war&quot; with Iraq. Moreover, the Islamic Republic has given a new meaning to political savagery and religious intolerance -- as Iranian Jews and Bahais can attest -- all in God's name.    While the ayatollah's regime may not have an overtly leftist orientation, through its alienation of the Iranian masses, it is paving the way for an eventual communization of Iran. A likely scenario is not a popular communist uprising but rather a coup by a small group of military officers capitalizing on the regime's unpopularity, followed by an appeal for help to the Soviet Union -- similar to what happened in Afghanistan in 1979. Moscow could use a 1921 treaty with Iran as a pretext to comply.    The West's naivete in such actions as the Reagan administration's secret dealings with the Islamic Republic lends credibility to the perception among many Iranians that the ayatollah is, in effect, kept in power by the West. These feelings are augmented by the Western world's willingness to support the ayatollah commercially. (West Germany and Japan provided Iran with 30% of its total imports in 1985.) All of this increases anti-Western sentiments not among the hooligans who are paid or brainwashed to shout &quot;death to America&quot; in front of Western TV cameras, but in the educated middle class.    While Iranian culture is antipathetic to communism, the longer the ayatollah stays in power, the more likely this will change. According to an old Persian proverb, &quot;a drowning man clutches onto anything, including a useless piece of wood.&quot; In the not-too-distant future, communism may become Iran's useless piece of wood.    ---   Mr. Fatemi is a professor of business at Laredo State University and editor of its International Trade Journal. </TEXT></DOC>