<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871111-0167 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:A Liberal Leader's Tax Strategy for Sweden---By Bengt Westerberg</HL><DD> 11/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP TAXES LABORMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> STOCKHOLM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The economic situation in Sweden has changed during the 1980s. In the beginning of this decade the immediate problems were our large deficits in the foreign trade and the national budget. The fiscal deficit is now almost eliminated and the current account gap has been cut.    There are many reasons for the new strength in the Swedish economy. Some of them can be attributed to the economic policies pursued by our government, which is led by the Social Democratic Party. Some of the improvements are due to the rapid growth of the international economy and the halving of oil prices. The improvement has given Swedish politicians time to consider what changes are needed in a longer perspective to ensure a continuation of a favorable economic situation.    In the spring the Brookings Institution published a report on the Swedish economy that included some policy recommendations. As Brookings saw it, the main problem is Sweden's inflation rate, which is permanently higher than in the rest of the industrialized world. The result is a slow but steady deterioration of our competitiveness. This report gave us two options. On the one hand, we could accept the higher rate of price and cost increases and combine this with successive small devaluations of the Swedish krona. That would enable us to keep unemployment low, an important aim for all Swedish political parties.    On the other hand, there's the option of abandoning high ambitions about unemployment. According to the Brookings report, an increase of about one percentage point in the unemployment rate would enable us to reduce the rate of inflation to a level compatible with maintaining high export competitiveness.    The reaction in Sweden to these recommendations was, for obvious reasons, that neither solution offered was acceptable. Continuous depreciation in the form of a floating exchange rate has disadvantages: larger uncertainty for corporations engaged in foreign trade and the risk of accelerating inflation. Acceptance of a higher rate of unemployment is socially unacceptable -- and it might not even work. The experiences of other countries show that inflation is reduced only as long as unemployment rises. Meanwhile it becomes difficult to push unemployment back down because many people lose contact with the labor market or their skills.    In fact Sweden has been following the first option during the past couple of years. Due to the way in which our exchange rate is established -- it is tied to a basket of other currencies with special weight given to the dollar -- the changes in the values of these other currencies have implied an automatic depreciation of the krona of a few percentage points every year. This path seems, however, to be a rather risky and dangerous one for the future.    The Swedish economy thus has a neat little problem to solve. What sort of economic policy will combine a lowering of inflation with a continued low level of unemployment and an exchange rate that is fixed in theory and in practice?    There are some changes in the economic policy on which there is broad consensus at least among economists. These include the need for tax reform and for increased efficiency in the public sector. There are some other changes on which opinions are more diverse: the need for more deregulation in different markets and the need for lowering the total level of taxation and public expenditure. Predictably, there is also political disagreement concerning the importance of the various changes.    It is, however, a good sign that there is such broad agreement concerning the basic analysis of the problems facing the Swedish economy. This was evident when the government joined opposition parties in their response to a report last spring concerning the medium-term policy.    My party, the Swedish Liberal Party, has stressed the necessity of tax reform and increased efficiency in the public sector. We feel it is imperative to radically lower the marginal income taxes, to simplify Sweden's complicated taxation rules for capital income, and to increase the efficiency of the capital market by changing the system of business taxation.    The marginal tax rate currently is as high as 75% for incomes above 200,000 Swedish kronor, or $31,000. A reduction of the top rate to 50%, as well as reductions for lower incomes, would greatly enhance the performance of the economy in several respects. First, we would run less risk of losing some of our most clever researchers and technicians to other countries and thereby getting behind in technical development. Second, we would increase the possibility of combining higher disposable income with lower nominal wage increases and thus reducing cost inflation. Third, and perhaps most important, we would increase incentives to work.    The American experience and a large number of theoretical studies have shown that labor supply reacts favorably to lower marginal taxes. The reaction in the top income brackets might even be so large that tax receipts do not decrease, at least not by the full &quot;mathematical&quot; amount. We feel sure that these dynamic effects of a better-performing market economy will result in a higher growth rate.    Another important change concerns the efficiency of the public sector. This is especially important in Sweden, where the public sector is large. Studies have shown productivity was actually reduced during the 1970s, a period when the public sector expanded rapidly. The performance in the 1980s seems to be a little better, but much remains to be done.    Many changes are needed within the public sector -- in its organization, in reducing central regulations and in allowing more personal initiative. The Liberal Party feels, however, that this is not enough. Much benefit would come from outside changes in the form of stimulating more competition in the production of social services.    Currently, local and regional governments enjoy a virtual monopoly in the production of education, health care and children's nurseries. The few examples of private alternatives have yielded lower costs as well as unchanged or higher benefits to users. And the theoretical argument in favor of increased efficiency through more competition is, of course, as likely to work here as in the production of industrial goods, where it forms the basis for Sweden's high standard of living.    On these important issues the policy of the Social Democratic government is unclear. In theory it agrees on the need for lower marginal taxes and more efficiency in the public sector. The government arrived at this point of view after years of pressure from the Liberal Party and the other nonsocialist parties. But its interest in actually doing something -- and doing it now -- seems weak. The Liberal Party will, of course, continue to drag the current government forward, but the performance of the Swedish economy would become even better with a change to a government with a more active attitude toward necessary policy changes.    ---   Mr. Westerberg heads the Swedish Liberal Party. </TEXT></DOC>