<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890803-0053 </DOCNO><DD> = 890803 </DD><AN> 890803-0053. </AN><HL> Futures Shock:@  Traders Are Indicted@  For Running the Pits@  By Their Own Rules@  ---@  FBI Sting at Chicago Markets@  Yields 46 So Far, Mainly@  Soybean and Yen Brokers@  ---@  Were Investors Sitting Ducks?@  ----@  By Jeff Bailey and Scott McMurray@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/03/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW) </IN><GV> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION (CFT) </GV><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The futures industry's worst nightmare began to unfold yesterday as federal law-enforcement officials announced felony indictments against 46 traders from this city's two big commodities exchanges.    Several of those charged are already telling prosecutors what they know about fellow traders, and the spreading investigation seems likely to join insider trading on Wall Street and the looting of the nation's savings and loans as one of the most troubling financial scandals of the 1980s.    If proved, the government's case would make plain that for many years, outside investors who used the futures markets were sitting ducks and often were picked off by hard-edged brokers and traders in the pits. In essence, law-enforcement officials charged yesterday that these traders turned the pits into their own private back rooms, where profitable trades were divvied up among insiders and losses were passed along to outsiders.    The Chicago Mercantile Exchange's Japanese-yen pit was hit hardest, by 21 indictments, including some major brokers. The Chicago Board of Trade's soybean pit came next, with 19 indictments, many against longtime grain traders.    Moreover, the prosecutors appear to be just beginning their work in the Merc's Swiss-franc and the Board of Trade's Treasury-bond pits; each was hit with only three indictments. The government's aim: a total of more than 100 indictments at both exchanges. No trial dates are set. In the indictments, filed in federal district court in Chicago, the government charged that a variety of illegal trading practices were used to steal money from customers. In the Merc's yen pit, the government alleged, illicit profits even changed hands in the form of cash. Among the likely victims are tens of thousands of individual traders and participants in professionally managed commodity funds.    For the two exchanges, which months ago began a vigorous campaign to protect their largely self-regulated status, the charges have inflicted a black eye, with many more rounds to go before they know the full extent of the government's case. If found guilty, some of the traders could face lengthy prison terms, big fines and loss of property.    At an overflow news conference here, Attorney General Richard Thornburgh and other federal officials were careful not to criticize the exchanges themselves and noted that only individuals have been charged. However, Anton R. Valukas, the U.S. Attorney in Chicago, said in an interview that the exchanges &quot;ought to be as concerned as we are with maintaining the integrity of the process.&quot; According to lawmen familiar with his thinking, Mr. Valukas views the exchanges' regulatory performance as falling far short of acceptable standards. The exchanges say their enforcement efforts are rigorous and adequate.    The indictments could carve a large hole in parts of the nation's two biggest futures exchanges. The 21 yen traders named in this initial wave of indictments represent about a fifth of that pit's regular population, and the 19 soybean traders make up about 10% of that pit's rolls -- and probably a much larger proportion of trading volume. More traders in those pits are likely to be indicted in the future.    The government charged more than a third of the traders under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO, and some of them face immediate government claims on their assets.    Most of alleged thefts involve a few thousand dollars at a time. But over time, such practices could carve millions of dollars out of the market at the expense of investors. More difficult to assess, as in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal, is the damage to confidence in the markets.    Six of the indicted traders -- Martin J. Dempsey, James D. Nowak and Charles W. Bergstrom in the Board of Trade's soybean pit, and John M. Baker Jr., Sam Cali and Thomas Crouch in the Merc's yen pit -- are highlighted in the indictments as ringleaders and face especially harsh penalties under RICO. They not only face the forfeiture of their exchange seats if they are convicted, as do all traders charged under RICO; their trading profits and brokerage commissions earned while the allegedly illicit trades were being made also would be seized by the government if they are found guilty. Forfeitures from some of these traders could exceed $1 million.    The Commodity Futures Trading Commission said eight of the indicted traders are cooperating with the investigation and settled administrative charges that the CFTC lodged against them. In the past few days, moreover, several additional traders have decided to cooperate and provide evidence against fellow exchange members, traders say.    The government's most successful FBI agent-turned-trader worked in the soybean pit, and the indictments of traders there are filled with allegations of stealing.    On one trade on June 9, 1988, it is alleged, Mr. Dempsey &quot;intentionally created&quot; a trading mistake to pass a $29,700 trading loss from his personal account to that of Richard Ostrom, an agent posing as trader Richard Carlson. According to the government, Mr. Dempsey intended to pay back the agent with money &quot;skimmed&quot; from Mr. Dempsey's customers.    The 400 pages of indictments, however, leave open many questions about the quality of the government's case. In the Merc's yen pit, one of the nation's biggest foreign-exchange trading arenas, the government alleges a huge five-year scheme to defraud customers but discloses almost nothing about specific trades or money transfers.    Tensions were high this week at the two exchanges, which normally resemble playgrounds of capitalism, as the names of cooperating traders filtered out and some colleagues realized they were trapped in the government's net. Mr. Baker, normally one of the Merc's biggest pranksters, was seen by several traders sobbing on the exchange floor Tuesday.    While two brothers, Brian E. and James G. Sledz, were widely known to be cooperating with prosecutors, only this week did yen-pit traders learn for certain that another of their peers, Thomas M. Braniff, was talking to the government. All three men were charged with felonies and reached administrative settlements with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Their trading privileges were suspended for three years.    As trading closed yesterday at the Merc, many members gathered round the television set in the Limit Up bar to watch the government's news conference. When a television crew entered to record the scene, a shouting match erupted, in language that would cost a trader a $500 fine on the exchange floor.    For now, Mr. Valukas and his staff will square off against traders' lawyers. But the final outcome of the government's undercover operation could lie in a test of wills between the aggressive prosecutor and the exchange leaders -- Merc chieftain Leo Melamed and Board of Trade Chairman Karsten &quot;Cash&quot; Mahlmann.    The Board of Trade said yesterday it was too soon to comment on the government's specific charges. But Mr. Mahlmann said in a statement, &quot;Such charges reflect on us all. The exchange and its {3,500} members will not tolerate a single instance of trading abuse in our markets.&quot; Any trader pleading guilty to a felony will be barred from the exchange, he added. The Merc said it would ask indicted brokers to &quot;immediately cease from conducting all public customer business.&quot; Futures brokerage firms are divided over whether they should continue to process trades for traders who have been indicted.    Although the indictments name only individual traders, Mr. Valukas's ultimate targets are the exchanges and their regulators. He sees the Merc and Board of Trade as rife with corruption and arrogant about their ability to write their own rules, according to federal lawmen. And although CFTC Chairman Wendy Gramm stood next to him at yesterday's news conference, Mr. Valukas believes the CFTC abdicates to the exchanges far too much of its regulatory responsibility.    In his view, lawmen say, the case could last well into the 1990s -- with the ultimate result, besides prison terms for convicted traders, being that the exchanges and lawmakers would be forced to make major reforms. Defense lawyers counter that the case will demonstrate mostly an excess of prosecutorial zeal.    Certainly, Mr. Valukas has played hardball from the start. Subpoenas went out en masse for maximum scare, and were delivered to traders' homes with a uniform message: Confess or we will use RICO to take your homes, cars and money and send you to jail. We have it all on tape.    Putting G-men in the pits wasn't cheap. In addition to the huge sums spent to provide agents with the life styles of rich traders, funds were also lost in the market. FBI agent Dietrich Volk, posing as Merc yen trader Peter Vogel, racked up trading losses of $83,116 last year.    Some traders are now cooperating with the government, while others have vowed to fight. The exchanges have only begun the battle to maintain their independence. The Board of Trade's Mr. Mahlmann recently warned his members: &quot;Our industry and indeed everything we stand for has been tainted with the scent of scandal. And believe me, there's wolves at the door that have smelled that scent.&quot;    &quot;Our ability,&quot; Mr. Mahlmann said, &quot;to write our own rules is at stake.&quot;    The exchanges, privy to much of the information subpoenaed by prosecutors, could quickly see the direction of the government investigation. Their parallel inquiries slowed the government's work, lawmen contend. &quot;People suspected of cooperating {with prosecutors} were isolated by the exchanges very early on,&quot; one official says. &quot;It was a very savvy move. It gives some backbone to those who otherwise might want to cooperate. It has been troublesome.&quot;    The exchanges also launched public-relations efforts. The Merc quickly formed a panel to recommend ways to clean up trading abuses, and it set up classes for new members on a timely topic: ethics.    Meanwhile, exchange officials started Washington damage-control efforts within hours of the disclosure of the investigation last Jan. 19. The exchanges, which are among the biggest financial contributors to members of Congress, have been meeting frequently with legislators. &quot;Just as Cash and I made 27 trips to Washington in 1988,&quot; Board of Trade President Thomas R. Donovan recently told members, &quot;we expect to get there one or two days a week for the rest of this year.&quot;    The Merc, in particular, also set about to show that it isn't lax in enforcing rules. In a move that has angered prosecutors, it launched disciplinary cases against some of its members for trades made with the FBI agents who posed as traders. Mr. Valukas earlier warned the exchange that such internal investigations could interfere with his own. (The Board of Trade says that so far it isn't pursuing such cases in deference to Mr. Valukas.)    The Merc reopened part of a major disciplinary case in its stock-index pit that had been settled just days before the federal investigation became known. It has since added further charges in that case and is expected to stiffen earlier penalties.    In coming days, as Mr. Valukas tries to stake his claim to some traders' assets under the RICO statutes, he may clash with the exchanges over money as well. Control over some indicted traders' exchange seats, worth as much as $500,000 each, will probably be sought by both the government and the exchanges. Board of Trade general counsel Scott Early, anticipating the clash, says legal precedent puts him ahead of the Internal Revenue Service and everyone else. &quot;I don't think RICO changes that at all,&quot; he says.    If indictments reach 100 traders, $30 million or more in seat proceeds could be at stake. Defense lawyers said the government, for now, is offering not to seize seats so long as traders don't try to sell them and collect the money.    ---   Robert L. Rose, Scott Kilman, Robert Johnson and Francine Schwadel contributed to this story. </TEXT></DOC>