<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880406-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS DEFEATED Jackson in Wisconsin's Democratic primary election.    With two-thirds of the vote in, the Massachusetts governor led with 47% to Jackson's 29%. Gore trailed with 17%, and Simon had 5%. Late-breaking support lifted Dukakis over his rivals and gave him a long-sought triumph in the industrial Midwest. The victory ensured Dukakis the bulk of the state's 81 delegates, and gave him an edge going into New York's April 19 primary. In the Republican race, Bush overwhelmingly defeated Robertson.    Dukakis won a narrow victory over Jackson in Monday's Colorado precinct caucuses, and Bush handily won the state's race for 36 GOP delegates.    ---   MEESE ANNOUNCED his choices for two top-level Justice Department posts.    The attorney general said he had recommended John Shepherd, a former president of the American Bar Association, as deputy attorney general, and Assistant Treasury Secretary Francis Keating as associate attorney general. Reagan must submit the nominations to the Senate for confirmation. Meese, however, failed to fill the position vacated by last week's protest resignation of the head of the department's criminal division.    The move was viewed as an attempt to show the department was returning to normal following the turmoil caused by a criminal inquiry of Meese.    ---   Arab hijackers forced a Kuwait Airways jet to land in northeastern Iran and demanded that 17 pro-Iranian prisoners be freed by Kuwait. The gunmen later released 24 of the 112 people aboard the plane, which was en route to Kuwait from Bangkok. Passengers included three members of Kuwait's royal family and one U.S. passport holder.    ---   Shultz traveled to Jordan and Syria to discuss a U.S. proposal for Mideast peace. The secretary of state, in an interview with Jordanian newspaper editors in Amman, said an independent Palestinian state in the Israeli-occupied territories doesn't make sense, and he ruled out PLO participation in Arab-Israeli peace negotiations.    The PLO said its guerrillas infiltrated into northern Israel on a hostage-taking mission. Security sources said two Arab guerrillas were killed and four Israeli soldiers wounded in four hours of fighting.    ---   The White House is weighing whether to invoke a law allowing the seizure of tax payments made by U.S. businesses operating in Panama, Reagan's national security adviser said. The disclosure came as new U.S. troops began arriving in Panama, where civilian battalions reportedly were being formed to defend against an &quot;invasion.&quot;    A convicted marijuana smuggler told a Senate subcommittee of an offer eight years ago by Noriega and then-Panamanian ruler Omar Torrijos to use an island off Panama for drug shipments. The smuggler said the offer was rejected because the two leaders were &quot;extremely greedy.&quot;    ---   A U.S. envoy will travel to Central America today to discuss the possibility of opening talks that would bring about U.S.-Nicaraguan diplomatic contacts for the first time since 1985, sources said. In Miami, Contra leaders threatened to cancel truce talks set for next week unless Managua allowed them to meet with opposition leaders.    ---   Philippine army rebel Honasan indicated he would try again to overthrow President Aquino. The leader of a failed coup in August, who escaped from a Manila prison Saturday, called on his supporters in the military to &quot;act and act boldly.&quot; Aquino is scheduled to visit China next week.    ---   Police in Tegucigalpa arrested reputed Honduran drug trafficker Juan Ramon Matta, who is wanted by the U.S. in the slaying of a special narcotics agent. The U.S. Embassy in Honduras said the Reagan administration was exploring legal means for obtaining his extradition.    ---   A court in Barcelona convicted an American photographer of trafficking in cocaine. Conan Owen, 23, who had pleaded innocent, was sentenced to six years and one day in prison. Meese, who had discussed the case with officials in Spain in February, said the U.S. regretted the court's decision.    ---   Gorbachev accused the West of attempting to exacerbate Soviet domestic problems by interfering via radio in an ethnic dispute over the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, claimed by Armenia. The Kremlin leader said various Western radio stations, &quot;including official ones,&quot; were &quot;engaging in provocations,&quot; the news agency Tass said.    ---   India's Prime Minister Gandhi met with Defense Secretary Carlucci and reiterated New Delhi's concern about shipments of U.S.-made weapons to Pakistan. During a one-hour meeting in the Indian capital, they also discussed regional developments, EastWest relations and arms control.    ---   Democrat Rose Mofford was inaugurated as governor of Arizona, a day after Evan Mecham was convicted on impeachment charges and removed from office. Mofford had served as acting governor since February. Mecham, a Republican, was found guilty of misusing public funds and attempting to obstruct a state inquiry.    ---   Census Bureau figures showed the median age of Americans reached 32.1 years last year, rising from 31.8 in 1986. It was the highest median age in U.S. history, the result of maturing baby boomers and a growing number of elderly, the bureau said.    ---   Afghanistan began parliamentary elections, and the Kabul government reported an &quot;enthusiastic&quot; turnout. The Sovietbacked regime declared a national holiday for the first of 10 days of balloting. </TEXT></DOC>