<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881028-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS NARROWED Bush's lead in the presidential race, a new poll shows.    The Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey gives the GOP candidate a substantial 51% to 42% edge over Democrat Dukakis, a sharp drop from the 17 percentage points Bush enjoyed two weeks ago. The poll also confirms that the electorate is unhappy with the campaign and its candidates. Separately, Bush minimized the need for &quot;radical steps&quot; to reduce the budget deficit, saying &quot;steady control, steady restraint&quot; would correct the $155 billion of federal red ink.    Dukakis insisted that the election &quot;is up for grabs,&quot; and said Bush's plan to cut the capital gains tax would only help the rich &quot;hire a second butler.&quot;    ---   THE KREMLIN SAID it will begin eliminating unprofitable Soviet enterprises.    The Soviet finance minister, speaking at the start of a two-day session of the Supreme Soviet, said Moscow would cut unprofitable businesses and farms in an effort to bolster the Soviet economy and overcome a budget deficit expected to reach $58 billion next year. It was the first time Moscow gave details of its growing deficit. The official also said that planned price changes wouldn't lower the standard of living.    The Soviet parliament's session is aimed at discussing an $804 billion government budget that is expected to emphasize improving consumer goods.    ---   Reagan plans to propose that the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, believed riddled with Soviet espionage devices, be razed and rebuilt. The cost could exceed $300 million. The president said he had &quot;no choice&quot; because of &quot;the many listening devices that were built into it.&quot;    ---   Solidarity leader Walesa demanded that planned talks between Poland's government and the opposition begin without preconditions. Government objections to two members of the union's delegation delayed the start of the negotiations. Walesa also called on Warsaw authorities to clarify the prospects for the legalization of the union.    ---   The Educational Testing Service unveiled plans for a comprehensive teacher licensing examination to help states weed out incompetent instructors. The exam, for beginning teachers, would include computer simulations of classroom situations as well as test candidates for reading and math skills. Prototypes are to be field tested in 1990.    ---   The FAA called for new safety steps by airlines flying older Boeing 737 jets, including the proposed replacement of thousands of rivets. The moves could cost the airlines as much as $24 million, the agency estimated.    ---   Anglican Archbishop Tutu said a black boycott of Wednesday's segregated voting for South African municipal councils was a success, and he urged Pretoria to give blacks full voting rights in national affairs. Right-wing whites posted gains across the country as the ruling party maintained control in major areas.    ---   Kidnappers in Lebanon released an old photograph of U.S. journalist Terry Anderson on his 41st birthday, his fourth in captivity since being abducted in March 1985 in Beirut. The Islamic Jihad released the photo to support a statement denying links to a woman arrested last week in Italy carrying pictures of two captive Americans.    ---   NATO defense ministers opened two days of talks in the Netherlands aimed at nuclear planning. Fourteen ministers from the alliance's 16 countries sought to avert a threatened crisis over Belgium's opposition to modernizing short-range weapons. Brussels has said that such a move in the current East-West climate would be premature.    ---   Police in Prague detained dozens of dissidents on the 70th anniversary of Czechoslovakia's prewar independence and flatly rejected talks with them. The arrests came as thousands of people gathered in the city's Wenceslas Square for the first official communist celebration of the holiday.    ---   Members of a House panel appealed directly to Reagan for improved safety procedures at U.S. plants that make nuclear weapons. In a letter to the president, 31 members of the Armed Services Committee urged the appointment of a five-member board, ordered by Congress this fall, to oversee safety at the plants.    ---   West German authorities arrested 13 Palestinians suspected of preparing a terrorist attack. Details of the planned strike weren't disclosed. A prosecutor in Duesseldorf said large arms caches also were seized in the police raids on 16 houses in four cities.    ---   A federal judge in New York delayed indefinitely the arraignment of Marcos on racketeering charges after defense lawyers presented medical evidence that the deposed Philippine president was too ill to travel from Hawaii. The judge, however, ordered Marcos's wife to appear in court Monday.    ---   Seven Latin American leaders called for a &quot;new dialogue&quot; with the U.S. and other developed nations to discuss foreign debt, drug trafficking and strife in Central America. The appeal came at the start of a meeting at Punta del Este, Uruguay. </TEXT></DOC>