<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0062 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Advances in Electronics MakeLife Easier to Eavesdroppers---By Peter WaldmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ESY BIACELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE is entering a new era of sophistication that promises to change the way people are watched. Most important, the development of computers and artificial-intelligence software that can both monitor and interpret people's actions -- as perceived through ever-smaller sensors like microphones, cameras and radio-tracking devices -- may soon enable watchers to automatically screen large segments of the population for specific behavior. This means that law-enforcement officials, for example, will be able to rely on computers for spotting crimes in progress or perhaps just suspicious activity -- all without adding greatly to manpower.    Though the most advanced of such automated surveillance techniques are under the close control of government security agencies and their suppliers, some hints of gains in the field are available. For example, according to a 1983 book on the National Security Agency, &quot;Puzzle Palace,&quot; written by private investigator and author James Bamford, the agency is using supercomputers programmed to recognize designated voices and key words to simultaneously monitor over 50,000 international telephone calls and data transmissions.    Such a feat is by no means implausible in today's high-tech environment. Following is a sampling of developments in three areas of electronic surveillance:    Monitoring Telecommunications   Despite major improvements in telecommunications technology in the last 20 years, the average phone call or telephone data transmission has become less secure from eavesdropping. That's because the now common use of microwaves and satellites for transmission allows would-be interceptors, equipped with receivers available for about $20,000, to simply suck messages out of the air. Moreover, this kind of phone monitoring is almost impossible to detect because it generates none of the telltale clicking noises associated with traditional wiretapping.    Also, as in other areas of electronic surveillance, the problem of &quot;listening&quot; manpower has been eased by automation. Surveillants today use voice-activated tape recorders that record 40 to 50 calls at a time, greatly expanding the lone eavesdropper's reach.    To foil telephone interception, some companies have developed &quot;secure telephones,&quot; which encrypt digitalized phone transmissions. These systems are costly and unwieldy to use and have thus been employed mostly by government agencies. But E-Systems Inc. in Dallas, Texas, says it has developed a prototype secure phone that fits inside a regular telephone chassis. It utilizes microprocessors to encrypt digital data. E-Systems hopes to market the phone within a year.    Bugging Rooms   Miniaturization has revolutionized room bugging. Today, tiny microphones and lenses with self-contained power supplies and radio transmitters -- available off the shelf in places like Tokyo, Hong Kong and the Frankfurt airport -- enable almost anyone to bug a room without the wiring that used to hamper the process. In addition, for $10,000 to $30,000, a surveillant can buy a laser-beam system that interprets voice vibrations on window panes, allowing him, from an outdoor perch, to eavesdrop on indoor conversations.    &quot;With today's technology, you can do anything, given enough time and money,&quot; says Hal Lipset, a private investigator in San Francisco with 40 years experience in the field.    Indeed, Mr. Lipset's debugging engineer, Bruce Bierman, says he has found fingernail-size listening devices hidden in air-conditioning ducts, thermostats and house plants. One time, he says, he found a TV camera lens mounted to a ceiling sprinkler system inside a union hall. The tiny device was pointed straight up toward the ceiling where small mirrors were unobtrusively fastened around the base of the sprinkler pipe. This gave watchers a panoramic view of the entire room.    The technology of counterespionage, meanwhile, is also advancing rapidly. Mr. Bierman says he recently ordered from a German manufacturer a new, portable radio-wave spectrum-analyzer capable of scanning a room in just 30 minutes for the full range of radio frequencies used in bugging devices.    Tracking People   Tracking devices have also benefited greatly from the growing power of computers. For example, using implanted transponders which interact with radio signals from a mainframe computer, B.I. Inc.'s system of identification for cows instructs feeding machines, also controlled by the mainframe, to serve up different diets for certain animals. The Boulder, Colo., company says transponders have already been implanted in 350,000 cows. Now, B.I. is adapting the technology to an identification system for people working in high-security installations. &quot;There are times when Big Brother must watch,&quot; says David J. Hunter, president of B.I.    On a wider scale, the system of antennas now installed in most metropolitan areas by cellular-telephone companies could easily facilitate vehicle tracking over large areas. Indeed, the mobile phone systems work by sending unique radio signals via these scattered &quot;cell&quot; antennas to a central computer which tracks the location of each unit.    &quot;Cellular, in a way, is probably the beginning of being able to track the whereabouts of people,&quot; says Mr. Bierman, the counterspy engineer. </TEXT></DOC>