<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880527-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Common Cause: Reagan Aims to Give Soviet Chief a Boost In Meeting at Summit --- Gorbachev Needs a Success To Further 'Perestroika' Within Communist Ranks --- Guest Lecture at Moscow U </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Kempe and Peter Gumbel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Ronald Reagan next week will play the most unlikely role of his long career: supporting actor for a Communist Party leader.    For President Reagan, who leaves office in eight months, the Moscow summit with Mikhail Gorbachev is an opportunity to cement his place in history. For Mr. Gorbachev, it is much more: a step toward securing his future as leader of the Soviet Union. Within weeks of the summit, Mr. Gorbachev plans a showdown with his critics at an extraordinary Communist Party conference, the first of its kind since 1941, where he intends to remove recalcitrant party functionaries and solidify his hold on power.    A successful summit -- showing him as an international leader -- is seen in Moscow as a prelude to a successful party conference. And that is seen in Washington as a prerequisite for stable, harmonious superpower relations now and on into a succeeding administration. As a result, Mr. Reagan has decided to do all he can to bolster the Soviet leader.    Although Mr. Reagan once called the Soviet Union an &quot;evil empire,&quot; he now calls its leader &quot;my friend.&quot; To achieve &quot;true peace&quot; with the Communist superpower is, Mr. Reagan says, his goal. He will sup at Mr. Gorbachev's dacha, or country home. He will make speeches on Soviet soil praising glasnost, Mr. Gorbachev's campaign to open Soviet society. He will stand before a mosaic of revolutionary figures at Moscow University, lecturing a crowd of 17- to 24-year-old students on the value of change, and advise them to be patient with their leader because progress comes slowly.    &quot;We all had a good laugh reading the president's speeches,&quot; says an administration Sovietologist who saw advance texts. &quot;They sound a lot like things Gorbachev would say. The Soviet leader couldn't be more pleased if he had written them himself.&quot;    After several years of debate over whether Mikhail Gorbachev is good or bad for America's global goals, the Reagan administration now seems to have decided to jump on his bandwagon and trust that his efforts to drive the Soviet Union toward economic reform and greater openness are good for America.    Mr. Gorbachev's efforts to modernize the Soviet economy raise the prospects of widening commercial ties between East and West. Moscow's decision to withdraw from Afghanistan has reduced U.S. fears of Soviet expansion. Most important, Mr. Reagan, like British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, finds that he can deal with Mr. Gorbachev. The superpower chiefs have negotiated arms-control agreements and talked of ending the arms race.    As a result, White House officials concede that Mr. Reagan's recent statements amount to an endorsement of Mr. Gorbachev. The president himself told European television journalists that outside nations should be helpful to Mr. Gorbachev &quot;because many of the reforms that he is undertaking are aimed at things that we have always criticized in the Soviet Union.&quot;    So, while the summit itself will be more show than substance -- no major agreements are expected to be signed -- it is important to the extent it strengthens Mr. Gorbachev.    &quot;The summit reinforces his authority,&quot; says Arthur Hartman, who until recently served as Mr. Reagan's ambassador to Moscow. Mr. Hartman notes that the summit obviously can't solve the Soviet leader's deeper problems -- economic lethargy and inflexible bureaucracy -- but adds, &quot;It makes it harder for those who want to oppose him.&quot; The summit will emphasize Mr. Gorbachev's ability to reduce friction with Moscow's most feared adversary.    Because of the controversy his domestic reforms have triggered, &quot;Gorbachev has known he was in for tough sledding ever since last summer,&quot; says Thane Gustafson of Georgetown University. &quot;The timing and the shaping of the summit have been pursued by the Soviet side with both eyes on the domestic situation. Gorbachev can only gain from the summit&quot; as he heads to the party conference.    At the conference, Soviet and Western officials expect Mr. Gorbachev to set his agenda for the next two to three years -- a period the Soviet leader calls &quot;the boost phase&quot; of perestroika, his economic restructuring efforts. Apart from outlining future strategy, they believe he will change the structure of the Communist Party in an attempt to broaden his power base.    Partly because of Mr. Gorbachev's internal troubles, some Soviet watchers see danger in all the summit enthusiasm that is building. Zbigniew Brzezinski, former national-security adviser to President Carter, fears that the atmospherics of a better relationship are &quot;leapfrogging&quot; ahead of realities. He says loose talk about warmer ties, expansion of trade and a proliferation of contacts between groups ranging from schoolchildren to lawyers is &quot;all moving ahead of real political accommodation.&quot; Trouble in Eastern Europe growing out of a combination of precarious economies and pent-up political frustration, Mr. Brzezinski fears, could undo all the talk of superpower harmony.    Despite that danger, the summit seems likely to reinforce the positive tone to superpower relations. Already, for one of the few times since World War II, U.S.-Soviet relations don't loom as an important political issue between the two leading presidential candidates in America. In pre-summit interviews, Soviet spokesman Gennady Gerasimov has called this a &quot;breakthrough.&quot; Like Mr. Gorbachev, the two U.S. presidential candidates are likely to focus more on domestic economic difficulties than international politics.    The broad consensus that relations should improve suggests continuity no matter whether Democrat Michael Dukakis or Republican George Bush wins the White House and opens the way for more East-West trade and U.S.-Soviet contacts.    &quot;Ronald Reagan sets the outer limit of what our relations are going to be with the Soviet Union,&quot; says Kenneth Adelman, former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. &quot;It is hard for Republicans to run against the Reds when Ronald Reagan, who has made a career of running against the Reds, is there in Red Square toasting the Soviet leader.&quot;    U.S. officials insist they aren't basing their policies on the imperfect science of helping Mr. Gorbachev, but their actions clearly favor a man they think wants to integrate his country more with the West through such possible moves as joining the International Monetary Fund and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. They argue that this should make the Soviet Union less aggressive.    So far much of the administration's policy seems based on the personal chemistry between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev rather than a coherent policy toward the new Kremlin. State Department officials concede they are largely making ad hoc responses to Soviet moves at this point.    &quot;The first thing we have to do is figure out for ourselves what we want,&quot; says Arnold Horelick, former chief Soviet analyst at the Central Intelligence Agency. &quot;We have to find better ways to explore opportunities. We should not be bound by old notions of what is and isn't acceptable to the Soviet Union.&quot;    It's Mr. Gorbachev's willingness to change the definition of what's acceptable in the Soviet Union -- by talking of Christianity, by striving to modernize the economy, by pushing for arms control -- that makes it easy for Mr. Reagan to deal with him. The outcome of the June Communist Party conference could help determine whether the pace of change accelerates or slows.    Yesterday, in releasing sweeping proposals that the party conference will consider next month, Mr. Gorbachev outlined plans intended to bring more &quot;democracy,&quot; or responsiveness, to government. Among the proposals: limiting state and party officials -- apparently including him -- to two five-year terms in office, except for officials whose third terms win endorsement in secret balloting by 75% of their colleagues. Another proposal would establish a mechanism for removing members of the Central Committee more frequently than is now the case -- every five years, at a party congress.    Western analysts say the &quot;democracy&quot; campaign primarily aims at removing Brezhnev-era bureaucrats who can't easily be dislodged under present party rules even if they frustrate reforms.    Mr. Gorbachev also is expected to strengthen his power base by removing some conservatives remaining in the party's Central Committee. Last weekend he fired two members of the policy-making Central Committee -- the party chiefs in Armenia and Azerbaijan, who took the blame for the ethnic unrest there earlier this year and who had been under fire for corruption and cronyism.    U.S. officials have concluded that Kremlin leaders are more preoccupied with internal politics than Mr. Gorbachev's meeting with Mr. Reagan. The summit, the fourth meeting between them, is a far more routine affair than the first party conference in 47 years. Western experts aren't sure about its rules or how delegates will be picked. It will be a far less orchestrated and more unpredictable event than the summit that precedes it.    The focus of the summit will be arms control. The leaders will sign ratification instruments for the treaty abolishing medium-range missiles that they concluded last December; the Senate is just completing its debate. And Secretary of State George Shultz predicts that negotiators will agree on &quot;some method of recording and capturing the very substantial progress&quot; made toward concluding a more important second treaty to reduce strategic nuclear arms.    The two sides also are expected to agree to announce in advance any launches of ballistic missiles, an expansion of existing agreements that require advance notification of test flights that go beyond territorial borders of either side. They will make formal an already negotiated agreement to evaluate ways of verifying the yield of nuclear tests; U.S.-Soviet teams plan to monitor experimental blasts at Semipalatinski in the Soviet Union July 17 and at the Department of Energy's Nevada Test site Aug. 2. They will also conclude a new protocol to the unratified 1976 Peaceful Nuclear Explosions treaty that will allow it to be considered by the Senate this autumn.    Officials also will sign more than a dozen bilateral agreements, ranging from maritime rescue and fisheries pacts to agreements on pollution control in the Bering Strait and the peaceful use of atomic energy. </TEXT></DOC>