<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900410-0103</DOCNO><DOCID>900410-0103.</DOCID><HL>   Environment:   Audubon Society Hopes Music Videos   And Movies Get Its `Green' Message Out   ----   By Laura Landro   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   GE TBSA AAPL WILLA PHG</CO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)</IN><LP>   On an exotic location shoot in Kenya, stars IsabellaRossellini, John Lithgow and James Earl Jones recentlyfinished filming a made-for-TV movie with the working title&quot;The Last Elephant,&quot; billed as an action-adventure dramaabout one man's crusade to stop poachers from slaughteringelephants for their ivory tusks.   It has romance, violence and intrigue, but this isn't youraverage Hollywood production. It's a movie with a message.The first feature film produced by the National AudubonSociety -- with $4 million provided by Turner BroadcastingSystem Inc. -- the movie aims to get viewers riled up enough&quot;to make a personal commitment to elephant protection,&quot; saysChristopher Palmer, president and executive producer ofNational Audubon Society Productions. Following the film'spremiere this fall on TBS, Ms. Rossellini will make an appealto viewers to call a toll-free number for information on howto fight poaching.</LP><TEXT>   With Earth Day around the corner and the environment highon the list of fashionable causes in Hollywood, Audubon's Mr.Palmer is on a hot streak. A 42-year-old former EnvironmentalProtection Agency official, he is trying to revamp theAudubon Society's image as a genteel bird watcher's group byproducing high-profile programming aimed at a generalaudience.   With a patchwork of financing from corporate backers suchas Turner and General Electric Co., institutions, andindividuals, Mr. Palmer has put together an impressive lineupof projects. In addition to TV specials and feature filmsthat will appear on Turner's TBS and TNT networks and thePublic Broadcasting Service, Audubon is producingenvironmentally oriented music videos featuring rock starssuch as the Grateful Dead. On the high-tech front, Mr. Palmerhas lined up joint ventures with companies such as AppleComputer Inc., Lucasfilm Ltd. and Dutch electronics giantN.V. Philips, which are helping to fund projects that includeinteractive video-disk systems for schools and institutions,and computer software and games.   In many of its projects, Audubon is going for the glitz,recruiting movie stars to narrate documentaries for free andluring rock icons to make music videos gratis for theirfavorite causes. Mr. Palmer wants to make more films like&quot;The Last Elephant,&quot; using fictional stories to tackleimportant environmental issues. While it isn't clear whetherthese projects will galvanize substantial numbers of viewersinto action, Mr. Palmer defends his strategy. &quot;We have toreach new audiences that don't read as many books andnewspapers or watch documentaries,&quot; he says. &quot;They do watchmusic videos and movies -- and we have to deal with the worldas it is.&quot;   Audubon isn't making fluff. While groups such as NationalGeographic Society have long provided TV viewers withhigh-brow nature programs and environmentally orientedspecials, Audubon has tackled controversial issues -- andlocked horns with powerful commercial interests in theprocess. Last year, in a much-publicized brouhaha, eightadvertisers including Citicorp, Ford Motor Co. and ExxonCorp. pulled about $250,000 of ads from TBS for Audubon's&quot;Ancient Forests: Rage Over Trees&quot; under pressure from thelogging industry. The program was critical of loggers in theNorthwest's older forests.   Stroh Brewery Co., an advertiser and the primaryunderwriter of Audubon specials, also withdrew its funding --partly because of a threat from loggers to boycott itsproducts and partly because the company was in the middle oftakeover talks and under severe financial pressure. TBSagreed to run the special without commercials, and alsoagreed to provide Audubon with interim funding for thespecials until it could line up a new sponsor.   Last month, after a six-month search, Mr. Palmer got a $3million commitment from General Electric, already a bigsupporter of Audubon's classroom projects. The grant willfund eight hour-long specials, and GE will also buycommercial time when the specials appear on TBS. GE saysAudubon will have complete editorial control over thespecials. Though GE and Audubon differ on such issues ascommercial nuclear power -- GE is in the business, whichAudubon opposes -- a GE spokeswoman says the two &quot;don't haveto agree on everything.&quot;   Turner, whose chairman, Ted Turner, is a big booster ofenvironmental causes, also has agreed to provide a chunk ofthe programming budget for specials and feature films. &quot;Weencourage Audubon to take a strong point of view,&quot; says JerryHogan, president of Turner Entertainment Networks.   Though the programs aren't profitable for the company,&quot;they add to the character and personality of TBS,&quot; Mr. Hogansays. Indeed, TBS has drawn high ratings for Audubon programsnarrated by such Hollywood stars as Michael Douglas andRobert Redford. Meryl Streep is narrating next month'sspecial on the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, and &quot;Cheers&quot;star Ted Danson will host a coastal-pollution specialscheduled for October.   Audubon uses the specials to get viewers involved. Lastmonth, TBS set up a toll-free &quot;dolphin hot line&quot; throughWestern Union for viewers of &quot;If Dolphins Could Talk,&quot; aboutthe mammals' plight with tuna fishermen and pollutionnarrated by Michael Douglas. Callers were able to order afree activist kit and send protest messages to the tunaindustry via a Western Union mailgram for a small fee.Western Union said the volume of calls it received in thetwo-hour period following the show was one of the highest inthe company's history.   Getting the feature film on elephant poaching produced wasa tougher sell for Mr. Palmer. Several Hollywood studiosrejected the idea before Turner's new TNT cable networkbought it, providing money to hire screenwriters and awell-known Hollywood producer, Robert Halmi. Turner's Mr.Hogan says the company is considering releasing the film totheaters overseas. &quot;The movie is an example of Chris'sentrepreneurial spirit -- coming up with a dramatic moviethat appeals to the viewer as entertainment,&quot; he says.   Mr. Palmer, who was born in Hong Kong and raised inEngland, was trained as an engineer and served in Britain'sRoyal Navy. A dual citizen of Britain and the U.S., he workedas an energy adviser for Sen. Charles Percy, then joined theCarter administration as chief of staff to the EPA's deputyadministrator. He joined Audubon in 1980 as director ofenergy and environment, starting the society's televisiondepartment in 1984. There, he says, he realized Audubon coulduse mass media and new technologies to vastly expand itsmessage beyond the hard core of about five million to ninemillion people on the usual environmentalist mailing lists.   To reach younger viewers, Audubon is trying to recruitrock and country stars to make environmental music videos;the first, featuring a new song by the Grateful Dead, willmake its debut next week. Claude Carmichael, a Wall Streetanalyst with a recording background who volunteered toproduce the music videos, says artists can compose a song oruse original material Audubon is having written for thevideos, and draw on the society's extensive library ofdocumentary footage to accompany their music.   Mr. Palmer is also promoting a range of educationalprograms for schoolchildren and working closely with schoolsto train teachers in the use of various Audubon-sponsoredmaterials. He raised $270,000 to start a computer softwareseries, Audubon Wildlife Adventures, featuring role-playingstories about grizzly bears, sharks and whales. Ajoint-venture with Lucasfilm and Apple Computer is developingvideo-disk-based interactive science programs onenvironmental issues. And with Philips, Audubon is producingso-called CD-interactive products that combine digital audiodisks with visual elements and computer data.   Audubon is also producing a series of print products,including Audubon comic books, college textbooks, a series ofchildren's books that will be published by Bantam Books in1992 and a companion novel for &quot;The Last Elephant&quot; movie.John Wiley andamp; Sons Inc. is publishing a series of &quot;AudubonPerspectives&quot; books that will cover the society'shigh-priority issues and include sections on what readers cando to get involved.</TEXT></DOC>