<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910925-0104</DOCNO><DOCID>910925-0104.</DOCID><HL>   Where Soviet Jews Belong   ----   By Karen Elliott House</HL><DATE>09/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)ISRAEL (ISR)IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)SYRIA (SY)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   If a Martian surveyed the spectacle of George Bush'sshowdown with Israel over the timing of a $10 billion loanguarantee to resettle Soviet Jews in Israel, one suspects theMartian would quickly come to the obvious solution: Resettlethem in America.   What's going on between the Bush administration and Israelis a bizarre squabble in which the Soviet Jews have becomepolitical pawns. Neither the U.S. nor Israel can claim themoral high ground of offering these people a choice of theirfuture homeland. In a rational and moral world, refugeesclearly are a benefit to any country fortunate enough toattract them. Therefore, the U.S. ought to be competing withIsrael to welcome this influx of talented and energeticimmigrants -- just as Western nations should compete toattract Vietnamese or Hong Kong Chinese, Cubans orSalvadorans, Egyptians or Palestinians.</LP><TEXT>   Instead, the Bush administration has gotten itself trappedin an amoral undertaking. It colludes with some of Israel'sstaunchest U.S. supporters to limit quotas under which SovietJews enter the U.S. This is all part of a deliberate strategyto route Russian Jews to Israel, a nation desperately seekingto increase its population (not to mention populate theoccupied West Bank of the Jordan River). Until recently, thecombination of socialist economic policies and externalthreats produced more Israeli emigrants than immigrants.   As one enlightened American Jewish voice, the Forward,noted in a recent editorial, Soviet Jews ought to have atleast three alternatives: to remain in a Soviet Union thatgenuinely welcomes their presence and contributions; toemigrate to Israel for religious or political reasons if thatis their desired homeland; or to join the countless refugeesfrom other lands and other persecutions who have soughtsecurity and prosperity in America. (Yesterday, reports camethat some Soviet republics are blocking Jewish emigration.)   Noting that America's present restrictive immigrationpolicy forces most Soviet Jews either to choose Israel or totake the considerable risks of waiting it out in the SovietUnion, the Forward concludes: &quot;Yet, it's impossible toimagine anyone better qualified to weigh these risks than thevisa applicants themselves. The spectacle of one group ofJews, themselves happily resident in America, opposingefforts to make way for more Jews to come here, this isincredible.&quot;   So what's going on here? Not only is the U.S. abandoningthe moral high ground and its own self-interest by notactively seeking Soviet Jewish immigrants, but once again theU.S. is being asked by Israel and her congressionalsupporters to bankroll Israeli actions that are contrary toAmerica's foreign-policy interests.   The Bush administration has finally decided in the wake ofthe war with Iraq to put its substantial credibility behind aMideast peace effort. It was obvious that Mr. Bush, inembarking on a comprehensive peace conference, a goal thathas eluded a half-dozen presidential predecessors, would haveto twist arms and endure tantrums from both Arabs andIsraelis. Even those who may want the conference seepolitical value in being dragged kicking and screaming to thetable.   This very much includes Israel, which now asserts that thepresident is undermining his own peace conference by delayingloan guarantees until after the results of any peaceconference are clear. Quite the opposite is true. Mr. Bush'sconfrontation with Israel over loan guarantees and hisshowdown with Iraq's Saddam Hussein over allowing UnitedNations inspectors access to nuclear and chemical sites willmerely strengthen the president's credibility with bothIsraelis and Arabs when they assemble to talk peace -- whichthey likely still will. This is because both Syria and Israelstill see advantages in a deal over the Israeli-occupiedGolan Heights.   Syria's Hafez Assad, having accepted the concept of aninternational peace conference, has been busily importing newNorth Korean weaponry that clearly threatens Israel. There isa dangerous sense of deja vu about this. It's not all thatlong ago that American policy makers convinced themselvesthat accommodation with Saddam -- a blind eye here, aid andcredit there -- could transform the Middle East's meanestgunslinger into a potential partner for regional stability.Mr. Assad is every bit as menacing, but substantiallysmarter. Thus America once again is trying to buy adictator's moderation and cooperation by listening to hiswords rather than analyzing and opposing his actions.   Meanwhile, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzak Shamir also hasbought into the concept of the peace conference whilelikewise setting out to sabotage its prospects byaccelerating the settlement of Jews, especially Sovietimmigrants, on the West Bank. The West Bank's future is acentral issue for resolution at the peace conference. Mr.Shamir and Mr. Assad, each in his own way, is sticking it toMr. Bush; each seeks to cash in on the president's desire fora dialogue between them about peace.   Mr. Assad has the luxury of Saudi financing (withAmerica's tacit blessing) for his military buildup. Mr.Shamir, with no such third-party sugar daddy, is askingAmerican taxpayers to guarantee the financing of his buildupof settlements. The fact that it's the Israeli prime ministerwho has most raised the hackles of Mr. Bush can be attributedto the fact that Mr. Shamir's request requires Americanaction, while Mr. Assad's actions merely need Americanacquiesence. Additionally, in a world that's never quitefair, the U.S. has more leverage over a democratic anddependent Israel than over a despotic and erratic Syria.   Whether the world is fair or not, Mr. Shamir is asking toomuch of President Bush and American taxpayers. It's hard toimagine a rational economic argument for any loan, much lessone at lower than market interest rates, for the settlementof refugees in dangerous and disputed territory that may notremain in Israel's hands at the end of peace process. Inshort, no sensible banker would guarantee a loan to build ahouse on a lot claimed by a hostile next-door neighbor.Israel, of course, argues that the $10 billion it seeks toborrow with U.S. guarantees isn't earmarked for West Banksettlements. But, as any banker or borrower knows, money isfungible.   The latest Israeli request, albeit a loan guarantee andnot a loan, comes on top of more than $3 billion annuallythat the U.S. provides Israel. While these payments aretechnically loans for economic and military purposes, loanshave a way of becoming grants. From 1974 to 1989, Israelreceived some $16.4 billion in loans that the U.S. convertedto grants, according to congressional researchers cited in aJournal news article last week.   The point isn't to oppose all aid to Israel -- a reliableU.S. ally, a democracy, and a society that if anything hasbroader American public sympathy after the televised imagesof its citizens living in gas masks during Iraqi missileattacks. The point is that this time around the U.S. ought tolook first to its own interests: welcoming productiverefugees from anywhere, including Soviet Jews, and preventingSyria, Saudi Arabia, Israel or anyone else from furthercomplicating the Mideast peace process to which America, atleast, is committed.   Under current American rules, some 40,000 Soviet Jews ayear may immigrate to this country, but most of these arecases of family reunification. The ceiling is set to rise toa still-modest 61,000 next year.   Our Martian friend, as he surveys American-Israelirelations, would be hard pressed to understand why Americaisn't truly competing with Israel to attract Soviet refugeesand why America should help subvert its own Mideast peaceinitiative. But most baffling of all to our Martian would bewhy, in a world witnessing the rapid collapse of socialisteconomics, American taxpayers should subsidize with loanguarantees the perpetuation of Israel's faltering, socialisteconomic policies. Why not lend refugees a few thousanddollars each and let them invest the money in building newlives in the land of their choice?   ---   Ms. House is vice president, international of Dow Jones andamp;Co.</TEXT></DOC>