<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910319-0169</DOCNO><DOCID>910319-0169.</DOCID><HL>   L.A. Debate -- Police Are Also Victims   ----   By Tom Kando</HL><DATE>03/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A24</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Friedrich Nietzsche once wrote that the gravest threat toa society's survival is its unwillingness to control itscriminals. To paraphrase a figure more widely known in ourworld, Michael Corleone, history teaches us that it ispossible to murder anyone with impunity.   Both these sets of words are relevant in the currentdiscussion and investigation of police brutality in LosAngeles. There, a videotape of a beating of a black motoristby a group of police officers has touched off a JusticeDepartment investigation. The beating itself was outrageous.The Justice Department is correct in perceiving this event asa &quot;national&quot; or &quot;civil-rights&quot; issue. But not, perhaps, anational civil rights issue in the sense that many aredescribing it.</LP><TEXT>   To understand what is happening in Los Angeles, it isworthwhile to look at what is happening in the rest of theU.S. Take, for example, another California city --Sacramento. Sacramento has seen more than its share of crime.The early part of 1991 has been particularly disgraceful. Aso-called thrill killer has murdered half a dozen people, andthe total number of murders so far this year exceeds 23. Thediscovery of unidentifiable bodies is becoming commonplace,often reported only on the back page of the local newspapers.The murders are happening everywhere, including the mostaffluent neighborhoods.   The national clearance rate for murder has declinedsteadily since the 1950s: Three decades ago, more than 95% ofall murders led to an arrest. Today, the figure is less than70% and going down. In Sacramento so far this year, fewerthan 40% of all murders have led to an arrest.   Part of the reason for the increasing inability of lawenforcement to solve murder cases is that the proportion ofstranger-on-stranger murder is going up. Cases involvingrelatives, neighbors or acquaintances are easier to solve, ofcourse.   However, the primary cause of our society's increasinglawlessness is the one to which Nietzsche alluded: Ourcorrectional, criminal justice and political systems havesimply lost the will to combat crime. In fact, they implementat every opportunity policies most likely to encourage crime.   Thus, the Sacramento thrill killer's mass-murderous spreehas led to immediate calls in the state legislature forstricter gun control laws. It is useless to remind thosefolks that the two jurisdictions with the strictest guncontrol laws in the country -- New York and Washington, D.C.-- are also among those with the highest rates of murder andother violent crimes. Policy is increasingly dictated byideological commitment rather than empirical facts.   The thrill killer executed all his victims in fast-foodand convenience stores located in middle-class neighborhoods.The victims were employees, and an occasional customer. Anobvious and pragmatic response would be for every clerk,cashier and cook in such businesses to have ready access to ahand gun underneath the counter. But enabling citizens toprotect themselves is not part of the professionalcriminological ideology.   Another way in which crime is encouraged is through theexclusionary rule. The definition and implementation ofcriminal justice policy is in the hands of politicians,judges, criminologists, academicians, Hollywood and mediapeople, lawyers, parole agents and probation officers. With afew exceptions such as Harvard criminologist James Q. Wilson,a large majority among these professionals has, for manyyears, been much more occupied with the legal rights ofdefendants than with the plight of victims or the security ofsociety. As a result, the typical policeman has long lost themotivation really to &quot;go after&quot; murderers and other violentcriminals.   When my friends on the local police force stop a vehiclefor a minor moving violation or a defective light, theyroutinely check the driver's license, his identity, whetherthe car is stolen and whether there is a warrant out for him.That's about it. They rarely try to find out where theindividual is from, how long he has been in Sacramento, wherehe lives, works, etc. Yet it is through such inquisitivenessthat most serious criminals are eventually apprehended. It issuch inquisitiveness that was typical of citizen-policeencounters in the past, and still is in Japan for exampletoday. But most of my policemen friends no longer bother,since such fact finding is unlikely to lead to arrest orconviction, but instead more likely to their own punishment,reprimand or a law suit.   Another factor is the matter of reward and punishment, orsimply put: justice. Every year, murderers such as theSacramento thrill killer put a premature end to the lives ofthousands upon thousands of innocent, hard working, lawabiding citizens, often putting them first throughexcruciating torture. One of this criminal's recent victimswas a beautiful, promising, hardworking college girl. A fewyears ago, also in Sacramento, authorities discovered inanother killer's apartment the remnants of the bodies ofvictims who had been partially eaten by the murderer]   It would be understandable if, in the face of suchunspeakable evil, many would find slow torture a moreappropriate punishment than swift and painless execution. Butsince the people of California are civilized, they simplyvoted to reinstate capital punishment in San Quentin's gaschamber. Yet, although capital punishment was approved twiceby an overwhelming majority of the voters a decade ago, thecriminal justice elite refuses to permit the state to executeanyone. Instead, each capital case is tried, appealed andsuspended ad infinitum at an average cost of $8 million percase to the taxpayers.   During that endless process, every mass murderer becomes acelebrity, enjoying year after year free room and board,media coverage and the best legal services that the publiccan pay for. From Juan Corona to Salcido, from Charles Mansonto Dorothy Puente, from David Chase to Dan White, and thedozens upon dozens of other killers and mass murderers, theyhave all learned the lesson that their crimes assured them ofa spotlight on national television, a permanent place inhistory and the lasting attention of society. If this is notreward, what is?   The L.A. videotape case is still unfolding. The issuesseem to be quite different from the ones in the casesdiscussed above. But they share the same surreal context, acontext that will change if and when the citizenry wrestlesback from the criminal justice professions and fromopinionmakers the means to protect itself. Until then, thesystem will continue to reward criminals, endanger our livesand emasculate the police. An important principle which issupposed to guide criminal justice is that ofproportionality, or just deserts, by which is meant acorrespondence between the seriousness of a crime committedand the severity of the ensuing punishment. This principle isoperative today, in a very perverted sense: The more seriousan offender's crime is, the more lavish are the resources andthe attention which society bestows upon him.   ---   Mr. Kando is a professor of sociology and criminal justiceat California State University in Sacramento.</TEXT></DOC>