<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900523-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>900523-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Data Switch:   PC Networks Begin   To Oust Mainframes   In Some Companies   ---   Small Machines and Software   That Operates Them Are   Cheaper and Often Better   ---   Still Work for the Big Systems   ----   By William M. Bulkeley   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><LP>   Consolidated Insurance Group recently pulled the plug onthe IBM 3090 mainframe at its Wilmington, Del., headquarters.   Technicians drained the cooling fluid and wheeled theminivan-length computer out on a dolly. Wayne Read,data-processing chief, shut off the air conditioners thatkept the glass-walled computer room at a constant 67 degrees.Now he's planning a party to celebrate the company'sconversion from the $3 million mainframe to a $300,000network of personal computers.</LP><TEXT>   Sitting in a cramped room is the heart of the new system:seven powerful PCs -- the &quot;servers&quot; that control the centraldata bases -- and the disk drives that store much of itsdata. But most of its muscle is in 150 desktop PCs. And thePC users love it. Instead of queuing up and eventuallygetting a lengthy report from the mainframe, they use theirown software to tap the corporate data base. They get theinformation electronically, pick the parts they want andprint them out on a desk-side printer.   Many users &quot;are very excited&quot; about getting information soquickly, Mr. Read says. &quot;With mainframes, you wait a day ortwo. Then, you may not like it and have another two-dayturnaround.&quot;   In switching to PCs, Consolidated Insurance appears to bein the vanguard of a revolution. Personal computers have beenthe fastest-growing sector of the computer industry for adecade, of course, but most of them have taken on new tasksor replaced typewriters and cash registers rather than doingthe heavy lifting performed by mainframes. Sending out bills,tracking corporate accounts and managing payables andreceivables has been considered too important to entrust tosmall computers. PC buffs talked about getting rid ofmainframes, but few companies did so.   Even five years ago, any notion of replacing a mainframewith PCs was heresy. And impossible: PCs weren't powerfulenough. But as PCs get ever faster and remain astonishinglycheap, more and more companies are concluding that theirmainframes are dinosaurs. They cost too much; some run ashigh as $20 million. And PCs, besides being far cheaper, cando some jobs better than mainframes can.   So, at long last, PCs are beginning to move into the coremainframe markets, the corporate data-processing centers.   The move is being resisted by most data-processingmanagers, who were reared in a mainframe world and don't wantto slash their staffs. And it is viewed skeptically by manychief executives. Moreover, some companies with huge databases would be hard-pressed to break them into smaller chunksfor PC networks. In other cases, the right PC software stillisn't available.   However, the experiences of some leading-edge companiesdemonstrate that switching to PC networks is often feasibleand highly cost-effective. &quot;In almost every large mainframeshop, you could cut costs at least 30%,&quot; contends DavidGajda, the president of RNG Associates, a Livonia, Mich.,computer consultant.   Dropping mainframes isn't painless. At ConsolidatedInsurance, which expects to cut annual operating costs by $1million, 30 people used to do mainframe work and write newsoftware when users asked for different information. Now,just 10 staffers are left; the rest started job-hunting assoon as they learned of the move to PCs. &quot;You have people whohave been in mainframe data-processing for 15 or 20 years.They elected to leave because that's where they want tocontinue to make their living,&quot; Mr. Read says.   In addition, the computer business itself seems headed foran upheaval.   &quot;We're at the early stages of a radical change in theeconomics of the industry,&quot; says William Zachmann, thepresident of Canopus Research, a Duxbury, Mass., consultingfirm. &quot;I'm convinced IBM's troubles haven't even started.&quot;With the spread of PC networks, declares Thomas Willmott ofAberdeen Group, a Boston consultant, &quot;The 3090 is dead meat.&quot;   More and more corporate executives, eager to controlrising computer costs, are getting the message. Ronald Peri,president of Computer Support of North America Inc., aBasking Ridge, N.J., consulting firm, says: &quot;In the pastyear, I've had three corporate presidents say to me, `We wantthat mainframe out of here.'&quot;   At International Business Machines Corp., Martin Clague, amarketing executive in the division that makes mainframes andlarge systems, concedes that powerful PCs, such as IBM's PS/2LAN server, can work as &quot;a very small mainframe.&quot;   But, he adds, &quot;PS/2s don't have the reliabilitycharacteristics&quot; needed by any company that can't put up withdown time. When more than 150 users are hooked together inmore than four separate local-area networks, he says, acorporate customer needs a mainframe to act as an &quot;industrialstrength&quot; network manager to supervise them all. Themainframes and their operating systems manage data andcommunications, detect and recover from errors withoutcrashing, and copy data regularly to prevent accidental loss.   &quot;All those things require fairly sophisticated machinedesign,&quot; he says.   At Digital Equipment Corp., John Rose, group manager forPC and PC-integration businesses, says the choice of buyingits VAX midrange or mainframe computer or a PC as the serverfor a network &quot;depends on the {software} applications.&quot;Digital says its more expensive VAXs &quot;let you attach asignificantly larger number of PCs&quot; and let many more peoplesimultaneously query the same data base. Nevertheless, evenat very large companies, PC networks have taken over some ofthe work once done on mainframes. Among such companies areAmerican Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., Baxter International Inc.and Rockwell International Corp. Turner Construction Co., thenation's largest general contractor, has widely adopted PCnetworks and expects to move its payroll system to a networkand close down its IBM 4300 mainframe next year.   George Colony, president of Forrester Research, says asurvey by the Cambridge, Mass., firm found that of 50 bigcompanies, 72% had replaced some minicomputers with networkedPCs, and 8% said they had replaced mainframes. Sierra Group,of Tempe, Ariz., says that of big companies it surveys, moreplan to cut mainframe and minicomputer spending than areincreasing it. As for PCs and networks, two-thirds areincreasing spending on these, and almost none cutting.   Most growth in mainframe sales is due to upgrades ofequipment by existing customers, analysts say. The growth isdwindling. The Computer and Business Equipment ManufacturersAssociation predicts that U.S. unit sales of mainframes willrise just 2.6% a year through 1998, down from its 3.3%estimate two years ago. It sees PC sales surging 14.5%.   PC networks' biggest advantage is cost. A $10,000,state-of-the-art PC handles up to eight million instructionsa second, by some counts about the same as an $800,000,bottom-of-the-line IBM 3090. Compaq Computer Corp. says itsnew $20,000 SystemPro PC is six times faster than a DigitalEquipment VAX minicomputer costing $150,000.   IBM disputes such speed comparisons as &quot;simplistic.&quot; LikeDigital, it contends that processor speed ratings are only aminor consideration in evaluating computer systems. They saythat their large systems, unlike basic PCs, have very fastcommunication channels and that their well-developed softwaresystems facilitate automatic backup. In addition, mainframesoftware developers long ago solved the problem of severalpeople simultaneously trying to get a record and alter it.PC-network developers have devised solutions, but theyhaven't been as thoroughly debugged over as many years.   Nevertheless, NCR Corp. Chairman Charles Exley says thatmicroprocessor-based systems have a 100-to-1 cost advantageover mainframes and that it will soon rise to 300-to-1.Customers are beginning to notice such differentials.   For years, Home Mutual Life Insurance Co., of Baltimore,depended on a Honeywell mainframe that cost $400,000 usedwhen acquired 12 years ago and a Data General MV 10000 thatcost $300,000 five years ago. Howard F. Brenner, executivevice president, has replaced both with a $160,000 PC network.&quot;We'll be saving that in hardware and software maintenance&quot;alone, he says.   Even when keeping mainframes for some jobs, companies arecutting costs by shifting work to networks. At RankOrganisation PLC, the British leisure-time conglomerate,Patrick Beet, director of microservices, says that by movingmonthly management reports and year-end accounting to PCnetworks, the company saves #500,000 a year.   Computer-hardware costs are only part of the story. PCnetworks require much smaller data-processing staffs. CBS FoxVideo, a video-distribution company owned by CBS Inc. and FoxFilm Corp., once had an IBM 3090 and a 4381 managed by 50workers. Today, it runs 10 PC networks around the countrywith just eight dataprocessing professionals at its New Yorkheadquarters. Costs have dropped to $1.3 million a year from$5.2 million, says Dean Calabreese, director of managementinformation systems.   In addition, PC software is much cheaper to buy thanmainframe software. At Consolidated Insurance, a $595software program now keeps track of debits and creditsinstead of a $200,000 general-ledger program for mainframes.   Inductotherm Corp., a Rancocas, N.J., foundry-furnacemaker, is replacing a mainframe, and John Ulrich, the managerof networks, says that &quot;a full-blownmanufacturing-resource-planning package on a micro network is$50,000. On a midrange computer it would be $100,000, and ona mainframe $500,000.&quot; Moreover, Inductotherm's mainframesoftware &quot;became so convoluted and complex over the yearsthat only the author could do anything to it without itexploding,&quot; Mr. Ulrich says. &quot;It's a helluva investment tothrow away, but it's virtually useless.&quot;   Mr. Peri, the consultant, says developing new programstakes a few days on PC networks; on mainframes, changing theappearance of a single screen may take a programmer a day ofpainstaking work.   PC networks still can't do everything, however. TheodoreKlein, a Boston consultant, says mainframes remain best forjobs with very large data bases and constant communication,such as airline reservations. &quot;You're not going to putCitibank's customer accounts on a micro,&quot; he says.   Mr. Klein says one Midwestern company (which he won'tname) fired its senior data-processing executives and movedits computer work to far-flung networks. &quot;They lost synergyand economies of scale,&quot; he says. Now, the firm has movedmany of the jobs back to the mainframe and centralized itscomputing again.   Switching to PCs also is slowed because PC softwaredevelopers are still struggling to match the capabilitiesoffered by mainframe data bases. For example, CBS Fox Videohas kept a Wang Laboratories Inc. minicomputer to run aroyalty accounting program that isn't available on PCs. Manysoftware developers that sell mainframe and midrange softwareare reluctant to supply PC software because of the much lowerprices and profit margins.   The big computer makers, which in the past generally urgedcustomers to buy mainframes and minicomputers as &quot;servers&quot;for PC networks, are beginning to make PC-network products.Earlier this year, both IBM and Digital Equipment introducedPC-based servers. And Wang recently introduced software thatprovides PC networks the same kinds of automatic backup andsecurity that users get with minicomputer software.   In addition, a host of small firms are eager to providewhat customers need. Network companies such as Novell Inc.,3Com Inc. and closely held Banyan Systems Inc. are growingfast by selling PC-network servers and software. To managebig data bases for PC networks, Sequent Computer SystemsInc., Teradata Corp. and closely held NetFrame Systems Inc.have designed powerful servers.   Despite such pressures, major computer makers are dawdlingin the PC-network area because it's hard to earn enough tosupport their vast sales, service and support organizations.&quot;The problem,&quot; says John Levinson of Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co.,&quot;is that the entire organizational structure built up aroundthe old products is as obsolete as the products are.&quot;   The big companies, their customers say, would much ratherkeep selling the more-profitable mainframes. Richard Hock,director of management information systems at EchlinManufacturing Co., a Branford, Conn., auto-parts maker, cutcomputing costs one-third by moving corporate-accounting andhuman-resource programs to PCs. Now, he hopes to replace theminicomputers and mainframes at Echlin's factories with PCnetworks as well. But, he says, the data-processing managersin the plants &quot;are fearful of losing power, and the hardwarevendors are helping fan that fear.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>