<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910121-0161</DOCNO><DOCID>910121-0161.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   FDIC Suit Accuses Milken, Others   Of Duping Sandamp;Ls; Seeks $6 Billion   ---   Agency Alleges the Rigging   Of Junk Bonds to Win   Investments by Thrifts   ----   By Wade Lambert and Amy Stevens   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   AMC CSV KM LABOR X.GRE B.GBL</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SECURITIES (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)BANKS (BNK)INSURANCE (INS)MASS TRANSIT, BUS LINES, SUBWAYS, HIGHWAYS (TRA)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. filed a suit seekingdamages of $6 billion from Michael Milken and otherdefendants accused of rigging the junk-bond market in ascheme to defraud the savings-and-loan industry.   The suit, filed in federal court in Manhattan, sweetensthe pot of potential damages sought by the FDIC for thriftlosses allegedly stemming from junk-bond investmentsunderwritten by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Mr. Milken,former head of Drexel's junk-bond operations, pleaded guiltylast year to six felony counts related to securities tradingand was sentenced to 10 years in prison.</LP><TEXT>   The suit, similar to the agency's bankruptcy claim againstDrexel, accuses the defendants of a scheme of coercion,extortion and bribery to win thrift investments from 1982through August 1989.   &quot;The liquidity of the markets for junk bonds was anillusion resulting from extensive manipulation through avariety of deceptive devices,&quot; the FDIC and Resolution TrustCorp. said in the suit. The suit added that Mr. Milken andthe other defendants who formerly worked in Drexel'sjunk-bond office &quot;developed and implemented an extensivepropaganda campaign to deceive and mislead the Sandamp;Ls and theirregulators about the risks of junk bonds.&quot;   The FDIC suit appears to expand the roster of formerDrexel employees accused of joining the alleged scheme todefraud thrifts. For instance, it accuses Drexel's formermergers chief, Leon Black, of assisting defendants from thejunk-bond department in &quot;efforts to misappropriate certainassociated securities intended for the purchasers.&quot; The suitsaid Mr. Black worked closely with the other defendants onleveraged buy-outs financed with junk bonds.   Theodore Miller, an attorney for Mr. Black, said: &quot;Itwould be inappropriate to comment at this time.&quot;   A spokesman for Mr. Milken said, &quot;This suit is repletewith false accusations and is without merit. . . . It isoutrageous to now blame Michael Milken for losses resultingfrom strategies and actions undertaken by independentmanagers of financial institutions, regulators, theprofessional money-management firms who advised savings andloans, and other investment banking houses.&quot;   A spokesman for Drexel said, &quot;This is a continuation ofthe piling on driven by political motivations.&quot; Drexel hasaccused the FDIC of using the junk-bond investments as ascapegoat for the thrift industry's woes.   Also named as defendants are three former savings-and-loanexecutives accused of buying and selling junk bonds at Mr.Milken and other Drexel employees' bidding, in exchange for ashare &quot;in the plunder of their respective institutions.&quot; Theformer thrift executives are Charles H. Keating Jr., whoformerly controlled the failed Lincoln Savings andamp; LoanAssociation of Irvine, Calif., David Paul, ex-chairman of thefailed CenTrust Savings Bank of Miami, and Thomas P. Spiegel,former chief executive officer of Columbia Savings andamp; LoanAssociation, Beverly Hills, Calif.   Stephen Neal, an attorney in Chicago for Mr. Keating, saidhe hadn't seen the suit, but he expects the allegations &quot;canand will be vigorously defended.&quot; Attorneys for Mr. Paul andMr. Spiegel couldn't be reached for comment.   The FDIC alleged that 44 failed thrifts now under theagency's control had losses estimated at $1.25 billionbecause of Drexel junk-bond investments. The FDIC is seekingan additional $750 million in damages for the defendants'alleged unlawful profits on the transactions, for the loss ofother earnings that the thrifts could have made by investingthe money elsewhere, and for excess fees and commissions. Thesuit asks that the actual damages be tripled to $6 billionunder federal racketeering law.   In a related case, Columbia Savings sued Mr. Milken andsome of the same defendants in federal court in Californialast month over its own junk-bond losses, estimated at $2billion. Columbia, which is expected soon to be taken over byregulators, also asked that its damages be tripled to $6billion.   Including the FDIC's and Columbia's bankruptcy-courtclaims against Drexel, a total of $22.5 billion in damages isbeing sought on behalf of failed thrifts for losses allegedlystemming from Drexel junk bonds.   Other defendants in the FDIC suit are 500 Drexel-employeepartnerships that the FDIC claims were used to conceal themanipulation of junk-bond transactions.   Also named is Donald Engel, a former Drexel managingdirector known for hosting infamous parties at the company'sjunk-bond conferences. &quot;During annual sales meetings . . .called `The Predators' Ball' and at other times, Engelprovided various forms of illicit entertainment and otherfavors to personnel of actual and potential Drexel clientswith the purpose and effect of inducing the acquisition ofjunk bonds and other actions,&quot; the suit said.   Neither Mr. Engel nor his attorney could be reached forcomment.   Other defendants include Lowell Milken, Michael Milken'sbrother; Peter Ackerman, Drexel's former chief of capitalmarkets; James Dahl, Drexel's most highly compensatedjunk-bond salesman; Kevin Madigan, formerly chief lawyer forthe junk-bond office; and David W. Bergmann, former junk-bondaccount executive for Sandamp;Ls. Former Chief Executive FrederickJoseph also was named as a defendant, but he wasn't includedin the group of defendants accused of taking an active rolein the alleged scheme.   Henry Thumann, an attorney for Mr. Ackerman in LosAngeles, said he hadn't seen the suit and couldn't comment.The other defendants and their attorneys couldn't be reachedfor comment.   ---   KMART LOSES LIBEL suit filed by a customer.   A San Diego trial court jury decided that the Troy, Mich.,retailer must pay $300,000 in damages for posting signswrongly stating that a customer had been switching pricetags.   The signs were posted in all checkout lines of a KmartCorp. store in Poway, Calif. The signs faced customers, notthe store's clerks. Printed on 8 1/2-inch by 11-inch paper,the signs read: &quot;Attention: Generoso Russo has been known toswitch price tags. Make sure you check all tags.&quot; Inaddition, the signs displayed Mr. Russo's Visa card numberand phone number.   Bob Ottilie, a San Diego lawyer for Mr. Russo, said hisclient, a regular customer of the store, never changed anyprice tags and that the allegations on the sign were false.He also said Kmart wasn't able to support any of itsallegations in court.   Lawyers and a spokesman for Kmart couldn't be reached forcomment.   Mr. Ottilie said that at trial Kmart didn't dispute thatthe store's accusation was erroneous. But he said the companyargued that Mr. Russo had suffered no damage to hisreputation.   Judge Michael Greer, of the San Diego County SuperiorCourt, found that the sign was untrue, was postedintentionally and that it was defamatory.   Unlike the posting of bounced checks in view of customers,this case involved allegedly libelous &quot;statements,&quot; accordingto Bruce Johnson, a Seattle libel lawyer not connected withthe case.   Mr. Johnson said Kmart's &quot;libel problems would beconsiderably lessened if the signs had been pointed at storeclerks.&quot; Under law, stores are permitted to communicate withemployees about information necessary to run a business. Thisunusual case also satisfies the requirement of &quot;publication&quot;-- or dissemination to the public -- to prove a libel case.   ---   CHARITY, RELIGIOUS GROUPS sue FDIC over Freedom Nationalaccounts.   The suit, filed by the Harlem-based groups in federalcourt in Manhattan, accuses the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorp. of fraud in not informing depositors of limits on theirdeposit insurance. The suit said the depositors were nevertold that their money was insured to a maximum of $100,000for each depositor, rather than for each account. Thedepositors said they face substantial losses because theirtotal funds in various accounts exceeded the $100,000 limit.   Freedom National Bank failed and was taken over byregulators Nov. 12. The bank was the only black-ownedcommercial banking institution in Harlem, according to thesuit.   The suit was brought by five not-for-profit groups,including Hale House Center, which cares for poor children,the Canaan Baptist Church for Christ, and Harlem Churches forCommunity Improvement. The suit said the loss would cause&quot;undue hardship and discomfort to the underprivileged anddisadvantaged.&quot;   The suit also noted that depositors at other failed banksin recent years have received insurance on 100% of theirfunds, even when the total amount exceeded $100,000.   &quot;The most recent example of this tendency to favor thelarger banks over the smaller ones is the failure of the Bankof New England&quot; earlier this month, which is being insured at100% of total funds on deposit, the suit said.   Legislators have questioned regulators about the differenttreatment of accounts. The FDIC last week said it may be ableto reimburse at least one charitable group 100% of itsdeposits at Freedom National, and that it is looking intoways to limit the losses that other not-for-profit groupsface.   An attorney for the FDIC couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   GREYHOUND LINES INC. hires the former general counsel ofthe National Labor Relations Board. Greyhound, a unit ofDallas-based GLI Holding Co., retained Rosemary Collyer torepresent the bus company in pivotal NLRB hearings that beganlast week in Milwaukee. Ms. Collyer, the NLRB general counselfrom 1984 to 1989, is now a partner in Washington, D.C., lawfirm Crowell andamp; Moring. She is working with Greyhound'sregular labor counsel, from the Dallas law firm Johnson andamp;Gibbs. Greyhound is accused of violating numerous federallabor laws in connection with an Amalgamated Transit Unionstrike that began last March 2.</TEXT></DOC>