<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900910-0030</DOCNO><DOCID>900910-0030.</DOCID><HL>   Toxic Turpitude:   Environmental Crime   Can Land Executives   In Prison These Days   ---   More Offenses Are Felonies   And Sentencing Is Stiffer,   Taking Some by Surprise   ---   Phantom Pipe for the Cyanide   ----   By David Stipp   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   BURLINGTON, Mass. -- John Borowski, owner of a smalldefense contractor here, never seemed to worry much about howto dispose of the toxic wastes his plant produced. He haddeveloped a simple, cheap method.   Using buckets, his workers would scoop fuming nitric acidand nickel wastes out of vats and pour them down a sink. Whenworkers questioned the practice, Mr. Borowski told them notto worry because it wouldn't hurt anyone, former employeessay. He knew the dumping was illegal but considered it &quot;likenot counting tips for income tax,&quot; says Peter Kruczynski, aformer manager at Mr. Borowski's Borjohn Optical TechnologyInc.</LP><TEXT>   The federal government saw it differently. In May, Mr.Borowski became the first person convicted on charges ofknowing endangerment under the federal Clean Water Act.Scheduled for sentencing in October, he could be sent toprison for years.   Thousands of gallons of wastes went down Mr. Borowski'ssink over the past decade, from there finding their way intoBoston Harbor. Some of the workers in his bucket brigadedeveloped rashes and other ailments, but Mr. Borowskiattributed the problems to drinking or laziness, formeremployees testified at his trial. &quot;If I had to follow everyrule on the books, I'd be out of business,&quot; one workertestified Mr. Borowski told him.   Mr. Borowski won't discuss the case, except to say that hewas unfairly charged because of &quot;a clique of people whoreally tried to do severe harm to me and to the company.&quot; Heplans an appeal.   A decade ago, the government might well have treated thedumping like minor tax cheating, at most slapping BorjohnOptical with a fine. But Uncle Sam is no longer playing Mr.Nice Guy with environmental cheaters. &quot;A person who mugs acity by polluting should receive at least as strong apunishment as the person who mugs an individual,&quot; declaresJames M. Strock, the Environmental Protection Agency'scriminal enforcement chief.   Judges and juries are beginning to agree. In fiscal 1989,federal courts handed out prison terms totaling about 37years and $11.1 million in fines for environmental crimes,compared with less than two years of sentences and $198,000in fines five years earlier, EPA figures show.   Prosecutors are aiming higher up the corporate ladder,too. In May, Paul Tudor Jones II, president of TudorInvestment Corp. and a prominent futures trader, pleadedguilty to criminally violating the Clean Water Act by fillingin wetlands to build a corporate retreat. He agreed to pay $2million in fines and restitution and drew 18 months'probation.   Greater enforcement efforts evidently are in store. Lastmonth the Senate passed a bill that would more than triplethe number of federal investigators going after polluters, toat least 200 by 1996. And Massachusetts has formed a30-person Environmental Crimes Strike Force.   This push began in the early 1980s, about the time theevacuations of Love Canal in Niagara, N.Y., and ofdioxin-laden Times Beach, Mo., brought home the dangers oftoxic waste. &quot;On the one hand, the EPA was friendly tobusiness during the Reagan years,&quot; says Russell Mokhiber,editor of the Corporate Crime Reporter, a newsletter inWashington, D.C. &quot;But along with Republicans' deregulationcame a law-and-order philosophy; the Justice Department hadsome cops who were out there enforcing the law.&quot;   If convicted, environmental-crime defendants are morelikely to draw prison time now because of felony clausesadded in the '80s, and also because of federal sentencingguidelines set in 1987. Before the new guidelines, jail termswere rare, and typically totaled 60 to 90 days. Now, &quot;anindividual convicted of an environmental felony will likelyhave to serve approximately two years in prison,&quot; Kevin A.Gaynor, a Washington lawyer, recently wrote in the journalEnvironmental Forum.   Not surprisingly, that's causing heated debate.&quot;Environmental criminal enforcement is on the verge ofspinning out of control&quot; because of &quot;increasingly complexregulations&quot; and arbitrary prosecutions, charges Mr. Gaynor,who defends companies and executives in such cases andrepresented Mr. Jones in the wetlands case. &quot;Now virtuallyany environmental violation is potentially a criminal case.&quot;   The EPA's Mr. Strock sees it differently. &quot;The clearestevidence we have that stronger enforcement is deterring crimeis the increased anxiety expressed lately by the regulatedcommunity,&quot; he says.   Law-enforcement officers acknowledge that the milderpolicies of the past may have lulled business people intocomplacency. Consider Robert and Scott McKiel, a father andson who ran Astro Circuit Corp., a Lowell, Mass., concernthat went bankrupt two years ago.   As president of an electronics company with about 300employees, the elder Mr. McKiel seemed above reproach. He wasa member of Lowell's Chamber of Commerce and Rotary Club, andserved as an officer in his industry's trade group. His son,Scott, vice president of operations, seemed cut from the samecloth.   Beginning in 1986, city officials repeatedly notifiedAstro Circuit that illegally high concentrations of toxicmetals were detected in its waste water. But the McKiels paidlittle attention to the notices, and the younger oneresponded &quot;nonchalantly&quot; when investigators confronted himwith evidence of the violations, say federal attorneys.&quot;We're guilty,&quot; the attorneys quoted him as saying. &quot;What areyou going to do, put us in jail or something?&quot;   Last year, he was sentenced to three months in prison andtwo years on probation after pleading guilty to knowinglyviolating federal water laws. His father, who pleaded guiltyto similar violations, got four months in prison and twoyears' probation. The McKiels didn't return phone callsseeking comment.   The typical scenario for toxic turpitude is acash-strapped firm deciding that plugging the flow ofpollutants is just too expensive. Properly disposing of asingle 55-gallon barrel of toxic waste now costs as much as$1,000. For small companies, such costs can quickly become amake-or-break expense when business is weak.   Some regulators fear an environmental crime wave will hitif the economy worsens. And the new polluters might be betterat covering their tracks. &quot;Midnight dumping is essentially athing of the past,&quot; says Andrew Savitz, Massachusettsassistant secretary for environmental law enforcement. &quot;Nowwe're dealing with technical environmental crimes . . .committed behind closed doors.&quot;   Consider Wells Metal Finishing Inc., a now-defunct companyin Lowell, Mass., near the Merrimack River, a waterwayfederal officials have targeted for cleanup. After municipalwater officials warned owner and president John Wells aboutillegal discharges into the river, he installed some specialplumbing. It shunted waste solutions laden with cyanide andzinc past his concern's water-treatment system into thesewer, and eventually into the Merrimack -- which is used fordrinking -- water downstream from the plant. That enabled hiscompany to freely dispose of large amounts of toxic chemicalsthat otherwise would have overloaded his treatment system,potentially tipping off employees or regulators to illegaldischarges.   But sensors outside the company's property showed itscyanide &quot;was turning Lowell's sewer into a gas chamber,&quot; saysBrendan O'Brien, an EPA investigator. Finally, a visitingcity inspector noticed the illegal bypass. Mr. Wells deniedthe extra pipe's purpose and promptly ordered the inspectorout of his building, according to U.S. attorneys. It was toolate. Now he is serving a 15-month prison term.   To counter such tricks, government agencies have assembledteams of scientists, lawyers and detectives outfitted withgear ranging from electronic sniffers to &quot;moon suits&quot; forpoking around in sewers. But environmental violators remainhard to catch and convict. In a case in Gloucester, Mass.,officials discovered a polluter's practices only after thechemicals involved blew up in the sewer, sending manholecovers flying and forcing a downtown evacuation. Mostenvironmental crimes escape notice until someone, often adisgruntled employee, tips off investigators.   That's what happened in Mr. Borowski's case. From theoutside, his Borjohn Optical seemed to be doing everythingright. Its mirror-making business, which involved platingnickel onto aluminum pieces and then treating them with acid,boomed after it won contracts to make optical parts for M-1tanks, cruise missiles and the Bradley Fighting Vehicle. Butsome of the winning bids seemed low, says a competitor, whoasked not to be named: &quot;We wondered how they were keepingcosts down.&quot;   Part of the answer lay in Mr. Borowski's hard work. The70-year-old Polish immigrant, though plagued by back injuriesreportedly inflicted by the Nazis in World War II, has aniron constitution and an intense drive to succeed. Workinglong hours, he personally oversaw every detail of Borjohn'soperations, even coming in late at night to rechargenickel-plating solutions.   He demanded the same dedication from workers. When hefirst dumped acid, says former employee Jerzy Kocjan, &quot;Ilooked down and saw holes all over my pants {from splattereddrops}. `Jesus, what's happening?' I thought. Then I saw myhands were turning yellow from the acid vapors. When I showedthem to Borowski, he just showed me his hands. They wereyellow, too.&quot;   Indeed, Mr. Borowski never seemed to realize how toxicBorjohn's chemicals were, agree former employees. Once he puthis daughter's old bicycle in a vat of the company's acidovernight to clean it up, they said. The bike partlydissolved and fell apart. Mr. Borowski once even temporarilystored an open vat of acid outside his building, only a fewfeet from an apartment parking lot where children played, sayformer employees.   Why didn't the workers complain to the authorities?   Mr. Borowski hired recent Polish immigrants to work in hisplating room. Few knew much English, and some were illegalaliens. They were eager for work and reluctant to buckBorjohn's down-the-sink system. Some quit after getting sick.But repression in Poland kept new ones coming, and Borjohnbecame &quot;a revolving door&quot; for such people, says CeriseLim-Epstein, an assistant U.S. attorney.   Meanwhile, Mr. Borowski took steps to avert regulators'suspicions by occasionally hiring toxic-waste concerns tolegally dispose of the hazardous wastes, prosecutors alleged.That provided documentation he presented as evidence thatBorjohn was doing the right thing. Records later obtained bythe government showed Borjohn properly disposed of 110gallons of the toxic solutions between 1986 and 1988.Meanwhile, it had used about 11,000 gallons of the stuff inthat period, according to evidence presented at the trial.   Things began to unravel in 1987 when Mr. Borowski hiredMr. Kruczynski, a young Polish immigrant, to help manage hisgrowing business. What made Mr. Kruczynski, now 28, a goodmanagement candidate -- his sharp mind, pluck and fluentEnglish -- made him just the wrong man to oversee illegaldumping.   While learning the ropes at Borjohn, &quot;I called itschemical supplier and asked if it was right to throw thechemicals down the sink,&quot; Mr. Kruczynski says. &quot;When theysaid no, I confronted Borowski and told him we had to stopthe dumping. He gave me a father-to-son talk about how peopledo it all the time. `Who does it really hurt?' he said.&quot;   Mr. Kruczynski soon found out. He noticed that workers inthe plating room invariably got rashes. One &quot;came in lookinglike he had been rolling in poison ivy,&quot; he recalls. Anotherkeeled over after taking &quot;too big a whiff&quot; of one ofBorjohn's chemicals. &quot;I took him to the hospital,&quot; says Mr.Kruczynski. &quot;He recovered but felt bad for days.&quot;   That employee, Jan Bafia, was later examined by a doctor,whose report was presented in court. Among other things, Mr.Bafia, who declines to be interviewed, reportedly sufferedfrom bleeding gums and eroding teeth, a painful cough,blisters on his face and arms, and hair loss. At least twice,he coughed up blood. Now he is probably at increased risk forcancer from Borjohn's chemicals, according to the doctor'sreport included in the evidence at Mr. Borowski's trial.   Acting on a tip, federal agents barged into Borjohn in1988, seizing evidence that led to Mr. Borowski beingindicted for knowing endangerment under the Clean Water Act.After a four-week trial, a federal jury convicted him of twoknowing-endangerment counts, each of which carries a maximum15-year prison term and $250,000 fine.   Awaiting sentencing, Mr. Borowski now runs his companyunder close EPA scrutiny. His lawyer, William Codinha, arguesthat the government improperly prosecuted the case underenvironmental law, which traditionally applies to &quot;whathappens under the street or in the sewer and not in thesink.&quot; Prosecutors offered only circumstantial evidence thatBorjohn's sewer discharges contained illegally highconcentrations of toxic chemicals, he maintains.   Furthermore, says the lawyer, before 1987 it was only amisdemeanor to break the federal law under which Mr. Borowskiwas convicted. Now it's a felony. He adds that the confusiondue to this &quot;midstream&quot; change has been compounded lately byprosecutors' crackdown on environmental crime.   &quot;We're really dealing with a changing, fluid system here,&quot;he says.</TEXT></DOC>