<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910116-0004</DOCNO><DOCID>910116-0004.</DOCID><HL>   Saddam Watch:   Embattled Iraqi Leader   Grows More Isolated   Amid Signs of Stress   ---   He Calls for `Faith Fighters'   And Appears Distracted   To Envoys Seeking Peace   ---   Puffy Eyes and Slow Speech   ----   By Geraldine Brooks and Tony Horwitz   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   AMMAN, Jordan -- Has Saddam Hussein gone from megalomaniacto martyr?   For a decade, both Western and Arab leaders thought theyknew the Iraqi ruler: ruthless and daring, grandiose in hisambitions, but ultimately capable of rational moves to ensurehis survival. Now, with the deadline for war past, thistraditional thinking has been shattered. The Saddam Husseinthat the U.S.-led alliance confronts today appears to beeither a man bent on martyrdom, like the suicidal warriors ofancient Masada, or a high-rolling gambler who has misread hiscards.</LP><TEXT>   In the days and weeks past, President Hussein hasconsistently failed to play any of a number of availabletrumps. A partial withdrawal from Kuwait might have securedhim an oil field and access to the sea -- U.S. denialsnotwithstanding -- while dulling the alliance's appetite forwar. A pullback in response to pleas from Palestinian orIslamic leaders, pleas he could easily have orchestrated,would have saved both his skin -- and his face. Even theslightest sign of flexibility in talks with Western leadersover the past week might have bought him time. Having ignoredthese options, he could have tried to lure Israel into apre-emptive strike, almost certainly fracturing America'scoalition with some of its Arab allies.   It is still possible the Iraqi ruler intends to face downthe threat of U.S. might for a few days, then compromise anddeclare a symbolic victory -- a reckless strategy, but oneconsistent with the brinkmanship and survival instinct he hasshown before. The United Nations secretary-general, though,returned from his mission to Baghdad hinting at a morealarming possibility. Javier Perez de Cuellar said SaddamHussein appeared totally detached from the crisis at hand,uninterested in anything his visitor had to say, and evenunable to focus on issues he himself has previously stressed.Instead, he seemed preoccupied with plying Mr. Perez deCuellar with tea and coffee -- a strange departure for a manwho earlier visitors report had little time for pleasantries.   No one seems able to reach Saddam Hussein, no matter whattack they take. While President Bush's toughly worded letterwas rejected in Geneva, a less-publicized flattering letterfrom the Soviets also got nowhere.   &quot;It said: `We know you don't bend to force, we know howgreat you are -- the world will owe you much if youwithdraw,'&quot; says a Middle Eastern diplomat familiar with itscontents. &quot;It was a very clever demarche, but it came toolate.&quot;   Veteran Saddam-watchers also notice odd changes in theIraqi president's demeanor: His speech often seems slow, hisface puffy and his eyes unfocused. It would be surprising ifsomeone in his situation didn't exhibit signs of stress.Running what is essentially a one-man regime, he has had tobe on round-the-clock alert since early summer, when hisplans for invading Kuwait began to take shape. The violenceof his rule, and his own early experience as an assassin,have always forced him to remain physically isolated andinaccessible. The crisis has driven him even furtherunderground.   A senior official from a country sympathetic to Iraqrecalls the labyrinthine path to the president's bunker, witheven Saddam Hussein's own chief of intelligence unsure of hisleader's location. King Hussein of Jordan says that the Iraqipresident has stopped taking phone calls, fearful the alliescould use them to pinpoint his position. Before the crisis,the rare journalists allowed to interview Saddam Hussein hadtheir pens taken apart to check for weapons; now, they mustplace their hands in a blue chemical solution, to neutralizeany toxins that might be passed in a handshake.   Saddam Hussein's seeming dream-state echoes through thegovernment-controlled media. Iraq's nightly news, always anOrwellian instrument, has made a grotesque charade of thebrewing confrontation. As the chances for peace ebbed overthe weekend, the TV news led for two nights running with filmof a visit by a Zambian delegation. Only near the end of eachbroadcast were there vague references to the &quot;latestdevelopments in the Arab Gulf region&quot; -- accompanied byendless footage of peace marches in Western capitals. IraqiT.V. also is regularly broadcasting tape from SaddamHussein's birthday celebration -- from over seven months ago.In one oft-repeated clip, young girls in tutus dance around aheart with the president's face at the center, singing HappyBirthday. Saddam Hussein watches solemnly from a nearby dais.   Also bizarre was the airing at 1 a.m. Monday of asignificant address to Iraqi editors that Mr. Hussein gaveearlier that evening. Cable News Network, so often used bythe Iraqi president to spread his message, wasn't alerted,leaving distraught producers scrambling to wake up aninterpreter for a rushed and incomplete broadcast. The latehour also ensured that few Iraqis heard the president'swords. The speech included some rather odd messages,including a warning to Iraqis that the U.S. had madesimulated tapes of his voice ordering Iraqis to give up armsand surrender Kuwait.   The tone of his words was almost that of Henry V's speechbefore the battle of Agincourt -- a clarion call to anoutmatched army, and a possible sign that he truly intendswar. &quot;One faith fighter equals 10 others,&quot; he said, &quot;andaccording to this calculation we are superior to them, evenin aircraft.&quot; He spoke of an antiquated cannon used inextremis during the Iran-Iraq war, an illustration that theU.S.'s superior technology would be bested by Iraqi ingenuityand experience.   The address also hammered home a theme that has resonatedthroughout all his recent appearances: that Jerusalem, notKuwait, is the true end of Iraq's march. &quot;We are approachingPalestine and Palestine is approaching us,&quot; he said,concluding the address. &quot;Triumph will be your future, notonly Kuwait, but the Golan Heights and the south of Lebanon.&quot;   What is striking is the way Saddam Hussein has recast theentire Gulf crisis in terms of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Attimes, as in the 1 a.m. speech, he seems to echo the lateEgyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser, who crippled his countryin an obsessive quest to defeat Israel. If Saddam Hussein isdetermined to fight, he appears willing to consume himself inthese same fires of Arab nationalism.   The themes that animated Iraqi propaganda in the weeksfollowing the invasion -- Iraq's historical claims to Kuwait,the corruption of Gulf leaders, the violation of Islamic holyplaces by U.S. troops -- have receded before a tide ofinvective aimed at the Jewish state. In his meetings withSecretary of State James Baker, Iraqi Foreign Minister TariqAziz spoke at great length about the Palestinian issue,skirting Kuwait altogether.   Most likely, Saddam Hussein feels that fixating on Israelis his last best chance for extracting a victory from thecrisis. He may be right. America's Arab allies, particularlySyria, have indicated they would abandon the coalition ifIsrael initiated combat or overreacted to a minor Iraqistrike. As he has done for months, Saddam Hussein also isratcheting up the domestic pressure on Arab leaders, who mustalways be mindful of their peoples' abiding hatred of Israel.And by boring in on the Israeli issue, the Iraqi president isspeaking as well to his own people. Even Iraqis who criticizehis decision to invade Kuwait, and who dismiss claims thatthe emirate rightly belongs to Iraq, say their position wouldquickly change if Israel became embroiled in the conflict.   Further evidence of President Hussein's last-ditchreliance on the Palestinian cause is the re-emergence inBaghdad of Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman YasserArafat after weeks of virtual invisibility. The assassinationin Tunisia early Tuesday of two of Mr. Arafat's deputies alsoseems curiously timed. While early reports indicate that thekillings were a score-settling between Mr. Arafat's factionand that of extremist Abu Nidal, it is possible they wereIraqi-inspired. By mimicking the murder in 1988 of anotherArafat deputy, Abu Jihad, by an Israeli hit-team -- an actionthat sparked bloody riots in the occupied territories -- Iraqmight have sought to ignite a similar bonfire, rattlingAmerica's Arab allies or even providing a pretext for anIraqi missile strike on Tel Aviv. Many Arabs already havepinned blame for the killing on Israel, despite evidence tothe contrary.   &quot;All Abu Nidal's men are Israeli agents,&quot; was theinstinctive reaction of Wafiq Faour, a Palestinian Americannow visiting Jordan on a peace mission.   But if the killings were an Iraqi ploy, they appear tohave failed. Reaction was relatively muted across the Arabworld. Meanwhile, an 11th-hour French initiative thatsuggested an Iraqi withdrawal be linked to broaderdiscussions of Palestinian issues collapsed yesterday.   Most diplomats in Baghdad never dreamed Jan. 15 would passwith almost no prospect for a peaceful resolution of theconflict. In an effort to understand an increasinglyenigmatic situation, one Western envoy says he took off twodays to read several books by Henry Kissinger that recountedthe former secretary of state's diplomacy in the region.   &quot;I read everything of his on the Middle East, thinkinghere's a guy who can get an edge on anyone,&quot; the diplomatsays. But he stopped reading when he realized even Mr.Kissinger was eventually taken by surprise by events in theregion, particularly the 1973 Arab-Israeli war.   &quot;Since then I've just been reading Mad magazine,&quot; thediplomat concludes. &quot;It's very relevant to my situation.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>