<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920116-0101</DOCNO><DOCID>920116-0101.</DOCID><HL>   Looking for an Enemy in Japan   ----   By Kenichi Ohmae</HL><DATE>01/16/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   J.BDT J.SMR J.TOY J.YRB</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)</MS><IN>AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   TOKYO -- President Bush's visit has produced muchconfusion and distress among the Japanese people. Most of usdon't understand why the president of the United States hastaken up issues usually handled by assistants to Carla Hills.Nor do we understand why America insists on depicting itselfas being in the worst shape since the Great Depression.   We wonder why so much has been made of the new tradetargets, which are so trivial. And we are worried by thereduction of everything to &quot;jobs, jobs, jobs&quot; -- a view thatis naive and dangerous for economies as interlinked as ours.Sadly, to some of us it seemed that we were visited by an olddiplomat looking for a new cold war.</LP><TEXT>   Yes, the U.S. economy is in a recession, but the rhetoricdraws far too bleak a picture. Last September there wereabout eight million Americans out of work, 200,000 fewer thanin the 1981 recession. We hear Lee Iacocca complaining thatAmerica is sick, and we wonder if Mr. Iacocca is mistakingthe health of his company for that of the U.S. economy. Hisindustry is not a microcosm of the whole country. In factonly around 80,000 of the unemployed Americans worked in theauto industry.   It's not unusual for heads of state to take businessmenwith them on foreign visits, but usually they take somewinners. The CEOs who accompanied Mr. Bush didn't includeheads of companies that have been successful in Japan. Wherewere Coca-Cola, IBM, Texas Instruments, Procter andamp; Gamble, SunMicrosystems and Lotus?   The subject matter of the visit was equally puzzling andhardly of presidential stature. Were we being visited by acandidate looking for an &quot;accomplishment?&quot; If so, the tradepromises he took home with him are trivial. Japan pledged,for example, to buy 20,000 cars -- at about half a billiondollars -- over three years. When John Akers, the chairman ofIBM, visits his Japanese division he will set much highertargets. If Mr. Akers told IBM Japan, &quot;You guys must grow byhalf a billion dollars over the next three years,&quot; they wouldall take vacations.   The Japanese also promised to buy $20 billion in Americanauto parts by 1994. This is a meaningless target. Remember,Bridgestone owns Firestone, Yokohama Tire owns Mohawk, andSumitomo Rubber owns Dunlop. These tire companies will buyfrom their U.S. subsidiaries and call the purchases&quot;American.&quot; Statistically this is significant because thetires will be counted as Japanese imports from America. Tiresare auto parts, so how could anyone object?   In addition, there are 120 Japanese transplants makingauto parts in the U.S., and Japanese auto companies willstart buying more from them. These parts will enter Japan, bemounted in Japanese cars, and then be exported back to theU.S. All this will satisfy politicians, bureaucrats andpresidents, but who will we really help? Remember, only 4.6%of total U.S. unemployment is in the automotive, machine tooland office and consumer electronics industries where Japan isan exporter. Let's say, for argument's sake, that Japanesecompetition was the cause of all the unemployment in thesesectors. Curing the problem would have scant effect on thehealth of the total economy.   What the president didn't seem to understand last week isthat the rules that link jobs, trade and the economy havechanged. In today's world, if the U.S. economy picks up, thefirst thing that happens is that imports increase and jobsare created in countries such as Mexico and South Korea. Morefundamentally, the current unemployment in the U.S. could bethe result not of a stagnant economy but of increasedefficiency either from technology or better management.   The Big Three auto makers are unquestionably sufferingbecause of the recession. But even in the most buoyanteconomy, GM is still a very inefficient maker of cars. Lastyear it employed more than 400,000 people in the U.S. to makeroughly 4.2 million cars and trucks. In the same year Toyotaemployed only 97,000 to produce more than 4.2 million carsand trucks. GM is cutting 74,000 jobs because it is trying tomodernize and close the gap, not because the economy is slow.Would Dick Gephardt and other politicians who profess to beso worried about &quot;competitiveness&quot; rather have GM forgo newtechnology and keep the jobs? Being competitive often meansdoing better with fewer people.   This isn't true just in manufacturing. The same is true,for example, at Sears. It announces 1,000 layoffs andeveryone cries recession. Yet Sears is trying to increaseproductivity and service by installing a state-of-the-artcomputer cash register and inventory system. Should Sears notmodernize just to keep jobs? If so, what about thecompetition from Wal-Mart and other more efficient retailers?   The strongest companies today are doing better work withfewer people. President Bush visited the new Toys 'R' Us inJapan to praise its success in cracking the Japanese market.He apparently presumed that Toys 'R' Us somehow created jobsin America. But this company is a champion at jobdestruction. It buys massive quantities directly frommanufacturers (half of which are Japanese) and has giganticstores with huge economies of scale. It wipes out middle menand smaller scale toy stores. The success of Toys 'R' Usmeans that its competitors lose lots of jobs.   There is severe competition in the retail business.Innovative companies such as Toys 'R' Us displace more jobsthan are lost in the manufacturing sector. As much as 86% ofU.S. unemployment comes from the service and constructionsectors. To create jobs, the U.S. needs to &quot;service&quot; morerather than &quot;manufacture&quot; more.   It is this kind of economic reality that the presidentseemed to ignore. He also ignored the fact that Japan bought$48 billion from the U.S. in 1990 in addition to $55 billionproduced by American companies in Japan. That makes theJapanese the world's largest buyers of American goods. Trademay be imbalanced, but not the access. The reason is thatwell-managed companies produce more in the sales market thanin their home country. It's not surprising, then, that twoout of five manufacturing jobs in the U.S. are created byJapanese transplants. (Maybe the president should havebrought the head of Honda U.S. with him.)   Perhaps, then, what troubled Japanese most about thepresident's visit was that he behaved as if he wasconfronting an enemy rather than visiting a friend. TheJapanese and U.S. economies are much more similar and farmore closely linked than Mr. Bush apparently realizes.   When the U.S. financial system collapsed, ours collapsedas well. When the U.S. money-center banks and the Sandamp;Ls fellinto deep trouble, so did ours. And for the same reasons.Both financial systems are plagued by scandals, and bothsystems are on the verge of collapse because of badreal-estate loans and scarce credit. Banks have lost theirrole as the primary lenders to industry. Both countries haveproduced too many plastic cards, and too many people are ontheir way to bankruptcy. That's why there's no buying power.   We both face a huge threat of unemployment coming fromsectors of our industries that have never faced up to globalcompetition. For Japan, these industries are chemicals,distribution, retail, construction and agriculture. For theU.S., these are smokestack industries.   In both countries our political leaders are equallycrippled by sentimental attachments to our economic pasts.Americans think the automobile industry is the essence ofAmerica. Three generations ago it was an industry that was sopowerful that it could put the lid on expansion of therailways and public transport. Today its residual politicalclout is out of proportion to its real contribution to thefinancial health of America.   So too with rice in Japan. Because it was once so, weJapanese believe that rice is the lifeline of Japan. But wedo not have to grow rice here. Like the Iacoccas of the U.S.,Japan's rice farmers influence politics, distorting theeconomy and crimping the quality of life in our country.   Maybe our leaders don't need to pay so much attention tothe past. Maybe it doesn't buy them many votes. The citizensof the U.S. and Japan are becoming more economically literateevery day. In their careful choosing of which products tobuy, consumers are learning more about competitiveness,global economics and trade than they could by listening tothe blathering of &quot;experts&quot; and politicians. They know acompetitive product when they see one.   Perhaps it is our leaders who need an economic education.They need only look at the behavior of consumers. Then theywould know that their real job is to mediate a peace at homeamong dying industries, the unemployed and citizens' desirefor better and cheaper products. They must not incite aneconomic war between our countries.   World-wide, sovereignty has shifted from the nation to theconsumer. The end of the cold war signified the triumph ofthe consumer -- of the informed man on the street. These sameforces are at work in the U.S. and Japan and should have beenon the agenda for President Bush and Prime Minister Miyazawa.   ---   Mr. Ohmae is McKinsey andamp; Co.'s managing partner in Japan.</TEXT></DOC>