<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910809-0115</DOCNO><DOCID>910809-0115.</DOCID><HL>   Hong Kong Missed BCCI Unit Signals   ---   A Number of Red Flags Might Have   Set Off Alarms for Regulators   ----   By Cynthia Owens   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5E</SO><CO>   BCCI</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)</IN><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)HONG KONG (HK)LUXEMBOURG (LU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   HONG KONG -- If Hong Kong's banking regulators don't wanthistory to repeat itself, they will have to consider how manyred flags were ignored or overlooked in the months leading upto the closing of the local subsidiary of Bank of Credit andamp;Commerce International.   For a year, regulators tried to keep Bank of Credit andamp;Commerce Hong Kong Ltd. separated from the rest of the BCCIgroup. But, although the subsidiary was locally incorporatedand maintained its own balance sheet, its ties to the parent-- including questionable links -- couldn't be completelyeliminated.</LP><TEXT>   Such connections that might have set off alarm bells forHong Kong regulators include:   -- Among BCC Hong Kong's clients was a locally basedPakistani shipping company run by the Gokal family, one ofthe families linked with the most serious allegations offraud at BCCI.   -- According to the U.S. Consulate in Hong Kong, the U.S.Drug Enforcement Administration asked the Hong Kong bankingcommissioner to freeze $22 million in deposits in BCC HongKong accounts because of suspicions that the deposits weretied to drug-money laundering.   -- BCC Hong Kong posted losses of 431 million Hong Kongdollars (US$55.5 million) in 1990, mostly in provisions forbad loans -- at a time when other banks were recordingearnings gains of 10% and more on their operations in theterritory. The bank required two cash infusions from the AbuDhabi government in the past eight months, including one forHK$125 million in the last week in June.   -- In an unrelated court case in June, Hong Kong officialsdisclosed that a private investigator on trial for corruptionhad told them in 1988 or 1989 that BCC Hong Kong was involvedin a transaction where a country sold arms to Iran and Iraq.The court withheld the name of the country.   None of these incidents indicates that the local bank wasinvolved in fraud, but taken together they could havesuggested to government regulators that BCC Hong Kong hadserious problems and could have shaken their conviction thatit could be isolated from troubles elsewhere in the BCCIgroup. These potential signals also call into question thedecision by Hong Kong authorities to leave the bank open forone working day after regulators in Europe closed most of thegroup's operations there for fraudulent activity that mayinvolve as much as $15 billion globally.   One problem appears to be that some of these red flagswere never spotted, despite the fact that regulators hadbegun to watch BCC Hong Kong more closely after the parentpleaded guilty to money laundering in the U.S. last year.   Hong Kong Banking Commissioner David Carse said in aninterview that he wasn't aware of the connection between thebank and the Gokal family, or of the potential link with armssales. &quot;If I didn't know, I couldn't do anything,&quot; he said.When asked about the accounts that were frozen at the DEA'srequest, he said, &quot;That doesn't imply that the bank isinvolved in money laundering.&quot;   The events in Hong Kong underscore the dangers of aregulatory system that relies heavily on overseassupervisors. Except for 30 locally incorporated banks, therest of Hong Kong's 400 banks and deposittaking companies aresupervised by regulators outside the British colony. To someextent, Hong Kong authorities, along with those in the U.S.,Britain and other countries, fell victim to lax supervisionof BCCI elsewhere.   BCC Hong Kong was an important part of the BCCI empire.Although it had just 26 branches and US$1.4 billion indeposits in Hong Kong, it was to be one of the three legs ofa reorganized bank that BCCI was planning to launch just asinternational regulators shut it down. To that end, BCC HongKong had made moves to clear its balance sheet of bad loansand build its capital base, under the eye of the Hong KongBanking Commission. As a locally incorporated bank, it wassubject to colony supervision.   The potential dangers of generally looser regulation forlocal banks than for foreign banks and of a manpower shortageat the Banking Commission were, in this case, exacerbated bythe lack of attention being paid to the activities of theLuxembourg-based bank-holding company, BCCI Holdings(Luxembourg) S.A., that owns 77% of the Hong Kong operation.   &quot;The question about whether banking regulators actedappropriately can be asked of regulators around the world,&quot;says Peter Philips, a fund manager for Fidelity InvestmentsManagement (H.K.) Ltd., a unit of the U.S. company.   Nevertheless, Hong Kong regulators would appear to havebeen watching BCC Hong Kong more closely than usual longbefore the move on BCCI's European operations in early July.Alerted by the parent's guilty plea to money laundering lastyear, local regulators moved in to scrutinize the subsidiary.Documents released Wednesday by Banking Commissioner Carseindicate that the government closely monitored the bank in1990 and 1991. Last year's accounts were signed by theauditors only on June 28, and Mr. Carse said his office haddiscussed BCC Hong Kong's 1990 loan-loss provisions with thebank and its auditors, Price Waterhouse.   Mr. Carse also said in his report that BCC Hong Kong wassound and viable on July 6, even after the world-wide actionto close most of its major operations. Then, days later, thegovernment refused to provide those interested in buying thebank with a guarantee, raising questions about the state ofthe bank's books. Provisional liquidators are looking intothe accounts again. They would still prefer to sell the bank,but without the government guarantee, liquidation is morelikely.   Banking commission officials say there is no evidence inHong Kong of the &quot;bank within a bank&quot; that was said tooperate at BCCI and made dozens of multibillion-dollar loansthat were nonperforming. Some of the loans weren't even onBCCI's books, and many were made to a small group of MiddleEastern or Pakistani families. One was the Gokal family ofPakistan, which runs Gulf Group, an international shippingoperation based in Europe.   One of the family's companies is Hong Kong-based GulfeastShipmanagement Ltd., where Mohammed Kassim Gokal is adirector. Because Gulfeast is privately held, its resultsaren't available. Joseph Isaac, administration manager ofGulfeast, says the company does have accounts with BCC HongKong, as well as four or five other banks in Hong Kong.   Swaleh Naqvi, one of the central BCCI figures linked withthe alleged global fraud, was a director of BCC Hong Konguntil December 1989. His once-close ties to the subsidiarycould have given regulators pause when they were deciding toleave the bank open after their overseas counterparts movedagainst the parent.   Bankers and analysts wonder why authorities maintainedconfidence in the local subsidiary after the bank was closedelsewhere. With access to the bank's books and theinternational regulatory reports about BCCI, Hong Kongregulators should have closed the bank on July 6, bankers andanalysts say. Instead they pledged support for it initially,then moved to close it July 8 when new support from the AbuDhabi shareholders wasn't forthcoming.   The bank's 40,000 depositors in Hong Kong, as in manyother places, were mostly small businesses and individuals.The Hong Kong government has made provisions for thedepositors to get 25% of their money in the next few weeks.But they will have to wait until the liquidators havefinished poring over the books before they see any more oftheir money.</TEXT></DOC>