<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900802-0013</DOCNO><DOCID>900802-0013.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>08/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   IRAQI TROOPS CROSSED into Kuwait, the Kuwaiti Embassyreported.   In Washington, a Kuwaiti Embassy official said that Iraqitroops had begun a major push across the Kuwaiti border.Western diplomats said that explosions were heard in Kuwaitafter four unidentified aircraft flew over the small PersianGulf state before dawn. The action followed the collapse oftalks between Iraq and Kuwait aimed at resolving atwo-week-old dispute over borders, oil and finances. Baghdadofficials had complained that Kuwait wasn't negotiatingseriously at the talks in Saudi Arabia.</LP><TEXT>   Iraq recently sent 100,000 troops to its southern borderafter claiming that Kuwait's oil output exceeding its OPECquota had depressed world prices.   ---   THE SENATE VOTED to overhaul election financing, includingan honorarium ban.   Lawmakers split along partisan lines in approving apackage of reforms sponsored by the Democrats, 59-40. Thebill limits the amount of money congressional candidates canspend on general election campaigns; bans political actioncommittees; and, for the first time, provides taxpayersubsidies for certain campaign costs such as TV air time andpostage.   Last week, the Senate denounced Sen. Durenberger, aMinnesota Republican, for ethical violations including abook-promotion scheme allowing him to evade honorariumlimits.   ---   REBELS ENDED their coup attempt in Trinidad and releasedall hostages.   Concluding a five-day siege in Port of Spain, at least 112Moslem insurgents surrendered and released more than 40hostages they held at the parliament building and at atelevision station. The leader of the coup was the first togive himself up. A government official said he believed thesurrender was unconditional, but details of the agreementweren't immediately available.   Another government aide said that wounded Prime MinisterRobinson, released by his captors Tuesday, was in charge ofthe government.   ---   Rebels ended their coup attempt in Trinidad. Concluding afive-day siege in Port of Spain, at least 112 Mosleminsurgents surrendered and released more than 40 hostagesheld at the parliament building and at a TV station. WoundedPrime Minister Robinson, released by his captors Tuesday, wassaid to be in charge of the government.   ---   A medical research team said more than one-third ofpatients afflicted with chronic hepatitis B were treatedsuccessfully with Schering-Plough's version of interferon.The report is the first time researchers have claimed successin treating a form of hepatitis that afflicts about 5% of theworld's population.   ---   The House approved an omnibus housing bill, ignoring aveto threat. The bill would significantly increase federalspending for public housing programs, allocating $28 billionfor housing programs for fiscal 1991, $10 billion more thanthe Senate approved last month in its bill.   ---   The Soviet Union will stop production of its rail-mobileintercontinental missiles as of next January, ForeignMinister Shevardnadze said. But Secretary of State Baker, ata joint news conference in the Siberian city of Irkutsk, saidthe announcement &quot;doesn't change&quot; the U.S. negotiating stancein long-range missile talks with the Soviets.   ---   Bush disclosed how he and Soviet President Gorbachevexchanged private letters during the period leading up totheir Malta summit at the end of 1989. In an interview, Bushsaid he and Gorbachev have used personal conversations andprivate correspondence to forge a cooperative relationship.   ---   Federal officials approved the use of oil-eating microbesto help clean up a 17-mile oil slick in Galveston Bay thathas stained Texas beaches and threatened wildlife. Crews inthe bay were using booms to hold the 500,000-gallon spill incheck as the Coast Guard opened an inquiry into thebarge-tanker collision that caused the spill.   ---   The two Germanys settled a fight on how to elect a unitedParliament but continued squabbling over whether East Germanyhas enough money to prop up its economy.   ---   Florida Gov. Martinez said he would free Roswell Gilbert,81, convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison forthe 1985 mercy killing of his wife, who suffered fromAlzheimer's disease. In announcing that Gilbert would bereleased today, the governor cited the retired engineer'spoor health.   ---   Bulgaria's Parliament elected democratic opposition leaderZhelyu Zhelev as the nation's first non-Communist presidentin over four decades. The selection of Zhelev, 55, ended afour-week political standoff after the resignation ofPresident Mladenov, who quit after it was proved he urged theuse of tanks to crush demonstrators.   ---   A six-year sentence was imposed on Sara Aldrete Villareal,the alleged high priestess of a drug-trafficking cult, herlawyer said in Mexico City. The cult is accused of killing 15people on the U.S.-Mexican border. Officials began findingbodies in April 1989.   ---   The Ukraine's Parliament voted to close the Chernobylpower plant, site of a 1986 nuclear accident, and to forge anenergy program that would be able to eliminate nuclear poweraltogether. A local news agency said deputies also declaredthe Ukraine an ecological disaster area.   ---   Iraqi officials walked out of talks in Saudi Arabia aimedat resolving a two-week-old dispute with neighboring Kuwaitover borders, oil and finances. Baghdad negotiatorscomplained that Kuwait wasn't negotiating seriously.Diplomatic sources have said that Iraq recently sent 100,000troops to its disputed southern border.   ---   A judge in Los Angeles dismissed all child-molestationcharges against Raymond Buckey, who promptly filed amultimillion-dollar malicious prosecution suit. The judge'saction came after jurors deadlocked Friday in Buckey'sretrial on eight charges in the seven-year McMartin Preschoolcase, with a mistrial declared.   ---   The U.S. is trying to get the U.N. to help end the crisisin Liberia, where rebel groups are fighting to oust PresidentDoe. &quot;We are extremely concerned about the fighting and thebloodshed,&quot; a State Department spokesman said.</TEXT></DOC>