<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910221-0093</DOCNO><DOCID>910221-0093.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   Don't Underestimate Banks' Capital Value   ----   By Martin Feldstein</HL><DATE>02/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><IN>BANKS (BNK)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC (FIS)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE BANKERS, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   The measurement of a bank's capital is now far moreimportant than when bank failures were very rare and capitalrequirements less central to bank regulatory supervision.Banks with less than the prescribed minimum ratios of capitalto assets are being forced by the regulators to shrink theirsize, reduce their dividends, and refrain from newactivities. If a bank's capital deteriorates to the pointwhere the accounting value of its assets becomes less thanthat of its liabilities, it is declared insolvent and isclosed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.   A fear of such restrictions or of being declared insolventhas made many bankers reluctant to lend as much as theyotherwise would. This reluctance to lend contributes to thecredit crunch that now retards the overall economic recovery.</LP><TEXT>   The Treasury's recent report on banking reform correctlyemphasizes the importance of bank capital. A bank thatincreases the amount of capital its shareholders have at riskreduces the chance that it will fail and its depositors willturn to the FDIC for compensation. To encourage more capitalaccumulation, the Treasury proposes that banks withsubstantial capital be allowed to expand their activities inseveral significant ways.   Although the definition of a bank's capital as thedifference between the value of its assets and the value ofits liabilities is clear, the current regulatory accountingrules understate the true value of bank assets and thereforeof bank capital. These accounting rules are responsible forthe appearance that many leading banks have very low capitalratios.   Current regulatory practice is to define the assets of abank as the value of its portfolio of loans and securitiesand of real estate acquired through foreclosure. But the truetotal assets of a bank also include all of the components ofthe bank as an operating business that will produce futureprofits: a credit-card business that earns a high net rate ofinterest, a mortgage-lending staff that can originate newsingle-family loans, a network of branches that can generatestable core deposits at interest rates below those oncommercial paper, a corporate client base and seasoned loanofficers that permit the bank to generate profitablecommercial loans, and so on.   In general, a bank can sell all or part of any of these&quot;profit centers&quot; to other banks. Credit-card portfolios havebeen sold by major banks to raise capital. Banks regularlysell the mortgages that they originate into a secondarymarket for a price that reflects the higher yield onmortgages than on other assets. Banks can and do sellbranches that provide a stable source of low-interestdeposits to other banks that want to expand in a particularmarket or simply to substitute lower-cost deposits forhigher-cost sources of funds.   These hidden assets should be recognized in assessing thesolvency of a bank and in measuring its capital. They are notmerely a vague accounting goodwill measure of unidentifiable,intangible assets. They are real assets of a going businessthat could be sold separately. Regulators can assign dollarvalues to each $1 million of credit-card portfolio ormortgage-origination capability or core deposits based onactual market transactions.   The most direct way to adjust the regulators' currentmeasures of bank capital would be to add the market value ofthese &quot;operating business&quot; assets to the value of theportfolio of ordinary assets and liabilities on the bank'sbalance sheet. Alternatively, instead of valuing each pieceof the operating business separately, the aggregate valuecould be represented as the present value of the futureoperating profits of the bank: net interest income (adjustedfor normal annual loan losses) plus fee income minusadministrative and other expenses.   Focusing on the operating business value of a bankprobably would reduce the long-run costs to the FDIC. TheFDIC's current practice is to close a bank when the value ofthe bank's portfolio assets is less than the value of itsliabilities. It would, however, clearly be cheaper for theFDIC to keep a bank open if the present value of the bank'sfuture retained earnings definitely exceeds the current gapbetween the bank's liabilities and assets. The bank wouldnever have to be closed and there would be no cost to theFDIC.   In practice, of course, future profits are uncertain.Because of this uncertainty, the best rule for the FDIC wouldbe to close a bank only if the FDIC's resulting immediatepayout would be less than the amount it would expect to paylater if the bank were allowed to continue operating. Thatexpected payout by the FDIC is in effect a weighted averageof the different possible payments it might have to make: azero payout weighted by the probability that the bank willnot be closed in the future and positive payouts of differentamounts that would have to be paid if the bank were laterclosed, each weighted by an estimate of the probability ofthat amount of loss.   Assessing the probability that the bank would eventuallysucceed and the probabilities that it would fail withdifferent costs to the FDIC is a matter of regulatoryjudgment. Each bank would have to be considered individually.The key point of the operating business approach is to shiftthe focus from the current portfolio of assets andliabilities to include also the broader value of the bank asa going business.   Focusing exclusively on the expected costs to the FDIC maybe too stringent a standard of bank solvency because it givesno independent weight to the consequences of bank failuresfor the national economy. Though it is widely agreed that thenumber of banks should be reduced, the merger of operatingbanks is preferable to closures, especially in the currentweak economy. The act of closing a bank can also cause themanagers of other banks to be unduly cautious in makingloans.   Critics of this &quot;operating business&quot; approach to decidingwhen a bank should be closed might note the mistake that wasmade when thrifts were allowed to continue operating in thehope that they would &quot;grow their way out&quot; of their existingproblems. But while there are clear lessons in the thriftexperience for dealing with the banks, the proposed approachis quite different from the way the thrifts were treated.   Thrifts were permitted to stay open even though they didnot have enough future earnings with their current activitiesand current-size portfolios to outweigh their existingcapital deficiencies. Congress and the regulators permittedthese insolvent thrifts to grow rapidly and to undertake newkinds of lending with higher rates of return in the hope thatthe expanded income would eventually outweigh the existingcapital deficiencies. Thrifts expanded into activities theydid not understand and took great risks to increase theirinterest rates. Very rapid growth was not only permitted butencouraged.   In contrast, in evaluating the operating business of abank to assess its solvency, the regulators should beconservative and look only at the earnings that would beachieved without expanding the bank's size or range ofactivities. Conditions of continued operation might also beintensive supervision, limits on expansion and restrictionson dividends to permit a more rapid accumulation of retainedearnings.   The proposed operating business approach is similar towhat, in retrospect, was done with the money-center banksthat held large amounts of LDC debt in the early 1980s.   When the debt crisis began in 1982, the major U.S.money-center banks had loans to lesser developed countrieswith a book value equal to nearly three times their capital.If the regulators had required the banks to write off asubstantial fraction of that debt immediately, many of thosebanks would have become insolvent. Instead, the banks wereallowed to continue to operate but were pressured by theregulators to increase their capital through retainedearnings and new equity issues and, over time, to accumulatereserves and eventually to write off some of the debt. While,at the time, the government's handling of the banks' LDC debtproblems may not have been conceived of explicitly as anoperating business approach to judging solvency, inretrospect it appears to have been a successful applicationof that principle.   Although I have emphasized the importance of the operatingbusiness value of a bank in decisions about closing thatbank, the value of the operating business also should moregenerally be included in the measure that the regulators usefor deciding whether a bank should be restricted or should bepermitted to expand its lending and its range of financialactivities. An increased attention to bank capital is verydesirable, but only if the full value of a bank's assets isproperly recognized.   ---   Mr. Feldstein, former chairman of the president's Councilof Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard.</TEXT></DOC>