<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910430-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>910430-0122.</DOCID><HL>   Roller Coaster:   Northeast's Economy   Might Now Be Stuck   In a Boom-Bust Cycle   ---   Moderating Costs Could Help   End the Current Slump,   But Where's the Engine?   ---   New York's Continuing Allure   ----   By Bernard Wysocki Jr.   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/30/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS, TRENDS, INDEXES, PROJECTIONS, ANALYSES (ECO)</NS><RE>MASSACHUSETTS (MA)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NEW YORK (NY)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)</RE><LP>   Boom and bust.   The phrase conjures up images of 19th century mining townsor, more recently, the economy of Texas and the rest of theoil patch. But some economists think a boom-bust cycle withvery different roots is beginning to characterize a moreunlikely region: the Northeast.</LP><TEXT>   Fred Breimyer, chief economist of State Street Bank inBoston, sees New England in a 20-year cycle of prosperity andretrenchment. The last bottom was in 1975, followed by theminicomputer-driven boom that peaked around 1985. So now, ashe sees it, the region is midway through a downturn in whichwages, office rents and other costs undergo a painfulretreat, which in turn will make New England more competitiveagain by the mid-1990s.   Richard Leone, a former Wall Streeter and the chairman ofthe Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, says much thesame could be said about the New York metropolitan area,which suffered through lean times in the mid-1970s, enjoyed adizzying Wall Street boom in the 1980s and is today deeplymired in a downturn that seems to have little to do with anordinary U.S. recession. &quot;In New York, the contractions willbe sharper and the recoveries will be steeper&quot; than in mostother parts of the U.S., Mr. Leone predicts.   Other regions of the country have soared, and sometimescrashed, because the engines of growth sputtered. Theindustrial Midwest suffered mightily in the early '80s at thehands of tough foreign competitors. The Farm Belt economysoared and then soured when land prices fell sharply. And theoil patch, after enjoying dizzying growth during the oilprice jumps of the early '70s and '80s, was devastated by thesharp price drops that followed. But this may be the firsttime that a region has gone boom and then bust largely on thebasis of its ideas -- technology in New England, finance inNew York.   When the ideas are hot, as in the 1980s, the economiesheat up, then tend to overheat and go bust. Today, much ofthe Northeast's economy is undergoing a painful contraction.But the good news is that the universities, financial houses,entrepreneurs and highly specialized workers of the Northeastwill probably produce new engines of growth at some point inthe 1990s, bringing on another boom. Even New York officebuildings may once again prove an attractive investment.   &quot;New York is in a funk, but Manhattan is one of the greatinfrastructures of the world,&quot; says Peter Aldrich, chairmanof Aldrich, Eastman andamp; Waltch, a large real-estate investmentadvisory firm. &quot;There will always be a Wall Street.&quot;   Others disagree with the boom-bust theory. In New York,&quot;the 1980s were boom and bust. But it's boom, bust and thenflat,&quot; says Matthew Drennan, a professor at New YorkUniversity's urban-research center. His econometric modelsuggests that after losing 72,000 jobs this year and another26,000 jobs in 1992, the city will enjoy very slow but steadyemployment growth of about 0.5% per year well into themid-1990s.   Then there are pessimists who look at the Northeast andsee boom, bust and busted -- a downward spiral that will betriggered by fiscal crises in some of the biggest cities ofthe Northeast. In this dim view of the future, decliningservices and higher taxes drive residents and employers outof the city, further eroding the tax base and forcing furthercuts in spending for police, sanitation and schools -- whichdrives more people out.   Already, New York City's fiscal situation is severe andPhiladelphia's is approaching the crisis point.   Moreover, city problems could spill over into the suburbs,some experts believe, by tainting entire metropolitan regionsas unstable. &quot;The city of Philadelphia's problems could hurtthe entire region's economy, but the suburbanites haven'tprocessed this yet,&quot; says Anita A. Summers, professor ofpublic policy at the University of Pennsylvania. &quot;The abilityof the Northeast cities to get control of their publicservices -- that is the critical factor in maintaining theirstrength.&quot;   Chief among those strengths in the past has been theNortheast's ability to adapt to change. &quot;The region is likelyto come back because of its adaptability,&quot; says James Gollub,a specialist in regional economic development at SRIInternational, Menlo Park, Calif. In particular, says Mr.Gollub, the high-technology corridor around Boston, whichfueled New England's last boom, is exceptionally adaptable.Its technology flows smoothly from laboratory to developmentof products in the marketplace. The work force is highlyskilled and can renew itself through retraining andre-education.   It was precisely that combination of high-technology andskilled work force that lifted New England out of theeconomic quagmire of the 1970s. The minicomputer boom broughttogether the region's high-tech brainpower with an army ofskilled manufacturing workers. All told, high technology,health and &quot;knowledge-based&quot; firms created 221,000 jobs ingreater Boston between 1976 and 1988, according to a reportby economist James M. Howell for the city of Boston.   Housing prices soared, restaurants flourished andMcDonald's outlets had to offer $8 an hour to get workers.Then came the huge building boom of 1984-87. &quot;It wasabundantly clear that commercial real estate was going downin 1986 or 1987, but we didn't stop it, because we keptmaking money,&quot; recalls Richard Reynolds, a Boston real-estatedeveloper who today calls himself an ex-developer. &quot;It was atremendous party.&quot;   It was unsustainable. By the mid-1980s, New England was,in the words of William Apgar, a professor of public policyat Harvard University, &quot;choking on its own success.&quot; Housingprices were so high that people couldn't move to New England.Commercial rents were so high that old-line manufacturers andshopkeepers had to leave. And, although little recognized atthe time, manufacturing employment had peaked and wasstarting to decline. Defense spending, another mainstay ofthe New England economy, fell sharply.   Then came the bust. Construction halted and constructionjobs disappeared. Real estate prices began to drop, and thenthe drop accelerated. Banks strained under the burden. InMassachusetts, unemployment has soared to 9.7%, real-estateprices have dropped about 30%, office and retail rents haveplummeted. And institutional investors have begun bottomfishing for apartment buildings.   All of which may mean rebirth. As Karl Case, a WellesleyCollege economist, says, New England has gone from anaverage-cost region in the 1970s to a high-cost region in the1980s, and is rapidly returning to a moderate-cost place tolive and work.   It isn't clear what the growth engines of the 1990s willbe -- forecasters don't see an industry likely to replaceminicomputers as an employer of tremendous numbers ofworkers. In any case, in the depths of the 1970s malaise inNew England, hardly anyone foresaw the spectacular growth ofthe minicomputer industry itself. Instead, the long-termoptimism about New England is more like an act of faith inthe world-class educational institutions such asMassachusetts Institute of Technology, the large numbers ofsmall companies in emerging technologies and the skilled workforce.   Eventually, however, the companies will have to movebeyond being design boutiques in high-tech and actually havelarge-scale manufacturing of some kind. &quot;If we want toprosper, we have to have manufacturing,&quot; says Lynn E. Browne,deputy director of research at the Federal Reserve Bank ofBoston. &quot;I'm not confident that the services-oriented elementis big enough.&quot;   For now, many New Englanders would be happy if the skystopped falling. Says Ms. Browne: &quot;An end to decline is quitea lift. If things stop falling, that's a big change.&quot;   Many New Yorkers would echo those sentiments. Long beforethe national economy began to slow down in 1990, New Yorkerswere already feeling the pinch. The stock market crash ofOctober 1987 may have had limited impact on much of the U.S,but it marked the beginning of hard times for Wall Street.Stock-market volume dropped and thousands of brokers losttheir jobs. The merger and buy-out wave came to an end withthe collapse of the junk-bond market. Commercial-bankproblems mounted. And both commercial real estate and housingmarkets headed into a tailspin. The recession only added toproblems.   Today, New York City's economy is still reeling. Newunemployment claims are running about 10,000 per week andreached an eight-year high in March. Even jobs as waiters andsales clerks are in very short supply. Meantime, sales-taxcollections are plummeting, causing James W. Wetzler, thestate taxation commissioner, to declare recently that &quot;NewYork City's economy is in a free fall.&quot;   It may be coincidence that New York and New England havesunk together, but there are some similarities. Their hottestindustries -- technology in Boston, finance in New York --ran out of steam in the late 1980s, bringing highlyleveraged, overheated real-estate markets down, too. In NewYork, more than in Boston, the current malaise is exaggeratedby fresh concerns over New York's quality of life.   Yet, even today, there is some evidence that New York'sproblems may be cyclical, although they have little to dowith cycles of auto buying or factory utilization. The steepdecline in office rents -- from $60 per square foot to $35 insome cases -- may keep many companies in New York that mightotherwise have considered leaving. Robert Ady, president ofChicago-based PHH Fantus, sees little movement out of NewYork these days, and he has counseled many clients to remainin Manhattan.   The rapid internationalization of New York is alsobecoming an important trend. The high-profile purchases ofoffice buildings by Japanese investors have slowed, butJapanese bankers and businessmen keep streaming intoManhattan's buildings. &quot;The Japanese are very comfortable inManhattan,&quot; says Mr. Ady, who also sees a large influx ofEuropean firms, especially Swiss and German. Europeans tendto build factories in the Northeast, he says. &quot;Europeans aremuch less likely to put a plant in Des Moines or Tampa.&quot;   New York remains a magnet for many ambitious young people.Robert Timpson, the Manhattan-based vice president andNortheast area manager at International Business MachinesCorp., says that after a recent recruiting trip to HarvardBusiness School, he concluded that New York still has plentyof allure. &quot;It's down from the white-heat, fourth Mercedes,yuppie silliness,&quot; Mr. Timpson says. Campus attitudes now are&quot;back to maybe 1980: `If you can make it here, you can makeit anywhere.'&quot;   But the 1990s will see the reshaping of New York'sfinancial world in profound ways, a wide range of expertssay. The changes will be a decidedly mixed blessing for NewYork. As the banking capital of North America, New York issuffering mightily from the problems of thecommercial-banking industry. Layoffs have occurred by thethousands. Many thousands more can be expected, as largeinstitutions combine and redundant people at all levels aregiven pink slips.   Another big minus for New York could be the loss of theback offices of financial houses. In some cases the move maybe local, to Brooklyn or to Jersey City, N.J., but there maybe an exodus to Florida or even overseas.   In some ways, financial service industries are goingthrough the same kind of difficult shakeout period thatmanufacturing companies encountered in the 1970s and 1980s.Pressures to cut costs will become even more intense, forcingcompanies to lay off people, move operations to low-costareas and use state-of-the-art technology to remaincompetitive. International competition will intensify.   Against their global rivals, New York securities houseshave some advantages. Many ideas originate in New York, andNew York is cheaper than London or Tokyo, at least at today'sexchange rates. In a study by Louis Harris for Sequor Group,New York was rated tops in the technology of clearingtransactions, one of the thorniest problems in securitiestrading.   Beyond that, a more entrepreneurial type of Wall Streetfirm is emerging. Beyond the well-publicized start-ups arenumerous lesser-known companies that are generating largeamounts of revenue. Two years ago, William Benedetto worriedthat top people at Wall Street houses would be reluctant tojoin his start-up investment banking firm. But both thepeople and the business have come his way. Today, he hasseveral partners and a lengthening list of clients, for whomhe has raised several hundred million dollars in privateinvestment funds. All of the partners were formerly at bigWall Street firms.   But it is New York's connection to the internationaleconomy that experts say will produce the major economicgrowth of the 1990s. Prof. Drennan of New York Universitypoints out that the U.S. had exports of about $29 billion inservices last year, almost as much as American farm exports.The bulk of them came from four U.S. cities: New York,Chicago, San Francisco and Los Angeles. And almost half ofthat came from New York -- its brokers, lawyers, consultants,engineers and other exporters of service.   Ultimately, the strength of the Northeast will probablyrely very heavily on the decisions of big employers tomaintain a large presence. At IBM, Mr. Timpson participatesin periodic meetings in which his colleagues raise thequestion of whether IBM ought to refocus more of its businessin, say, the Sunbelt.   IBM has 5,000 employees in New York, where it does $2billion a year worth of business. Is it going to shift focusaway from the Northeast? Mr. Timpson shakes his head no andsays of New York: &quot;We'll have a city here, not a hollowshell. All things considered, I'm encouraged.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>