<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910809-0152</DOCNO><DOCID>910809-0152.</DOCID><HL>   Bad Bets:   Many Big Sandamp;L Losses   Turn Out to Be Due   To a Financial Gamble   ---   `Risk-Controlled Arbitrage'   Was Sold by Wall Street   And Backed by Regulators   ---   A Sort of `Mass Psychosis'?   ----   By Charles McCoy   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   DLP FSAK MER SB</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE BANKERS, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE RATES (MOR)</NS><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)FLORIDA (FL)KANSAS (KS)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)OREGON (ORG)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   Donald Tisdel's grand experiment promised to save thegovernment lots of money. But in June, it officially failed,sticking the government with losses estimated at hundreds ofmillions of dollars.   In 1987, Mr. Tisdel and a group of California venturecapitalists took control of Far West Federal Bank ofPortland, Ore. He persuaded regulators to finance the rescueof the deeply insolvent thrift institution by authorizing theFederal Home Loan Bank of Seattle to lend Far West up to $1.5billion to invest in so-called risk-controlled arbitrage, arazzle-dazzle 1980s innovation designed to lock in profitsthrough complex combinations of hedging instruments. Over adecade, Mr. Tisdel predicted, the profits would pull Far Westout of its negative net worth of $292 million.</LP><TEXT>   At a time when hundreds of thrifts were dying fromill-conceived investments and diversification moves, the plansparked some skepticism. If profits can be generated soeasily, asked Dennis Jacobe, director of research at the U.S.League of Savings Institutions, &quot;why not just loan theindustry $100 billion and relax?&quot;   Hundreds of thrifts did borrow tens of billions of dollarsin experiments similar to Mr. Tisdel's. Almost every one hasproved disappointing; many were ruinous. In June, regulatorsseized Far West, saying, &quot;The arbitrage program failed toproduce the anticipated results.&quot;   With Far West's demise -- and a federal appeals court'srecent upholding of the government's seizure of FranklinSavings Association, a big risk-controlled arbitrage play inKansas -- it is clear that this financial maneuver played amajor role in the national thrift debacle. It proved lethalin such major failures as those of American Savings ofStockton, Calif., once the nation's biggest thrift, GibraltarSavings of Beverly Hills and Seamen's Bank For Savings in NewYork.   &quot;A case can be made that this so-called arbitrage willcost the government more than junk bonds,&quot; says WilliamSeidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Thebonds are estimated to be costing taxpayers $4 billion to $5billion. The bill for the overall thrift mess is estimated ata minimum of $230 billion, plus hundreds of billions ininterest costs.   Although thrift operators obviously played a key role thearbitrage cases provide evidence that some large securitiesfirms and other investment bankers sold the thrift industry abill of goods. And regulators weren't just standing by,either; they encouraged the maneuver.   Among those linked to the disaster are two former topthrift regulators, Richard Pratt and Edwin Gray, along with aformer head of the Texas Securities Commission and a currentmember of the Federal Reserve Board. Also involved werefinancial experts, lawyers and accountants.   Risk-controlled arbitrage was designed to give thrifts asafe way to lock in long-term profits by investing infixed-rate securities based on pools of mortgages. Thearbitrage promoters said they could protect the spreadbetween investment yield and deposit costs, no matter whichway short- and long-term rates went. In brief, they promiseda foolproof hedge.   Some of the hedges used were common, like interest-ratefutures, but many were new, untested and exotic, likeinterest-only strips of cash flows from mortgage-backedsecurities. Wall Street invented numerous newfangledinstruments that were supposed to move in predictablepatterns as rates rose or fell.   In the tough thrift environment of the early 1980s, thisspiel was as beguiling as fool's gold. Thrifts barreled in,and some did score at first. But as Sandamp;Ls bought up hugeblocks of mortgage securities, the securities' prices rose.That tightened the spreads, making hedges more difficult andleaving little room for error.   Neither the thrift operators nor the high-priced expertswho promoted the idea had any experience with how the hedges,especially the newer ones, would work in practice. Theyexpected short- and long-term rates to move in the samedirection; in fact, short-term rates rose while long-termrates fell, wrecking their hedges. Many thrifts also bookedgains quickly by prematurely selling one side of an arbitrageif it gained in value, while deferring the losing side inhopes that events would rescue it. Events didn't.   The arbitrage &quot;was almost like some sort of masspsychosis,&quot; says Eric Stattin, a former Shearson Lehmanpartner and thrift executive. &quot;Greed seemed to blind some ofthe most influential people involved with the industry.&quot;   Promoters still defend the idea generally, saying itsimply wasn't executed correctly. Mr. Tisdel says Far West'sarbitrage program was working, and he has sued thegovernment, alleging that regulators' interference caused FarWest's failure. James Faulstich, the head of the Seattle HomeLoan Bank who authorized the loans to Far West, calls Mr.Tisdel's efforts &quot;heroic.&quot; Ernest Fleischer, Franklin'schairman, says regulators weren't competent to judge hisarbitrage plans.   However, Mr. Pratt and Mr. Gray, both former heads of theFederal Home Loan Bank Board, now term the arbitrage a flawedconcept, while disclaiming blame for its spread and theeventual losses. The Resolution Trust Corp., which is chargedwith the thrift cleanup, and the Office of Thrift Supervisionare investigating the actions of people who advised thethrifts.   &quot;These were impossibly complex strategies that had neverbeen tested in the market,&quot; says Herbert Sandler, co-chairmanof Golden West Financial Corp. &quot;But some of the thriftmanagers and investment bankers who got involved . . . weresimply charlatans, and others were blinded by a consumingbelief in their own supposed brilliance.&quot;   Some did seem brilliant -- for a while. Mr. Fleischer, atax attorney, became an investor in Franklin in 1972 andeventually its chairman. In the early 1980s, he became thefirst and biggest proponent of risk-controlled arbitrage,swelling the assets of the once-tiny Ottawa, Kan., thrift tonearly $12 billion in 1990. By the late 1980s, Franklinhardly made loans; it essentially operated as asecurities-trading firm in the guise of a federally insuredthrift.   Franklin raked in $317.3 million in profits between 1984and 1988, when much of the industry was ailing. Mr. Fleischerwas proclaimed a genius by some Wall Street pros -- who weregetting tens of millions of dollars in fees from his Sandamp;L.They praised him even though one of his deals led to MerrillLynch's $250 million loss one afternoon in April 1986, thebiggest single trading loss in Wall Street history.   Beneath the surface, however, lay rot. In 1989, accordingto a recent decision by the federal appeals court in Denver,a special regulatory review turned up dubious accountingpractices obscuring $424 million of deferred losses onhedging instruments and questionable letters of credit todevelopers; a $120 million tax-deferral arrangement thatregulators suspected was improper; and the potential fordefault on $2.9 billion of zero-coupon bonds with the unusualdistinction of being issued by a thrift. Examiners also foundthat Franklin would soon have to sell some arbitrage assetsas they matured, and they concluded that &quot;whether interestrates went up or down, Franklin would incur losses.&quot;   Regulators at the Office of Thrift Supervision thoughtFranklin faced potential write-downs totaling $474 million,which would have left it insolvent by $85 million. In January1990, the OTS ordered Franklin to take immediate write-downsof some $250 million; a month later, it put Franklin intoconservatorship. Mr. Fleischer initially conceded that theseizure was needed to stave off a bond default, but hedisputed the proposed write-offs and ridiculed regulators asincompetent. He sued in federal district court in Topeka andgot the seizure overturned. But in a stinging rebuke to boththe district-court judge and Mr. Fleischer, the Denver courtvoted unanimously to dismiss Franklin's suit.   Calling Franklin &quot;highflying&quot; and &quot;debt-laden,&quot; the courtsaid &quot;the record reveals the owners diverting millions ofdollars into their pockets . . . notwithstanding the lossesbeing incurred by the association.&quot; The court also assailedthe district judge for actions it deemed improper, such asbehaving as if he were the regulator&quot;substituting {his}judgment concerning the acceptable level of high-risk assetsfor&quot; the OTS's. The judge was Dale Saffels, who had headedthe Federal Home Loan Bank Board of Topeka and once wasresponsible for supervising Franklin.   Mr. Fleischer is unbowed. On July 5, he petitioned theappeals court for a rehearing, attacking its ruling for,among other things, its &quot;intemperate tone.&quot;   At year-end, investment bankers estimate, as much as athird of Franklin's $6.1 billion of assets were esotericinstruments. The U.S. won't say how much it expects Franklinto cost taxpayers. Mr. Fleischer contends that, properlymanaged, its portfolio could still be profitable, making thecost to taxpayers minimal. But some industry executives seethe losses eventually topping $1 billion.   Mr. Fleischer had many imitators. Among them were threeTexans who rode to the rescue of the deeply insolventSeamen's Bank in New York in 1985 with a $50 millioninfusion. The three were Jess Hay, chief of one of thenation's largest mortgage bankers; R. Ted Enloe, hisrighthand man, and Robert Utley, a former Texas securitiescommissioner. Their rescue plan: risk-controlled arbitrage.   In 1989, with short-term interest rates rising andmanagement expecting them to go higher, Seamen's arranged $1billion of interest-rate hedges known as swaps. Seamen's alsoincreased to about $400 million its holdings of interest-onlystrips of cash flows from mortgage-backed securities, or IOs,which would also become more valuable if rates rose.   But interest rates dropped, driving down the variable ratethat Seamen's received on its swaps and the value of the IOs.Seamen's was quickly out $39 million. When it laterliquidated its IOs, it took an additional $100 million loss.By the time Seamen's was closed in mid-1990, its mortgagesecurities were worth $103 million less than they had cost,regulators say.   Seamen's is expected to cost taxpayers $529 million. TheFDIC's Mr. Seidman calls it &quot;a real beaut . . . they did allthe damage in two weeks.&quot; Mr. Enloe, one of the threeprincipals, acknowledges: &quot;Some of our hedges did not performas well as we would have liked.&quot;   Some thrift executives who caught the arbitrage bug knewthey lacked the expertise to run such complex schemes, sothey hired others, mostly young, high-priced people reputedto be experts. James Thompson was 30 when hired by FinancialCorp. of Santa Barbara, but he had worked for David Paul,then considered a visionary for his strategies at now-defunctCenTrust Savings of Miami.   Financial Corp. was reeling from real-estate losses andwas thinly capitalized, but Mr. Thompson put about $2billion, some 40% of the thrift's assets, intorisk-controlled arbitrage and other complicated tradingstrategies. At first they earned money, and he was regardedas a &quot;miracle worker,&quot; an ex-colleague recalls.   But in the 1987 third quarter, a position in Treasurybills and interest-rate futures blew up when rates plunged;almost overnight, Financial Corp. lost $29 million. Mr.Thompson tried to recover by ballooning the thrift'smortgage-backed securities position to some $3 billion, butthe damage was done. He resigned in 1988, and regulatorsclosed Financial Corp. in April 1990. A banking executivewith knowledge of its assets estimates the failure will costthe U.S. up to $100 million.   Mr. Thompson says the 1987 debacle resulted from a tradingloss in bonds, as distinct from a loss on a truerisk-controlled arbitrage program; federal regulators saythat's a distinction with little difference. Mr. Thompsonalso says the loss came during the tumultuous weeks leadingup to the October 1987 stock-market crash, when whipsawinginterest rates clobbered even big Wall Street firms withlosses. He says that his arbitrage systems performed &quot;prettymuch as expected&quot; and that losses on failed acquisitions,junk bonds and other investments in which he wasn't involvedcontributed more to the company's demise than his tradingstrategies did.   Jerome E. Nussbaum, another reputed master of cutting-edgestrategies, more than tripled Gibraltar Savings'mortgage-backed securities portfolio to some $6.6 billionbetween 1985 and 1987. Included in his portfolio wereinterest-rate hedges and other instruments designed toprotect against rising interest rates.   Alas, rates dropped in late 1987. At about the same time,Mr. Nussbaum's wife fell ill; understandably distracted, hedidn't adjust the hedges in time. No other executive at thethrift understood enough about the portfolio to pick up theslack or even see trouble brewing, a former officer says.Gibraltar got stuck with high-cost hedges and lower-yieldingassets as borrowers refinanced mortgages. The result: lossesof $26 million in 1988 alone.   Later, a deteriorating market for mortgage securities leftGibraltar holding securities worth $400 million less than ithad paid for them. Gibraltar failed in March 1989;liquidating its mortgage-securities portfolio generatedlosses of $280 million.   Mr. Nussbaum's strategies, says his attorney, Peter Rosen,were &quot;conservative and carefully developed.&quot; He blamesregulators for forcing Gibraltar to liquidate the portfolioprematurely: &quot;Had they not done so, the program would haveearned hundreds of millions of dollars.&quot;   One of the earliest risk-controlled arbitrage experts wasWayne Angell, now a Federal Reserve Board governor. Mr.Angell served as a paid consultant to Franklin, sitting onits investment advisory board from 1981 to 1985. He helpedMr. Fleischer build arbitrage systems and advised him onhedging strategies, and he also was an arbitrage consultantto other thrifts. Mr. Fleischer calls him &quot;one of theprincipal architects&quot; of the whole idea.   Mr. Angell declines to comment. &quot;Wayne is kind of shyabout Franklin,&quot; says Joseph Coyne, a Fed spokesman.   The experts were aided by investment bankers who fannedout across the country to sell thrifts on arbitrage systems.For them, the idea was a bonanza, with fees for advice, forarranging and financing purchase of mortgage securities, forbuilding hedges, for executing trades to maintain hedges --and for unwinding a thrift's positions when the systems fellapart.   At Salomon Brothers, mortgage traders under the tutelageof Lewis Ranieri -- a legend on Wall Street for inventingmortgage-backed securities and for warning about the perilsof junk bonds -- pushed the arbitrage programs strongly.Salomon sold Minneapolis-based TCF Financial Corp. on aprogram that included $2 billion of mortgage-backedsecurities by 1985. But when interest rates skidded in 1986,borrowers paid off the mortgages far faster than TCF and itsSalomon advisers had anticipated. TCF was left withlower-yielding assets mismatched with expensive debt andhedging instruments. The result: $50 million of losses in1987, plus another $57 million in arbitrage-related losses in1988. TCF flirted with insolvency but has recovered.   Risk-controlled arbitrage &quot;was just a mirage conjured upby Wall Street,&quot; says William Cooper, now its chiefexecutive.   Mr. Ranieri says Salomon wasn't a &quot;heavy player&quot; inrisk-controlled arbitrage. He adds that much of that activityoccurred after he had been promoted and given up control ofday-to-day trading.   Richard Pratt, the chairman of Merrill Lynch CapitalMarkets, also is touched by the fiasco. While he headed theFederal Home Loan Bank Board from 1981 to late 1983, hisregulators permitted thrifts to launch arbitrage programs.Later, investment bankers under his command at Merrill Lynchearned millions in fees advising thrifts on the programs.   Ash Williams Jr., who was Florida's principal regulator ofMr. Paul's CenTrust, says Mr. Pratt was one of severalexperts instrumental in fending off state and federalregulators' moves to curb the thrift's activities, includingits risk-controlled arbitrage. &quot;He literally sat at DavidPaul's right hand in meetings with regulators and explainedwhy CenTrust's activities were valid,&quot; Mr. Williams recalls.&quot;The representations he and other highly regarded expertsmade to regulators stalled our efforts to shut CenTrustdown.&quot;   Asked about risk-controlled arbitrage now, Mr. Pratt callsit &quot;often just a way to pump up profits and defer losses andhand it over to the government if things broke down.&quot; He saysthat he left the Bank Board before the dangers became clearand that Merrill Lynch &quot;wasn't particularly heavily involved&quot;in the programs.   The biggest, perhaps most ill-advised program was AmericanSavings' 1986 plunge; when deeply insolvent, it bought morethan $4 billion of mortgage securities and hedginginstruments. The maneuver was authorized by Edwin Gray, thenhead of the Home Loan Bank Board, over objections from hisfield regulators. The portfolio was set up under thedirection of David Smith of Kaplan andamp; Smith Associates, asmall but highly regarded consulting firm based in Glendale,Calif. After American Savings failed, liquidating thesecurities cost the government $670 million.   Both Mr. Smith and Mr. Gray now say American Savingsshould have been closed before its 1986 plunge. &quot;Rightly orwrongly, we were trying to make the institution salable, andit was the only thing we thought had any hope of doing that,&quot;Mr. Gray says. &quot;In retrospect, I wish we hadn't done it.&quot; Asfor the basic idea, he says: &quot;It was a siren song that foundmany gullible listeners, and it proved terribly damaging.&quot;   The Seattle Federal Home Loan Bank was especially gung-hoon risk-controlled arbitrage. In 1987, Patricia A. McJoynt, atop Seattle regulator, suggested an arbitrage program for astruggling little thrift called Family Federal Savings andamp; LoanAssociation. Steve Way, its former chief executive, says someof his managers were dubious. But at a meeting that fall, hesays, Ms. McJoynt told them the maneuver might be one of thefew ways the thrift could stay alive.   &quot;So, this is the long bomb, isn't it?&quot; said one officer,cocking his arm, quarterback-style. &quot;Yes,&quot; replied Ms.McJoynt, according to Family Federal officials.   Ms. McJoynt says she doesn't recall the exchange andcontends Family Federal executives were eager to tryarbitrage. In any case, the program bombed: Family Federalfailed last year, burdened by more than $2 million ofarbitrage losses. Says Stephen Smith, a former Seattleregulator: &quot;A lot of regulators in this country didn'tunderstand the dangers any better than anyone else. They gottaken in, too.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>