<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900914-0074</DOCNO><DOCID>900914-0074.</DOCID><HL>   Deepening Despair:   Rising Black Violence   In South Africa Puts   Mandela on the Spot   ---   Some In ANC Want to Fight,   But He Fears Bloodshed   Could Set Back Reforms   ---   Hacked and Shot in the Massacre   ----   By Roger Thurow   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AFRIC</CO><LP>   SEBOKENG, South Africa -- One by one, the men from thecinderblock hostels step forward under the towering bluegumtree to bear witness to the slaughter of the night before.   It was 2:30 in the morning, they all say, when gunshotsand explosions shattered their sleep in the wretcheddormitories that house South Africa's migrant workers. Alarge man called Oupa says a bullet ricocheted off his metaldoor. When he opened it, he saw black men with red headbands,allegedly members of Inkatha, a Zulu-based politicalorganization, rampaging with spears, machetes, guns andgrenades.</LP><TEXT>   An old man with a limp tells of peeking through a windowand seeing a white man on horseback firing a rifle in alldirections. A younger resident describes how the sun rose toreveal two dozen corpses. Some were horribly disfigured bymachete blows to the face, he says. Others were both hackedand shot. As the men regrouped to confront their attackers,government soldiers opened fire on them. Eleven more hostelresidents fell dead.   Anger surrounds the bluegum tree. Where, the men ask, wastheir organization, the African National Congress? Where wasthe ANC's armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, or MK? As ANC leaderNelson Mandela stood before them later that horrible day,they begged for weapons. They wanted revenge.   Instead, Mr. Mandela, himself boiling with anger afterseeing a man's brain spilling out of a crushed skull at themorgue, appealed for calm. The savage fighting, which hasleft over 700 blacks dead in the past month -- including morethan 20 killed yesterday in an attack on a train inJohannesburg -- has bloodied his own prestige and that of theother major peace brokers, the government and Inkatha. And ithas staggered the negotiations he has delicately nurturedwith President F.W. de Klerk.   The ANC, Mr. Mandela explained to the vengeful men, hadsuspended its armed struggle. He had no arms to give them.Trust him, he pleaded. Trust the ANC.   But trust is a fleeting thing in South Africa these days.For the third time this year, the mortuary and hospital ofSebokeng are full. March 26, July 22, Sept. 4 -- three&quot;massacres,&quot; as the residents here say, when the main road ofthis blighted black township south of Johannesburg becameslick with blood. For the third time, Mr. Mandela came tovisit and reassure. For the third time, the people, weary ofbattle, listened to their beloved leader and wanted tobelieve.   &quot;Yes, we will trust Nelson -- for now,&quot; says PetrusDzanebe. But he now sleeps in his clothes, he confesses, andwith one eye open. &quot;We live in fear,&quot; he says, &quot;that thiswill happen again, at any time.&quot;   Should it, local ANC officials fear that Mr. Mandelacouldn't dare return to Sebokeng without weapons. Earlierthis week, even Mr. Mandela himself said the grass-roots callfor armed protection is growing too strong to resist for muchlonger.   Mr. Mandela, who has been a free man for seven monthsafter 27 years in prison, faces a dilemma of Gorbachevianproportion: Wildly popular abroad, he is desperatelystruggling to control the tumultuous course of change athome.   Where optimism for a &quot;new&quot; South Africa once flourishedfollowing his release in February, dark despair now reigns.   &quot;We don't know where we are going,&quot;' says PhineasMthimkhulu, a Methodist minister who dodged several bulletswhile assisting the injured during the hostel massacre. &quot;Arewe going up or down, left or right?&quot; He shrugs. &quot;Who knowsanymore?&quot;   Even the ANC, in an internal paper analyzing the violence,expresses doubt. &quot;We need to ask if South Africans are readyto move in the direction of a new society. Are we ready tothink in a new way? Is it possible for us to talk of a newSouth Africa or is it yet too early?&quot;   Few have remained unscathed by the violence. Inkatha, theconservative, capitalist antithesis of the socialist-orientedANC, can no longer profess its peaceful innocence after morethan 100 supporters, including its regional leader, werearrested during the Sept. 4 hostel fight.   And the claims of propriety and impartiality by thesecurity forces -- who deny ANC charges that they aid Inkatha-- are sounding ever more hollow after a judicial inquiryruled that police were &quot;unjustified&quot; in opening fire withlive ammunition on a crowd 30 yards away during the firstSebokeng massacre on March 26.   Less than a week after that report was made public, thearmy opened fired in Sebokeng on Sept. 4. Also, eyewitnessreports of the presence of masked whites in the hostel battlehas fueled suspicions that certain elements of the whiteright wing are stirring up black animosities to derail thegovernment-ANC negotiations over a new constitution andblack-white power sharing.   The ugly appearance of black factional fighting, which hascrippled much of the rest of Africa, is also undermining theefforts of the government to interest foreign investors in apost-apartheid South Africa. Mr. de Klerk will be promotinghis reforms when he visits Washington later this month, but,as he recently told South African businessmen, &quot;There can beno real reform before stability.&quot;   The greatest damage, though, has fallen on the ANC and onthe slender shoulders of the 72-year-old Mr. Mandela. Theunceasing violence, which spreads like an infectious plaguefrom one township to another in the Johannesburg area, hasexposed the ANC's leadership weaknesses as it emerges from 30years of exile and makes the transition from liberationmovement to political party.   And Mr. Mandela's inability so far to defuse the factionalfighting has disappointed those who expected him to act morelike a statesman than an ANC cadre. Commentators here notethat his refusal to meet with Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezias long as Inkatha &quot;perpetuates violence&quot; is precisely theargument the government used in refusing to negotiate withthe ANC for three decades.   While the ANC's hierarchy has become a partner with thegovernment in shaping the country's future, grass-rootssupporters are still pursuing the ANC's revolutionarystrategy of making the country ungovernable through strikes,boycotts and mass protest. In Sebokeng, for instance, youthleaders still refer to different sectors of the township bytheir revolutionary nicknames: Beirut, Nicaragua, Cuba,Angola, Palestine, Libya, Moscow.   Although relative calm returned to the hostel area --dubbed Vietnam -- after Mr. Mandela's visit, youths spent thenext few days roaming the Beirut section, blocking thestreets with boulders, hijacking cars and inviting severalclashes with police, who were quick to unleash tear gas. Theyouths pointedly ignored Mr. Mandela's instruction to returnto school.   &quot;Give us MK,&quot; says a teen-ager wearing a floppy &quot;Coke isit&quot; hat. He is sitting on one of the boulders blocking theroad. &quot;Give us Hani.&quot; Chris Hani, the Umkhonto we Sizwecommander, is particularly popular among the youth.   The wave of violence began after the ANC suspended itsarmed struggle on Aug. 6 in return for an agreement with thegovernment on the return of exiles and the release ofpolitical prisoners. But as the killings mounted, so diddissatisfaction and misunderstanding over the suspension. &quot;Adesperate call for arms became deafening,&quot; says the ANC'sdiscussion paper. Some ANC officials, it notes, have beenreluctant to speak in the areas of unrest because they had noanswer to this demand.   &quot;Generally speaking, the vision of unbreakable strength{the ANC} had nurtured and earned over the years was dented,&quot;says the paper. &quot;Instead, people felt the ANC was displayingpolitical paralysis and had fallen prey to de Klerk's sweettalk.&quot;   Also dented is the ANC's decades-long struggle to overcomethe country's ethnic differences exacerbated by thegovernment's policies of racial segregation.   Although the ANC's membership includes blacks from all themain tribes, as well as whites, Indians and coloreds (peopleof mixed race), the top leadership is predominantlyXhosa-speaking. The Xhosa image became more accentuatedduring the 30 years of banning as the ANC became personifiedby the jailed Mr. Mandela, who is a Xhosa.   Thus, when Inkatha, which is overwhelmingly Zulu, clasheswith the ANC, political differences are reduced, in manyminds, to a Zulu-Xhosa tribal war. Inkatha pamphlets urgeZulus to resist Xhosa domination in any new government; ANCsupporters vow to &quot;kill the Zulus.&quot;   Andrew Mapheto, an official in the ANC's Johannesburgoffice who wrote the discussion paper, says he was oncealmost attacked because he was driving a car with licenseplates from Natal province, the home of the Zulus. He alsotells of two Zulu children who were killed when the familyhome was bombed. On the day of the funeral, taxi driversrefused to transport the mourners and local youths said thecemetery wasn't open to Zulus. The family was told to burytheir dead in kwaZulu, the Zulu homeland.   Sebokeng and the surrounding black townships of what isknown as the Vaal Triangle have contributed two generationsof anti-apartheid martyrs. It was in neighboring Sharpeville,in 1960, that police opened fire on a large group ofdemonstrators. Later that year the ANC was banned andUmkhonto we Sizwe was formed.   In 1984, a protest against township living conditions andblack local government was met by police fire, triggering anationwide wave of unrest and repression that led to thestate of emergency and the intensification of internationaleconomic sanctions against Pretoria.   This year, on March 26, a few weeks before the first-evertalks between the government and the ANC, Sebokeng residentswere again marching in protest against township conditionswhen police again opened fire. More than a dozen people werekilled and 281 injured, many of them shot in the back.   Mr. Mandela rushed to Sebokeng and the ANC postponed thestart of negotiations, demanding an independent commission toinvestigate police actions. It was that commission whichlabeled the police shooting &quot;unjustified.&quot;   On July 22, following an Inkatha rally to whip up supportin a solidly ANC area, Inkatha supporters armed withtraditional Zulu weapons such as spears and machetes clashedwith hostel residents, who are mostly Xhosa, Sotho andTswana. Dozens were killed and injured, and the small numberof Zulus who were living in the hostels were forced out.   Until then, residents of the hostels say, the varioustribes had gotten along fine. After the clash, the crowded16-to-a-room hostels were filled with mistrust and tension.   This set the stage for the Sept. 4 predawn attack. Thenight before, the police patrol that had been on duty aroundthe hostel since the earlier fighting was removed. This, theANC alleges, allowed Inkatha supporters to enter the hostel.Mr. Mandela says that these circumstances, together withwitness accounts of white men fighting alongside the Zulusthat night, arouse the suspicion &quot;of connivance between thepolice and Inkatha.&quot; Both Inkatha and the police vehementlydeny this and reject claims they work in concert.   In order to defuse the tribal aspects of the fighting,which the ANC says only helps those who want to see apartheidentrenched, Mr. Mandela told the residents of Sebokeng thatthey mustn't blame Inkatha alone. Revenge against Zulus, hesaid, would play into the hands of &quot;right-wing&quot; elements whowant to see blacks fighting blacks. He told the people tosilence their calls for weapons, because arms would only givethe police and army more reason to shoot.   Still, tension blanketed the township. Despite Mr.Mandela's assurances that he would hold the governmentresponsible for the killings, the fear of a fourth massacreloomed.   &quot;Most of our people accept what comrade Mandela says, butthey are very angry and afraid,&quot; says Maurice More, the25-year-old president of the local South African YouthCongress branch, which is allied with the ANC.   The telephone in his township office rings. A colleaguesays police and army vans have been seen making their way toSebokeng. &quot;Those of us who are activists are forced to bevigilant, alert,&quot; says Mr. More, turning to look out thewindow. &quot;You never know what will happen.&quot;   Over in &quot;Beirut,&quot; the township's militant teen-agers aremanning their roadblocks, making sure nobody who doesn'tbelong here gets through. Police and army vehiclesoccasionally roll over the boulders, lobbing tear gascannisters along the way. The youths scatter. Five minuteslater, they are back, checking the traffic.   Tear gas lingers over the Central Methodist Church,located in the middle of Beirut. &quot;One morning we'll wake upand some of them will be dead,&quot; Joel January, the churchsecretary, says of the youths. &quot;I tell you, this is no life.It isn't what we expected a couple of months ago.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>