<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920206-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>920206-0005.</DOCID><HL>   Legal Morass:   Hundreds of Businesses   Wait and Run Up Bills   As Tort Case Drags On   ---   A Lawyer Ties Them Vaguely   To Steel-Plant Toxicity;   Injuries Are Vague, Too   ---   'Blackmail,' the Defense Says   ----   By Christi Harlan   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/06/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR LSST UK WX XON</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)ENERGY (ENE)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)COMMODITY CHEMICALS (CHC)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)OIL-EQUIPMENT, SERVICES, PLATFORM SUPPLIERS (EQS)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)OIL-EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES (OIE)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)</NS><RE>CONNECTICUT (CT)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   DAINGERFIELD, Texas -- Two of Harold Nix's neighborsdropped by his law office one day in 1987. The women wantedto know whether they had legitimate workers' compensationclaims against the nearby Lone Star Steel Co. plant, wheretheir husbands had worked for years before both died fromlung cancer.   Mr. Nix suspected there might be more to it than that. &quot;Istarted thinking what I could do other than filing a li'l ol'comp claim,&quot; he says.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Nix's lawyerly curiosity produced what many of hiscolleagues believe is the largest toxic-tort litigationpending in the U.S.: 36 related lawsuits, filed in statecourt here on behalf of 2,729 Lone Star Steel employees,onetime employees and employees' relatives. The suits name372 companies as defendants, ranging from such giants asExxon Corp. and Union Carbide Corp. to the owner of ahardware store in downtown Daingerfield.   So many lawyers have flooded into this tiny northeastTexas town that one hearing, on a requested change of venue,was moved from the courthouse to the highschool gym. And theyhave swamped the Morris County district clerk's office withsome 39,000 documents.   For Mr. Nix, the litigation is the crucible of a novellegal theory -- and a chance to reap tens of millions ofdollars in fees. For the defendants and even some of Mr.Nix's fellow plaintiffs' lawyers, however, the cases aresomething else: litigation at its worst, the kind thatinspires derision of lawyers and outraged demands for legalreform by Vice President Dan Quayle and many others.   Few would dispute that there is some basis for litigationhere. Some former Lone Star workers are genuinely sick, andthere is some evidence of careless handling of chemicals. Butdefendants complain bitterly that many of the plaintiffs'claims are spurious. They see themselves as victims of alegal process in which a clever lawyer, aided by the state'svague productliability laws, can tie them up in costlylitigation for nearly five years without specifying whichcompanies are alleged to have done what to which plaintiff.   &quot;This is a perfect example of the abuse of our judicialsystem,&quot; says Brad Gahm, a vice president of thereform-minded Texas Association of Business and a lawyer whoonce worked on Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s defense in thecase.   The lawsuits, the first of which was filed on May 15,1987, allege that chemicals at the Lone Star plant combinedto create a toxic cloud that infected workers with &quot;chemicalAIDS.&quot; &quot;This toxic smog,&quot; one suit contends, &quot;crept in everso quietly like little cats' feet and did permanent damage tothe bodies of the unsuspecting workers.&quot; Damages aren'tspecified in the suits, but Mr. Nix pegs the total potentialrecovery at &quot;hundreds of millions of dollars.&quot; Mr. Nix didn'tsue Lone Star Steel, but other defendants have moved to dragit into the case.   Neither steelmakers nor the United Steelworkers of Americacan think of another steel plant involved in similarallegations. Nor can Mr. Nix, who takes credit for devisingthe theory. &quot;There's not any litigation that I can think offor such a broad array of illnesses and chemical exposure,&quot;he says. That, he explains, is because &quot;no one had recognizedthe causal connection&quot; between steelworkers' illnesses andproducts they worked with.   But defendant companies argue that there isn't any similarlitigation because Mr. Nix plucked his theory out of thin air-- thin clean air, they assert. The defendants deny thattheir products contributed any toxicity to the atmosphere atthe mill or any illness in the community. Among the companiesaccused of contributing to the alleged toxic smog, they pointout, are makers of felt-tip markers and picnic tables. Othercompanies are accused of exacerbating the problem by, somesuits say, &quot;taking company vehicles, and in some cases,personal vehicles, onto the premises each day, adding to thepollution of the work environment.&quot;   If the workplace was so polluted, defendants ask, why havemedical tests shown that only one-fourth of the plaintiffssuffer from work-related illnesses? They add that all ofthose ailments involve asbestos, a product whose hazards arewell-established. At the Lone Star mill, asbestos curtains,for example, were used to protect workers at the open hearth.   The defendants suggest that most of the workers' healthcomplaints are probably due more to old age and a diet filledwith chicken-fried steak and mashed potatoes. &quot;Whatever builtup cholesterol in their blood streams wasn't the defendants'products,&quot; Robert M. Martin Jr., a defense attorney, argues.   Nevertheless, the defendants' liability insurers havealready had to shell out millions of dollars of fees to some150 law firms. And the end isn't in sight: Mr. Nix doesn'texpect the first jury to be picked for another two years.   Even more galling to defendants is the fact that manystill don't know what they are specifically accused of; Mr.Nix has refused to narrow his allegations. Suits makingsimilarly broad allegations have been dismissed in courtselsewhere, but state district Judge B.D. Moye hasn't grantedany of the defendants' repeated requests for more specificpleadings. Appeals by the defendants have been unsuccessful.The 62-year-old judge, who was first elected to the bench 15years ago, declines to be interviewed about the cases.   Mr. Nix says he will make more specific allegations afterhe completes his fact-finding, which includes combing through40 years and 14 million pages of the mill's receipts andpurchase orders. &quot;This is blackmail,&quot; says William Wilde,counsel to a committee of defendants and insurers that isworking on common defense issues. &quot;This is a perversion ofour justice system.&quot;   A Westinghouse spokesman says neither Westinghouse nor Mr.Nix has been able to produce any records showing that weldingrods manufactured by Westinghouse were sold for use at LoneStar Steel. Yet the company remains a defendant.   Other defendants, who know that their products were usedat the steel mill, are still waiting to learn which specificplaintiffs are accusing them, since not all of the plaintiffscame in contact with all of the products. &quot;We don't knowwho's suing us or why they're suing us,&quot; says R.W. Blair, aco-founder of Jones-Blair Co., a closely held Dallas paintmaker that supplied pipe varnish to Lone Star Steel. &quot;Myfrustration limits were exceeded some time ago on this legalbusiness.&quot;   Like most of the defense teams, JonesBlair's lawyers werehired by the company's liability insurer, so the companyisn't directly bearing all of the defense costs. And becauseresolution of the cases remains so distant, the companyhasn't had to project the effect of potential damages onearnings. Estimating that risk wouldn't be easy, anyway: Mr.Nix is insisting on jury trials, and juries are notoriouslyunpredictable. So is the amount of insurance coverage foreach defendant because policy limits can vary widely.   Nonetheless, the litigation is a constant irritant todefendants. Warren Nilsson, who owns one of the two MorrisCounty businesses the litigation cites, says his warehouse,which stored alloys used by Lone Star Steel, was named in thefirst lawsuits filed back in May 1987. Subsequent suits havenamed his holding company, Irvin Enterprises Inc., which alsoowns oil jobbers that supplied Lone Star Steel, a couple oftire stores and the downtown hardware store.   And which business is Mr. Nilsson's insurer defending?After all this time, he still doesn't know. &quot;Why we're in it,I don't know,&quot; he says. &quot;It's puzzling.&quot; Mr. Nix says IrvinEnterprises is a defendant because its units &quot;supplied many,many, many toxic products through the years&quot; -- an allegationthat befuddles Mr. Nilsson. He says he was worked aroundthose chemicals for 20 years and isn't sick. Asked about theallegations that his fellow citizens were poisoned by a toxiccloud, Mr. Nilsson says cautiously, &quot;Everyone I know aroundhere is healthy.&quot;   The motivation for many of the lawsuits, defense attorneyscontend, relates to the declining fortunes of the steelplant. For almost 40 years, Morris County thrived, thanksentirely to Lone Star Steel. During the oil boom of the late1970s and early 1980s, when the demand for steel pipe fordrilling equipment was great, the mill employed 6,000workers, equal to almost half of the county's population of13,000. But the pipe business cratered with the oil industry,wiping out thousands of jobs.   &quot;We went from a pocket of prosperity in '82 -- fat cats,whatever you want to call us -- to a pocket of poverty in ayear,&quot; says James W. Smith, mayor of Lone Star, a town closeto Daingerfield and the site of the steel mill. The steelcompany itself, a unit of Dallas-based Lone Star TechnologiesInc., agreed to bankruptcy-court reorganization at the behestof its bank lenders in 1989 and emerged from the proceedingslast year. The mill now employs fewer than 1,000 people, andunemployment in the county stands at 18.7% of the work force,or more than 2 1/2 times the Texas average of 6.8%.   The job losses created the perfect climate for Mr. Nix'slitigation, defense lawyers believe. Until he filed the firstlawsuit, only a handful of workers' compensation claims andasbestosis cases had been litigated on behalf of Lone StarSteel employees. That fact helps fuel the cynicism of defenselawyers; so does the lack of medical evidence linking thehealth complaints to a defendant's products.   Mr. Nix dismisses complaints about the ambiguity as notunusual in the types of personal-injury cases in which hespecializes. They're a lucrative specialty for the urbanelawyer, who employs seven of the county's 12 licensedattorneys and earns enough to be a regular donor to statewideDemocratic candidates, often at $10,000 a pop. He alsofinanced the early stages of the Lone Star Steel litigation.   You wouldn't discern his wealth from visiting his office,however. With its vinylcovered chairs and boxes of recordsand charts, the nerve center of the Lone Star Steellitigation looks more like a public health clinic than aprosperous law firm.   The cases could make Mr. Nix even wealthier. Already, hisfirm has earned about $4.8 million from $16 million ofsettlements by seven defendants (it works on a contingencybasis, collecting about 30% of whatever its clients win). Hesays the firm has plowed its share of the money back intoinvestigations related to the cases.   With his strategy in the cases, the 52-year-old MorrisCounty native quickly proved he isn't some bumbling backwaterbarrister. He didn't sue Lone Star Steel for its workers'alleged injuries: Injury complaints against employers arerelegated to the unwieldy Texas workers' compensation system,where workers' recoveries could be limited. He also avoidedsuing in federal court, where rules are less favorable toplaintiffs in personal-injury cases. And he didn't seekclass-action status -- which also requires stricter prooffrom complainants -- because &quot;there are no two plaintiffs whohave the exact same cause of action,&quot; he says.   That in itself is amazing, because Mr. Nix decided earlyin the litigation that he would sign up any Lone Star Steelworker with a health complaint. In most toxic-tort cases,lawyers concentrate on the strongest -- and mostemotionally-appealing cases. But as a longstanding resident,he says it wouldn't have been fair to turn anyone away.&quot;That's when people, by word of mouth -- the neighbors andthe brothers started coming in,&quot; he says.   As a result, Mr. Nix's clients include the sorts ofplaintiffs that outrage defendants and critics of U.S.courts. Among them: a man who worked 15 days at Lone StarSteel 22 years ago; another who worked there only for themonth of September 1964; and the family of a worker killed ina one-car accident in 1965.   But Mr. Nix insists serious illnesses are involved. Heestimates that about a third of the plaintiffs are sufferingfrom asbestos-related ailments. About 1,500 to 1,600claimants have undergone tests required by threeasbestos-makers that have agreed to compensate asbestosvictims. So far, about 700 to 800 of them have some type ofasbestos-related illness.   Defense attorneys have asked for mandatory medical testingof all plaintiffs by 1993, to establish once and for all whatthe ailments are and what may have caused them. Such testswould &quot;eliminate those hundreds of plaintiffs who aren't sickand eliminate about half of the defendants,&quot; suggests Mr.Martin, whose clients include Martin Marietta Corp. &quot;Thisshould have been done a long time ago.&quot;   But Mr. Nix and his associates resist the testingsuggestion. Under their &quot;chemical AIDS&quot; theory, some workers'illnesses won't show up for years, they contend. &quot;Theydeserve medical monitoring,&quot; argued Nelson Roach, one of Mr.Nix's associates, at a recent court hearing on thedefendants' request for medical tests. Such monitoring issometimes provided for in settlements of toxic-injury cases.   Medical monitoring might help ease the minds of plaintiffssuch as R.B. Jefferson, who worked 29 1/2 years on the openhearth at Lone Star Steel before retiring in 1982. Hisbrother, another longtime steelworker, died of cancer, andMr. Jefferson says &quot;cancer's a possibility for anyone.&quot; Butfor now, his major health complaints are hearing loss and&quot;slight, emphysema-like&quot; breathing problems, and his formerworkplace is the most likely source of those ailments, hefigures. &quot;I don't remember seeing any chemical labeled,&quot; hesays.   Another retiree and plaintiff, Pat Turner, washard-pressed to remember any manufacturers' labels on thepaint thinners and other solvents he worked with during his20-plus years at Lone Star Steel; as a result, he spent morethan three days being questioned by defense lawyers inOctober. During the questioning, he said he didn't thinkabout the health hazards of his job until the first lawsuitswere filed.   &quot;I began to read and make studies on these things,&quot; hetestified. &quot;I came to the belief that (the products) couldand probably were a contributing factor to my healthproblems.&quot; Mr. Turner has had two heart operations and othersurgery. And although he hasn't consulted a doctor inconnection with his work, he adamantly defended his right tosue. &quot;I was convinced I was right,&quot; he said.   Such vague allegations and seeming lack of medicalevidence rile critics of Texas' civil-justice system. &quot;Wehave a drastically inadequate system for determiningproducts' liability,&quot; says Mr. Gahm of the Texas Associationof Business. Of course, Texas isn't the only state under firefor allegedly pro-plaintiff liability statutes, and VicePresident Quayle seeks to limit untested medical theories andthe damages plaintiffs can collect in product-liabilitycases. But Texas does have a reputation for breeding casessuch as the Lone Star Steel litigation, and the state is afavorite target of reformers.   A statutory definition of a defective product would helpprevent speculative cases such as the Lone Star Steellitigation, Mr. Gahm says, as would a standard fordetermining negligence in an injury case. Texas law lacksboth, and Mr. Gahm's group has spent four years in what hecalls &quot;a fevered battle&quot; to wrest such definitions from theTexas legislature. &quot;What we're trying to do would directlyaffect Harold Nix,&quot; he says.   But the debate over legal reform, however heated in thestate capital, doesn't mean much to this hardscrabble countyand its efforts to reconstruct its shattered economy. MayorSmith blames the litigation for the area's inability toattract new employers, despite such moves as establishing atax-abated enterprise zone. &quot;All of a sudden, we've got areputation, deserved or not,&quot; he says.   But Mr. Smith, who retired as director of industrialrelations after 32 years with Lone Star Steel, doesn't blamethe workers for suing. &quot;The people are hurting,&quot; he says. &quot;Ifthey can pick up $3,000 (from a settlement or verdict), thatwould be great. . . . If I'd been laid off and hadn't done myinvestments, I might have signed up.&quot;   However, he hopes that the litigation will be settled ormoved from Morris County-neither of which seems likely.   &quot;A lot of the defendants are really aggravated about beingin this lawsuit, so they're not willing to pay nuisance valueor any value&quot; to settle, says Hubert Crouch, a Dallas defenselawyer and chairman of the defense steering committee.   As for moving the case, Judge Moye has declined to changethe venue once and is withholding a decision on a secondrequest until the lawyers attempt to seat the first jury.Defense attorneys contend that seating an impartial jury willbe nearly impossible in a county where nearly half thepotential jurors are either plaintiffs or relatives ofplaintiffs. Last month, the defendants urged the judge torule on the venue change soon, reminding him of comments bypotential jurors in a November 1990 survey by the GallupOrganization.   Among those comments: &quot;It has caused a lot of cancer andhas made the environment very unhealthy,&quot; said onerespondent. &quot;I heard that they didn't tell the workers thatthe chemicals were dangerous, and it's these chemicalscausing the illness and death,&quot; said another. Still anotherpotential juror had heard &quot;that many people have died becauseof a ruthless, profit-hungry company.&quot; All of thosestatements came from people who also said they could make &quot;afair and impartial judgment&quot; in the case.   Mr. Nix contends that an impartial jury can be seatedhere. Doug Jacobs, vice president of United SteelworkersLocal 4134 and a maintenance worker at Lone Star Steel who isalso a plaintiff, doesn't think the defendants will find anybetter place. &quot;Regardless of where they go, there's going tobe a certain amount of working people,&quot; he says.   Mr. Jacobs, who is seeking compensation for &quot;lots of jointproblems&quot; and 10 years of headaches, says he isn't expectinga windfall from the litigation. &quot;I'm not out buying a new carcounting on the money,&quot; he says. &quot;In my mind, I can see thisgoing on quite a while.&quot;   That's putting it mildly. Defense lawyers have completedpretrial fact-finding interviews, called depositions, of just79 of the 2,729 plaintiffs, working two weeks each month inthe cavernous union hall in Lone Star. Each plaintiff isquestioned by as many as 15 lawyers representing variousgroups of products made by defendants. And because thedepositions provide the defendants' only opportunity, so far,to narrow the allegations, some plaintiffs have beenquestioned for three days.   &quot;At this rate, we should finish deposing the plaintiffs in38 years,&quot; says Jim Cowles, a Dallas lawyer representing sixdefendants. &quot;My clients are being held hostage in MorrisCounty.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>