<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910117-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>910117-0012.</DOCID><HL>   War in the Gulf: The Confrontation Begins   ---   Wars Have Been Boons,   Banes for U.S. Presidents   ----   By James M. Perry   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7B</SO><LP>   A U.S. naval squadron sailed straight into harm's way,guns blazing. By the time the bombardment ended, the walls ofthe enemy's old castle had collapsed, the minaret had beenknocked off the mosque and a huge hole had been blown in thewalls of the bashaw's breakfast room.   The year was 1804 and the place Tripoli, in what now isLibya. It was the infant American nation's first offensiveagainst a foreign foe, touched off by attacks on U.S.shipping in the Mediterranean, the cruel captivity ofAmerican merchant seamen and the incessant demands fortribute.</LP><TEXT>   The assault worked, and the pirate princes of Morocco,Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli relented.   But on land, U.S. armies haven't always been sovictorious, especially when they chose to strike first.Success came when the soldiers were well-led, well-equippedand clearly motivated. Failure, as often as not, resultedfrom political amateurism and miscalculation.   And while wars often produced heroes who went on to becomepresident, more recently they have tended to destroypresidential reputations.   The first post-Revolutionary land attack on a foreign foewas in the War of 1812. It was a disaster. It marks the onlytime the white flag of surrender has been raised to a foreignenemy over a U.S. city -- Detroit.   The strategy, a three-pronged attack approved by PresidentMadison, was unrealistic, and the commander in Detroit,William Hull, was a coward. Leading 2,500 men, he marchedinto Canada, which then was a part of the British empire,issuing bombastic, arrogant proclamations along the way. Hewas opposed by two decimated regiments of British regulars,some Canadian militiamen, and, most important, about 300Indians led by the great war chief Tecumseh.   The Indian war whoops scared Hull into such a funk that heretreated to Detroit, and, against the advice of his ownofficers, surrendered his entire army, along with 33 cannon,40 barrels of powder, 100,000 cartridges and full rations for15 days.   President Polk found dozens of reasons to justify hisattack on Mexico in 1846, but the real excuse was &quot;ManifestDestiny,&quot; the idea that America's future included, amongother things, all of what now is New Mexico and California.In essence, Polk's rationale in taking this territory from aweak neighbor wasn't all that different from the Iraqi leaderSaddam Hussein's in marching on Kuwait.   The Mexican War was something of a triumph. U.S. armiesled by Winfield Scott and Zachary Taylor marched thousands ofmiles, in terrible distress, at a cost of more than 13,000lives, to make sure America's destiny was, indeed, manifest.Taylor went on to become president. Scott ran for presidentand lost, moving on to command the Union Army at the outsetof the Civil War.   The war against Spain in 1898 was another touch ofManifest Destiny. Spain held Cuba, and it was in the harborof Havana that the battleship Maine blew up and sank,probably for accidental reasons. But this was provocationenough, and U.S. naval forces easily defeated rusting,obsolete Spanish ships at Santiago and Manila Bay. TeddyRoosevelt charged up San Juan Hill, in what most militaryhistorians now say was a badly run business, and wrotehimself into the history books.   But if earlier U.S. wars tended to make presidents, morerecent ones have been apt to destroy them.   The wars in Korea and Vietnam involved U.S. forcesintervening to assist allies under attack. In each war,fought hard against stubborn foes in unfamiliar terrainthousands of miles from home, about 50,000 Americans died.   In the Korean war, fought under the United Nations flag,U.S.-led forces retreated from North Korea after the Chineseintervened in enormous numbers. But South Korea waspreserved. In Vietnam -- a war that wasn't fought under U.N.auspices -- the U.S. failed to create an effective, credibleSouth Vietnamese army and society. South Vietnam fell.   President Truman's reputation was wrecked, temporarily atleast, by voters' frustration over the war in Korea, andLyndon Johnson's was destroyed by the events in Vietnam.   The fighting in Grenada and Panama doesn't rise to thelevel of general warfare, but those actions do show the U.S.,in the late 20th century, continuing to initiateoverpowering, lightning-quick attacks to protect itsperceived vital interests. Grenada was attacked after oneCommunist government was replaced with a more radicalCommunist government, at a time when Cuban constructionbattalions were busily building a suspiciously largeairfield. President Reagan also expressed concern about thesafety of Americans attending a medical school there. Theattack was badly coordinated and sometimes ineptly led, withunits from every military service specialty competing forslices of the action.   Panama was attacked to depose Manuel Noriega, adictatorial leader President Bush's administration chargedwas heavily involved in international drug smuggling. Thatattack, too, was sometimes badly coordinated, and questionslinger about the number of civilians who were killed in thefew furious hours it took to complete.   But there never was any question U.S. power would carrythe day in either situation. Iraq, with its veteran army andcarefully fortified defensive positions, poses an altogetherdifferent challenge.</TEXT></DOC>