<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910207-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>910207-0049.</DOCID><HL>   Drucker on Management:   How to Be Competitive Though Big   ----   By Peter F. Drucker</HL><DATE>02/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><LP>   The big companies dominate the headlines. But midsizedbusinesses are fast replacing them as the engines driving theAmerican economy.   Between 1985 and 1990 American manufactured-goods exportsrose by more than 80% in volume; those to Japan actuallydoubled. Yet, only two of the nation's biggest companies,Boeing and General Electric -- selling airplanes and aircraftengines, respectively -- significantly increased exports. Therest of the growth -- the fastest ever recorded in peacetimeAmerica, and one of the fastest in any country's history --was contributed by medium-sized firms with sales (in 1990dollars) of more than $75 million to less than $1 billion.</LP><TEXT>   Since the 1987 stock market crash, big businesses acrossthe board have steadily cut employment. Indeed, for the firsttime since the Great Depression, big businesses have beenlaying off white-collar people in large numbers. Yet, untilthe second half of last year, total employment still grewfaster than population. Labor-force participation remainedthe highest in our history (and the highest ever recorded inpeacetime for a developed country), and unemployment remainedat a boom-time low. At least 75% of America's almostexplosive employment growth since 1975 took place in midsizedbusinesses.   During the past decade or two, midsized business hasbecome more competitive and big business less competitive.The handicaps under which midsized business used to laborhave largely disappeared. Above all, now that a managerial orprofessional job in the big company no longer promiseslife-time security as it did only 10 years ago, midsizedcompanies are fast becoming the employers of choice for manyof the ablest young people.   But more important than the strengthening of the midsizedfirm is the decline in the advantage of being big.   The manufacturing companies that dominated theirindustries during the past hundred years -- GE, Siemens andPhilips; Procter andamp; Gamble, Unilever and Nestle; Du Pont,Hoechst and ICI; International Harvester and InternationalPaper; the Standard Oil companies, Shell and Texaco; GM,Ford, Fiat and Daimler-Benz -- were all built on the sameconceptual foundation. And so was the Bell Telephone System.To each industry, the theory asserted, belongs one clearlydelineated technology. It generates all the knowledge neededto lead the industry. In turn, whatever knowledge comes outof the industry's specific technology will become a salableproduct for the company. And there is, the theory assertedfurther, very little if any overlap between differenttechnologies and between different industries based on them.   This theory still underlay the rise of the very bigcompanies of the post-World War II period, such as IBM in theU.S. and Matsushita, Hitachi and Toyota in Japan. It alsounderlay the rise since 1950 of such pharmaceutical giants asHoffmann-LaRoche, Merck and Pfizer. One of them, only 20years ago, defined its business as &quot;the application ofbiochemistry to supplying whatever products are needed inhealth care.&quot; And Citibank's strategy for becoming theworld's first financial institution that is bothtransnational and a &quot;universal bank&quot; was based on the sametheory of the business.   A parallel theory underlay the rise of the largeretailers, such as Sears Roebuck in the U.S., Marks andamp; Spencerin Britain, and the department-store chains in the U.S.,Western Europe and Japan. They assumed homogeneous buttotally distinct mass markets, again with little overlapbetween them. Everything bought by a customer within one ofthese markets would belong in the same value category, interms of price or quality or life-style appeal.   This theory enabled the successful retailer to change frombeing a &quot;distributor&quot; of goods designed by outside makersinto being a &quot;buyer&quot; who creates and designs the goods hesells -- the pioneers were Sears and Marks andamp; Spencer in the'20s and early '30s. Again, the theory still worked in thepostwar period. Kmart, for instance, was built on it.   No new theories on which a big business can be built haveemerged. But the old ones are no longer dependable.Technologies are no longer discrete. They overlap andcriss-cross each other. No industry or company can be fed outof one technological stream. However brilliant its work, evenATandamp;T's magnificent Bell Labs can no longer supply everythingthe telecommunications industry needs, nor can IBM's equallymagnificent labs supply all the software or semiconductordesigns that IBM's computers need. Health-care products,competing with one another, now come out of organic chemistryand pharmacology, genetics and molecular biology, physics andelectronic engineering.   Conversely, one technology no longer feeds only oneindustry. Much of what the research labs of the big companiesare now discovering finds its major application outside ofthe company and even outside of the industry -- in the caseof Bell Labs, for instance, outside of telecommunications.Above all, &quot;industry&quot; is becoming a very fuzzy term indeed.   Twenty-five years ago, computers and telephones wereseparate industries. Now ATandamp;T has decided thattelecommunications leadership requires acquiring a majorcomputer company -- NCR, a century-old maker of cashregisters and a leader in computerized office equipment.Twenty-five years ago, copiers, printing machinery,typewriters and computers were separate industries, each withits own technology and its own markets. Xerox now offers amachine that is a copier, high-speed printer, word processorand fair-sized computer all in one.   Similarly, the assumptions on which the big retailers havebeen operating no longer hold. There is increasingsegmentation in all markets, and increasing overlap andcriss-crossing between them. No one, for instance, in theoffice-furniture market could tell any more what isindustrial, wholesale and retail.   Big businesses are not going to disappear. On thecontrary, we will need quite a few big businesses, some evenbigger than anything we have today. Information and money arebecoming increasingly global. New challenges, such as theenvironment, demand the kind of transnational work that onlyvery big enterprises can perform. And there are many productsand services that can be supplied efficiently only by bigorganizations: building a big power plant or a pipeline;producing passenger jets; making paper; running long-distancetelephone service, or making automobiles and trucks that canbe serviced throughout the world or at least across acontinent -- the list is endless.   Global competition in high technology almost certainlyrequires bigness. The competitors threatening America'sglobal position in high-tech industries, whethersemiconductors, computers, factory automation orhigh-resolution TV, are not lonely garage mechanics. They aremultibillion-dollar giants. And the only American companiesthat have successfully fought them so far are very bigcompanies -- IBM, Intel, Motorola and Xerox, for example.   The challenge, therefore, is for the corporation to learnhow to be competitive despite being big. This means becomingmarket-driven. It means building into the company's system anorganized abandonment of yesterday's products andtechnologies. It means organizing the whole business aroundinnovation. Big businesses will have to become not onlybetter but different. &quot;Synergy&quot; will be out. The more clearlya business (especially a big one) is focused on one productrange or on one market, the better it is likely to do.   Another implication: Whatever diversification a bigbusiness needs -- e.g., to gain access to a differenttechnology or a different market -- is better achievedthrough strategic alliances, such as partnerships, jointventures and minority participations, than throughacquisitions or grass-roots developments.   Finally, decentralization is no longer enough for amultiproduct, multitechnology, multimarkets company; thevarious units have to be set up as truly separate businesses.This is what GE, for instance, is trying to do in setting up13 &quot;Strategic Business Units.&quot; One might go a step furtherand organize the big business the way GE's Europeancounterpart, Siemens in Germany, is organized: as a &quot;group&quot;in which each business is a separate company with its own CEOand board.   Big diversified companies of tomorrow may not even have&quot;central management.&quot; They may emulate the two mostsuccessful builders of large business empires in the past twodecades, the American investor Warren Buffett and theAnglo-American Hanson PLC. Both operate as &quot;investors&quot; that&quot;supervise.&quot; They make sure that their individual businesseshave the right plan, the right strategy and the managementthey need. But they do not &quot;manage.&quot;   Still, bigness will no longer be desirable in itself. Itwill have to serve a function. For 100 years superiorperformance went with being the biggest in a given industry.From now on it will increasingly mean being the right size.And in most fields this will mean being midsized -- as theleaders in American exports of manufactured goods alreadyare.   The shift from the big to the midsized enterprise as theeconomy's center of gravity is a radical reversal of thetrend that dominated all developed economies for more than acentury. It has been all but ignored so far by economists,politicians and the media. It may well, however, have beenthe most important economic event of the past 20 years. Oneof its consequences is that to be competitive despite beingbig is fast becoming the new management challenge.   ---   Mr. Drucker is a professor of social sciences at theClaremont Graduate School in California.</TEXT></DOC>