<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910222-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>910222-0095.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Terrorism in Columbia: The Other Oil War   ----   By Jimmy Weiskopf</HL><DATE>02/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   LATAM TAXES</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)OIL, INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   BOGOTA -- While the U.S. and its allies fight with Iraqover the oil fields of Kuwait, another petroleum war is beingwaged in Colombia. The dynamiting of oil and gas pipelines byMarxist guerrillas -- together with their destruction ofpumping stations, control centers, exploration camps,drilling rigs and earth-moving machinery -- has caused theloss of some $700 million over the past few years. And inJanuary, the damages reached an all-time monthly high.   The guerrillas believe that Colombia is exploited by themultinational oil companies, and they are willing to destroytheir country's own oil rather than let it fall into &quot;enemy&quot;hands. The guerrillas belong to the Revolutionary ArmedForces of Colombia (FARC) -- founded some 35 years ago -- andthe National Liberation Army (ELN), a more recentlyestablished, Maoist-type group and the most fanatic of thehalf-dozen or so subversive groups active in Colombia.Between the two, the country suffered $30 million worth ofoil losses in January, a situation so grave that some oilcompanies now working in Colombia are at the point ofabandoning their operations.</LP><TEXT>   Ironically, oil terrorism in Colombia has become moreacute at the very time when the major Latin Americanproducers are expecting an unprecedented bonanza because ofthe Gulf War. Colombia is the continent's third largestexporter -- after Mexico and Venezuela -- and in normalcircumstances could have been expected to fill the gaps inthe U.S.'s strategic reserves of oil. But circumstances inColombia are far from logical. In fact, the current upsurgeof terrorist activity broke out at a time when thepossibility of a negotiated truce with the subversives neverlooked more promising.   Last year the M-19 guerrilla group gave up its arms andbecame a legitimate political party. In fact, as a result ofits strong representation in a recently elected popularconstitutional assembly, the former guerrilla group now loomsas a major legitimate political force.   The prospects for some kind of deal with the FARC lookedpromising as well. But last December, on the very same daythat the elections for the constitutional assembly were held,the Colombian army launched an unprecedented attack on theCasa Verde -- the command post of the FARC in the ruggedlymountainous Uribe region of central Colombia. The situationchanged dramatically.   As a result of the attack on the Casa Verde, the FARC andthe ELN forged closer links with each other. Both groups arenow working under the umbrella acronym of the CNG -- theNational Guerrilla Coordinating Body. The CNG has instigatedone of the worst guerrilla offensives ever seen in Colombia.On Feb. 6 (the day of the inauguration of the constitutionalassembly), it launched a simultaneous attack on 50 strategicsites in 10 different departments of the country: Tenpolicemen, seven soldiers and two civilians were killed; fournavy officers and four policemen were kidnapped; 10electricity towers and a number of pipelines were dynamited;and helicopters, buses and trucks were destroyed.   The effects of this counteroffensive have been felt, mostof all, in the oil installations. The pipeline most affectedhas been the 496-mile-long Cano Limon-Covenas connection,which links the fields in Colombia's eastern plains region(Arauca) with an oil port on the Atlantic coast. The Araucadeposits are one of the richest in South America and the CanoLimon-Covenas pipeline has been hit by the guerrillas morethan 150 times since it was opened up in the late 1980s.   The power of the guerrillas in Arauca is so intense thatlast October, after an attack on the same pipeline, Colombiahad to suspend oil exports altogether for three days becauseengineers for Ecopetrol (the state oil concern that has amonopoly of local production but works in partnership withmajor multinational companies) simply couldn't get access tothe damaged installations. Together with attacks on crudepipelines in other regions (34 in all in January), thecurrent guerrilla offensive has reduced Colombia's dailyproduction of 450,000 barrels by nearly a quarter.   Possibly the most damaging long-term effect of thisterrorism is not economic but ecological. According to theVII World Conference on Oil Spills held in Texas three yearsago, Colombia was already one of the countries with thehighest grade of oil contamination in its waters in theworld, and since then the situation has worsened. Thelivelihood of thousands of fishermen has been threatened bythe leaking of oil into marshes, rivers and lakes, andexperts say that the costs of the destruction of wildlife andthe contamination of agricultural land are incalculable.   Despite increased vigilance by the Colombian army in thepast few months, the government says that complete securityfor the pipelines is beyond its resources. At a meeting heldin late January with the Ministry of Defense, representativesof the multinationals working in Colombia called for greaterprotection of their installations. &quot;This is a trulyunsupportable situation,&quot; said one spokesman for the oilcompanies. &quot;We are desperate. Nothing works against suchsubversion.&quot;   Nevertheless, it seems unlikely that the major companieswill withdraw from Colombia, at least for the time being. Theburden of terrorism has fallen most heavily upon the smallerindependents, while the multinationals believe that they canweather the storm. Moreover, some of the guerrilla groupshave conceded publicly that Colombia does not have thetechnological know-how yet to exploit its oil on its own.Thus, they do not object to the participation of foreigncompanies as such -- only to the disproportionate share ofthe oil pie that they are getting. What the guerrillas demandis a renegotiation of the &quot;association contracts&quot; betweenEcopetrol and the multinationals.   The guerrillas are also angry about the multinationals'alleged evasion of taxes owed to the Colombian government andpoint out that the oil-producing regions lack adequate socialservices and display some of the most degrading poverty inthe country. But there may be a kind of &quot;war tax&quot; paid out,nevertheless. It is rumored that some of the oil companiesare paying millions of dollars annually in protection moneyto the guerrillas. This never has been admitted publicly butArmand Hammer, deceased founder of Occidental, once admittedthat guerrilla payoffs were a normal procedure in Colombia.   Even so, the problem of guerrilla terrorism will not beeasy to solve. The hardline ELN supports Saddam Hussein andrecently bombed a Mormon Church and a Jewish-owned leatherfactory in the name of the fight against &quot;American-Zionist&quot;oppression. And the FARC's offensive has shown it to be muchmore tenacious than was previously thought.   In the past few weeks, reports of peace offers, made bythe FARC and ELN through the government of Venezuela, havebeen published in Colombian papers. But the possibility ofconclusive negotiations still seems a long way off. In themeantime, everyone in Colombia is wondering how long itsalready troubled economy can withstand the shock of such aprofoundly damaging waste of valuable natural resources.   ---   Mr. Weiskopf is a free-lance writer who has lived inColombia since 1977.</TEXT></DOC>