<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900702-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>900702-0085.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Rite Aid, Its President, Go to Trial   On Charges of Attempted Bribery   ----   By Randolph B. Smith and Wayne E. Green   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   RAD WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)DRUG-BASED RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS, PHARMACIES (RTD)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)BANKS (BNK)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)</GV><LP>   Rite Aid Corp., the nation's largest drugstore chain, andits president will go to trial today in Cleveland on chargesthat they tried to bribe a member of the Ohio Board ofPharmacy.   Attorneys for the company say a judge's ruling last weekthat some taped conversations of Rite Aid president Martin L.Grass can't be used as trial evidence was a key victory.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Grass and the company are charged with paying a memberof the Ohio Board of Pharmacy $33,000 to resign as part of analleged scheme to pack the board with people more friendly toShiremanstown, Pa.-based Rite Aid. The company insists thepayment was a legitimate buy-out of an existing consultingcontract with the board member, Melvin T. Wilczynski.   Last week, Cuyahoga County (Ohio) Common Pleas Court JudgeLillian Greene ruled that pharmacy-board investigators had noauthority to tape conversations between Mr. Grass and Mr.Wilczynski because bribery doesn't fall under the board'sjurisdiction. The judge suppressed three taped conversationsbut said a fourth tape and a videotape of the payment couldbe used at the trial. The two tapes were made by CuyahogaCounty sheriff's officers.   John Jeffries, professor of law at the University ofVirginia, called the suppression of the tapes &quot;verysurprising&quot; and &quot;hostile to the prosecution.&quot; He says suchtaping is legal under federal law because one party to theconversations, Mr. Wilczynski, consented.   Rite Aid attorney George J. Moscarino, of the Clevelandlaw firm of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue, says the ruling willhelp prove Rite Aid's innocence. &quot;The ruling finally enablesus to show the tremendous bias and outrageous misconduct ofthe pharmacy-board investigators,&quot; Mr. Moscarino says. Hecontends board investigators had a grudge against Rite Aidand &quot;venue shopped&quot; after a prosecutor in another countyrefused to bring the charges.   Assistant Cuyahoga County Prosecutor William R. Caine, whobrought the case against the company, declined to comment.   But others close to the case said the suppressed tapesaren't crucial to the prosecution. They say prosecutors canrely on the videotape of an April 27, 1989, meeting in aCleveland airport hotel room. The tape shows Mr. Grasshanding Mr. Wilczynski a corporate check and six copies of anundated resignation letter to Ohio Gov. Richard Celeste,which Mr. Grass instructed him to sign. On the tape, Mr.Grass said that Gov. Celeste had agreed to appoint a Rite Aidofficial as Mr. Wilczynski's successor on the board.   A spokesman for Gov. Celeste vigorously denied anagreement.   ---   LENDER LIABILITY LIMITED in some environmental cases byColorado statute.   The law, which took effect July 1, is designed to shieldfinancial institutions in situations where they haveforeclosed on loans to companies that own or operate propertycontaminated with hazardous substances. Because lendersacquire such properties in foreclosure, they're increasinglynamed as defendants in environmental damage suits filed byadjoining landowners and others who contend their propertyvalues have been hurt by the pollution.   The Colorado law exempts lenders from these so-calledthird-party claims if the contamination occurred before thelender acquired the property. Even if it occurred afterwards,a lender may be exempt if it had the property properlyinspected before foreclosing and didn't &quot;knowingly andrecklessly&quot; cause the pollution.   Colorado is the first state to impose such limits onlender liability, but the law is attracting considerableattention from other states, says John Byrne, senior counselat the American Bankers Association in Washington, D.C. &quot;It'sa positive change,&quot; says Mr. Byrne.   Some environmentalists had contended that the law unfairlylimits a plaintiff's right to sue. But Colorado bankerscountered that it will help small businesses that handlehazardous materials. They said banks were refusing to makeloans to such companies because of the prospect of litigationif the lender had to foreclose. &quot;This law eliminates some ofthe uncertainty,&quot; says Jac K. Sperling, an attorney withDenver-based Fairfield andamp; Woods, counsel for the ColoradoBankers Association.   However, Mr. Byrne notes that the law doesn't restrict alender's liability for cleanup costs (as distinct fromproperty-damage costs) at a site owned by a company to whichit lent money.   Last May a decision by the federal appeals court inAtlanta apparently expanded the potential cleanup liabilityof financial institutions.   ---   FREE-SPEECH PROTECTION for fund-raisers eroded in New Yorkruling.   Philanthropists who feel deceived by fund-raisingcampaigns may sue charities in New York for fraud andmisrepresentation without having to prove the charitiesintended to deceive givers. The decision was part of a stateappeals court ruling in a case brought by several AmericanJewish donors against the Jewish National Fund.   The donors filed the suit in September 1988, claiming thatthe fund had violated New York consumer protection laws byleading them to believe that donations aided tree planting inall of Israel, including the territories occupied after the1967 war with Arab countries. The fund, however, only plantstrees in land held before the war.   The charity challenged one part of a lower court ruling,which ordered it to state in its literature that it does notplant trees in occupied territories. The plaintiffschallenged another part of the lower court ruling thatdismissed the claim that the fund had violated New Yorkconsumer protection laws.   In a 4-1 decision, the Appellate Division of the stateSupreme Court reinstated the plaintiffs' consumer law claimand upheld the injunction (requiring explanation of where thetrees will be planted) imposed by the lower court. &quot;While thesolicitation of charitable donations is a form of protectedspeech, it is subject to narrowly drawn government regulationdesigned to protect the public from fraud or other deceptivepractices,&quot; the court ruled.   The dissenting judge wrote that &quot;the leading case oncharitable solicitation . . . makes it clear that suchsolicitations involve speech protected by the FirstAmendment.&quot;   The plaintiffs' lawyer, Howard Rubin of Goldman, Drazen,Rick, Steiner andamp; Rubin, says the ruling means that anyone whogives money based on statements calculated to persuade nowhas the right to sue for fraud.   The fund's lawyer, Stephen Wagner of Anderson Kill Olick andamp;Oshinsky, says he will probably appeal. If upheld by theCourt of Appeals, the highest court in the state, the rulingwill force all advertisers -- not just charities -- to screenall advertising and campaign copy closely to weed outstatements that might be construed as deceptive, regardlessof the intent, Mr. Wagner said. Such a decision mightpersuade courts in other states to construe their consumerlaws in the same broad manner, he said.   &quot;It will be a very grave restriction of the FirstAmendment rights&quot; of anyone who advertises, Mr. Wagner warns.   ---   JUDGE DENIES UNUSUAL REQUEST in libel suit.   Federal Judge Edward S. Northrop of Baltimore ruled lastweek that National Life Insurance Co., a Montpelier,Vt.-based insurance company, isn't entitled to receive thenames and addresses of people who received copies ofallegedly defamatory materials.   National Life had sought the information in connectionwith a suit it filed in May seeking $13 million in damagesagainst Phillips Publishing Inc., a Potomac, Md.-basedpublisher of consumer and trade newsletters and magazines,and Richard E. Band, a financial analyst who edits a Phillipspublication called Richard E. Band's Profitable Investing.   The suit alleges that in a series of special reports,articles and promotional materials, Mr. Band made false anddefamatory statements about the company's financial stabilitythat damaged its reputation and business. The Wall StreetDigest Inc., a Sarasota, Fla.-based financial newsletterpublisher that reprinted one of Mr. Band's articles, is alsoa defendant in the suit.   The defendants deny the allegations.   National Life sought the names of subscribers and theapproximately one million people who recieved promotionalmaterial containing Mr. Band's findings. Profitable Investinghas 2,400 subscribers; the Wall Street Digest has 25,000.   Theodore Sherbow, a lawyer with the Baltimore firm ofWeinberg andamp; Green who is representing National Life, said therequest was an attempt by the company to engage in&quot;self-help&quot; to correct the false information, as urged byformer U.S. Supreme Court Justice Lewis Powell in anotherlibel case.   But Bruce W. Sanford, in the Washington, D.C., office ofCleveland-based Baker andamp; Hostetler, attorneys for Phillips andMr. Band, said National Life's request would have resulted in&quot;the court helping them engage in a war of public opinionrather than a war of litigation.&quot;   In his ruling, Judge Northrop wrote that the informationdidn't seem relevant to National Life's case at the presenttime, but said the company could resubmit its request at alater date.   ---   FORMER CONGRESSMAN'S extortion conviction in Wedtechscandal is overturned.   A federal appeals court reversed the convictions of formerU.S. Rep. Robert Garcia, of New York, and his wife, Jane LeeGarcia, who were convicted in October. Mr. Garcia, a Democratwho had represented the Bronx for six terms, resignedearlier.   The court ruled that insufficient evidence may have beenpresented to prove that the Garcias committed extortion. Thecase stemmed from payments and loans that Wedtech Corp., adefunct defense contractor in the Bronx, made to the Garciasin return for favors by the congressman.   The appeals-court panel said prosecutors failed to provethat Wedtech made the payments out of fear of economic loss,one of the legal definitions of extortion. Instead, theappeals court said, &quot;By paying the Garcias, Wedtech waspurchasing an advocate, not buying off a thug.&quot;   A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office said nodecision has been made on whether to appeal the decision.   ---   THE SENATE CONFIRMED three new members for the U.S.Sentencing Commission, giving the panel a full complement ofseven. The new members are Julie Carnes, a former assistantU.S. attorney in Atlanta, David Mazzone, a federal judge inBoston, and Michael Gelacak, a Washington lawyer and formerSenate aide. The commission establishes guidelines forcriminal sentences in the federal courts.   ---   Arthur S. Hayes and Amy Dockser Marcus contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>