<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910416-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>910416-0012.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>04/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   TURKEY BEGAN to move thousands of Kurdish refugees closerto relief supplies.   The order to transport the Kurds from mountain camps onthe Iraqi border to new bases inside Turkey represented amajor policy shift for the Ozal government, which previouslyhad tried to prevent an influx of Iraqi Kurds. A Turkishofficial said the number of Kurds from Iraq could soon reach700,000. Despite increased aid, the State Department citedreports estimating that 400 to 1,000 refugees are dying fromdisease each day along the Turkish border. Meanwhile, Tehranaccused Iraq of sending a brigade nearly two miles intoIranian territory.</LP><TEXT>   The EC called for Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein to be triedin an international court for war crimes and genocide againstthe Kurdish population.   ---   THE EC AGREED to lift its remaining trade sanctionsagainst South Africa.   Foreign ministers of the 12 Western European nationsannounced they would end their sanctions on imports of iron,steel and gold coins as a reward for the Pretoriagovernment's efforts to abolish the apartheid system ofracial segregation. The EC, however, will continue to observeU.N. bans on sports events with South Africa and U.N.embargoes on arms and crude oil. In Cape Town, President deKlerk called the EC decision &quot;positive and most encouraging.&quot;   The African National Congress, the main South Africanopposition group, appealed to the EC to keep the sanctions,saying the action was too hasty.   ---   Striking Soviet miners demonstrated in the Ukraine, urgingGorbachev to quit, while workers in the industrial city ofMinsk said they were ready to &quot;strike to the bitter end&quot; overpay and political demands. More miners walked out at thelargest Soviet coal field, the Siberian Kuzbass, where 51 ofthe 76 mines were idle.   ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide what state systems ofhigher education must do to satisfy their 37-year-oldobligation to end racial segregation. The justices will hearan appeal involving the Mississippi system, but their rulingis expected to affect a number of other state educationsystems.   ---   Winds and currents kept oil from the sunken tanker Havenfrom washing up on the Italian Riviera, but officials voicedconcern about France's coast. Meanwhile, the ship's age andrecord prompted fears about the vessel's ability to remainwatertight. The ship sank Sunday with 41 million gallons ofcrude aboard.   ---   The White House said the U.S. and Soviet Union mustresolve differences on a conventional arms treaty awaitingratification before Bush and Gorbachev hold their nextsummit. But a Bush spokesman said Washington no longerinsists that a nuclear arms treaty still under negotiationmust be ready to sign before a summit can take place.   ---   Albania's new Parliament adjourned its first session aftera half hour when the anticommunist opposition boycotted themeeting. The opposition Democratic Party said its delegateswouldn't attend the assembly until the government fixesresponsibility for the April 2 killing of fouranti-government protesters in Shkodra.   ---   A scientist told Congress he transplanted tissue from anaborted fetus to a living one last May in an attempt tocorrect a life-threatening disorder. Dr. Robert N. Slotnickof the University of California at Davis, said it won't beknown for weeks whether the surgery, the nation's firstfetus-to-fetus transplant, was a success.   ---   Cheney rejected congressional charges that politics playeda role in his proposal to close 43 U.S. military bases andscale back 28 other installations. The defense secretarydescribed the Pentagon's plan as &quot;a good-faith effort to savemoney.&quot;   ---   NATO announced that it would cut 10% of its military andcivilian staff at European command centers within the nexttwo years because of the easing of Cold War tensions. A NATOspokesman in Brussels said more than 500 jobs would beeliminated.   ---   Moscow warned Pyongyang to open its nuclear reactors tointernational inspection or lose the Soviet Union's supportin building them, according to a Soviet official. OnSaturday, South Korea's defense minister suggested Seoulmight launch a commando raid on North Korea's nuclearfacilities if they weren't opened to internationalinspection.   ---   Vietnam advised the U.S. that it shouldn't make peace inCambodia a precondition for normalizing relations with Hanoi.The Vietnamese foreign ministry criticized a recent U.S.proposal that urged Vietnam to support a U.N. peace plan inCambodia in exchange for normalization of U.S.-Vietnameseties within a year or two.   ---   Battles raged near two Sierra Leone towns as local andGuinean soldiers tried to repel Liberian insurgents, a policespokesman said. The Sierra Leone official said the troopswere meeting stiff resistance from Charles Taylor's NationalPatriotic Front of Liberia, the main rebel group in the15-month-old Liberian civil war.   ---   Ibrahim Hussein of Kenya won his second Boston Marathon infour years, completing the 26-mile, 385-yard race in 2:11:06.Wanda Panfil of Poland was the female victor with a time of2:24:18.</TEXT></DOC>