<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910911-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>910911-0107.</DOCID><HL>   Fannie Mae Says Salomon, Others Filed False Reports   ----   This article was prepared by   Michael Siconolfi, Laurie P. Cohen   And Paulette Thomas</HL><DATE>09/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1</SO><CO>   FNM MS SB</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE BANKERS, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)PETROLEUM (PET)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><NS>BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE RATES (MOR)SECURITIES REGULATION (RGU)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)EUROPE (EU)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)SWITZERLAND (SZ)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The Federal National Mortgage Association said severalWall Street firms that sell its debt, including SalomonBrothers Inc., inflated customer orders and filed falsereports with Fannie Mae.   The government-backed mortgage agency said it is revisingits procedures for the sale of debt offerings.</LP><TEXT>   The disclosure came as the Securities and ExchangeCommission and Fannie Mae are investigating possiblesecurities law violations by Salomon and other firms in theirefforts to gain an edge in the markets for the securities offederal agencies.   This investigation goes beyond the current governmentprobe of manipulation of the Treasury securities market bySalomon and possibly other firms. And Fannie Mae's action isthe first by any agency to revise sales procedures in thewake of the Salomon investigation.   Fannie Mae declined to identify the other Wall Streetfirms, or to say how many of them filed false reports. Thecompany is continuing to review its relationship withSalomon, a spokesman said yesterday. Salomon is one of FannieMae's 56-member selling group that sells long-term Fannie Maedebt to finance its mortgage portfolio.   Meanwhile, Salomon plans to revamp the way it pays topemployees to reduce the number of individuals who receiveenormous bonuses, people familiar with Salomon said.   The Salomon Inc. unit still will pay traders andinvestment bankers bonuses based on a formula tied to theirindividual performance and that of their department. ButSalomon executives say they plan to scrap the special payarrangements that had been negotiated between former ChairmanJohn Gutfreund and important Salomon departments.   Those pay pacts, launched last year, triggered hugebonuses for some top Salomon traders. One such special paydeal led Salomon to pay Lawrence Hilibrand, a bond-arbitragetrader, $23 million in salary and bonus last year, the peoplesaid.   Fannie Mae buys mortgages and repackages them intosecurities for sales to investors. Last week, Salomonadmitted that it inflated the size of customer orders itreported to Fannie Mae at the agency's debt sales, and keptrecords reflecting the exaggerated estimates. Salomon said itdid this to ensure that the firm received all the Fannie Maesecurities it needed. Salomon said its practice of inflatingcustomer orders has been discontinued.   Fannie Mae regularly markets its bonds to the 56-memberselling group in negotiated sales. As of June 30, Fannie Maeissued $12.64 billion in long-term debt, and $91.29 billionin debt overall.   But according to individuals familiar with thegovernment's investigation, the SEC has learned that manyfirms routinely inflated customer orders. The SEC asked aboutthis practice in a questionnaire sent to dozens of firms lastmonth.   And yesterday, Fannie Mae sent out its own questionnaireasking all selling group members to provide additionalinformation on the practice. The agency asked for writtenexplanations of all inaccuracies in reports it has receivedin recent years and has also asked selling group members forcopies of current and proposed procedures on their sales ofagency securities.   Meanwhile, the SEC also has sent additional subpoenas to anumber of individuals at major securities firms in recentdays seeking testimony and additional information aboutTreasury market practices. The new subpoenas appear to bebased on the SEC's desire for more information to supplementwhat the SEC already has learned from its first round ofsubpoenas to more than 130 firms.   Yesterday, Fannie Mae notified its debt-selling group thatmaterial breaches of agreements will prompt their explusionfrom the selling group. Fannie Mae also requested that allmembers of the group confirm the accuracy of prior reportssubmitted to Fannie Mae. It has also initiated a program toaudit compliance with the rules.   &quot;This behavior is totally unacceptable,&quot; James Johnson,Fannie Mae's chairman and chief executive officer, said in astatement about the inflating of customer orders. &quot;Becausethe process must have integrity, participants must beaccountable for upholding the highest standards of behaviorrequired by law and contractual obligations.&quot;   Based on its trading records, Fannie Mae believes thatneither it nor buyers of its securities incurred losses as aresult of the misleading reports, but the corporation willcontinue to evaluate its sales data.   Fannie Mae will also review whether its distributionsystem for its debt securities should be revised or replaced.   Salomon's system of compensating its top traders has beenunder scrutiny in the wake of the Treasury bidding scandal.Some Salomon executives believe the firm's specialarrangements may have helped fuel the scandal. Some Salomonofficials believe the arbitrage group's special payarrangement frustrated Paul Mozer, Salomon's former headgovernment-bond trader. Mr. Mozer, who Salomon executives saywas paid $4.8 million last year, was fired last month afterthe firm said he submitted unauthorized bids at severalTreasury-note auctions.   Mr. Mozer -- who before heading Salomon's government-bonddesk had worked for the bond-arbitrage group -- was angeredby the special pay deal negotiated with his formercolleagues, according to Salomon executives.   Most Salomon employees are paid based on a subjectiveevaluation of how they, their department and the entire firmperformed. But Mr. Gutfreund and Thomas Strauss, Salomon'sformer president, quietly agreed to pay members of thebond-arbitrage group based on a fixed formula tied to thegroup's profit, Salomon executives say. The arbitrage group'sarrangement -- which entitled its members to 15% of thegroup's profit -- wasn't disclosed to other departments, andthere were protests from other Salomon traders when news ofthe arrangement later leaked out.   No final decision has been made on how Salomon will payits employees for the firm's 1991 compensation year, whichends Sept. 30. But a senior Salomon executive: &quot;I would likeit where all departments know the philosophy for which allother departments are getting paid.&quot;   How Salomon compensates its key personnel is one of themost nettlesome decisions facing the firm in the wake of itsbidding scandal. The firm's 1991 bonuses will help dictatehow many employees will stay with the firm after Sept. 30.Compensation, said another senior Salomon official, &quot;is themost significant decision facing the firm.&quot; He added: &quot;It's agreat chance to institute more changes than would be possibleunder most circumstances.&quot;   The bond-arbitrage desk, which has about a dozenprofessionals, was headed by John Meriwether, a formerSalomon vice chairman who resigned with Messrs. Gutfreund andStrauss after the firm said the three knew of an unauthorizedbid at a Treasury-note auction but didn't report thatinformation to the government for months.   Shelving the pay arrangement for the bond-arbitrage groupraises fresh questions about the ability of Salomon to keepthe highly profitable group intact. Already, Salomonexecutives are worried about defections stemming from theresignation of the 44-year-old Mr. Meriwether as head of thedepartment.   The special pay arrangements were the latest in theevolution of compensation at the 81-year-old investment bank.Before 1981, when Salomon was a private partnership, partnerswere paid a percentage of the firm's total profits in whatsome Salomon executives call &quot;millionaire socialism.&quot; Thefirm shifted to paying most employees based on individualperformance after the firm went public.   Both Deryck C. Maughan, chief operating officer, andWarren Buffett, Salomon's interim chairman, are said to favorpaying employees based on their performance, as opposed tothat of the entire firm, according to people familiar withtheir views. But Mr. Maughan is believed to favor somewhatmore modest bonus levels, people familiar with the firm say.   Separately, Mr. Buffett ordered Salomon's Phibro EnergyInc. unit not to trade with Marc Rich andamp; Co., a Swissoil-trading firm. The decision apparently stemmed from Mr.Rich's fugitive status in the U.S., people familiar with thefirm said. Mr. Rich, who heads the firm, fled the U.S. afterhis indictment in 1983 on tax evasion and racketeeringcharges. Neither Phibro nor Salomon commented on thedecision.   As the Salomon scandal unfolds, rumors that other WallStreet firms are in trouble are rife. Yesterday, MorganStanley Group Inc.'s stock tumbled $3.375 to $41.50 a share,down 7.5%, on more than four times its average trading volumeon the New York Stock Exchange. The decline was linked torumors that Morgan Stanley was under investigation forimproper activities in the Treasury securities market. MorganStanley said its own internal review turned up no evidence ofattempts to manipulate that market, adding that it has noreason to believe it is the target of any governmentinvestigation.   In Washington, two senior Senate Banking Committee membersintroduced a bill that would make it a violation of federalsecurities laws to falsely bid at Treasury auctions. Thelegislation, unveiled by Committee Chairman Donald Riegle(D., Mich.) and Securities Subcommittee Chairman ChristopherDodd (D., Conn.), responds to a request last week for such ameasure by Securities and Exchange Commission ChairmanRichard Breeden.   In the wake of the Salomon scandal, the bill is expectedto face little opposition from a Congress that wants to beseen as moving to protect taxpayers, though worried aboutdamaging the crucial process of funding governmentoperations.   This bill, the Goverment Securities Auction EnforcementAct of 1991, fits that goal because it covers much of theground that is already covered by federal securities laws.But the new legislation would explicitly put management atbidding firms on notice that they need to carefully supervisethe bids or else be held to a tough &quot;failure to supervise&quot;standard.</TEXT></DOC>