<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900921-0011</DOCNO><DOCID>900921-0011.</DOCID><HL>   World Business (A Special Report): Eastern Europe   ---   The Idea Man:   France's Jacques Attali Is the Driving Force Behind   A New Bank Aimed at Aiding East Bloc Redevelopment   ----   By Philip Revzin and Peter Truell</HL><DATE>09/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R17</SO><CO>   EUROP FREST JAPAN</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)BANKS (BNK)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><LP>   PARIS -- Jacques Attali is an idea man.   For the past decade he has been Francois Mitterrand'spersonal idea man, showering the French president with ideas,on international debt, nuclear arms and the global balance ofpower. Overflow ideas went into 15 books, including twonovels, labored over between 4 a.m. and 7 a.m. each morning,about money, power, love, life and death.</LP><TEXT>   But Mr. Mitterrand's former special counselor, throughwhose office all visitors to the president had to pass,recently had an idea that is taking him in a new direction.Western Europe, Mr. Attali thought, urgently needed to helpEastern Europe and the Soviet Union rebuild their industrialbase. Existing institutions such as the World Bank and theInternational Monetary Fund could help, but were either toobig or too bureaucratic to solve the problem.   So Mr. Attali (pronounced with the accent on the lastsyllable) thought up the European Bank for Reconstruction andDevelopment. He calls the bank the first independent majornew international financial institution since the 1944Bretton Woods conference set up the World Bank and theInternational Monetary Fund. (Later institutions, such asdevelopment banks for Asia and Africa, are arms of the WorldBank or the IMF, he reasons.)   The new institution, with an initial capital of 10 billionEuropean Currency Units ($13 billion), will channel money toboth private and public projects in the East. With the firmbacking of Mr. Mitterrand, Mr. Attali sold the idea to theEuropean Community, which will hold a majority stake in thebank, and to other governments, including the U.S. and Japan.He wrote the business plan and articles of incorporation forthe bank. And he got himself named its president-designate.All in less than a year.   The problem is certainly urgent. With risky free-marketreforms already under way in Poland and Hungary, beingreadied in the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, and a moredistant dream in Bulgaria and Romania, Eastern Europe needslots of financial help. Fast. The enormous costs of the WestGerman bailout of East Germany seem to rise every day, andestimates of basic infrastructure needs in East Germany aloneare dozens of times what the EBRD will be able to provide forall of Eastern Europe.   &quot;Financing the cleanup after communism threatens to besurprisingly disruptive in the short run,&quot; according to areport by Credit Suisse First Boston Ltd. of London. CreditSuisse estimates that a Marshall Plan for Eastern Europe andthe Soviet Union on the same relative scale as the postwarrebuilding of Western Europe would cost $85 billion -- nearlyseven times what Mr. Attali has -- and that money wouldn't benearly enough to erase the legacy of 45 years of failedeconomic policies.   Mr. Attali didn't respond to a request for an interviewfor this article; aides said he wasn't giving any pressinterviews before officially being named president of theEBRD. But in past interviews, in speeches and in hiswritings, he has outlined his basic vision of the EBRD.Essentially, he views it as a sort of international merchantbank trying to make a profit for its 42 shareholding nationsby investing in new Eastern European companies in the fieldsof telecommunications, railroads, airlines, television,newspapers and other basic industries that would in turn spurmanufacturing activity.   An international financial official who recently met Mr.Attali says the new bank will be &quot;two-thirds Lazard Freres,one-third World Bank.&quot;   Its charter requires that at least 60% of its loans go toprivate-sector projects, a stipulation won by the U.S. duringthe bank's formation process. &quot;The bank won't be financinghumanitarian projects,&quot; Mr. Attali told the FrenchParliament's foreign-affairs committee in June. &quot;As thebiggest merchant bank in the world, it will serve as acatalyst for an entire development process.&quot;   Mr. Attali's strategy -- and a lot of the controversy hehas generated since being nominated to head the EBRD -- isbased on his firm belief that global power in the future willdepend on a nation's or a region's ability to support strongmanufacturing industries. In a recent book, he sees theemergence of two major couples in the world: Japan and theUnited States, and Europe and the Soviet Union. In bothcases, he argues, it is the first member of the couple, Japanand Europe, that will be the dynamic manufacturing forcesupporting the militarily strong but economically burdenedsuperpower.   His main argument is that the U.S. manufacturing industryhas declined perilously in the face of Japanese competition.&quot;The United States will find itself in a situation of beingsymbolically secondary,&quot; he writes. &quot;Already it can't sellanything to Japan but agricultural products. It will becomeJapan's granary, like Poland was for 17th-century Flanders.&quot;He adds: &quot;The U.S. will have to get used to the idea of beingno longer master of the world, at the very moment capitalismis winning everywhere in Eastern Europe.&quot;   To capitalize on the triumph of capitalism in the East, anincreasingly united Western Europe has to provide seed moneyand know-how. Hence the EBRD. &quot;It will be the training groundfor the transition from a centralized to a market economy,&quot;he writes, playing the same role that the European Coal andSteel Community did as the precursor of the Common Market andeventually turning the European continent into an industrialpowerhouse.   He firmly believes that both governments and the privatesector have a role to play: He has enthusiasticallychampioned such subsidized projects as the European Airbusand the promotion of high-definition television, as means ofensuring Europe's manufacturing future. He was the architectof Mr. Mitterrand's ill-fated nationalization programstarting in 1981, which was later partly reversed and whichnow has been frozen.   Mr. Attali is a man around whom controversy occasionallyswirls. He was born 46 years ago in French Algeria to a poorbut eventually successful family of merchants. The familymoved to Paris when Jacques and his twin brother, Bernard,now chairman of Air France, were 12. The boys quickly rose onacademic merit through the most elite of France's eliteschools. Jacques went to four of the best schools, includingthe &quot;Ecole Nationale d'Administration,&quot; the breeding groundfor France's top officials. He became an economics professor,a member of the Socialist Party, and economic adviser to Mr.Mitterrand in the years before the Socialists won power in1981.   Since then, from his key seat at the Elysee Palace, Mr.Attali has served as France's sherpa, or advance man, for thelast 10 economic summits, as well as playing a key role instrategic affairs. During the debate over the stationing andremoval of American medium-range missiles in Europe, Mr.Attali met frequently with Charles Powell, MargaretThatcher's security adviser, and Horst Teltschik, adviser toHelmut Kohl, trying to work out a common European defensestrategy.   Mr. Attali also forged a close alliance with the U.S.Treasury in the first 18 months of the Bush administration,exerting considerable influence on U.S. internationaleconomic policy, according to senior U.S. officials. Mr.Attali's closest ally in the Treasury, Undersecretary forInternational Affairs David Mulford, was pushing the U.S.administration to write off more Third World debt, a strategyfavored by Mr. Attali and Mr. Mitterrand.   When Mr. Attali was vigorously lobbying to set up theEBRD, the Treasury initially allowed the French a free handand agreed that the U.S. would have the same 8.5%shareholding as France, Italy, West Germany, Britain andJapan. Under pressure from the National Security Council andthe State Department -- and after an internal wrangle -- theTreasury became more engaged in the negotiations regardingthe new bank. It pressed for -- and got -- a 10% share in thenew institution, forced through regulations limiting Sovietborrowing from the bank, and insisted on a private-sectoremphasis in the new institution's lending policies.   Mr. Attali's appointment to head the new bank createdconsiderable ill will. The Dutch in particular, who had hopedto snare the top job at the new institution for their ownformer finance minister, H. Onno Ruding, were dismayed at thesecretive negotiations between Britain and France that led toa London location for the EBRD and to Mr. Attali'sappointment as its head. They are still fuming. &quot;I don't seehow anybody can believe that the man {Mr. Attali} whomasterminded the most sweeping program of nationalizations inFrench history is the right man to privatize Eastern Europe,&quot;says a Dutchman.   Mr. Attali will have to be more diplomatic if he is tomake a success of his new task. The bank has -- for the timebeing -- a relatively limited mandate, with Poland,Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria asits main customers. But it has 42 shareholders, including allthe major Western nations, the East Bloc countries and evenMexico.   The U.S. administration already is upset by Mr. Attali'srecent attempts to concentrate management power in his ownoffice at the EBRD. Mr. Attali has tried to cut back thepowers of the planned bank's board of directors, U.S.officials say, and has tried to ensure that he has nopowerful deputy but instead a group of four equalsubordinates.   The U.S. and some other bank shareholders are insisting ona powerful deputy to Mr. Attali and a board of directors withreal clout. These issues won't be settled until next monthwhen more meetings on the bank's management structure arescheduled to be held in Europe. The U.S. is even threateningto pull out of the EBRD if Mr. Attali's proposed managementstructure is implemented.   U.S. and European government officials generally commendMr. Attali for his charm and genius, but caution that hisideas and obsessions can sometimes seem harebrained. Lastyear Mr. Attali was sent by Mr. Mitterrand on a specialmission to Bangladesh, which had been recently devastated bya flood. During preparations for the economic summit inParis, Mr. Attali spent months trying to convince otherindustrial countries' leaders that it was necessary to spendbillions of dollars to build dams and dikes in Bangladesh toprevent cataclysmic floods that occur only once in ageneration.   To counterbalance Mr. Attali, the Bush administration issaid to favor World Bank senior vice president Ernest Sternas Mr. Attali's deputy. Mr. Stern, an American who hasdevoted most of his career to economic development and theWorld Bank, is highly respected in international financialcircles and has a formidable reputation for his managementand financial skills. He has headed both the World Bank'soperations and its financial departments.   Apart from these squabbles, the U.S. seems to have noproblem with Mr. Attali's general approach. &quot;Jacques wants tohave a flexible organization, pay high salaries, and run {theEBRD} like a merchant bank,&quot; says a senior Treasury official.&quot;To really get at the private-sector business, he's going tohave to have good private-sector people.&quot;   Bush administration officials say that a strong U.S. sharein the EBRD is important because it reinforces Americanpartnership with Europe at a time when the countries in theEast Bloc are turning toward democratic market-orientedsystems. It also reflects the U.S.'s continuing commitment toa strong, reunited, free and economically healthy Europe,they say.   But some in Washington aren't nearly so enamored of theEBRD. William Niskanen, chairman of the Cato Institute and aformer member of the president's Council of EconomicAdvisers, says: &quot;I think the last thing these EasternEuropean countries need is money that will be used to deferthe most important decisions.&quot; He says both the U.S. andEastern Europe would be better off without the newinstitution.   &quot;There may be foreign-policy reasons for the U.S. joiningthe EBRD, but those I think are better served by bilateralaid,&quot; he adds.   ---   Mr. Revzin is chief of The Wall Street Journal's ParisBureau. Mr. Truell is a staff reporter in the Washingtonbureau.</TEXT></DOC>