<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900612-0117</DOCNO><DOCID>900612-0117.</DOCID><HL>   Germany's Job Straitjacket   ----   By Marie-Josee Drouin</HL><DATE>06/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><CO>   EUROP LABOR</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   While attention has focused on the potentiallyinflationary effects of currency conversion between East andWest Germany, the greatest challenge will be the creation ofjobs to assuage the large-scale dislocation and unemploymenta united Germany will face.   Forecasts of unemployment triggered by Germanreunification, plant modernizations and the abandonment ofnonproductive, noncompetitive activities, irrespective ofcyclical conditions, range from 500,000 to two millionworkers. Yet West Germany's dismal job-creation record duringthe past two decades has been generally overlooked.</LP><TEXT>   Blinded by West Germany's export performance, inflationcontrol and overall growth, observers seem impervious to thefact that during the 1970s, overall employment grew a paltry1.6%. Over the 1980-88 period, overall employment rose a mere1.8%. During this time the annual rate of employment growthin the U.S. exceeded West Germany's 10-year growth rate, withthe U.S. creating, on average, more than two million net jobsper year.   During the past few years, it has become widely recognizedthat West Germany's inability to create jobs was attributableto the numerous legislative and regulatory constraints thatlimit hiring and firing flexibility and sharply increase thecost of labor relative to other factors. High levels of jobprotection and benefits favor those who are already employedand restrict dismissals. As labor has come to be seen more asa fixed cost than a variable cost, employers tend tosubstitute capital for labor.   Clearly, if you can't fire, you hire more cautiously. Ifyou can't shift workers around relatively freely, you do nottake the risk of increasing employment. In a similar vein,workers who are confident of not losing their jobs have noincentive to adjust their wage demands.   There have been recent attempts to make West German labormarkets more flexible. Employers now have more latitude ondismissals and can also make increased use of fixed-termcontracts. Despite these ameliorations, the question remainsas to how such a rigid apparatus of labor and sociallegislation and regulation is likely to affect job creationin East Germany.   Unification will vastly expand the supply of labor and ofthe unemployed. Whether the demand for labor will be vigorousenough to mitigate the immense absorption problem thissuggests is another matter. Unlike the Turkish guest workers,these unemployed cannot be sent home.   Much rests on Germany's ability to introduce flexibilityin work rules, dismissals and wages. One would expectunification to cause West German wages to ratchet downward,but why should that be when workers enjoy full job protectionand security?   Likewise, West German union pressures as well as job andsocial benefits will put a floor on East German wages, which,in any event, will ratchet upward. Imposing on an economy insuch dire need of adjustment as East Germany's a labor-marketstructure that has even discouraged job creation in a countryas dynamic as West Germany is indeed a very hazardousproposition.   The problem is all the more compelling given that recenttrends suggest that those West German firms that are mosteager to expand into the East German market are small andmedium-sized firms. Many such firms had found access to WestGerman capital markets difficult and international expansiontoo daunting. East Germany, however, is an appealing marketfor them. But without flexible rules, their expansion planscould be in serious jeopardy.   In the U.S. it was small and medium-sized enterprises thataccounted for more than 75% of the jobs created during thepast two decades. Such firms provide another crucialcontribution to an economy such as East Germany's. There isno better model for emulation and stimulation ofentrepreneurial initiative than successful small andmedium-sized concerns. While attention is turned to theprivatization of large-scale enterprise, the contribution ofsmall and medium-sized firms to competition and economicdynamism tends to be overlooked.   It is often argued that co-determination and pensionbenefits were essential in shaping the social contract thatwas a basis of West Germany's success after World War II. Butit is also widely acknowledged that the legislation andregulations gradually grafted on the West German economy asthe country became more prosperous would have beenstultifying had they been imposed lock, stock and barrel fourdecades ago. And even in a country as rich as West Germany,they became excessively constraining, at least as far as jobcreation is concerned.   To now strap an economy in need of tremendous structuraladjustment and employment growth in such a straitjacket ofregulation would be a disastrous mistake. Some mechanism mustbe found to ease the rules and regulations governing theGerman labor market at least for a fairly lengthy transitionperiod.   There have been signs that the availability of low-paidEast German workers already may have damped some of thedemands of West German unions. Last month, for example, WestGermany's most powerful union, I.G. Metall, backed down fromdemands for an 8.5% wage increase and a 35-hour week, settledfor a 6% wage hike and stuck with the 38 1/2-hour week.   This seemingly more conciliatory attitude is not solely aby-product of unification. For the past few years, as in mostindustrialized countries, membership as well as politicalsupport for unions in West Germany has been waning. Moreover,the combination of German unification and the movement towarda more unified European market in 1992 have raised the issueof German international competitiveness and adaptability.   In searching for ways to ease the transition for EastGermany, Germany as a whole might seize the opportunity topush for more flexible and less costly work rules. The timingand mood couldn't be better, as cracks are beginning toappear in the once comfy relationship among West Germangovernment, industry and labor.   ---   Ms. Drouin is executive director of the Hudson Instituteof Canada, in Montreal.</TEXT></DOC>