<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910108-0074</DOCNO><DOCID>910108-0074.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Top Court Asked to Review Tobacco Case   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Amy Stevens   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   LTR MO PCC WNEWS BGL</CO><IN>TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)ADVERTISING, MARKETING, PUBLIC RELATIONS (ADV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Lawyers in a landmark tobacco liability case have askedthe U.S. Supreme Court to settle the critical question ofwhether warnings on cigarette packages shield tobacco makersfrom lawsuits.   The petition seeking review by the high court comesshortly before the scheduled start of a second trial in thecase filed by Antonio Cipollone against Liggett Group Inc.,Philip Morris Cos.' Philip Morris Inc. unit and Lorillard, aLoews Corp. subsidiary. The trial has been postponed as aresult of the review petition.</LP><TEXT>   The case of Mr. Cipollone -- whose wife, Rose, died oflung cancer in 1984 -- has attracted widespread attentionbecause the first trial resulted in the only jury verdictrequiring a cigarette manufacturer to pay damages torelatives of a smoker who died of cancer.   A federal appeals court in Philadelphia later overturnedthe $400,000 verdict and ordered a new trial. But the appealscourt barred Mr. Cipollone from pursuing any claims againstthe tobacco companies that occurred after 1966, the year thatCongress required warning labels on cigarette packs and incigarette advertisements. The U.S. Supreme Court refused toreview the case at that time.   However, in new papers filed with the Supreme Court, Mr.Cipollone's attorney, Marc Z. Edell, argues that a recentruling by the New Jersey Supreme Court on the same issuecreates a conflict with the appeals court decision. In July,the New Jersey court ruled that warnings on cigarettepackages don't protect tobacco makers from product liabilitysuits.   Plaintiffs' lawyers said the appeals court ruling in theCipollone case has dominated the debate over whether thewarning labels immunize cigarette makers against claimsdating since 1966. The issue is crucial to tobacco liabilitysuits because the number of possible pre-1966 claims isdiminishing as the population ages.   &quot;After that {Cipollone} decision, people stopped filinglawsuits. If the Supreme Court accepts this petition, it willput tobacco litigation back on track,&quot; said Richard Daynard,chairman of the tobacco products liability project atNortheastern University, an anti-smoking group.   But defense lawyers for all three companies said theydoubt whether the Supreme Court will agree to hear the case.   Allen Purvis, a Kansas City, Mo., attorney for Loews, saidthat in recent years five federal courts and the MinnesotaSupreme Court have ruled that the warning act protects thetobacco companies from liability.   &quot;The New Jersey decision was an aberration. The conflictis not important enough for the Supreme Court to review,&quot;said Mel Spaeth, a Washington attorney for Philip Morris.   ---   WYMAN BAUTZER of Los Angeles fires 15 associates andconfirms merger talks.   The 103-lawyer firm of Wyman, Bautzer, Kuchel andamp; Silbert,whose colorful history defined the practice of &quot;L.A. Law&quot; tosome observers, dismissed the lawyers and dozens of staffmembers in response to declining profits. The firm also isnegotiating a combination with Katten, Muchin andamp; Zavis ofChicago, lawyers on both sides said.   Howard L. Weitzman, a member of Wyman Bautzer's managementcommittee, said the firm has been affected by the nationwidedownturn in the corporate transactions, which formed themainstay of much legal business in the 1980s.   &quot;The legal market has changed. Like every other business,Wyman Bautzer has to adapt to the needs of the community,&quot;said Mr. Weitzman, who successfully defended John Z. DeLorean against drug charges and represented boxer Mike Tysonin civil matters.   The firm has gradually reduced its corporate practice froma mid-1980s high of 30 lawyers to about 15, though the recentlayoffs were &quot;across the board,&quot; Mr. Weitzman said. InAugust, 11 associates were discharged for what the firmcalled &quot;nonperformance.&quot; But at least one attorney said hiswork was never criticized.   Mr. Weitzman maintains that the firm's litigation and realestate departments are strong and says the recent &quot;downsizingwas done to enhance profitability&quot; and improve the firm'sposition for a potential merger or acquisition.   In addition to the cutbacks, the firm has been wracked byinternal dissension and a lawsuit arising from the 1988departure of 14 partners, who formed a rival firm aroundTerry N. Christensen, a former Wyman Bautzer name partner andan attorney for financier Kirk Kerkorian.   In June, a judge ruled that the dissident group couldn'tdissolve Wyman Bautzer -- as it sought to do -- and insteadis liable for damages resulting from the Christensenpartners' breach of their duty to their former partners. Mr.Weitzman blamed the suit for &quot;diverting a lot of the lawyers'attention&quot; and burdening his firm with legal fees.   Wyman Bautzer was formed in 1951 by Eugene L. Wyman, whoonce served as the Democratic Party chairman for California.He worked at the firm until he died in one of its elevatorsof a heart attack at the age of 48 in 1973.   More recently, the firm underwent several changes,resulting from the 1988 death of Gregson Bautzer, a Hollywoodsocialite and entertainment lawyer, and the departure ofpartner Frank Rothman to New York-based Skadden, Arps, SlateMeagher andamp; Flom.   ---   HEADHUNTER FEE DISPUTE involves large New York law firm.   The dispute stems from the moves of criminal-defenselawyer Jed Rakoff and two other partners to Fried, Frank,Harris, Shriver andamp; Jacobson late last year. The deal wasbrokered by legal headhunter Laura Colangelo, who wasapproached by Mr. Rakoff, previously with the New York lawfirm Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander andamp; Ferdon.   But Fried Frank balked at Ms. Colangelo's fee of about$500,000. Although she has agreed to reduce her bill to below$350,000, the parties remain &quot;substantially apart,&quot; accordingto Fried Frank partner Robert E. Juceam.   Legal headhunters' fees for partner placements vary.Wendeen Eolis, another New York headhunter, said that 5% ofthe lawyers' annual billings is standard but &quot;clearly subjectto negotiation.&quot;   Both sides in the Fried Frank dispute agree that they hadno written contract. But Ms. Colangelo maintains that herprevious contracts with the law firm entitled her to 15% of alead partner's compensation, plus a sliding percentage of thegroup's business. Mr. Juceam counters that Fried Frank haspaid well below $200,000 for similar services.   Ms. Colangelo says she will sue. Mr. Juceaum says FriedFrank will &quot;vigorously&quot; defend itself.   Ms. Colangelo's lawyer, Robert D. Mercurio, says that ifthe case does go to trial, a ruling might &quot;identify anindustry standard.&quot;   ---   MGM SUES gay community-patrol group over use of PinkPanther name.   In a lawsuit filed in federal court in Manhattan,MGM-Pathe Communications Co. said the gay group's name, thePink Panther Patrol, and its paw-print insignia are trademarkinfringements. MGM owns the Pink Panther trademark, which hasbeen used in motion pictures, cartoons and various licensingefforts.   The Pink Panther Patrol was formed last summer in responseto attacks on gay men and lesbians in New York City. Membersof the group, wearing T-shirts emblazoned with the paw print,patrol parts of Manhattan and respond to calls for help.   In the lawsuit, MGM said that while it supports the rightsof all minorities, including homosexuals, it can't afford toallow any unauthorized use of the trademark. MGM asked thecourt to bar the group from using the name and paw-printinsignia. The lawsuit also seeks damages of $300,000.   The Pink Panther Patrol couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   BAN ON YARMULKES in Illinois state prison upheld.   Citing prior U.S. Supreme Court rulings, a federalappellate court in Chicago ruled that a state prison has theright to forbid Jewish inmates from wearing yarmulkes.   Reversing a lower-court ruling, the court wrote that &quot;theprison setting, like the military setting, is one in whichFirst Amendment rights may be restricted in order to achieveinstitutional goals.&quot; Dixon Correctional Center forbids thetraditional Jewish headgear for what it calls securityreasons, but the opinion noted that inmates can follow Jewishlaw by covering their heads with baseball caps, which areallowed.   The three-member panel's opinion agreed with the prison'sdefense that &quot;non-uniform headgear would limit theeffectiveness of (the prison's) attempt to limit theexistence . . . of gangs&quot; and would open the door to othertypes of religious wear.   ---   CAREER MOVES: Illinois Attorney General Neil Hartigan,whose eight-year tenure ends Jan. 14, will become a partnerthe following day at the Chicago law firm Gardner, Carton andamp;Douglas. Mr. Hartigan, who recently was defeated as theDemocratic candidate for governor, will be chairman of thefirm's newly created Public Law Department. Also joining thefirm as a partner is Deputy Attorney General Michael Hayes. .. . Meanwhile, Michelle D. Jordan, formerly chief of theenvironmental control division of the Illinois attorneygeneral's office, has joined the Chicago law firm Hopkins andamp;Sutter as a partner. Ms. Jordan will practice civil andcriminal environmental law at the firm.</TEXT></DOC>