<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900410-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>900410-0089.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Insurers Receive Setback in Asbestos Case   ----   By Wade Lambert and Ellen Joan Pollock   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   OI UICI CI CMAFC FORGN</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)INSURANCE (INS)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)ACCOUNTING (ACC)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   In a severe setback for the insurers of former asbestosmanufacturers, a New Jersey state judge ruled thatOwens-Illinois Inc.'s insurance companies will have to pay asmuch as $960 million to cover asbestos-related claims againstthe company.   Owens-Illinois sued several of its insurers in 1980 whenthey balked at paying the asbestos-related claims. JudgeErminie Conley of Superior Court in New Brunswick, N.J., onFriday rejected the insurers' arguments that Owens-Illinois'spolicies don't cover asbestos damages. The judge said thepolicies cover a combined maximum of $960 million inproperty-damage and personal-injury claims. The maximum forpersonal-injury claims, which account for most of the damagesbeing sought in suits against Owens-Illinois, is $620million.</LP><TEXT>   Gita Rothschild, an attorney for Owens-Illinois, calledthe ruling &quot;a total victory. It's a vindication of the rightsof policyholders.&quot;   David D'Aloia, an attorney for two of the insurancecompanies, United Insurance Co. and Allstate Insurance Co.,said, &quot;I was stunned by the ruling. . . . We disagree withthe judge's ruling and are evaluating it for appeal.&quot;   The other companies that were either primary or secondaryinsurers in the case are General Reinsurance Corp., CignaReinsurance Co. and Owens Insurance Ltd. Owens, which is asubsidiary of Owens-Illinois, had entirely reinsured its riskthrough the other companies, Ms. Rothschild said.   The policies would cover suits filed againstOwens-Illinois for damages that came to light after 1977,which would account for most of the tens of thousands ofasbestos-damage suits pending against the company. Claimsagainst Owens-Illinois before September 1977 are covered bythe company's previous policies. From 1948 to 1958,Owens-Illinois made pipe insulation from asbestos, whichcauses respiratory illnesses.   The insurers had claimed their policies didn't apply toany asbestos health injuries, such as lung cancer, because ofexclusions added to the policies. They also accused thecompany of fraud, alleging that Owens-Illinois didn't informthe insurers of various asbestos-related suits.   As a result of Judge Conley's ruling, Owens-Illinois wouldreceive &quot;hundreds of millions of dollars in coverage thatwasn't meant to be included and that wasn't paid for by thecompany,&quot; Mr. D'Aloia said.   The judge's decision, however, doesn't mean that any ofthe money will go directly to Owens-Illinois. Instead, ifupheld, it would guarantee that insurers will have to pay ahuge portion of settlements and damages awarded in thecompany's asbestos cases.   &quot;All of the money will go to asbestos victims,&quot; said Ms.Rothschild. &quot;The policyholder should get the coverage that itthinks it is buying. It shouldn't have to fight to get thecoverage that it thinks it has been paying for all theseyears.&quot;   ---   NEW FEDERATED STORES bankruptcy court filing is linked topossible effort to get back $500 million from banks.   With Campeau Corp.'s two U.S. retailing units alreadyunder court protection, the units' holding company, FederatedStores Inc., also filed a bankruptcy-law petition on March30. While the company presented the filing as a housekeepingmatter, it appears to be more than that.   By filing under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Codebefore April 7, the holding company gained a significantadvantage in the event it attempts to get back $500 millionpaid to the Bank of Montreal and Bank Paribas on April 7,1989.   The payment was made as part of a refinancing of AlliedStores Corp., a Campeau unit. Under bankruptcy law, aninsolvent company can sometimes get money returned that ithad paid out within a year prior to the Chapter 11 filing. IfFederated had filed for bankruptcy court protection afterApril 7, it would have forfeited this possible right.   In the weeks prior to Federated's filings, creditors ofthe two units, Allied and Federated Department Stores Inc.,had put pressure on the parent's chairman, G. William Miller,to file under Chapter 11 so that the company -- and hence itscreditors -- might get a crack at the $500 million. &quot;We weresaying that we were concerned and we didn't want to see that{April 7} date passed,&quot; said Lawrence M. Handelsman, counselto the Federated bondholders committee.   While Allied creditors are participating in the Allied andFederated Department Stores proceedings in Cincinnati, parentFederated chose to file its own Chapter 11 petition in adifferent city: San Francisco. This concerns some creditors,who may want a role in the fight for the $500 million becausethey believe that it ultimately belongs in Allied's coffers.   If the creditors ultimately decide to sue to get the moneyfor themselves, they would likely rely on the doctrine offraudulent conveyance. In such a suit, anyone damaged when aleveraged buy-out goes bad can bring suit on the grounds thatthe buy-out was designed or destined to render the resultingcompany insolvent.   Bankruptcy lawyers say that the judge in San Franciscowill have separate debtors and creditors to protect. Thus, itcould be more difficult for Allied and Federated creditors topursue actions in that court. &quot;I think it's strategy. . . .It does remove those actions from the main arena {inCincinnati},&quot; says a lawyer for Allied creditors.   Mr. Miller, Federated's chairman, points out that threeother Federated holding companies had earlier filed forbankruptcy-law protection in San Francisco and that to fileFederated's petition elsewhere would have been &quot;confusing.&quot;   He says he believes that bondholders knew that FSI wouldtry to preserve their rights and complains that &quot;lawyers liketo stir up activity.&quot;   ---   PEAT MARWICK WINS VERDICT dismissing $21 million damagesuit in Texas.   A state court jury in Houston threw out the negligencecase after nearly three weeks of trial. Most such cases don'tget so far because liability insurers often prefer to settleto avoid the possibility of a big judgment. The insurersbelieve many people see accountants as a source of &quot;deeppockets&quot; to recoup business losses.   &quot;It's difficult to run the risk, but Peat Marwick feltstrongly in this case,&quot; said Cliff Gunter, an attorney inHouston with Dallas-based Bracewell andamp; Patterson, counsel forthe accounting firm.   The case reflects a trend in which more investors aresuing accounting firms, claiming they lost money in businessdeals by relying on misleading documents prepared byaccountants. Filed in March 1987, the suit was brought by 13members of a real estate limited partnership known as 320Associates, which was established for the construction of adowntown Houston office building. Lenders foreclosed on theproject.   The plaintiffs, a group of locally prominent professionalsand business people, alleged that Peat Marwick didn'tproperly prepare partnership tax returns for 1981. Theycontended it negligently misrepresented certain partnershipagreements in the tax returns, causing them to continuefinancial commitments they otherwise would have withdrawn. Ina verdict issued last Thursday, the jury exonerated PeatMarwick.   &quot;This case was yet another example of the alarming trendin our society where one party makes a business mistake andtries to make another pay for it,&quot; said Mr. Gunter. Attorneysfor the plaintiffs couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   CHICAGO LAW FIRMS want foreign legal advisers licensed toconsult in Illinois.   The petition submitted to the Illinois Supreme Court wouldallow foreign attorneys to advise corporations based in theircountries about U.S. law. The lawyers also would be able tocounsel U.S. firms on foreign matters. They would not,however, be permitted to represent clients in domestic cases.   Nine major Chicago law firms, including Sidley andamp; Austin,Jenner andamp; Block, Kirkland andamp; Ellis and Mayer, Brown andamp; Platt,are behind the petition. But it is not an altruisticendeavor. Chicago lawyers can't practice in some foreigncountries, notably Japan, because foreign lawyers can't workin Illinois. The firms say the reciprocity problem alsohinders the growth of international business and trade inIllinois. New York, Alaska, California, Washington, D.C.,Hawaii, Michigan, New Jersey, Ohio and Texas already haverules similar to the Illinois proposal. Wisconsin also isconsidering licensing foreign lawyers as consultants. TheCook County state's attorney's office says it will not opposethe effort as it did five years ago.   At that time, the state's attorney's office feared thatunlicensed foreign attorneys would mislead and exploitimmigrants and foreign residents.   ---   A CONTEMPT RULING was upheld against an attorney whorefused to identify his client.   Chipping away further at the attorney-client privilege,the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta affirmed acontempt ruling against Jerald W. Newton, a Santa Monica,Calif., attorney. Asserting the so-called &quot;last-linkdoctrine,&quot; Mr. Newton refused to reveal the identity of aclient whose fees were paid by a third party. He was asked tomake the disclosure by a federal grand jury in South Floridainvestigating money laundering.   The last-link doctrine protects lawyers from having todisclose client information which, though not ordinarilyprivileged, becomes so because it would be the last link inproving a crime. The appeals court said that since the &quot;JohnDoe&quot; client was already under indictment, he couldn't havereasonably expected his identity to be kept confidential. Mr.Newton said he hadn't decided what to do about the ruling.   The ruling is the second in a month from the 11th circuitdealing with attorney-client privilege and the doctrine. Inanother case last month, Chief Judge Gerald B. Tjoflat saidhe would like to see the full panel review the last-linkconcept and toss it out.   The law is developing rapidly in this area. In a SeventhU.S. Circuit Court of Appeals opinion in March, the courtupheld the attorney-client privilege in a case involving aChicago lawyer, David Cherney, who refused to reveal who paidhis client's fees.   Mr. Cherney said that the third party had consulted himabout his own possible involvement in a conspiracy.</TEXT></DOC>