<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920323-0193</DOCNO><DOCID>920323-0193.</DOCID><HL>   Basically Sound:   It's Hit a Rough Patch,   But Japan's Economy   Is Still Enviably Robust   ---   Bank Stress and Dip in Profits   Mask Solid Balance Sheets   At Most Big Companies   ---   Minuscule Jobless Rate   ----   By Clay Chandler and Masayoshi Kanabayashi   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/23/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTEREST RATE NEWS (FIN)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)STOCK MARKET NEWS (STK)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)</RE><LP>   TOKYO -- Japan's economy may be in a slowdown, but you'dnever guess it from a visit to a job placement office here:In this congested metropolis, it's one of the uncrowdedplaces. Clerks in the Job Applicants section gaze out overempty chairs; clerks filing the Jobs Offered notices arebusier.   &quot;We haven't felt {the slowing economy} yet,&quot; says TsugioHama, manager of a Tokyo textile wholesaler who is renewing aHelp Wanted notice.</LP><TEXT>   An unaccustomed torrent of bad economic news has flowedfrom Japan in recent weeks: Gross national product isfalling, blue-chip companies are using red ink, and demandsfor interest-rate cuts are heard everywhere. Yet the gloomyreports obscure some fundamental truths about Japan'seconomy, which remains basically sound. Japan's beleagueredstock market and troubled banking system may force Japanesecompanies to pay higher dividends and otherwise modify theway they do business, but over the past 20 years Japan hassuccessfully made several difficult adjustments -- to two oilshocks and to a rapid, sharp increase in the value of itscurrency.   &quot;This isn't a soup-kitchen scenario,&quot; says Stephen Barber,president of the Tokyo office of Invesco MIM, a Britishinvestment-trust management company.   Indeed, although corporate profits in Japan are falling,the country's unemployment rate is just over 2%, and theannual inflation rate is well under 3%. Bankruptcies aremounting, but Japan hasn't had a bank failure since World WarII and isn't likely to experience anything like the U.S.savings-and-loan fiasco.   Interest rates are up from the low levels of the late1980s, but Japan's annual budget deficit is tiny, andlong-term borrowing costs are still lower than in any otherindustrialized nation. Despite share prices that have plungedover the past two years and slackening bank lending,economists say many of Japan's big companies have cashreserves to last them through the next two years.   And although their rate of spending on new plants andequipment has begun slowing, Japan's firms still invest twiceas much as their U.S. rivals as a percentage of totalnational output. Most have just finished creating a newgeneration of high-tech facilities and machines that willlast them until the beginning of the next century. Economistssay short of an earthquake or a global trade war, Japan willbe the world's major -- if not its only -- exporter ofcapital in the latter 1990s.   All this leaves the Japanese with a strong sense ofself-assurance despite the downturn. Whatever their concernsabout their economy's immediate problems, most Japanese --executives, laborers, government officials and privateanalysts -- are confident of the long-term future.   &quot;Our problems are not nearly as serious as those in theUnited States,&quot; says a senior official at the Bank of Japan.&quot;I think we're very lucky.&quot;   Yet over the past two months, Japan's financialauthorities have been given ample reason to worry:   -- Recession abroad and sluggish consumer demand at homehave forced Japan's manufacturers to cut output at the mostbrutal pace in 20 years. Inventory is piling up in spite ofthe cuts, and for many companies won't be cleared for months.Corporate profits are expected to be down an average of 11%for the year ending March 31, and a few blue-chipmanufacturers like Sony Corp. and Victor Co. of Japan (JVC)are reporting their first losses ever. Corporate bankruptciesare at record levels. A quarterly survey released by the Bankof Japan earlier this month found business confidence at itslowest level in five years.   -- The Tokyo stock market is in a funk. Last week, thebenchmark Nikkei stock average sank below the psychologicallycrucial 20,000 level, wiping out all the gains of the booming1980s. Tokyo shares are worth about half what they were atthe market's peak at the end of 1989. Three of the nation'sfour largest securities houses say they will post big lossesthis year, and Tokyo's financial district is abuzz withrumors that dozens of the nation's struggling small brokeragehouses may be forced to merge with larger rivals. Issuance ofnew shares, meanwhile, has ground to a virtual halt.   -- The stock market's slump has put a kink in the lendingplans of the nation's powerful city banks, whose assets arelargely tied up in Japan's equity market. With share pricesso low, banks have a more difficult time meetinginternational capital requirements and as a result can makefewer loans. Slumping land prices are hurting banks, too,which had lent so heavily to real-estate concerns. Recentestimates of nonperforming loans held by 15 major banks rangefrom 7 to 20 trillion yen, or at least $52 billion.   -- Last week, officials at the Economic Planning Agencyreported that the Japanese economy shrank 0.05% in the lastthree months of 1991 -- the first time in more than two yearsthat Japan's output has contracted. Analysts expect anothercontraction in the three months ending March 31.   Japan's downturn has already begun rippling through theworld economy. Japanese investors are bringing home the moneythey once tossed about so freely in overseas markets. Only afew years ago, Japanese investors snapped up as much as halfof U.S. Treasury securities offered at government auctions;lately, their demand for the securities has slumped to 10%.Japanese investors have backed out of at least a dozenHawaiian resort projects. In 1988, Japan was a net exporterof capital by $136.5 billion; in 1991, it was net importer by$36.6 billion.   In the late 1980s, Japan's financial authorities &quot;put thewhole economy on steroids,&quot; says Kenneth Courtis, chiefeconomist at the Tokyo unit of Deutsche Bank AG. But now, asJapan kicks its addiction to that era's loose money,&quot;everybody is suffering withdrawal symptoms.&quot;   Some confusion about the state of Japan's economic healthstems from the relatively high standards experts use tomeasure it. Take the question of whether Japan is in arecession. Despite the contraction in the third fiscalquarter and the expected contraction in the fourth, Japan islikely to finish the fiscal year ending March 31 with GNPgrowth of 3.5% or so. For the year ending March 31, 1993,most experts agree the economy will fall well short of thegovernment's official estimate of 3.5% growth, but even thepessimists think it will grow at least 2.5%.   If the U.S. economy performed like that, economic policymakers would celebrate. But in Japan, those growth rates drawsober expressions of concern and prompt even foreigneconomists to warn that Japan suffers from an oxymoronicmalady called &quot;growth recession.&quot;   In the labor market, there's little evidence of recession.The ratio of job offers to job seekers has eased onlyslightly in recent months; today, for every 100 peopleseeking work, there are 128 jobs available. In pastrecessions, applications have outpaced jobs.   Last week, Hitachi Ltd. said it will move about 2,000employees out of its computer, semiconductor andconsumer-electronics divisions into heavy machinery andequipment plants. And the U.S. subsidiary of Fujitsu Ltd.said it plans to fire at least 100 of its 5,000 workerspartly because of slow sales. But the overriding concern ofmost Japanese employers is that they won't have enoughworkers when the slump abates. They are hoarding laborers forthe future despite profit declines. JVC, for example, hasn'taltered plans to take on 839 new recruits this spring eventhough the maker of videocassette recorders expects a pretaxloss of $34.2 million -- its first deficit since 1951 -- inthe current fiscal year.   Koichi Ohmori, a 22-year-old student due to graduate froma Tokyo accounting college this month, says he isn'tconcerned about finding work. He has already rejected oneoffer because the firm was too small. &quot;I'm looking for abetter job,&quot; he explains with a smile.   Corporate capital expenditure plans also demonstrateJapan's long-term optimism. The Bank of Japan's quarterlysurvey indicates Japanese companies plan to reduce capitalspending 11.8% in the fiscal year ending March 31, 1993.However, the largest corporations plan only a 3.2% cut, andthat would be a relatively modest decline given the highlyaggressive pace at which they have invested over the pastfive years. Japanese companies spent $3 trillion on newfactories and equipment between 1986 and 1991. Last year,private investment accounted for a whopping 22% of Japan'sreal gross domestic product, about double its share in theU.S. economy.   Corporations will get a boost in meeting their investmentgoals if Bank of Japan Governor Yasushi Mieno lowers theofficial discount rate this week, as is widely expected. Mr.Mieno has lowered this rate -- the interest the Bank of Japancharges on its loans to private banks -- three times sinceJuly. The rate now stands at 4.5%, two percentage pointshigher than during the peak of the liquidity boom.   The government is expected to help on the fiscal side,too. Japan's Diet, or parliament, adopted a mildlystimulative budget earlier this month, and plans toaccelerate the impact of its spending programs by disbursingabout 75% of its public works contracts in the first half ofthe fiscal year beginning April 1. The cabinet of PrimeMinister Kiichi Miyazawa, who is known to favor expansionistfiscal policies, is likely to call for additional spending onpublic works projects to be disbursed in the second half.   If those official supports aren't enough, Japan'scompanies may resort to a solution that has helped themcushion the impact of past downturns: increasing exports.Many of Japan's big manufacturers already have begun steppingup shipments abroad to clear inventories. Japan's tradesurplus doubled in February from a year earlier to itslargest monthly level ever, and economists are predicting itcould balloon to more than $100 billion in 1992.   That prospect worries Japanese government officials, whoare concerned about aggravating the already high tensionswith the U.S. The Ministry of International Trade andIndustry last week called on Japan's automobile manufacturersto lower the voluntary ceiling on auto exports 28% to 1.65million vehicles for the year beginning April 1, but themeasure probably won't make a major dent in the tradesurplus. Japan's auto makers are expected to report exportsof 1.73 million cars to the U.S. in the 12 months ending thismonth, so the cut in exports next year would amount to only80,000 cars.   As for the stock market, it will take more thanaccelerated public-works spending, a modest cut in interestrates or further expansion of exports to boost Japan's shareprices. Restoring the stock market's appeal may requireraising corporate dividend payouts, lowering commissionscharged by brokerage houses and official approval of abroader range of investment instruments.   The long-term health of Japan's economy, however, isn't indoubt. Mr. Mieno told members of the parliament last week heanticipates a recovery in the spring of 1993. Many privateeconomists think Japan will bounce back even sooner, withmost predicting a recovery by the end of this year.   Masashi Kojima, president of Nippon Telegraph andamp; TelephoneCorp., expects his own company's profits will drop by as muchas a third in the next fiscal year. Even so, he plans tospend 1.96 trillion yen -- &quot;the highest in our 120-yearhistory,&quot; he says -- on capital improvements in the nextfiscal year.   &quot;I'm sure many people say I am crazy to invest so muchwhen the financial situation is bad,&quot; he says, &quot;but I amconvinced that's the way to go. If I were in the U.S., wherebusiness performance is measured on a quarterly basis, Iwould be fired.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>