<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911023-0125</DOCNO><DOCID>911023-0125.</DOCID><HL>   Patronage Banking:   BCCI Made Its Mark   Through Intimate Ties   To Pakistani Leaders   ---   Credit, Jobs, Aid in Moving   Cash Abroad Cemented   Links to Nation's Powerful   ---   A $3 Million Check to Zia   ----   By Thomas Petzinger Jr. and Peter Truell   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   BCCI</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)</NS><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)LUXEMBOURG (LU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)PAKISTAN (PK)UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (TC)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- The BCCI boys are back in business.   This desperately underdeveloped country recently awarded10 licenses to new banks, the first private banking permitsto be awarded in years. And among the lucky recipients weretwo former top officials of the very bank accused ofconducting what may be history's greatest financial scandal.</LP><TEXT>   One winner was Kemal Shoaib, a former BCCI official whohobnobs with the political elite here. Mr. Shoaib's licensefrom Pakistan came just in time: Only a few weeks earlier theU.S. Federal Reserve had barred him from U.S. banking forlife and fined him $20 million.   Another one of the newly sanctioned bankers, ArshadNawabi, needed no introduction to Prime Minister Nawaz Sharifat the licensing ceremony. As an executive in BCCI's MiddleEast operations, Mr. Nawabi through BCCI had previouslybankrolled a steel mill owned by the prime minister's familyin Dubai, according to an accountant familiar with thetransaction.   As the world has learned over the last four months, Bankof Credit and Commerce International played politicsbrilliantly around the globe. But nowhere did the bankachieve greater results than in the country from which itsprang -- Pakistan, the 10th most populous nation in theworld. The favors traded between the bank and publicofficials went so far beyond conventional business-governmentrelations that Pakistan sometimes appeared all but a whollyowned subsidiary of BCCI.   BCCI got its people appointed to government positions --and why not, when it was simultaneously hiring so many of itsown managers from the ranks of government service? It bailedthe nation out of a balance-of-payments crisis -- and inreturn got the lucrative contract to finance the sale ofPakistan's entire rice harvest.   &quot;They are always somewhere behind the power play,&quot; saysMianzahid Sarfaraz, a member of the country's rulingcoalition and a former senior cabinet minister.   With Arab money and Pakistani management, BCCIconsolidated its political hold during the martial-lawadministration of Gen. Zia ul-Haq, helping to manage themassive influx of funds that financed anti-Soviet forces inneighboring Afghanistan. In one example of BCCI's patronage,the bank's Dubai branch in May 1985 issued a check personallypayable to Gen. Zia for 40 million rupees, the equivalent ofnearly $3 million at the time. A copy of the check doesn'tindicate whether the funds were intended for his personal useor, as government officials now suggest, for religiousactivities.   Gen. Zia was killed in a 1988 plane explosion, leading tothe election of populist candidate Benazir Bhutto. But Ms.Bhutto was sacked within 20 months by President Ghulam IshaqKhan, a longtime supporter of the bank who serves aspresident of the tax-exempt BCCI Foundation. &quot;BCCI hasconnections to all the Zia cronies who ousted my government,&quot;Ms. Bhutto charges. Swept into power after her sacking wasthe government of Prime Minister Sharif.   But politics was often a nonpartisan activity for BCCI.Members of Ms. Bhutto's own Pakistan People's Party have inthe past received funds, and her family has had its own tiesto BCCI officials. Political leaders say that BCCI peoplealso helped finance a radical party, the MQM, whose violentclashes with other political factions have helped transformthe port city of Karachi into a land of lawlessness. Theshootings, kidnappings and mayhem there have made Japaneseand other potential investors reluctant to visit Pakistan,much less to make the capital investments the governmenturgently seeks.   Now, in part from the effects of BCCI's failure, Mr.Sharif's ruling coalition is beginning to crack, invitingspeculation that Pakistan's all-powerful army may press for achange. The political stress has also been caused by a newfinancial scandal involving Pakistan's privately ownedcooperative banks and government-owned lending institutions,from which Mr. Sharif and his associates borrowed huge sumsto expand the steel, sugar and textile empires owned by theirfamilies. Like so many dominoes, BCCI's failure prompteddepositor runs on the cooperatives, some of which haddeposits with BCCI that were suddenly inaccessible. Thecollapse of the cooperatives has in turn drained scarcecapital from government-owned banks. More than a milliondepositors have been hurt.   The prime minister and President Khan wouldn't beinterviewed for this article. Associates did speak on behalfof the prime minister and his associates, however. &quot;As thesons of families with significant business houses and asindividuals emerging on the political spectrum, they werenatural choices for BCCI to extend credit to,&quot; explains AbidaHussein, an adviser to Prime Minister Sharif who next monthwill become Pakistan's ambassador to Washington.   Though related by marriage to the founder of BCCI, theincoming ambassador acknowledges that BCCI's insinuation intothe political establishment has taken its toll on Pakistan.BCCI operated in 69 countries, but two-thirds of itsemployees were Pakistanis. Its devil-may-care businesspractices endowed BCCI's Third World work force with the kindof living standards enjoyed in the West, teaching the folksback home that playing fast and loose had its rewards, if notits virtues.   &quot;This mass of corrupt practices which has pervaded ourpolitical culture and our administrative apparatus -- theBCCI phenomenon encouraged a lot of these trends,&quot; says theambassador-designate.   How did Pakistan become so vulnerable to the interests ofone bank? The answer begins with an unfortunate bird calledthe bustard.   From its breeding grounds in the central Asian republicsof the Soviet Union, the slow-flying bustard migrates acrossPakistan, where Arab royalty for years has made a sport ofhunting it with predatory falcons. In the late 1960s a bankernamed Agha Hasan Abedi, who had a flair for flattery, beganingratiating himself with the great sheiks of the Arabianpeninsula by arranging hunting outings for them and theirentourages. So furious was the hunting that the bustardpopulation plunged almost immediately. The deposits,meanwhile, rolled into Mr. Abedi's bank.   In 1972, however, disaster struck. A new socialistpresident named Zulfikar Ali Bhutto nationalized much ofPakistan's industry and all its banks, derailing Mr. Abedi'sfast-track career. Undaunted, Mr. Abedi called once again onthe sheiks for deposits and start-up capital. BCCI was born.   Mr. Bhutto's edicts blocked BCCI from doing business inPakistan. But that didn't prevent the bank from assuming ahuge informal -- and illegal -- role. With Mr. Bhutto'ssocialism spreading across the country, Pakistan's well-to-dobegan using BCCI as a pipeline for getting capital to a saferhaven, according to Western diplomats and others who keepcompany with wealthy Pakistanis. By 1987, as much as $20billion had been spirited from the country, economistsestimate, with BCCI playing an important, though by no meansexclusive, role. That sum almost certainly exceeds all themoney Pakistan has spent on education in its 44-year history.The literacy rate in the country is 26%.   But BCCI didn't only suck out capital. It also made loansto Pakistani entrepreneurs intent on resuming abroad theprivate businesses that Mr. Bhutto had seized from them. Onesuch customer was a young Nawaz Sharif.   The Sharif family had helped to set off a small industrialrevolution in the agricultural Punjab province, whereentrepreneurs were establishing spinning mills for cotton,crushing-plants for cane and flour mills for wheat. TheSharifs introduced the threshing machine to the region,making obsolete the practice of using wind power and oxenfeet to mill grains. The Sharifs also established one of thecountry's most successful steelmaking operations, calledIttefaq Foundry.   Having lost everything in the nationalization, the Sharifsbegan commuting to the nearby Arab emirate of Dubai, justacross the Gulf of Oman, where BCCI was beginning to prosper.In Dubai the head of the family began meeting with a fellowPakistani named Salmaan Taseer, a British-charteredaccountant who had a practice in Dubai. Unfortunately for theSharifs, Mr. Taseer would also become a member of Pakistan'sNational Assembly in the opposition party, where today he isleading the political attack on Mr. Sharif's government.   As Mr. Taseer recalls hearing from the family, BCCI notonly lent the Sharifs the start-up capital for their steelplant -- roughly $2 million, he says -- but helped the familyfind a local investor, as required by Dubai regulations.&quot;BCCI did the whole package,&quot; he says.   BCCI's greatest service occurred some time later, when,according to the accountant, Dubai imposed high electricityrates on the company, making its operations uneconomical.BCCI, says Mr. Taseer, found a buyer for the concern, andforgave the balance on the loan. BCCI had made a friend ofthe future prime minister of Pakistan.   The BCCI official handling the account was Arshad Nawabi,who until recently headed BCCI's Middle Eastern operations.Some 18 years later Mr. Nawabi would get one of those covetednew banking licenses from Prime Minister Sharif. Mr. Nawabicouldn't be reached for comment.   The years of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's presidency weredifficult for Pakistan, and the army brought them to a closein a 1977 coup. (Within two years, Mr. Bhutto would behanged.) Suddenly, BCCI was back in the power structure in abig way. Pakistan would spend the next 10 years in theindomitable grip of Gen. Zia, a bosom buddy of BCCI's Mr.Abedi.   Their relationship gave new meaning to the notion of abusiness-government partnership. As Pakistan lurched from onecrisis to another, BCCI was ready with the bailing buckets:Emergency loans to ease a balance-of-payments crisis; a cashadvance against the country's entire rice crop.   BCCI also opened a revolving door between itself and thegovernment of Pakistan, hiring the children of governmentofficials and even many political figures themselves. AbdulBasir, who runs the bank's operations in Pakistan, says thatthe former officials hired by BCCI &quot;were very useful to therunning of the bank.&quot; He also says children of politicalfigures, like all prospective employees, &quot;have to undergoserious written tests&quot; before getting jobs.   Perhaps BCCI's most important work for the Ziaadministration involved the funds that came through Pakistanto aid the mujahedeen guerrillas fighting the Sovietoccupation of Afghanistan. Although the U.S. contributedheavily to the anti-Soviet effort, most of the money thatpassed through BCCI came from the wealthy and ardentlyanti-Soviet Persian Gulf states. &quot;It was the Arab money thatwas pouring through BCCI,&quot; says Mr. Sarfaraz, who was amember of Mr. Zia's cabinet.   One top government official today acknowledges that thismay help explain the nearly $3 million check that BCCI issuedto Gen. Zia in 1985. Government officials say they believethe check was intended for a foundation that financespilgrimages to Mecca. Opposition officials assert that thepayment was simply a bribe.   BCCI also played a prominent role in handling armstransactions, not only for the Afghan resistance but forPakistan's own defense. &quot;BCCI went into virtually all armstransactions,&quot; says Tariq Rahim, a lawyer who served in Gen.Zia's federal council and who is now active in the oppositionparty.   Many of these services were immensely profitable for BCCI,but the bank benefited from its political involvement inother, more important ways. When the United Kingdom's 51%interest in Attock Oil Co. went on the block, many urged thegovernment of Pakistan, which owned 49%, to buy the rest.Instead, the shares were sold to BCCI.   &quot;BCCI had a direct approach to Gen. Zia, and he bulldozedit through the cabinet,&quot; says Mr. Sarfaraz, who was in Gen.Zia's administration at the time.   BCCI's biggest and most confidential activities inPakistan were handled from London, Dubai and other foreignlocations. Eventually, BCCI was granted authority to openthree branches in Pakistan. These branches enjoyed virtuallycomplete tax-exempt status thanks to Gen. Zia's financeminister, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who approved a plan wherebyBCCI's profits would be donated to an enterprise called theBCCI Foundation, and who went on to become head of thatfoundation.   The BCCI profits passing through the foundation wouldsupposedly be donated entirely to charitable causes, althoughsignificant sums also went to finance Attock Cement Co., ahuge and struggling operation run by BCCI front man GhaithPharaon. The foundation declines to provide any financialrecords or to comment publicly on its activities.   BCCI's influence with the Zia regime even rubbed off onthe bank's customers. Mustafa Gokal, whose family shippingoperation was BCCI's biggest borrower, was named a cabinetminister by Gen. Zia. As minister for shipping, Mr. Gokalopened up the state shipping monopoly, making governmentcontracts available to private bidders, and particularly theGokal family firm. To the extent the Gokal family benefited,so did its banker, BCCI.   But during this era BCCI was hedging its bets, supportingsome members of the opposition forces left behind by thefallen Mr. Bhutto. &quot;Mr. Abedi was a great friend of Mr.Bhutto,&quot; says Mr. Basir, the BCCI branch manager.   One beneficiary of BCCI's largess was Jam Sadiq Ali of Mr.Bhutto's PPP, who spent about 10 years in exile in London onBCCI's tab. (&quot;It was a very small flat,&quot; Mr. Basir insists.)Mr. Ali's association with BCCI's Mr. Abedi was so strongthat on one occasion he presumed to commit several milliondollars of the bank's money to the PPP when Mr. Bhutto'sdaughter, Benazir, had ascended to the party's leadership.   It was late 1989, and the PPP, although newly in power,faced a crisis. Hounded by charges of corruption andmismanagement, Ms. Bhutto's administration feared an imminentvote of &quot;no confidence&quot; in the National Assembly, an eventthat could trigger a new round of national elections.Electing people to parliament can cost plenty in Pakistan,between the huge numbers of meals purchased for votersattending rallies and the outright payments of cars, cash andother favors to potential candidates to discourage them fromentering the race. The Pakistan People's Party, Ms. Bhutto'saides determined, would need $5 million to get through theelections.   Not to worry, Mr. Ali said, according to two people whoattended the meeting. At the time, BCCI was seeking aninvestment banking license in Pakistan, but Ms. Bhutto wasdragging her feet. If she would only approve the license, Mr.Ali stated, BCCI would &quot;be able to give this much and maybemore,&quot; says Farooq Leghari, a member of Ms. Bhutto's cabinetwho was at the meeting.   Ms. Bhutto, having been warned by contacts in the U.S.that law enforcement agencies were beginning to crack down onBCCI, declined the offer, although eventually heradministration approved the investment banking licenseanyway. Mr. Ali has had a bitter falling out with Ms. Bhuttoand her party. He is currently out of the country for medicaltreatment and couldn't be reached for comment.   One morning in August 1990, Ms. Bhutto found herselfwithout a job -- fired as prime minister on charges ofcorruption and incompetence by President Khan, who used aprovision of the constitution to force the removal. Newelections would be held in two months. Mr. Zia's pals, thrownout of office after his death, at last had their chance toreclaim the government.   Ms. Bhutto's followers contend BCCI had a role inbankrolling Mr. Sharif's ascendance to power in subsequentelections. Mr. Basir, the manager of BCCI's Pakistanoperations, can't vouch for any political contributions madefrom outside the bank's three branches in Pakistan. As forhis own operations, &quot;as general manager, I'm sitting hereknowing that no money has been given to any political party,&quot;he says. That doesn't mean that political leaders aren'tborrowing money from the bank, he adds. &quot;If they are usingthe money for the enhancement of their political positions,we have no control over it,&quot; he says.   Election day came on Oct. 24, 1990. Mr. Sharif's coalitionwon handily, although election observers from abroad haveraised serious questions about fraud at the polls.   Today, mired in the scandal surrounding the collapse ofthe cooperative banks, Prime Minister Sharif's coalitionstruggles to hang on. While Pakistan wallows, Mr. Abedi, theBCCI founder, remains behind a walled-in compound in Karachi,his life of jetting between London, Luxembourg, the MiddleEast and Pakistan cut short by heart and brain ailments. Buthe is secure. For the one thing that his munificence with thegovernment of Pakistan bought him -- worth more than all thedeals and special treatment he won for his bank over theyears -- was a sanctuary from law enforcement authorities,who have indicted him in New York County. Pakistan,predictably, has made no move to extradite Mr. Abedi.   &quot;If he didn't have this kind of PR with the governmentofficials here,&quot; says Mr. Sarfaraz, the national assemblyman,&quot;they would have simply handed him over on a plate.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>