<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900918-0121</DOCNO><DOCID>900918-0121.</DOCID><HL>   Will the Earth Move   On Dec. 3? Midwest   Rattled by Prediction   ---   A Scientist Expects a Quake;   Some Map Plans to Flee,   And Entrepreneurs Profit   ----   By Michael J. McCarthy   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Friday nights used to be slow at TheFault Line, a nightclub here on busy Poplar Avenue. But afterword spread that a major earthquake was forecast for Dec. 3in the Midwest, The Fault Line began throwing earthquakeparties.   On Friday nights now, hundreds of patrons pour into theclub to swig &quot;Earthquake shooters&quot; and sign up to win Dec. 3Earthquake Escape Packages to the Bahamas or Hot Springs,Ark.</LP><TEXT>   But even as Memphians whoop it up, the prediction that theBig One may come in December is triggering tremors up anddown the Mississippi Valley. Shaken, thousands of people arecrowding into earthquake survival classes. In Arnold, Mo.,3,000 people showed up for one course.   In Missouri and Arkansas, some schools and businesses haveannounced plans to close in early December. Entrepreneurs arehawking quake insurance, survival kits and gas-line safetygadgets.   Some people are planning to flee. &quot;You can't run fromeverything,&quot; says Tammy McCormick, a nurse in Blytheville,Ark., who will take her two youngsters and spend several dayswith relatives in North Carolina. &quot;But it seems stupid tostay on a fault line with a prediction like this.&quot;   Everybody talks about the San Andreas fault in California.But the Midwest actually has had three of the most powerfulearthquakes on this continent. In 1811 and 1812, along a120-mile zig-zag formation called the New Madrid fault, aseries of quakes ravaged the Midwest. Researchers estimatethose earthquakes ranked stronger than 8 on the RichterScale, which hadn't been invented yet. They were more than 10times greater than the 7.1 quake that rocked California's BayArea last October.   Church bells rang as far away as Boston. Chimneys crumbledin Cincinnati. And as tons of soil and rock bed pitched androlled in a seismic frenzy, new waterfalls spiked up, causingpart of the mighty Mississippi River to flow backward forseveral hours.   The New Madrid (pronounced MAD-rid) fault still has 150small, mostly unfelt, earthquakes a year. In the next 10years, experts warn, the area has a 33% chance of a quakemeasuring 7.1. That could produce billions of dollars indamage and thousands of casualties. &quot;We're overdue for one inthe 6s and low 7s,&quot; says David Stewart, an earthquake expertat Southeast Missouri State University.   Over the years, a few pinpoint-on-the map towns have triedto capitalize on the little-known fault. New Madrid, Mo., thefault's namesake, draws tourists to a museum with exhibits onthe 19th century devastation. And Paragould, Ark., has heldearthquake festivals with events like the &quot;Miss Faultless&quot;beauty contest.   But as Monday, Dec. 3, approaches, the whole matter isbecoming more serious. That's because the predictor hasgained credibility in some important circles for his work onthe climate.   Iben Browning, a 72-year-old scientist, predictedOctober's Bay Area quake a week before it happened, saypeople who heard him speak to the Equipment ManufacturersInstitute. And he predicted &quot;geological danger&quot; on Sept. 19,1985, along a band of latitude that included Mexico City --where a massive quake struck on that day.   Mr. Browning, who has a Ph.D. in physiology, genetics andbacteriology, writes a climate newsletter out of New Mexico.He has clients, such as PaineWebber Inc., who have long paidfor his wisdom on how the weather will affect theiragricultural investments.   Since 1971, Mr. Browning says, he has picked the correctdates of four large earthquakes, two volcanoes -- and one daywith both a volcano and an earthquake.   He bases his forecasts on tidal forces caused by thepositions of the sun and the moon -- an old theory, criticssay, that doesn't wash. On Dec. 3, those forces are expectedto be at a 27-year high. Mr. Browning says that will exertpressure that could trigger faults already ripe to fail.   The New Madrid area has a 50-50 chance of producing atleast a 7 quake on Dec. 3, give or take a day or two oneither side, Mr. Browning says. At that time, a similar quakehas a lesser chance of occurring on California's San Andreasor Hayward faults, according to Mr. Browning, and an 8.2quake in Tokyo has a greater chance.   Skepticism abounds. &quot;No responsible scientist can predictan exact day for an earthquake,&quot; says Brian Mitchell, a quakeexpert at St. Louis University, echoing the majority opinion.   But Mr. Browning shouldn't be written off so quickly, saysSoutheast Missouri State's Mr. Stewart, who recently spentfour days with Mr. Browning. &quot;He has a methodology that candetermine, plus or minus a window of a day or two, anenhanced probability of a volcano or an earthquake in certainlatitudes,&quot; says Mr. Stewart. &quot;No one else has been able toreplicate it, but that doesn't mean it's wrong.&quot;   Mr. Browning says it's not easy being on record withpredictions that few other scientists will support. &quot;I feellike a lonely little petunia in a cabbage patch,&quot; he says.But asked if he enjoys being right, he says, &quot;It's the onlydamn thing that matters. If one is a business consultant,they don't pay you for being wrong.&quot;   Plenty of other business people are cashing in on hisprediction. Insurance salespeople are peddling earthquakecoverage to homeowners and businesses. Salespeople from aMemphis company pop up at survival seminars with a device(for $259 and up) that turns off gas lines when a quake hits.And entrepreneurs are marketing two kinds of earthquakeT-shirts in Memphis. One says, &quot;I'm staying,&quot; the other, &quot;I'mleaving.&quot;   All of this has changed life in places like Blytheville,Ark. (pop: 24,314), tucked amid vast flat farmland, right atthe corner of the Arkansas, Tennessee and Missouri borders.   So many people plan to skip town on Dec. 3 that theFlexible Technologies tubing plant already plans to shut downfor two days, at a cost of thousands of dollars. Says JimmyConnell, plant superintendent, &quot;It's going to be a ghost townaround here.&quot;   Robert Edwards, a Blytheville fireman who teaches seminarsin earthquake survival, has become a hot property. For fiveyears, most of his classes were lightly attended. Now hisphone-answering machine says he is almost completely bookedthrough October.   For one recent class, he was in Osceola, Ark. It is 9 a.m.on a rainy Saturday, and 325 Osceolans, gripping legal padsand spiral notebooks, fill the high school auditorium for anall-day session on earthquake preparedness. With his boomingvoice, Mr. Edwards lays out a grim scenario: &quot;One hundred andfifty thousand dead in Memphis instantly -- instantly. Andall the federal emergency help is going to go there and St.Louis. You have to be prepared to take complete care ofyourself for 24 hours to two weeks. You may be five to sixmonths without power.&quot;   After the seminar, two elderly sisters, both widows, spliton what to do. Fearing their home will be looted, Bess Mann,86 years old, wants to ride it out. But her sister, HalliePeterson, 83, wants to stay with their nephew in Mississippi.Scared that the big Memphis-Arkansas bridge that spans theMississippi River will collapse in a quake, she's charting analternate route two hours out of her way.   School districts in Earle and Wilson, Ark., have announcedclosings around Dec. 3. Some schools practice earthquakedrills, while others sponsor cake sales to buy survival kitsfor classrooms, with items like blankets, flashlights andradios.   Michael Prince, a child psychologist in Jonesboro, says heknows of 10 to 15 children, age four to nine, so unnervedthat they've reverted to bed-wetting or extreme anxiety aboutbeing separated from their parents.   Trying to calm the fear, the National EarthquakePrediction Evaluation Council, a panel of academic andgovernment seismic experts, will review the Browning claim ata meeting in a few weeks. In 11 years of studying predictionmethods, the panel has found no bona fide approach. The groupusually ignores claims that aren't scientifically documented(like the one by the California man who said his goldfishhelped him predict quakes).   &quot;But this one,&quot; says Randall Updike, the executivesecretary, &quot;has created such chaos in the mid-continentregion that we felt we had to give our advice.&quot;   Mr. Browning says he is tentatively booked to give a talkin Minneapolis on Dec. 3 and he doesn't plan to go there viaSt. Louis. But he adds: &quot;I highly recommend against panic.That will kill more people than earthquakes.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>