<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910523-0125</DOCNO><DOCID>910523-0125.</DOCID><HL>   Counterpoint:   A Foreseeable Failure in the Gulf   ----   By Christopher Layne</HL><DATE>05/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)</RE><LP>   Earlier this month, in northern Iraq, U.S. and Britishforces were fired on by Iraqi troops. Combined with thedifficulty of getting the United Nations to take oversecurity responsibility for the Kurdish refugee area, theseincidents show that northern Iraq could become a quagmire.But U.S. entanglement and the terrible suffering of the Kurdsand Iraq's Shiites is a direct consequence of Washington'sdecision to wage an unnecessary and unwise war. There are noexcuses for the failure to anticipate the problems of thewar's aftermath. Before the war began, several analystspresciently warned that a conflict would have long-termdestabilizing effects adverse to U.S. interests: notably, avanquished Iraq would be prone to internal strife and indanger of disintegrating completely.   The administration did not listen. Nor did it do muchthinking of its own about the probable consequences of war.Not until the very eve of hostilities -- far too late -- wasan interagency study group set up to think about the end gamein the Gulf. Administration leaders plunged into war withclear-cut military goals but with only the haziest politicalobjectives. Confronted with the geopolitically unsettlingconsequences of its deeds and words, the administrationengaged in the stomach-churning spectacle of simultaneouslylamenting the fate of the Kurds and Shiites while denyingresponsibility for creating the situation.</LP><TEXT>   Under strong political pressure, and without anintellectual compass of its own, the administration driftedaway from its initial, prudent inclination to steer clear ofdirect involvement in Iraq's civil war. It has wobbledinstead into an open-ended commitment to the Kurds. NowAmerica's moral morass has become a political, and possibly amilitary, one. Even if the U.S. can avoid further combatoperations in Iraq, it has become the guardian of the Kurdishcause and, as such, is inextricably caught up in Iraq'scomplex and violent domestic politics, at the mercy of eventsbeyond its control.   This sorry state of affairs is the natural outcome of thewarmed-over Wilsonianism that is passed off as the &quot;new&quot;world order. There is nothing new about it. Since 1945,American internationalists have consistently elevated eventsof secondary importance to the level of vital interest in anattempt to secure political goals on a global scale. Theworld-order values are familiar: national self-determination,democracy, proscription of aggression and the rule ofinternational law.   There are serious problems with making such goals thebasis of U.S. foreign policy. World-order values are at issuein virtually every external crisis, which means there is nobasis for distinguishing between vital and peripheral U.S.interests. Every problem abroad thereby becomes an Americanproblem; selective intervention inevitably leads to chargesof hypocrisy. Because world-order values are frequentlyoffended by other nations' domestic structures, a policybased on those values necessitates frequent U.S. intrusioninto their internal affairs.   The military victory in the Gulf war has created theintoxicating illusion that Washington can aspire to lay downrules of conduct among nations. But the world is arecalcitrant place, not a piece of clay that can be shaped toU.S. specifications. War and instability are inescapablefeatures of world politics. Dictatorships and authoritariangovernments abound. And there are innumerable religious,ethnic-national and territorial disputes that contain withinthem the seeds of future regional wars. Happily, few of theworld's crises affect tangible U.S. national interests.   All nations -- even superpowers -- have limited resources.And as University of California professor Kenneth Waltznotes, for any nation to attempt to eliminate internationalor internecine conflicts in a &quot;world where grievances anddisputes abound,&quot; would require &quot;as much wisdom as power.&quot;The limits of world order -- that is, the limits of America'spower and wisdom -- have been ignored by those who areproposing fanciful schemes to have the U.S. march on Baghdad,put Iraq into political receivership, and (somehow) establishdemocracy in that country.   The U.S. has seldom succeeded in stage managing politicalchange in other countries. It was naive to think Washingtoncould inflict catastrophic damage on Iraq and fan the flamesof an anti-Saddam rebellion without producing chaos. Those inWashington still pinning their hopes on a nice, surgicalmilitary coup to oust Saddam should recall the revolving-doorjuntas in Saigon after a U.S.-inspired coup removed the balkySouth Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem. The most likelyalternatives to Saddam Hussein are chaos or a new form ofstrong-man or one-party rule, not a viable pro-U.S. regime.Moreover, even if an effective post-Saddam government doesemerge, it can be expected (after postwar reconstruction) toreassert Baghdad's aspirations for regional pre-eminence.Iraq's national interests -- including its territorial claimson Kuwait -- predated Saddam Hussein and will not disappeareven if he does.   Realists know that policies must be judged on theirobjective consequences, not the intentions of policy makers.The administration did not have to plunge into war in theGulf. Even if one concedes that protecting Saudi Arabia froman Iraqi invasion was a legitimate U.S. interest, thatobjective could have been -- indeed, had been -- achieved bydeterrence and by containing Baghdad militarily, economicallyand diplomatically. Having instead decided to fight,Washington is accountable for the reasonably foreseeableoutcome of its actions.   Neither the U.S. nor the Middle East is better off becauseof the war. The U.S. attempt to implement a new world orderhas caused appalling suffering in its first application.Internal Iraqi turbulence has far-reaching regionalgeopolitical implications. And with the Arab-Israeli peaceprocess unsurprisingly stalemated, the Middle East is furtherthan ever from the administration's goal of regionalstability. It could not have been otherwise.   Hans Morgenthau said that a successful foreign policydistinguishes between the desirable and the possible, becausethe making of such distinctions is the key to pruningoverweening ambition to fit resources and reality. Given thecost of world-order politics, U.S. foreign policy could dowith more modesty. George Kennan correctly observed, &quot;Theproblems of this world are deeper, more involved and morestubborn than many of us realize.&quot; The war's aftermathdemonstrates there are many problems in the world, but few&quot;made in America&quot; solutions.   ---   Mr. Layne is a fellow in foreign policy studies at theCato Institute in Washington.</TEXT></DOC>