<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920311-0097</DOCNO><DOCID>920311-0097.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Sweepstakes Operator Takes Heat   For Its Phone-Billing Practices   ----   By Ellen Joan Pollock and Arthur S. Hayes   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/11/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B7</SO><CO>   ADBE LABOR PFE T</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (CMT)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDICAL andamp; BIOLOGICAL TECHNOLOGY (MTC)RECREATIONAL PRODUCTS andamp; SERVICES (REC)SOFTWARE (SOF)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)</IN><NS>CONSUMER ISSUES (CSU)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES (LAB)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES (LAW)ANTITRUST NEWS (TST)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)CENTRAL AMERICA (CME)CONNECTICUT (CT)PANAMA (CZ)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)FLORIDA (FL)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)MISSOURI (MO)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   Attorneys general in three states are attempting to stop amarketing company from billing sweepstakes winners who makewhat they think are toll-free phone calls to find out whatthey've won.   Sweepstakes Clearinghouse appears to be a new twist ontelephone operations that, until now, have typically beenconducted on 900 information lines. But consumer advocatesand telephone company officials say that while SweepstakesClearinghouse's promotions are clearly misleading, they maybe hard to stop.</LP><TEXT>   Sweepstakes Clearinghouse, run by Allied Marketing GroupInc., Dallas, operates by sending postcards promisingrecipients prizes ranging from $10,000 in cash to $200 savingcertificates. Winners are instructed to dial a toll-free 800number to claim their prize, which most often turns out to besavings certificates for products marketed by the company.   A recording gives them two choices -- either mailing inthe postcard or punching in a 13-digit code for an immediateresponse. Callers are told that continuing on the line willcost them $3.90 a minute and that the call will take three tofour minutes. The code, taken from the postcard, provides thebilling address for the call.   Consumers who choose to wait for an answer will then bebilled by a Dallas interactive computer service, AudioTelecom Inc., for the call. Although callers are told theywill be billed, the attorneys general are arguing that thepromotions are misleading, in part because callers areconditioned to believe that 800 numbers are always free.   William M. Parrish, an Austin, Texas, lawyer for the twocompanies, said &quot;the companies' position is they do notbelieve that their promotion is deceptive. Consumers are veryclearly told what the companies believe are the relevantfacts.&quot; Mr. Parrish said that more than 300 people who havedialed the company's 900 and 800 lines have won major prizes,including $10,000 in cash. He also said the company has &quot;astandard policy of refunding any consumer who is dissatisfiedwith the promotion in any way.&quot;   &quot;We're really fearful this will become the scam of thenineties,&quot; said Richard Blumenthal, Connecticut's attorneygeneral. Allied Marketing has agreed to stop the promotionsin the state, which filed suit against the company yesterday.Missouri and Florida have also filed suits against AlliedMarketing and Audio Telecom.   &quot;We've never seen an 800 number used in this way, wherepeople were told on the card that it was a toll-free call,&quot;said Mr. Blumenthal. He and other states' officials said thatAllied Marketing is being investigated by other states. NewYork state's Consumer Protection Board and Consumer Action, aSan Francisco consumer protection organization, have alsoissued warnings about Allied Marketing's promotions.   Steven Pastore, executive director of the TeleconsumerHotline, a Washington, D.C., consumer information service forphone customers, said he has received many phone complaintsabout the Allied Marketing promotions and at least 15 writtenrequests that he look into the problem. &quot;These guys deserve aclose look,&quot; said Mr. Pastore, &quot;Consumers are used to callingan 800 number and thinking that they won't be billed.&quot;   State officials are concerned about other aspects of thesweepstakes as well. Mike Twomey, an assistant attorneygeneral in Florida, says that the Audio Telecom bill &quot;is madeup to look like a regular phone bill.&quot; Some of the bills evendisplay a logo easily mistaken for that of a phone company.And Audio Telecom inserts an American Telephone andamp; TelegraphCo. sales catalog for consumer phones into the billingenvelope.   That raises the ire of ATandamp;T, the long-distance carrierservicing Allied Marketing through another telemarketingcustomer. ATandamp;T spokesman Monty Hoyt said his company hasdemanded that Allied Marketing stop sending the catalog andthat the company has agreed to comply. Mr. Parrish, however,said that no such agreement has been reached.   &quot;I think it is disturbing that what has been built up over25 years in terms of public trust of 800 service is beingeroded,&quot; Mr. Hoyt said. Nevertheless, there appears to belittle ATandamp;T can do. Allied Marketing doesn't seem to beviolating regulations governing phone companies, Mr. Hoytadded, so &quot;our hands are really tied until there issufficient action taken by the states' attorneys general.&quot;   Ken McEldowney, executive director of Consumer Action,said he sees &quot;a major loophole that makes it possible forconsumers to really be deceived in a sense very easily,particularly those consumers that are less educated or whenEnglish is not their primary language.&quot;   Mr. McEldowney added, &quot;What we found is as regulationshave gotten tighter and as the long-distance companies havegotten more rigorous about their monitoring of 900 lines,scam operators are looking for other places to operate.&quot;   ---   NFL's FIXED SALARIES for practice players violateantitrust law, judge says.   U.S. District Judge Royce C. Lamberth ruled that aclass-action suit filed by 235 players, hired by the NationalFootball League to practice with full-time players in 1989,may go to trial to determine damages. Judge Lamberth, inWashington, D.C., determined that the NFL violated federalantitrust law by setting the salaries of the practice playersat $1,000 a week.   Doug Allen, a spokesman for the NFL Players Association,claimed that the NFL had hoped to impose a wage scale for itsfull-fledged players as well. The wage scale the NFL forcedupon the practice players was a test, Mr. Allen said, so thatJudge Lamberth's ruling has significance beyond the immediatecase.   Greg Aiello, an NFL spokesman, said, &quot;That's moot. We haveno plans to impose a wage scale.&quot;   Three years ago, NFL teams established six-playerdevelopmental squads, paying each player $16,000 for the16-week season, compared with the $50,000 season minimum fora full-fledged player. The practice players, who never appearin actual games, complained that the NFL teams violated theSherman Act's prohibition against restraint of trade byconspiring to rob them of the ability to negotiate for theirsalaries. Since 1989, NFL teams have paid practice playersunder negotiated agreements.   The NFL said antitrust laws don't cover agreements on wagescales imposed by employers on employees. In his ruling,Judge Lamberth ruled that law does cover employees. As aresult, the NFL faces a trial to determine the amount ofdamages it owes the practice players. Under an earlierruling, the league may have to pay triple damages.   In a written statement, Gene Upshaw, executive director ofthe players association, said &quot;the {practice} players wereseverely damaged and collectively should recover well inexcess of $50 million.&quot;   In a statement, the NFL said, &quot;We disagree with the courton this preliminary ruling and believe we will win onappeal.&quot;   (Antony Brown et al. vs. Pro Football Inc., U.S. DistrictCourt, Washington, No. 90-1071)   ---   SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS of type-font programs can registercopyrights.   The U.S. Copyright Office allowed developers of softwareused to digitize and print type fonts to register theirprograms with the office for copyright protection. The rulingwas seen as a victory for Adobe Systems Inc., Mountain View,Calif., Bitstream Inc., Cambridge, Mass., and otherdevelopers of font programs.   The companies argued that the office's initial refusal ofregistration left them vulnerable to piracy of theirproducts. Historically, font programs have been excluded fromcopyright protection because of an earlier rule prohibitingcopyrighting of typeface designs regardless of how they aremade. The rationale was that they are utilitarian andtherefore unprotectable.   As a result, the copyright office wouldn't recognize adistinction between copyrighting typeface designs andcopyrighting the computer programs that generate thosedesigns. The office issued a decision in 1988 that said fontprograms would be registrable only if they contained adisclaimer saying that the typeface data weren't protected.   Bitstream and others argued that the language of thedecision was confusing and made no viable distinction betweenthe uncopyrightable data and copyrightable programs. In thenew ruling, the copyright office said that it would issueregistrations on applications for font software programsproviding the authorship is for a program, not a typeface.   ---   NORIEGA DECIDES not to take stand in his own defense.   In Miami yesterday, Gen. Manuel A. Noriega told the judgepresiding over his drug-trafficking and racketeering trialthat he wouldn't testify. Shortly afterward, Gen. Noriega'sdefense rested.   &quot;I am prepared to testify mentally and physically, butbased on the laws of the country of the United States, andbased also on the Geneva treaty for prisoners of war, I wouldlike to take my right not to testify,&quot; Gen. Noriega toldJudge William Hoeveler in a private meeting in the judge'schamber attended by attorneys from both sides and a smallgroup of pool reporters.   Gen. Noriega said he decided not to testify, afterdiscussions with his lawyers, because his &quot;presentation wouldhave to be limited not to include political matters, issuesof war and the invasion.&quot; The former Panamanian leader hassaid in the past that the U.S. turned on him when he refusedto go along with U.S. foreign policy in Central America.However, since the trial's start in September, JudgeHoeveler, of U.S. District Court in Miami, has staunchlyrefused to allow evidence about how U.S. foreign policy mayhave affected the case.   Immediately after the defense rested, the government puton the stand its first rebuttal witness, a Drug EnforcementAdministration agent. It is expected that the court will hearother rebuttal witnesses this week and that the case will goto the jury next week.   Miami criminal lawyers who have followed the trial weresurprised that Gen. Noriega, whose defense scored some pointsagainst the prosecution's case last week, hadn't taken thestand. If convicted on the 10-count indictment, the formerleader, deposed by a U.S. invasion in 1989, could face a longprison term. &quot;I think it was critical for him to testify,&quot;said Samuel Burstyn, a criminal lawyer. &quot;Rightly or wrongly,the jury will draw a negative inference from his refusal totestify.&quot;   ---   HEART-VALVE LAWSUITS are set back by California appealscourt ruling.   A state appeals court told a lower court to reconsider aruling that 39 out-of-state residents suing Shiley Inc., aunit of Pfizer Inc., may bring suit in California.   The 39 plaintiffs seek damages for fraud and emotionaldistress because their heart valves might fail. In none oftheir cases, though, have the valves actually failed. Onlyunder California law can someone seek damages in such a case,according to Craig Needham, an attorney for the plaintiffs.   The decision by the intermediate state appeals courtfollowed a California Supreme Court ruling last year thatresidents of other countries can't sue Shiley in California.The intermediate appeals court asked the lower court to takethat ruling into consideration when looking at the suits byout-of-state residents.   &quot;This is not major, but it does have the potential toreduce their possible monetary claims against them,&quot; saidStephen Buerman, an analyst at Merrill Lynch.   Mr. Needham, of San Jose, Calif., said the plaintiffs willpetition for a rehearing and, if that fails, take the case tothe state Supreme Court. Plaintiffs have the right to bringsuit wherever they choose, he argued. Shiley is based inSanta Ana, Calif., another reason that Mr. Needham saidCalifornia is a valid forum for the suits. Pfizer is a NewYork-based pharmaceuticals company.   (Shiley Inc. et al. vs. Sheila Moore et al., SuperiorCourt of Orange County, Fourth Appellate District, G011110)   ---   BAR APPLICATION will no longer require mental-healthhistory.   The D.C. Court of Appeals, which licenses bar members inWashington, eliminated a bar-application question on whetherapplicants had ever been treated for mental, emotional ornervous disorders. The decision came in response to acampaign by the Mental Health Law Project, a Washingtonadvocacy group that said the question violated the Americanswith Disabilities Act.   The Washington bar will instead seek more information fromemployers about applicants' behavior, said Charles Reischel,a member of the admissions committee. Questions aboutsubstance abuse and hospitalization for mental illness werenarrowed to ask whether treatment took place in the last fiveyears.   ---   John J. Keller contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>