<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901231-0134</DOCNO><DOCID>901231-0134.</DOCID><HL>   Las Vegas Confronts Economic Crunch   As Rapid Expansion Bumps Into Slump   ----   By Neil Barsky and Pauline Yoshihashi   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 9</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO)LODGING, HOTELS, MOTELS, LODGES, CAMPGROUNDS (LOD)HEAVY CONSTRUCTION; INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL (CON)HOME CONSTRUCTION (HOM)</IN><LP>   Las Vegas, Nev., the fastest growing city in the nation,faces an economic squeeze.   The city's ambitious development plans are coming tofruition just as the regional economy is beginning to slow.Even as the city's gambling industry is adding thousands ofnew hotel rooms, many casinos have been laying off workers.And just as thousands of new homes are ready to go on themarket, housing sales are falling.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;Las Vegas is an accident waiting to happen,&quot; says DavidShulman, a Salomon Brothers economist who tracks real estatemarkets. &quot;The only reason Las Vegas has been booming isbecause it was on the periphery of Southern California. Now,that's stopped and things are bound to change.&quot;   Exciting new projects and aggressive marketing could helpthe casinos goose their gambling numbers for a while --barring a shooting war in the Mideast that plays havoc withfuel supplies. But the same can't be said in the housingindustry, where out-of-state wealth has fueled growth overthe past decade.   As a city that thrived on the free-spending ways ofothers, Las Vegas was made for the 1980s. It grew up duringthose years from a purely gambling town to a destinationresort attracting families and conventioneers. While gamblersspent money wildly, builders transformed the Las Vegasvalley's dirt roads, rock and sand into a carpet of housingdevelopments, man-made ponds and golf courses. Jobs, crispdesert air and the cheap cost of living lured immigrants fromaround the country, and the population nearly doubled, to780,000 residents from fewer than 450,000.   &quot;We are now a mature and diverse community that justdoesn't have the same reliance on casino gaming as it oncedid,&quot; boasts Don Haze, a commercial real estate broker whoopened a Coldwell Banker commercial leasing office in 1981.   But a lengthy downturn could undo some of theimage-building that Las Vegas underwent in the 1980s. &quot;Youmust remember that the people who have been successful inthis town have always had their feet on the gas pedal,&quot; saysR. Keith Schwer, of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas'sCenter for Business and Economic Research. When the city washit by the recession of 1981, tourism spending grew a littleless than 1%, though visitor volume posted a slight decline.&quot;The movers and shakers have not been conditioned to dealwith great economic downturns,&quot; Mr. Schwer says.   The recession in the early '80s spurred city leaders tomount a campaign to help Las Vegas break out of itsdependency on the casino industry. In 1983, the Nevada stateLegislature passed a law permitting interstate banking thatled Citibank to move its credit card distribution center toLas Vegas. Today, 2,000 people work there. By contrast, thecity's huge new Mirage casino employs about 7,000.   But almost no major companies have followed Citibank'slead. The Nevada Development Authority estimates that in thepast two years only 3,103 new jobs were created by privatesector firms either expanding or moving into Nevada. As aresult, experts say, the economy still lacks the diversitythat would help it weather another prolonged downturn.   Still, Las Vegas isn't Phoenix, and there haven't been anybillion-dollar thrift seizures or distressed land sales yet.Even the most pessimistic economists expect Nevada'spopulation growth to remain healthy. What's more, thenational credit crunch has saved developers from buildingprojects with no prospect of success.   &quot;What we need to do now is take a few deep breaths,&quot; saysDonald Snyder, chairman and chief executive of FirstInterstate Bank of Nevada, a unit of First Interstate Bancorpand Nevada's biggest bank.   Las Vegas does have excesses that are uniquely its own.Huge new Disney-like facilities such as the 3,000-room Mirageand the 4,000-room Excalibur have forced the industry into aDarwinian struggle in which older, undercapitalizedfacilities are falling behind more modern competitors.   &quot;The strong will survive,&quot; says Golden Nugget's chairman,Stephen Wynn, whose $710 million Mirage continues to lurecrowds from neighboring casinos. &quot;But I am worried about someof our competitors. You can't just build boxes, rent out therooms and get by anymore.&quot;   Size is no indicator of success, either.   Bally Manufacturing Corp., one of the nation's biggestgambling companies, has defaulted on its casino debt, and ithas trimmed its staff by 600 workers. Other big names havealso hit cold streaks. At Hilton Hotels Corp., high-rollercompetition from the Mirage and Caesars Palace has cut intooperating profit, which fell 50% in the third quarter. NowHilton, Nevada's biggest employer, plans to trim operatingcosts -- and staff -- in Las Vegas by about 8%. Altogether,that means layoffs of more than 500.   Other once-proud Las Vegas names have been tarnished byclosings and bankruptcy filings. The Landmark hotel andcasino shut its doors earlier this year; the Aladdin hasfiled for bankruptcy protection and is slated for auction.Meanwhile, aging casinos like the Dunes and the Stardust havestruggled to keep pace.   And even before the town has recovered from the one-twopunch of the Excalibur and Mirage, the industry faces anotherchallenge from MGM Grand Inc.'s Kirk Kerkorian, who has vowedto forge ahead with plans for a 5,000-room megafacility. Addto that the Riviera's 1,600-room new wing, the Stardust'sadditional 1,200 rooms and dozens of other projects on theboards, and further fallout appears certain.   &quot;It's what I call the rule of 500,&quot; says Alan Pomerantz, areal estate attorney with Weil, Gotshal andamp; Manges in New YorkCity. &quot;If a city projects a need for 500 hotel rooms, then500 developers will build 500 hotels each with 500 rooms.&quot;   The rule of 500 appears to apply to residentialdevelopers, as well. While the twin engines of Las Vegas'shousing growth -- the casino industry and the spillover fromthe California market -- are beginning to sputter, housingstarts continue to climb. Over the next year, builders haveapplied for permits to put up more than 49,000 housing unitsin Clark County, which includes Las Vegas.   Tight credit could keep as many as 30% from being built,says Glen Barton of the Meyers Group, a market researchcompany based in Los Angeles. But that would still leave34,000 new homes and apartments to absorb.   Economists cite another disturbing trend in Las Vegas'sgrowth pattern: A full 8.1% of all payroll workers are in theconstruction sector, suggesting that there aren't enoughindigenous industries to pick up the slack once things quietdown.   And home buying has begun to taper off. According to theMeyers Group, the number of home sales in the third quarterdropped 27.3% from a year earlier, while the inventory ofunsold homes was up 15.4%.   Consider the case of Leon Cohen, a 75-year-old former realestate broker from Encino, Calif. He cashed in on theCalifornia real estate boom last year and moved to theserenity of the Nevada desert, where he lives in Del WebbCorp.'s Sun City, a planned community. As a retiree andformer Californian, Mr. Cohen is the type of resident LasVegas planners dreamed of when they imagined an economy freedfrom the cyclical whims of the gambling industry.   But there may not be many Leon Cohens left. &quot;With theCalifornia real estate market going down, I'm sure I couldn'thave made my deal today,&quot; he says. &quot;I was lucky things wentso well in California when they did.&quot;   Some development companies are betting that any slowdownwill be brief and are plunging ahead with ambitious projects.One is a 25-village city-within-a-city called Summerlin,developed by Howard Hughes Properties. Designed on 39 squaremiles of property, the project won't be completed until earlynext century. Construction has already begun on Lake LasVegas, a $3.5 billion project bankrolled by the Bass brotherson 2,200 desert acres.   &quot;We all know there'll be a slowdown here, just likethere's going to be one everywhere,&quot; says Coldwell Banker'sMr. Haze. &quot;But they used to say that when California got acold, Las Vegas got pneumonia. Now I think when Californiagets its cold, we just might only get a case of sniffles.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>