<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911022-0010</DOCNO><DOCID>911022-0010.</DOCID><HL>   Sverdlovsk -- What Really Happened?   ---   The Medical Evidence:   Death in the Air   ----   By Peter Gumbel</HL><DATE>10/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   SVERDLOVSK -- Mikhail Markov was a fit 46-year-old whorarely missed a day's work until he came home one evening in1979 with a bad cough. Within hours he developed a strongfever. As his temperature soared, his breathing grew heavier.Rushed to the hospital, he died a few hours later. Theofficially recorded cause of death: bacterial pneumonia.   &quot;The doctor said his lungs looked like jellied meat,&quot;recalls his widow, Tamara, tearfully clutching his deathcertificate.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Markov was one of the first victims of a mysteriousanthrax epidemic that broke out in Sverdlovsk in April 1979.Several others who died in the first days of the outbreakwere also diagnosed as having pneumonia. Only later, afterthe first post-mortems were done by a Sverdlovsk pathologistand then confirmed by a team of Moscow experts, was thediagnosis changed to sepsis caused by anthrax.   The initial pneumonia diagnosis is one of manydiscrepancies that cast doubt on the Soviet account of theepidemic. The Soviets insist that 64 people died ofgastrointestinal anthrax after eating contaminated meat. TheU.S. has charged that the outbreak stemmed from an airborneleak of anthrax spores from a military laboratory that wereinhaled by the victims.   If that were true, the post-mortems would have provided adifferent conclusion: Instead of intestinal anthrax, thecause of death would have been inhalatory, or pulmonary,anthrax.   It is a crucial distinction, as the Soviets realize. Tosupport their claim that the outbreak was caused by taintedmeat, they have provided medical evidence that seeks to proveintestinal anthrax was the cause. In presentations given inthe U.S. in 1988, Dr. Vladimir N. Nikiforov, an infectiousdisease specialist who flew to Sverdlovsk soon after theepidemic started, showed several slides that he said had beentaken during post-mortems of victims. They graphicallydepicted an intestinal tract riddled with infection.   Dr. Nikiforov insisted that only the intestines had beentouched. If the deaths had been caused by inhalatory anthrax,other areas such as the respiratory tract, the lung region,and especially the mediastinum would have been infected. ButDr. Nikiforov denied this was the case. Strangely, he didn'tproduce any slides of these key parts of the anatomy to backup his assertion, saying he had &quot;mistakenly forgotten&quot; tobring them with him.   Dr. Nikiforov's evidence now turns out to be less than thewhole truth. Over the past year, several Soviet publicationshave interviewed doctors in Sverdlovsk who dispute hisfindings, most notably Faina Abramova, the local pathologistwho first diagnosed anthrax. Dr. Abramova told onecorrespondent that victims' lungs had also been infected. Shewent much further in an interview with Natalia Zenova, theUrals correspondent for the weekly Literaturnaya Gazeta whowas the first Soviet journalist to probe the outbreak.(Portions of that article were reprinted on this page on Nov.28, 1990.)   In remarks that didn't make it into print, Dr. Abramovatold Mrs. Zenova that &quot;the breathing, nervous and intestinalsystems&quot; of the victims were all infected. She concluded:&quot;The infection evidently entered through the respiratorychannels.&quot;   If that is indeed the case, the Soviet explanation iswrong and the victims died after inhaling anthrax spores, asthe U.S. has alleged. That could help explain the earlydiagnoses of bacterial pneumonia, and why the KGB has beenanxious to suppress them. One victim's family told Mrs.Zenova how the KGB had tried to take away the deathcertificate listing pneumonia as the cause.   The elderly Dr. Abramova was too frail to see me. But oneof her assistants who helped to conduct most of the anthraxpost-mortems, Dr. Lev Grinberg, confirms her assertions. Nowa pathologist who specializes in lung cancer, Dr. Grinbergsharply disputes the official explanation of intestinalanthrax as the cause of the outbreak. He says Dr. Nikiforov,who died last year, deliberately ignored medical evidencethat didn't fit his theory. &quot;It's just selective data,&quot; Dr.Grinberg asserts.   He clearly remembers the details because he was planningto write his doctoral dissertation on the anthrax outbreak.Dr. Abramova, meanwhile, wanted to write a monograph. Bothtook special care to collect and sift through all thepathological material, including hundreds of slides that theytook during the post-mortems.   After traveling to Moscow to write an initial report onthe epidemic for the government, politics cut short theirplans. Dr. Nikiforov, who had first encouraged them to writeup their findings, was suddenly unavailable. It didn't takethem long to understand why: Radio Liberty and the BBC hadstarted broadcasting the U.S. allegation that the outbreakwas connected to Soviet germ warfare experiments, eliciting afurious response from the Soviet leadership. The twopathologists had no choice but to drop their projects.   The brief report they wrote in Moscow has disappearedwithout trace. However, thanks to an apparent oversight bythe KGB, which went to extraordinary lengths to collect allother evidence, the two Sverdlovsk pathologists kept theiroriginal material, including the photographs. Wary of losingthese crucial documents that could cast light on the truenature of the epidemic, Dr. Grinberg won't let anyone seethem until they have been published in a Soviet medicaljournal. So far, however, no Soviet journal has dared to doso.   Other important anomalies in the medical evidence areprovided by families of some of the victims. Their accountsof the eating habits and the symptoms of their deceasedrelatives cast substantial doubt on the official tainted-meattheory.   One of the biggest puzzles is why unrelated individuals,rather than entire families, died in the epidemic if it wascaused by bad meat. Medical history does know of cases inwhich two people ate the same contaminated food and only oneof them fell sick. But the Soviets say 64 people died in theanthrax epidemic, all of them unrelated. At the very least,that is an incredible coincidence.   Pyotr N. Burgasov, a former deputy health minister who ledthe 1988 delegation to the U.S., provided a simpleexplanation: Meat was hard to find in Sverdlovsk at the time,and it is Soviet custom to give what there is to the workinghead of the household.   Tamara Markov rejects this assertion. Her late husband,Mikhail took all his meals at home, she says, and would evenwalk home for lunch from the nearby ceramics factory where heworked. &quot;He ate what I ate,&quot; she says.   Relatives of other victims say the same applies to them.For example, Alexei Syskov, a welder who died at the age of27, did sometimes eat lunch at the canteen of the timbermachinery factory where he worked. But no other employee athis factory came down with the disease. And his widow Larisainsists that she, Alexei and their children always ateprecisely the same food at home.   Then there is the puzzle of the missing symptoms. Ifintestinal anthrax was to blame, the victims would beexpected to show some signs of food poisoning such asvomiting, diarrhoea or stomach pains. &quot;The primary symptomsshould be abdominal,&quot; says Dr. Philip S. Brachman, a U.S.authority on anthrax.   Like other relatives, however, Larisa Syskov says therewas nothing of the sort. &quot;There was nothing wrong with hisstomach,&quot; she remembers. What about diarrhoea or vomiting?&quot;There was no poisoning,&quot; she insists.   For Olga Yampolskaya, such discrepancies are troubling.For years, Mrs. Yampolskaya worked as Dr. Nikiforov'sassistant, and was with him in Sverdlovsk during the anthraxepidemic. At the time, she was more concerned with tending tothe victims than worrying about the causes. Now, 12 yearslater, she acknowledges her confusion on reading Soviet pressaccounts that question the official version of events. &quot;To behonest,&quot; she says, &quot;I couldn't not have doubts.&quot;   ---   Mr. Gumbel is the Journal's Moscow bureau chief. This isthe second of three articles.</TEXT></DOC>