<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910325-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>910325-0070.</DOCID><HL>   Free-for-All:   As Competition Rises   In Global Banking,   Europeans Have Edge   ---   By Avoiding Excesses of '80s,   They Take Fewer Big Hits,   Rest on Solid Capital Bases   ---   Innovative Flair of U.S. Banks   ----   By Michael R. Sesit in New York,   Craig Forman in London,   Terence Roth in Frankfurt   And Marcus W. Brauchli in Tokyo</HL><DATE>03/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   U.MID U.STA U.LLO NW MBK J.STB JAPAN EUROP G.DBK UBNKZ.CSH Z.SBV BCS CCI JPM BT J.IBJ</CO><IN>TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)</IN><LP>   In the 1990s and beyond, the rough game of high-stakesinternational banking will probably get even rougher.   &quot;We are in an era of aggressively intensified competition,rapidly shifting definitions of what financial products are,a general slowdown in world economic growth and much, muchtougher risk-management demands,&quot; says Robert Dugger, chiefeconomist for the American Bankers Association.</LP><TEXT>   So rough is that looming competition, says George Vojta,chief of strategic planning at Bankers Trust New York Corp.,that of 40 to 45 banks now aspiring to be global powerhouses,only six to 10 will make the grade by the end of the 1990s.   And some experts predict that most of the winners won't beAmerica's big banks, which dominated world banking from the1950s through the 1970s, or Japan's behemoths, which made arun for the top in the 1980s. Of a dozen banks picked asstrong contenders by bankers, regulators and analysts, halfare European. One reason is a bit ironic.   &quot;The European banking system is in the good shape it is inbecause it didn't have the same determination to dominate theworld that the U.S. and Japanese did,&quot; says Alan Moore,director of corporate banking and treasury at Lloyds BankPLC. European banks generally have been conservativelymanaged, treading more carefully in the risky, deregulatedfree-for-all of international finance. Now, some Europeangiants have a lot going for them, including solid capitalbases, strong balance sheets and dominant shares of homemarkets expected to grow quickly.   Yet all the big international banks face difficultproblems. Global banking will change &quot;from being a protectedindustry to a deregulated one. Everybody can invade yourmarket; you can invade everybody else's markets,&quot; Mr. Vojtasays. &quot;Your survival will be based on your ability to take onall comers and succeed often enough to make sufficient profitto pay shareholders and build capital.&quot;   However, planning for survival is difficult. Nobody knowsexactly what the future global bank will look like. But ingeneral terms, global banks must be able to serve thefinancing needs of corporations, big and small, anywhere inthe world. They also must be able to garner a commandingshare of the increasing flow of capital across nationalborders and be flexible enough to shift resources tofast-growing areas and high-return businesses.   They must do all this while new technology and newfinancial products are shaking up the banking industry andwhile corporate clients and investors are becoming ever moreglobal. Already, big banks are battling each other on manyfronts: lending, underwriting, financial advice and newfinancing techniques for corporations, currency andsecurities trading, leasing, insurance, money management andconsumer banking. The banks are also hurt by the industry'sovercapacity-too many banks chasing too few customers-andmany are struggling to meet international rules requiringthem, by early 1993, to have capital equivalent to 8% ofassets.   Moreover, the costs of trying to go global and failingwill be high. &quot;Mismanaging the process would be confusing toan organization, expensive for the shareholders andunsettling for clients,&quot; says Douglas A. Warner III,president of J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. Banks losing out in thescramble could be taken over or become mostly domestic orniche institutions.   All the contenders enter the race with major handicaps andmajor advantages.   Many U.S. banks are plagued with weak capital bases andsoured loans to less-developed countries, on real estate andfor highly leveraged takeovers. They also keep losingbusiness to nonbank rivals.   But after two decades of competing domestically againstinsurers, investment banks and money managers as well asinternationally, U.S. banks have developed superior creativeskills. &quot;The Americans stand tall,&quot; says Lowell Bryan, chiefbanking consultant at McKinsey andamp; Co. &quot;European and Japanesebanks are sitting on top of cartels that are going to have tochange. The (global) winners are going to be the ones withthe biggest skills; you don't get skills sitting in anoligopoly.&quot;   The Japanese giants, backed by a strong economy andpowerful corporate customers, are rich in assets. But theworld's biggest banks are poor in capital and innovativeflair and are learning that size doesn't guaranteeperformance. In the past year, Japan's banks have beenravaged by soaring interest rates, a plunging stock marketand intensifying competition. Now, deregulation threatensmany of them by narrowing spreads between borrowing costs andlending income.   &quot;The era of Japanese banks' dominance, if it ever wasdominance, is over,&quot; declares Daniel J. Kreps, a principal atSRI International, a consulting firm in Menlo Park, Calif.&quot;They will play a role commensurate with the importance ofthe Japanese economy, which is considerable. But they won'trun&quot; world banking.   The well-capitalized European banks have mostly solvedtheir Third World loan problems and are taking much smallerhits from bad real-estate and takeover credits than U.S. andJapanese banks are.   But they have little experience with head-buttingcompetition. Europe's banking sanctuaries -- local marketslong protected from price-cutting competition by law ortradition -- will be torn asunder by the planned 1992integration of financial markets in the 12-nation EuropeanCommunity. The roughly 300 mergers and partial mergers amongEurope's banks in the past two years foreshadow a furthercompetitive shakeout; many analysts predict that today'sroster of European banks will be halved to 800.   However, that attrition could leave the strongest Europeanbanks -- Germany's Deutsche Bank AG, Union Bank ofSwitzerland, Credit Suisse, Swiss Bank Corp. and Britain'sBarclays Bank PLC -- mightier than ever. All but Barclays arerated triple-A; they are the world's only private-sectorbanks so designated by each of three major credit agencies.Barclays is rated triple-A by two and double-A by one.   Triple-A status lowers a bank's cost of funds and gives ita competitive edge in earning fees from municipalities andcorporations that need back-up credit lines. It also attractswealthy individuals, especially frightened ones. &quot;In acrisis, people just throw money at us; it's almost anembarrassment,&quot; says Christopher Roberts, U.S. area head forCredit Suisse.   Each of the five banks, with a dominant position at home,has considerable leeway in setting domestic interest ratesand can subsidize forays abroad. In Switzerland, according toSalomon Brothers Inc., four banks hold 53% of the assets; inBritain, 13 banks account for 57% of domestic sterlingdeposits. By contrast, each of the top 10 U.S. banks has anaverage of only 3% of industry revenues. And foreign bankshold 25% of U.S. banking assets, up from 14% in 1982 and 3.8%in 1973.   In home markets, Europe's banks have long been able toenter businesses, such as investment banking and insurance,mostly denied their U.S. and Japanese rivals. Continentalinstitutions also hold large stakes in industrial companies,and many Japanese banks are in huge interlocking corporategroups, the &quot;keiretsu.&quot; In addition, banks in Europe andJapan can set up branches anywhere in their own countries.U.S. Treasury Department proposals to grant U.S. bankssimilar privileges face tough going in Congress.   Relying on the &quot;universal&quot; bank concept, Credit Suisse andUBS both pursue a three-pronged strategy: commercial banking,investment banking and money management. Unlike some Britishand Japanese banks, none of Switzerland's big three pursuesconsumer banking outside its home country.   Deutsche Bank and Barclays do. Preparing for 1992, thebank that awestruck competitors call &quot;the Big D&quot; has acquiredsubsidiaries -- mostly retail branch operations -- in Italy,Spain, Austria and the Netherlands. Last year, it shelled outthe equivalent of $1.62 billion for Morgan Grenfell GroupPLC, a premier British merchant bank. Barclays also hasconcentrated on Europe, acquiring banks in Germany andopening branches in Spain. It is purchasing Europeenne deBanque, once part of the Rothschild interests, to beef up itscommercial banking in France.   But nobody matches Citicorp in its lust to be the world'sconsumer bank. The New York bank's two biggest profit centersare its New York branch system, with 1,200 automated tellermachines, and its $30 billion credit-card business, with 27million card holders. &quot;It's going to be very unlikely we'llsee many other global players in the consumer end of thebusiness,&quot; says Richard S. Braddock, Citicorp's president.   In Japan, Citicorp is the only foreign bank competing inthe consumer market with the Japanese giants. Withdesigner-finished lobbies and top-of-the-line computersystems, it is targeting wealthy clients. In addition,Citicorp &quot;is better positioned for 1992 on the retail sidethan many European banks,&quot; says Thomas H. Hanley, a SalomonBrothers managing director.   What the U.S. Air Force was to Operation Desert Storm,U.S. banks are to international finance. Their technologicaledge enhances their capabilities in trading and in designingand distributing myriad new services -- capabilities widelyexpected to help them seize opportunities as European andJapanese markets are deregulated.   Last year, Bankers Trust sold securities permittinginvestors to bet on the direction of the Tokyo stock market.Meanwhile, J.P. Morgan and Citicorp arranged for banks aroundthe world to reduce their loan exposure in Argentina by $4.6billion by taking equity stakes in two newly privatizedtelephone companies.   &quot;In corporate and investment banking, technology can makeup for a lot; you don't have to have a physical presencewithin each country,&quot; Mr. Hanley says.   All three banks have invested heavily in servicingcorporate clients and constructing sophisticated currency andsecurities trading systems. Bankers Trust, for example,spends about $350 million a year on its computer operations.&quot;The cumulative technology is reaching the point where we'vedeveloped barriers to entry, where others don't even want totry to compete,&quot; the bank's Mr. Vojta says.   If the innovative American banks do get the right tooperate without geographic and product constraints in theU.S., Mr. Bryan of McKinsey says, &quot;we have potential winnersin this country; we don't have to give them advantages&quot; incompeting with foreign rivals. &quot;We just have to get out oftheir way.&quot;   That isn't true for most Japanese banks, despite theirsize. Just a few of them, analysts say, can challenge majorU.S. or European banks. Only Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd.,Sumitomo Bank Ltd. and Mitsubishi Bank Ltd. have &quot;theexperience, technological capability and capital strengthnecessary to succeed in providing a full range of commercialand investment bank services on an international scale,&quot; saysAlicia Ogawa, a banking analyst at S.G. Warburg SecuritiesLtd.   Paradoxically, many banks are retreating to the relativesafety of their home markets just when their corporateclients and investors are becoming more global. One reason:Global expansion has caused a lot of disappointment.   In the past few years, Chase Manhattan Corp., BankAmericaCorp., Chemical Banking Corp. and other U.S. banks have soldor closed operations abroad to cut losses or meet the newcapital standards. One big problem: Many banks venturingabroad never proceeded beyond their initial move. &quot;Toeholdsalways look good because they're cheap, but it's sort of, `Doyou want to pay now or want to pay later?'&quot; CiticorpPresident Braddock says. &quot;The question is, if you buy thetoehold, how do you build it into something substantial?That's a fundamental flaw in a lot of acquisitionstrategies.&quot;   Salomon's Mr. Hanley cites two examples in the U.S.&quot;NatWest doesn't have real critical mass, and Barclays isstill looking for market share,&quot; he says. NatWest's U.S.units had a 1990 loss of $352.4 million, and other bigBritish banks -- Lloyds, Midland Bank PLC and StandardChartered Bank PLC -- have sold U.S. banks to raise money.Japanese banks, hurt by soured buy-out loans and seeking tomeet the capital rules, also are selling assets and slowinggrowth world-wide.   &quot;The banking industry has lost multibillions of dollars ininternational markets,&quot; says Robin Monro-Davies, managingdirector of IBCA Ltd., a London bank credit-rating agency.&quot;America has been a graveyard for foreign banks.&quot;   ---   Barbara Donnelly in New York contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>