<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910308-0047</DOCNO><DOCID>910308-0047.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Gorbachev Gives Ground   In Bid to Preserve U.S.S.R.   ---   Eight of 15 Republics Back   Revised Draft of Treaty   To Replace 1922 Accord   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   MOSCOW -- President Mikhail Gorbachev has made a number ofimportant concessions to Soviet republics, includingpromising them a fair share of regional gold and diamondrevenues and a say in military policy, in order to win theirbacking for a new union treaty.   The tactic appears to have had some success, with eight ofthe 15 republics reaching a consensus on a revised draft ofthe treaty, which is supposed to replace an agreement datingback to 1922 that established the U.S.S.R.</LP><TEXT>   But Mr. Gorbachev is still far from achieving his goal ofpreserving the Soviet Union in its present form. Of the sevenremaining republics, six -- the three Baltic states, Georgia,Armenia and Moldavia -- insist that they won't participate inthe new treaty at any price. Azerbaijan is still undecided.   Nonetheless, winning initial approval from the other eightis a milestone for Mr. Gorbachev. Several of them, includingthe Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, had rejected hisinitial draft, published last November, because they said itleft too much power in the Kremlin's hands.   By agreeing to greater power-sharing, Mr. Gorbachev hasapparently managed to avoid a humiliating, and potentiallyfatal, political defeat. The provisional agreement on the newtreaty, reached at a meeting of republican leaders grouped inthe Federation Council on Wednesday, also undercuts a strongchallenge by his main political rival, Russian PresidentBoris Yeltsin.   Mr. Yeltsin had sought to use disgruntlement with Mr.Gorbachev's initial version to forge an alternative treatythat would bypass the Kremlin. Those efforts have nowcollapsed, and Soviet officials say Mr. Gorbachev'sconcessions appear to have played a decisive role. Inparticular, they cite a change of heart by some of the poorerrepublics from Soviet Central Asia, which stand to gainfinancially from the new treaty's provision for preferentialtax status and subsidies from a proposed regional fund.   Mr. Yeltsin took part in the Federation Council session,but his attitude to the revised draft remains unclear. In aradio address yesterday, he again called for Mr. Gorbachev'sresignation and said the Kremlin isn't fully taking intoaccount the interests of republics. But several of hisdeputies helped to draft and even signed the copy of the newagreement that served as the basis for the FederationCouncil's discussions.   The treaty is now being sent to the parliaments of all 15republics for further amendment and approval. Somecontentious points, including a new name for the U.S.S.R. andthe status of so-called autonomous republics, remain to besettled. The text is expected to be published in the next fewdays, even before it is completed, so that people can read itbefore voting in a March 17 nationwide referendum on thefuture of the union.   According to a copy of the text obtained by thisnewspaper, the new version goes much further than Mr.Gorbachev's initial November draft in conceding keydecisionmaking powers to republics. It explicitly allows themto have direct political, diplomatic and economic ties withforeign partners, so long as these don't contradict theinterests of the union as a whole.   Most significantly, it commits the Kremlin to worktogether with the republics in several controversial areas.As well as getting a share of gold, diamond and hard currencyresources, republics would help to formulate military policyand decide on the deployment of Soviet troops inside thecountry.   The latter has become a big point of friction because manyrepublics oppose the army's current policy of deployingrecruits outside their native territory.   The draft treaty would give republics some control overmilitary factories on their territory that also producecivilian consumer goods. They also would have a say infinancial questions such as Soviet foreign borrowing andThird World aid.   In Mr. Gorbachev's first draft, all these issues wouldhave been decided by the Kremlin, although there was a weakpledge to consult with republics. Moreover, while his initialversion saw the new treaty as a supplement to existing Sovietlaw, the revised text is supposed to serve as the basis of anew constitution that specifically honors the &quot;sovereignty&quot;of republics.   For all the changes, the new treaty remains vague aboutexactly how the Kremlin and the republics would worktogether. The only forum mentioned is the already-existingFederation Council, which has so far been more of atalking-shop than a policy-making body, and the draft treatydoesn't explain how it is supposed to work in the future.   Indeed, the draft appears to actually reduce therepublics' role in implementing policy once they have helpedto formulate it. In Mr. Gorbachev's initial version,republican leaders would have been included in the so-calledCabinet of Ministers, or government. But this provision isconsiderably watered down in the new draft, which stipulatesthat republican leaders &quot;may take part&quot; in the government.</TEXT></DOC>