<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920228-0146</DOCNO><DOCID>920228-0146.</DOCID><HL>   California's Fertile Immigration Debate   ----   By Tim W. Ferguson</HL><DATE>02/28/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)MEXICO (MX)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   If the nation is in a mood to raise the walls againstforeign influxes, it's too late in a place like California.Immigrants have arrived and, in most cases, brought highbirth rates with them. This is giving rise to a new wave ofpopulation-control activism within the U.S. borders, and someblurring of political constituencies.   Or so it might appear from the formation this month of aCalifornia Coalition to Stabilize Population, with the SierraClub and the Foundation for American Immigration Reform asheadliners. The group wrote to Gov. Pete Wilson thanking himfor his funding of &quot;family planning&quot; activities at a timewhen some other discretionary items in the state budget werecurbed. It's only one of the signs that something isstirring.</LP><TEXT>   You see it, too, in the current crackdown at theU.S.-Mexican boundary orchestrated by Attorney GeneralWilliam Barr. He has dispatched 500 more Border Patrolofficers to roll back the teeming tide and added as well tothe ranks of the Immigration and Naturalization Service,which since 1988 has raided more than 500 employers in SanDiego County alone for hiring the wrong kind of workers. Atthe other end of the state, a bid to split California in twois being made by the non-urban north.   Gov. Wilson's own actions are the most significant cluethat crowding out is a California concern. Last year heraised the possibility of Norplant contraceptive insertionsas a sanction for dissolute mothers, and now he has proposedno longer increasing benefits when welfare mothers have morechildren. Although consistent with his longtime birth-controlbent, these steps broke new ground for a mainstreampolitician. Although not tied directly to immigration, aboutwhich Mr. Wilson has been ambiguous, they can be seen in thatcontext.   Presumably the governor wishes to tap a vein of popularsupport. Indeed, California residents have carried burdens ofmassive immigration, both in the cost of universal publicservices and the strains of clashing cultures in everydaylife. (About 6.6 million legal immigrants are estimated tolive in the state, 20% of its population.) The issue hasn'tbeen this politically potent since early in the century. Itisn't pluralism per se that bothers the objectors, they'lltell you. It's the numbers.   And, more than ever, that means the number of babies. Evenif somehow the hungry could be stopped from crossing theborder, or more likely encouraged to stay home by improvedeconomic and political opportunities, a crunch appears to becoming.   The fertility rates of immigrants are noteworthy, thoughgauging them entails some imprecision. Those for &quot;Hispanics&quot;(undifferentiated between U.S.- and foreign-born) are nearlythree times those of Anglos and rose 18% between 1987 and1989. Those years saw the start of the amnesty program forillegals under the 1986 immigration law, which eased entreeto public medical care. According to a Census sample,Mexican-born women in the U.S. give birth at least half-againas often as their native-born contemporaries. Fecundity amongCentral Americans and non-Chinese Asians was also high.   Most of the immigrant cultures have a special reverencefor children and the joy they bring into the world. The darkbelief among some more established Californians is that laxparenting turns many of these kids, in their adolescentyears, into gang-style terrors in their communities.   Gov. Wilson's welfare curbs, which appear headed for aNovember vote of the people, apply most stringently toarrivals from out of state (more so than to eligibleforeigners, curiously enough). But they are muddying theideological waters. Joining much of the left in oppositionare Roman Catholic Cardinal Roger Mahony of Los Angeles, acultural conservative, and such anti-abortion activists asConnie Youngkin of San Diego, otherwise an anti-taxer in herRepublican bid for a legislative seat. Thus the right issplit where population control is involved, as is the left(between its environmental-Planned Parenthood wing and thesocial welfare lobby).   In the end, traditional divisions will emerge and mostfree-market conservatives will support the Wilson welfareplan and most statist liberals will oppose it. But its likelypassage will not stop the baby boom and the resultingpolitical crosscurrents.   The population-cap lobby is urging all Californians tobear no more than two children per family. It is alsopressing Gov. Wilson for stronger development controls thanhe is inclined to support. The reasoning goes that if growthand sprawl are held in check, the economic inducements tomigrate and procreate will be as well.   History suggests this logic is backward, that the march toaffluence -- with all its messy side effects, including thedisturbance of natural resources -- is the surest route topopulation control. Containing the supply of housing andjobs, by itself, is a ticket to shanties in the hills,riverbeds and urban lots and to the crudest forms of streetpeddling and hustling. It is less surely a deterrent toreproduction, as a trip to any squalid Third World metropoliswill demonstrate.   Growth controls mix up left and right just as birth rightsdo. Conservatives -- or, to put it better, the propertied --often like zoning, at least locally. Restrictions applied athigher levels tend to be viewed as more in conflict withbusiness, especially now that organized environmentalism isan arm of the left. Here again, conservatives' basicpro-business beliefs should carry the day despite the strays-- and in today's dicey economy, a new blanket of regulationis unlikely to be chanced.   So the prognosis is for tighter welfare rules, only modestgrowth limits, and continued sound and fury at the border.This will not have much effect on the overloaded schools,hospitals and courts of California, so the issue will remaina dangerous one. The best hope is for a gradual dismantlingof the expensive service bureaucracies (through vouchers,perhaps), for a better sharing nationally of the tax coststhat some regions bear inordinately, and for a generalizedprosperity -- here and abroad -- that would provide morebreathing room.   ---   Mr. Ferguson is a Los Angeles-based member of theJournal's editorial board.</TEXT></DOC>