<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900706-0138</DOCNO><DOCID>900706-0138.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Hurdles Won't Block Privatization   Of Argentina's Oil Industry   ----   By Octavio Frigerio</HL><DATE>07/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><IN>TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><LP>   BUENOS AIRES -- There is at least one benefit toArgentina's dramatic economic decline: The deterioration hasreached such an extreme level that all social sectors seem tohave come together to demand an immediate resolution,focusing on privatization of an obsolete, statist economy.While resistance to privatization efforts continues,opposition groups retreat a bit more every day as they areforced to come up with productive responses when faced withan increasing public awareness of the urgent solutionsrequired.   Much attention recently has focused on the privatizationof Argentina's byzantine state-owned telephone company. Butthe privatization of the oil and gas sector -- lorded over bythe state oil monopoly YPF -- may be a better indicator ofthe forces for change in Argentina as well as the resistancethat still has to be overcome.</LP><TEXT>   With other entities, privatization usually means littlemore than the transfer of public assets to private hands. Butprivatization in the oil and gas sector also can implysubstantial new investments that lead to expansion andeconomic growth. For such projects there is an abundance ofinternational expertise available as well as substantialinvestor interest, if the right conditions pertain. Hencetheir significance as they clear the channels for aninvestment flow that also can benefit other sectors ofArgentina's economy.   Argentina is not a major oil producer, but it is blessedwith abundant reservoirs of both oil and gas, commerciallyquite viable at current world price levels. Yet major areasof its territory remain largely unexplored. The only way tobreak the current cycle of stagnation in Argentina'soil-and-gas-producing sector lies in the opening of thoseresources to private capital investment, be it of national ormultinational origin. Therein lies the financial strength andoperational capability with which to develop those fields.   This proposal is certainly not original. What is new isthe almost universal support it has garnered from publicopinion generally in Argentina.   Thirty years ago, the Movement of Integration andDevelopment political party first suggested transforming halfa century of state monopoly of all oil and gas activity;multinational oil companies were invited to share in theproduction process. Such a break with nationalist traditionbrought on one of the nastiest political debates in Argentinememory. The fiercest critics were the &quot;Radicales&quot; of theRadical Civic Union (which elected President Raul Alfonsin in1983) along with certain sectors of the &quot;Peronista&quot; Party towhich Argentina's President Carlos Menem belongs.   Years went by and in 1984 President Alfonsin traveled tothe U.S to make an announcement -- at the Houston PetroleumClub -- inviting foreign investors to participate in thedevelopment of Argentina's oil and gas resources. NowPresident Menem is embarked on a more ambitious effort toopen areas where the primary producing fields are currentlylocated to joint-venture participation with the privatesector. These have been YPF's exclusive preserve and willrequire a high level of investment to maintain productivityand develop new fields. These are also the areas that willprovide the quickest return on investment, if properlymanaged.   This project now faces delays and political challenges ofvarious sorts. These will be unimportant if the president'sdetermination holds steady, and if there is a clearunderstanding that what is at stake is much more than whowill be the operator of this or that field.   Perhaps the most notorious obstacles to privatizations(though not the most difficult) are the conditionalities thatthe oil workers union seeks to impose on the process. Thereare strong and valid reasons behind their lobbying: Thespecter of unemployment looms ever larger in Argentina'srecessionary environment.   Public-opinion polls spell it out clearly. On the one handa majority of the population (80%) backs the privatizationdrive. On the other, a high percentage wants it to happenwithout affecting employment. This might not be a problem ifthere were a prosperous economic environment offeringalternative job opportunities. Such not being the case,privatization efforts demand a return to economic growth ifsocial upheaval is to be avoided.   Another hurdle in the way of definitive oil and gasprivatization is the inconsistency between the positions ofvarious government officials. Territorial squabbles seem tounderlie these differences and undermine a resolute executionof the project. This is especially so when ambiguities evokeunderstandable but undesirable suspicions. There is only oneway to jump over this hurdle: political determination andresoluteness at the highest level.   If the overriding objective is that of promotinginvestments and productive growth, there will be clear andacceptable answers to each challenge that may appear. Anexample of a critical subject that is part of this discussionconcerns who will be the operator of a field when there is ajoint-venture association with YPF. If greater efficiency isdesired, there is only one viable answer: the private-sectoroil company investor. Any other response would scare awaypotential investors and/or defeat the objective of achievingincreased efficiency.   Another source of opposition to genuine privatization isthe group of companies that has been accustomed tocomfortable positions as ensured suppliers to the state. Thewhole area of public-sector purchases and contracts lacks theagility and the controls that are normal in private-sectorbusiness. Purchasing procedures -- not to mention corruption-- increase the operating costs of public-sector companiesfor the benefit of privileged suppliers, many times acting as&quot;cartels.&quot; Such sinecures are not lost without a fight,naturally.   Argentina's provinces have become yet another player inthe YPF privatization process, claiming that they shouldreceive a larger share of the royalties. This is not theplace to get into the complexities or merits of this debate.But the underlying cause for such confrontations is thestagnant economy. A concerted and intense investment drivewould increase oil royalties to a level that could satisfyprovincial governments as well as fulfill the requirements ofthe nation as a whole.   What is substantive in all this is that Argentina isopening a promising path for oil and gas production to bedriven fundamentally by private investment -- domestic andforeign. Even though there are obstacles to be overcome,there is a strong and healthy undercurrent of popular supportfor this policy direction. Building on this support, and withthe political determination and executive decisiveness thatalone can achieve worthwhile goals, success well may be athand.   ---   Mr. Frigerio was president of YPF from July 1989 untilJanuary 1990.</TEXT></DOC>