<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910307-0088</DOCNO><DOCID>910307-0088.</DOCID><HL>   Charmed Life:   Ray Miller Prospers   By Starting Companies   That Generally Don't   ---   Entrepreneur Has Twice Made   Millions by Selling Out   Before Share Prices Fell   ---   His Latest Venture Struggles   ----   By Todd Mason   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/07/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   ITI UMCI TRW</CO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><LP>   DALLAS -- Entrepreneur G. Ray Miller has collected atleast $18 million starting up small companies and thenselling shares to the public.   He owns a 110-foot, $3.5 million yacht with 11 stateroomsand a telephone with a satellite transmitter. He sold hisFerrari Testarossa to make room for his Maserati. He is anight-life legend here, once renting a city bus and equippingit with a bar so he and a host of fetchingly costumed femalefriends could make the Halloween nightclub scene in style.</LP><TEXT>   His investors have had much less to celebrate. While Mr.Miller has touted himself in press releases as anentrepreneur &quot;known for recognizing niche market potentialand starting successful new companies,&quot; one of his start-ups,U.S. Telephone Communications Inc., disappeared in a distresssale just 18 months after its initial public offering. Sharesin another, International Telecharge Inc., are trading atabout 8% of their initial offering price.   In both companies, however, Mr. Miller made millions byselling his own shares and bailing out of management shortlybefore the companies began their descent.   Still, investors were willing last August to buy into hislatest venture, United Medicorp Inc., which promised to solveinsurance collection problems for cash-strapped hospitals.But with cumulative losses of $10.2 million and the shareprice off 50% since the August offering, the company barelyresembles the venture Mr. Miller spoke of in stirringspeeches to investors six months earlier.   Mr. Miller blames the problems at these companies onothers, although he offers few specifics. He is unrepentantabout his fast exits and his big stock sales. &quot;When you'retired of a job, you leave,&quot; he says. And, &quot;if you leave acard game with more money than you had at the start, thenyou've won, right?&quot;   With the stock market bulls running these days, start-upcompanies are once again aiming to cash in on investoreuphoria by going public. But investors hoping to get in onthe next Genentech or Compaq might consider the career of Mr.Miller and take heed. In fact, of the initial publicofferings, or IPOs, floated during the 1980s, raising $55billion all told, only a third are still around and showingprofits for investors, according to a study by JeffersonGroup, a Washington public policy firm.   Even when start-up firms do rise in price, at leastinitially, the gains often go to the insiders or biginstitutional investors who get first crack at the stock andknow enough to bail out before trouble begins, says Standardandamp; Poor's Corp. vice president Robert S. Natale. Investors inMr. Miller's ventures have learned those lessons the hardway.   Brash, profane and flamboyant, Mr. Miller dropped out ofschool in the ninth grade and kicked around various jobsbefore finding his niche as a super-salesman in thetelecommunications business. In 1979 he and others foundedU.S. Telephone to take advantage of the deregulation of thelong-distance market. The company leased long-distance linesfrom American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. at a discounted bulkrate -- 75% lower than ATandamp;T's consumer rate at the time --and thus was able to offer consumers its own, cheaperlong-distance service.   To sell the concept, Mr. Miller, the company's executivevice president of sales, organized lavish parties when U.S.Telephone opened new markets. The company rented New York'sTavern on the Green one evening, and for another, Mr. Millerspent days wrestling with fire department officials inChicago so that a Texas catering firm could cook Mexican fareover open flames in a private club.   U.S. Telephone went public in 1982 at $8 a share andtraded as high as $26 a share until ATandamp;T started discountingits consumer rates. This plus indulgent spending pushed U.S.Telephone into the red in 1983. The next year, UnitedTelecommunications Inc.'s US Sprint unit paid $5 a share forU.S. Telephone, essentially buying its customer base.   By then, however, Mr. Miller was already gone. He andother officers say he clashed repeatedly with fellow foundersover turf and hierarchy, so he quit shortly after the IPO andcashed in his stock for $14 million.   He then launched a home security company based on acomputerized telephone system that was supposed to call thepolice automatically if an alarm was triggered. But thecompany never got to the investing public because the productnever was completed. Mr. Miller blames his research team, butHouston attorney C.F. Kendall, one of his partners, blameswhat he terms the entrepreneur's poor administration. Afterthe company was liquidated, Mr. Kendall sued Mr. Miller in aHouston state court in 1987 over the disposition of itsassets and won a $3 million judgment.   Undaunted, in 1985 Mr. Miller formed InternationalTelecharge, a telephone-operator service competing with ATandamp;Tfor long-distance charge calls. To attract the numerousentrepreneurs, hotels and even gas stations that had beenspurred by deregulation to install their own pay phones, hepromised big commissions on each call if they would use hisservice instead of ATandamp;T's. International Telecharge'soperators would route calls through another long-distancephone company, say MCI or US Sprint, pay that carrier's rate,then charge the calling customer an even higher one. &quot;You cansafely say their rates were three times ATandamp;T's,&quot; says AmyNewmark, who is president of her own research firm.   Once again, critics say, Mr. Miller poured on thepromotion and largely ignored the fact that angrycompetitors, regulators and consumers eventually would forceITI to cut its prices. &quot;Glossy literature, extravagantparties, limos, company tours,&quot; says Harry Newton, publisherof the industry magazine Teleconnect, of Mr. Miller's salesapproach.   And the company grew like topsy, especially after a trademagazine pictured Mr. Miller presenting an oversize,Styrofoam check for about $100,000 to a client. ITI wentpublic in 1987 at $8 a share and by 1989, revenue had zoomedto $274.5 million. The stock traded up to $14. But consumersbegan refusing to pay the high prices ITI was charging andthe company was forced to write off $2.8 million inuncollectables by mid-1989.   When ITI reported a quarterly loss of $8.7 million in June1989, more money than it had ever made, shareholders filedthe first of two lawsuits alleging that management hadoversold the company's prospects. A Dallas federal judgerecently certified the first suit as a class action.   At least one shareholder, however, wasn't complaining. Mr.Miller began selling his ITI stock in October 1987, sometimesin 5,000-share blocks several times a day. He pocketed $4.1million in direct sales, although he says he disposed of mostof his shares in gifts to a trust he set up in Liechtensteinto frustrate the lawsuit by his former partner, Mr. Kendall.By November 1988, he was forced out as chairman and chiefexecutive by his board, but not before cutting a separationdeal that calls for consulting payments and otherconsiderations over a 10-year period valued at $1.8 million.   (ITI posted a net loss of $7 million on revenue of $183million for the nine months ended Sept. 30, the latestfigures available. Dale W. Christensen, its controller, says,&quot;We're attempting to be competitive with ATandamp;T ratescurrently.&quot;)   After leaving ITI, Mr. Miller, with two ITI directors andseveral ITI officers as founding investors, launched UnitedMedicorp. Despite Mr. Miller's track record, the small Dallasbrokerage firm of Eppler Guerin andamp; Turner agreed to underwritea stock offering for United Medicorp for three reasons, itsinvestment banking chief, Frank Lauinger says: &quot;Excitingindustry, exciting growth prospects, and a professionalmanagement, generally speaking.&quot;   Still, Mr. Lauinger admits that Eppler, now calledPrincipal/Eppler Guerin andamp; Turner and a unit of PrincipalFinancial Group of Des Moines, Iowa, was so concerned aboutMr. Miller's track record and his reputation for hardpartying that it hired a private investigator to review hispast. Eppler also took the precaution of reserving a seat onthe board of directors for its nominee and forbidding insidersales of stock for four months instead of the usual three.   During an interview in his office last August, surroundedby African art, Civil War relics and a wooden Indian, Mr.Miller swung smoothly into his sales pitch. Imagine thebonehead errors that hospital clerks make on health insuranceclaims, he said, chuckling, such as checking `male' for thesex of a hysterectomy patient] Still wonder why the averageclaim molders uncollected for 80 days?   He leaned across his desk: &quot;We have the finest medicalcare in the world,&quot; he shouted happily. &quot;We just can't fillout the {expletive} forms.&quot;   But as in past ventures, flaws in the Miller strategyquickly surfaced, even before the public stock offering inAugust. United Medicorp designed a computer system to finderrors in a standard insurance form used by private insurancecarriers, and to file the claims electronically. The taskwasn't so easy, however, because of the vast array ofsupplemental information some carriers demand in addition tothe basic forms. Since the additional documents wound up inthe mail, the hospitals gained little by filingelectronically. &quot;The idea sells real great, but the nuts andbolts of it didn't work that well,&quot; says Red Bennett, officemanager of the ABA Medical Center in Texarkana, Texas, whichterminated a United Medicorp contract in October after eightmonths.   In addition to procedural problems, United Medicorp seemsto have hyped its early marketing materials. Early pressreleases described the start-up as &quot;bringing together theservice expertise of Andersen Consulting, General ElectricCo.'s GE Capital, GTE Corp.'s GTE Health Systems and Sears,Roebuck andamp; Co.'s Sears Business Centers.&quot;   In fact, the large companies are -- or were -- onlyvendors to United Medicorp. Meanwhile, top executives andsales representatives have quit, some to join competingfirms. United Medicorp president Mark C. Myers shrugs off theproblems. &quot;Coming out of the final development stage, as weare,&quot; he says, &quot;it's not disconcerting to us to uncover kinksin the system.&quot;   Nevertheless, to deliver the revenues investors expect,Mr. Miller is shifting strategies from automation to simplebill collection. United Medicorp now offers to collecthospitals' past-due insurance claims for percentages of therecovery, a business with high potential fees and lowstart-up costs. The company in November signed HowardUniversity Hospital in Washington, D.C., as a collectionclient.   United has also signed a joint marketing and servicesagreement with a unit of TRW Inc. The company will turn overto the TRW unit all claims that insurers refuse to pay; TRWwill then pursue collection from the patient. In a pressrelease, Mr. Miller describes the joint venture as a&quot;formidable team.&quot;   Still, the company recorded a $1.8 million loss in thethree months ended Dec. 31, the quarter it was supposed toachieve profitability according to its business plan; itbegan laying off workers last September.   At about that time, the board of directors voted asubstantial increase in Mr. Miller's $225,000 annual salary.After this newspaper inquired about the raise, Mr. Millergave it back. Mr. Myers says the raise was returned becauseof the company's reverses.   Then again, Mr. Miller doesn't seem to need the money.Taking a break from his struggling business, he put on alavish New Year's Eve cruise for about a dozen people off KeyWest on his custom yacht, the Alpha Centauri. He explainswith a shrug, &quot;I just have a happy life style.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>