<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900628-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>900628-0081.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   Trade Economic Aid for Soviet Arms Cuts   ----   By Martin Feldstein</HL><DATE>06/28/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   The accelerating economic collapse of the Soviet Unionpresents an unprecedented opportunity for the U.S. and itsallies to obtain a major reduction in Soviet militarycapacity in exchange for massive economic aid. At the Houstonsummit meeting, President Bush and the other Western leadersshould agree on a general strategy for tying any economic aidfor the Soviets to a reduction of Soviet arms.   The alternative approaches that are now being considered-- giving aid without any strings attached or conditioning itonly on such things as Soviet economic reforms and relationswith Lithuania -- would miss a major opportunity to improvethe prospects for world peace. So too would a decision simplyto deny aid and therefore pass up the chance to trade Westernconsumer goods for Soviet military cuts.</LP><TEXT>   Although the recent Washington summit meeting betweenPresident Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev exuded warm feelings, itdid little to reduce the Soviet military threat. Even afterthe agreed arms reductions, the Soviets will still havemassive destructive strength, including more than 5,000ballistic missiles and 2,000 strategic bomber weapons. Mr.Gorbachev and the other Soviet negotiators have beenunwilling to accept further cuts in strategic weapons or toresolve the threat of conventional armed forces in Europe.   The obvious lesson is that the Soviet Union is notprepared to give up substantial additional offensive militarycapacity in exchange for parallel military reductions by theU.S. The Soviet leadership has presumably concluded that therisk that the U.S. or NATO will attack the Soviet Union isextremely low. Since reducing that risk further is of littlevalue to the Soviets, they are unwilling to make significantfurther military concessions in exchange.   What the Soviets really want is not reduced U.S. militarycapacity but current consumer goods and access to thetechnology, the advice and the investments that will permitthem to develop a Western standard of living. It is amistake, therefore, to limit arms negotiations to militarytrade-offs alone. More generally, it is wrong to regard theSoviet Union in arms negotiations as a power like the U.S.when, despite its formidable military capacity, its economyis on the verge of collapse. The proper focus for U.S.negotiations with the Soviet Union should now be on tradingAmerican consumer goods and know-how for Soviet militaryreductions.   This proposal to trade economic assistance for armsreductions is very different from the call for unilateralWestern aid modeled on the Marshall Plan. The advocates ofsuch aid -- like French President Francois Mitterrand andmany others in Europe and the U.S. -- point to the success ofthe Marshall plan in securing economic growth and democracy,not only in the countries of Western Europe that had been ourallies in World War II but also in the defeated Germany. Theyargue, moreover, that the recent collapse of the Warsaw Pactand the Soviet recognition that the communist economic systemhas failed now represent a psychological defeat for theSoviet Union that could lead to the same kind of poisonedatmosphere in the Soviet Union that prevailed in WeimarGermany after World War I but that was avoided by theMarshall Plan aid to Germany after the Second World War.   American opponents of aid to the Soviet Union rightlystress that the Soviet situation today is very different fromthat in Europe after World War II. The Soviets lack thetradition of capitalism that made the Marshall Plan sosuccessful in Western Europe. Even more important, althoughthe Soviet Union may appear on the surface like a defeatedenemy, there has been nothing analogous to Germany'sunconditional surrender. The Soviet Union is still aformidable military adversary with massive nucleardestructive capacity.   Of course, that is a case against unconditional economicassistance to the Soviet Union or assistance conditioned onlyon economic and political actions by the Soviets. It is not acase against using economic assistance as a way of gettingthe Soviets to accept a reduction of their relative militarystrength.   Similarly, the argument that Western economic assistancemay not help the Soviets to reform their economy is notrelevant if the Soviets will accept such aid as an inducementto reduce their military strength. Even if much of the aid iswasted from an economic point of view, it will be valuablefor the U.S. if it achieves a better military balance.   The American goal should be to secure as much of areduction in Soviet military strength -- particularly nuclearweapons and intercontinental delivery capacity -- as possiblein exchange for our consumer goods and technical assistance.The closer that the Soviets are prepared to get to completeelimination of their offensive intercontinental nuclearcapacity, the more the U.S. should be prepared to give inconsumer goods and related technology.   The U.S. has a clear and vital interest in reducing Sovietmilitary capacity, especially the ability to deliver anuclear attack on the U.S. The presumably peaceful intentionsof Mr. Gorbachev provide little comfort, since we cannot knowhow long he will remain in a position of power or what kindof individual will succeed him.   There is also an increasing probability that the SovietUnion itself will not survive the current decade but willdivide into a group of separate affiliated republics.Advocates of national self-determination may cheer the notionof separate governments for the Baltic states, for theUkraine, for Georgia, for Azerbaijan, and for the RussianRepublic. But who can help but be nervous about the prospectthat the nuclear weapons now spread around the Soviet Unionwill no longer be controlled by a single Soviet government?   Uncertainties about the future leadership of the SovietUnion and about its very existence are the current basis ofAmerica's very real interest in negotiating Soviet arms cuts.These same concerns should support using economic aid toachieve a reduced Soviet military capacity.   Some opponents of economic aid to the Soviets argue thatthe U.S. cannot afford substantial spending on such aid at atime when large budget deficits persist and may becomeincreasingly difficult to finance because of a reducedavailability of capital from abroad. But after spendingtrillions of dollars on defense in the past decade to achievemilitary parity with the Soviets, it would now be foolish notto spend a few tens of billions of dollars if that could buyclear military superiority and a reduction in the overallrisk of military conflict.   Moreover, if we do succeed in inducing the Soviets toreduce their nuclear capability substantially, the U.S. couldreduce defense spending and still have a militarysuperiority. The more that the Soviets are willing to reducetheir international nuclear capability in exchange forconsumer goods and technical assistance, the more that theU.S. can safely reduce its own military spending. To asignificant extent, consumer aid to the Soviet Union can thusbe self-financing through the reduced U.S. military spendingthat it permits. Indeed, if consumer aid buys a large enoughreduction in Soviet military strength, the overall peacedividend could even be larger than currently projected.   The reduction in U.S. military spending will also make iteasier for the Soviet political leaders to persuade their ownmilitary hierarchy to accept a cutback in Soviet militaryspending. Although the real essence of the agreement is thereduction of Soviet military spending in exchange forAmerican economic aid, wrapping these in the same packagewith additional U.S. arms reductions will permit the Sovietleaders to accept the proposal without the loss of face thatwould be associated with reducing their military strengthunilaterally in exchange for economic assistance. From ourown point of view, the critical fact would be that the Sovietmilitary cutbacks would exceed our own, leading to U.S.military superiority and greater global stability.   A trade of Western economic assistance for Soviet armsreductions should appeal to a broad political spectrum in theU.S. and its allies. Supporters should include those who wantto assist the Soviets on humanitarian grounds, those whobelieve that economic assistance will increase politicalstability in the Soviet Union, those who want to increaseU.S. military strength relative to the Soviets by reducingSoviet military capacity, and those who will welcome areduction in both U.S. and Soviet defense spending andmilitary capacity.   There is of course no way to know how such an offer wouldbe received in the Soviet Union at this time. But thecollapse of the Soviet consumer economy and the internaldissension that it is causing suggest that this is a goodtime to present such an offer. Soviet economist StanislavShatalin, recently appointed by President Gorbachev as amember of his new presidential council, has statedemphatically that the Soviet Union must run to the West formassive economic assistance. And although it is stillpublicly denied, Germany has apparently negotiated with theSoviets a package of consumer assistance and credit aimed atobtaining the Soviet Union's support of full Germanparticipation in NATO and a timetable for the withdrawal ofSoviet troops from East Germany.   If in their current dire economic circumstances theSoviets do not agree to scrap a substantial portion of theiroffensive weapons in exchange for massive economic aid, thatwould be a sad but useful indication that they are really notserious about abandoning their old goals of militaryconquest. If that is so, we should learn it as soon aspossible. But if there is a chance for trading our consumergoods for greater military security, it is an opportunitythat should not be lost.   ---   Mr. Feldstein, former chairman of the president's Councilof Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard.</TEXT></DOC>