<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910510-0159</DOCNO><DOCID>910510-0159.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Our Education System Needs a Tuneup</HL><DATE>05/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><LP>   Heidi Waleson's April 15 Leisure andamp; Arts article, &quot;WhyWe're All Afraid to Sing,&quot; correctly points out that manyAmerican orchestra educational programs leave much to bedesired, and that symphony orchestras and other culturalinstitutions are desperately trying to take up the slackcaused by cuts in the humanities curriculum suffered byschool districts due to the fiscal woes of government atevery level.   However, it should also be pointed out that manyorchestras are able to reach most children in theircommunities only once a year, and even then they can reachonly those children fortunate enough to get a seat eitherbecause of the priorities of their parents or because schoolbuses to such events are still funded by their districts.When an orchestra or any other cultural institution has justone hour a year to accomplish its educational mission, itreally matters little whether the program includes &quot;a manicconductor and a clowning actor . . . with a rubber spider,&quot; a&quot;conductor, dressed up as a time-traveling Beethoven,&quot; orRiccardo Muti. One hour a year is not enough time to helpchildren acquire the listening skills needed to appreciateany but the most simple music.</LP><TEXT>   In studying symphonic music, each successive experience inlistening can (and should) lead to further refinement inperception, not only of the music, but of the listener'sself. However, developing sophisticated listening isdifficult in a culture that seems to abhor sophistication infavor of simplicity and ease of consumption.   But the real issue facing symphony orchestras is not musiceducation, it is the totality of education, and what partmusic and the humanities should play within that totality. Inother words, what are the goals of education? Are they merelyto produce a competent work force, as so many of ourindustrial and political leaders are proclaiming, or shouldthe goals be higher-to educate people who are able to fulfilltheir own, unique potentials, including the ability to work?   There must be a balance in education between theacquisition of knowledge and skills and the self-awarenessnecessary to apply them wisely, and that is where music andthe humanities come in -- by providing experiences that arenot only enjoyable, but also conducive to introspection andto raising fundamental questions about our lives. However,our cultural institutions cannot carry this torch inisolation from the community as a whole. They need tofunction within an environment of balanced education,supported by an entire community.   One such environment existed in Rochester, N.Y., in the1930s. Under the leadership of George Eastman, the greatindustrialist and founder of Eastman Kodak Co., a powerfulconsortium was created in which business, the city schooldistrict and the philharmonic orchestra combined theirresources to bring a brilliant program of music education toall the children of Rochester.   Mr. Eastman's plan was to reach every student in thedistrict as many as 30 times a year by taking the orchestrato highschool auditoriums for educational and communityconcerts that were then broadcast to all the other schools.   The high-school concerts Mr. Eastman began in 1931 havecontinued to this day, through depression and war. Some ofthe children who were touched by this program eventuallybecame board members of the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra.   Education should rank at the top of any nation's agenda,and especially so in a democracy that depends primarily onthe wisdom and skills of its citizens. To proclaim that theproblems of education can't be solved by throwing money atthem is simply to deceive ourselves.   The resources must be found to solve these problems, andthis certainly includes money and the involvement of ourcultural institutions. It also includes defining forourselves what is meant by education and then acting towardthat end, while remaining vigilant to ensure that therallying cry of &quot;Education]&quot; is not used by governments andcultural institutions to gain access to funding that is thenmisdirected to support noneducational activities.   William L. Cahn   Holcomb, N.Y.   ---   While Ms. Waleson addresses a pertinent and timely issue,she fails to explain the fundamental reason Americans areafraid to sing: It stems not only from a choral conductor'scriticism, but also from a musical education that neglectsthe human voice. Everyone has a voice and because of this,singing is the most accessible means to a well-rounded musiceducation. The most significant problem of American musiceducation is that the most basic musical component, singing,is not used to teach music skills in the classroom.   There is a solution: Isaac Stern recommends a method,called the Kodaly Concept, in which a proficiency in singingforms the foundation of all music learning. Zoltan Kodaly,the renowned composer, musicologist and educator, wasconvinced that students must be taught the language of musicthrough singing.   After intensive study of this system in Hungary withprofessors of theory and music education of the LisztAcademy, we have begun to implement this system successfullyat Georgetown University. Compared with traditionalapproaches to music teaching, the results have been mostencouraging.   Micheal Houlahan   Philip Tacka   Department of Fine Arts   Georgetown University   Washington</TEXT></DOC>