<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900522-0101</DOCNO><DOCID>900522-0101.</DOCID><HL>   Broken Trust:   How a Private Banker   Cost Wealthy Clients   As Much as $50 Million   ---   At Manufacturers Hanover,   Geneva Official Exploited   Secrecy, Sloppy Controls   ---   Phacos Denies Fraud Charges   ----   By Robert Guenther   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/22/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MHC EUROP</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</IN><LP>   GENEVA -- Constantin Phacos was an unusual success storyin the secretive, fast-money business of internationalprivate banking.   The slight, shy banker, who sometimes stutters whennervous, had assembled an enviable stable of wealthy, mostlyGreek clients particularly attracted to the enormous returnsMr. Phacos boasted from trading foreign currencies.</LP><TEXT>   Manufacturers Hanover Corp., anxious to become a majorplayer in this business, recruited Mr. Phacos in 1986 in whatseemed to have been a coup. But it was actually the first ina series of errors that could cost the U.S. bank as much as$50 million, making it potentially one of the largestbank-fraud cases ever.   Last October, the 38-year-old Mr. Phacos was rousted outof bed and charged by the Swiss government with embezzlement,forgery and misappropriation of client funds. Manufacturerssays roughly 80 client accounts were apparently looted inwhat it calls &quot;an enormously complicated and sophisticatedscheme with indications of outside collusion.&quot;   The bank, which refuses to discuss the matter further,took a $50 million charge against earnings last November tocover client losses and the costs of an investigation.   Swiss authorities decline to discuss the charges againstMr. Phacos, who remains in jail facing a minimum of threeyears in prison if convicted, his lawyer says. The attorney,Henri-Philippe Sambuc, concedes that his client actedimproperly in some respects but insists the money was simplylost trading foreign currencies for clients. The attorneysays more than 160 clients were affected.   Interviews with people familiar with the Geneva branch andinternal documents obtained by this newspaper indicate thatwhatever the outcome of Mr. Phacos's case, the Geneva scandalis as much the result of sloppy internal controls atManufacturers as it is the product of a rogue employee.   As early as 1987, for example, the bank's outside auditor,Peat Marwick Mitchell andamp; Co., said that correction ofshortcomings in the Geneva branch's internal controls was &quot;amatter of urgency.&quot; A spokesman for what is now KPMG PeatMarwick declined to comment.   Though Manufacturers declined several requests forinterviews, the company provided a brief statement asserting,among other things, that &quot;every warning flag was heeded&quot; bythe bank. &quot;We made changes in our Swiss operations each stepalong the way, but, quite obviously, the measures we tookdidn't succeed in preventing the fraud or uncovering it untilit had resulted in a major loss.&quot;   Manufacturers' Geneva debacle is in part a result of therisks of private banking, or catering to the financial needsof wealthy clients, which has become one of the mostlucrative and fastest growing fields in consumer banking.Switzerland in particular is a favored locale forprivate-banking operations because of the country's lawsprotecting customers' privacy.   But wealthy individuals' passion for secrecy can give bankauditors and officials nightmares if they don't take extraprecautions. Many of Mr. Phacos's clients, for example, leftexplicit instructions that they not be sent monthlystatements or confirmation notices on trades.   Many wealthy individuals bar such written communication inorder to hide assets from relatives or others in their homenations, banking industry executives say. Communication isdone only by phone or in person, and should the client letsuch monitoring functions lapse, the potential for abuse islarge.   The Geneva embarrassment is especially galling forManufacturers Hanover in light of the progress it has madeshedding its image as the weak sister of the big New Yorkbanks. In recent years, the nation's ninth-largest bank hasslimmed down, gotten a grip on its problem loans, boostedliquidity and rebuilt capital. The banking company recentlyhad its debt rating raised by two major agencies at a timemany banks are being downgraded.   But the private-banking scandal is one of three breakdownsin controls suffered by Manufacturers in little more than ayear. Unauthorized trading in Canadian government securitiesby a bond salesman last year cost Manufacturers $14 million,and two junior officers in the stock transfer department weredismissed in January 1989 following the theft of $1 millionof stock.   Manufacturers says it has now reviewed all its securitycontrols world-wide, and it is severely punishing employeeswho violate procedures.   Manufacturers opened its small Geneva office in 1985 as atwo-officer operation: one manager, one account executive andtwo clerical workers. Forced by Swiss rules to hire locally,Manufacturers soon turned to Mr. Phacos, who had a largeclient pool and who, until recently, had worked for theGeneva branch of Israel Discount Bank andamp; Trust Co. Although heis a Greek national, Mr. Phacos had been able to work forseveral years in Switzerland because both his ex-wife andwife are Swiss citizens.   At Manufacturers, Mr. Phacos performed a variety of moneymanagement services for clients, but he was known inparticular for trading foreign currencies. According toclients, he promised unusually high returns and, for a time,seemed to deliver. In one spectacular two-week period, Mr.Phacos boasted of achieving a 30% return for customers, oneformer client says.   Word-of-mouth about such trading results brought Mr.Phacos a stream of new clients, including his father-in-law.   Mr. Phacos, who declined to be interviewed, drove a newMercedes, lived in a fashionable Geneva neighborhood and flewfirst-class on vacations. His wife, Karen, who owns aboutique in Geneva, says her husband is &quot;a family man. Hebarbecues on weekends, drives the kids to school, gardens anddoes the grocery shopping on weekends.&quot; She wouldn't discussthe case against her husband.   Mr. Phacos's direct superior, Emile G. Marshi, asilver-haired veteran banker, showed a disinclination forpaperwork and oversight, spending most of his time solicitingcorporate lending business and engaging in otherfee-generating activity, people familiar with the office say.   Mr. Marshi has been indicted in the Phacos affair oncharges of financial mismanagement, but he hasn't beenjailed. Following a complaint in 1987 from superiors that heget more control over the paperwork in his office, Mr. Marshiresponded that &quot;the account documentation has poisoned ourlife here. All the staff has been working flat out for nearlya month, giving up their lunch breaks and staying late to thedetriment of our more important work.&quot; Reached by telephone,Mr. Marshi declined to comment on the case.   In fact, as internal documents show, there wererecord-keeping problems and other irregularities associatedwith monitoring Mr. Phacos from the time he arrived there in1986.   Managers at Manufacturers' Zurich branch, which oversawmany aspects of the Geneva office, first complained in 1986that, in its foreign currency trades, the Geneva branch wasignoring bank rules on margin requirements, or the amount ofcash or securities needed to serve as collateral on suchtrades.   Peat Marwick noted as far back as 1987 that the Genevabranch had insufficient documentation of its customers'accounts. At one point, the branch's files were so sketchythat only the account officer, Mr. Phacos, knew theidentities of the depositors.   &quot;The files on Geneva clients need to be completed as soonas possible,&quot; states a 1987 memo prepared by Peat Marwick.&quot;The most important single aspect to be documented is theidentity of each banking client; a simple statement that theaccount officer concerned knows such identity is notadequate.&quot;   But little seems to have been done to correct thesesituations. In the first six months of 1988, for example, theGeneva branch executed 6,000 foreign exchange trades, ablistering pace for such a small office, industry executivessay. Cash and securities in numerous client accounts werebeing pledged as collateral for the trades of othercustomers, a highly unusual practice, according to industryexecutives.   Mr. Marshi responded in 1988 to criticism from Zurich onthe handling of foreign exchange trades in a tart memo: &quot;Inother words, your {sic} are calling me a liar. What do youknow of my business here?&quot; In another memo on the same topic,he wrote: &quot;It does seem strange that after your neglect forover a year on margins, you are now showing such zeal.&quot;   The Geneva branch suffered from loose controls in otherways. To guard against fraud with &quot;hold-mail&quot; accounts, orthose in which the client refuses to receive writtencommunication from the bank, banks typically require twoemployees' signatures for transactions over a certain value.As a further protection against conspiracies, the twosignatories are always in separate departments reporting todifferent bosses. Lastly, for transactions requested over thetelephone, the most dangerous type of money or securitiestransfer, banks usually assign a third person to call theclient back to verify the instructions, using a codeword.   But at Manufacturers' Geneva office, some of thesesafeguards were lacking, people familiar with the situationsay. One such &quot;hold-mail&quot; client asserts, for example, thathis signature was forged on forms giving Mr. Phacos totaldiscretion to trade his account. Peter Ioannides, a Greekbusinessman, says bank investigators showed him a piece ofpaper allegedly signed by him authorizing Mr. Phacos'strading. &quot;I immediately recognized that it wasn't mysignature,&quot; says Mr. Ioannides. &quot;I didn't give thempermission to play the markets or anything.&quot;   In late 1988, Manufacturers Hanover shut down allforeign-exchange trading in Switzerland after the Zurichbranch -- not Mr. Phacos -- suffered a $3.4 million loss fromunauthorized trading.   Not long afterwards, in March 1989, Mr. Marshi leftManufacturers in a dispute over controls, according to thebank.   Shortly before leaving, Mr. Marshi received a bonus of125,000 Swiss francs, or about $86,000, according to bankmemos. (The bonus would have been even larger except for a$13 million loss suffered by the bank on a loan to GatoilS.A., an oil broker introduced to the bank by Mr. Marshi.)   Mr. Phacos's star continued to rise after Mr. Marshi'sdeparture. In April 1989, he was promoted to vice presidentfrom assistant vice president. According to clients, Mr.Phacos boasted to them that he had surpassed management'sexpectations for his performance.   But six months later, he was in trouble. In October oflast year, a client called requesting account balanceinformation while Mr. Phacos was on vacation in the U.S. Atthat point, a clerk approached Francois Herve, the new branchmanager, and told him that she had been instructed by Mr.Phacos before he left to provide the customer with an accountbalance far greater than the one shown by bank records.   Mr. Phacos was immediately called back to Switzerland, anda swarm of Manufacturers accountants and lawyers from NewYork descended on Geneva.   At this same time, Nickolas A. Trechas, a Greek shippingexecutive who had $1.2 million in his account at theManufacturers Geneva branch, made a routine checkup call tothe branch. Unable to reach Mr. Phacos and suspecting thathis conversation was being taped, Mr. Trechas left Athens forGeneva that morning without even shaving. By the time he gotthere, Mr. Phacos was in jail, and Mr. Trechas's seven-digitaccount was overdrawn by $20,000.   For months after Mr. Phacos's arrest, Mr. Trechas's andother customer accounts were frozen pending theinvestigation, and only recently has the bank begun releasingfunds.   Recalling his first meeting with a banker investigatingthe matter, Mr. Trechas says, &quot;They asked me how I got mymoney to the bank. Was it in a suitcase? How much did I knowabout what was going on inside the branch? They were treatingme like I was accused of something]&quot;   Mr. Trechas, who still hasn't gotten his money back,laments, &quot;I have been soaked. This is changing my wholephilosophy. I don't know who to trust.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>