<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900627-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>900627-0085.</DOCID><HL>   Buried Trouble:   Metal-Processing Past   Haunts Jersey City,   And PPG as Well   ---   Toxic Chromium Is All Over,   But Is Difficult to Trace;   Firm Resists Cleanup Bill   ---   Is It as Bad as Love Canal?   ----   By Gregory Stricharchuk   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   PPG</CO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><LP>   JERSEY CITY, N.J. -- In 1982, Earl Aldredge, a Vietnamveteran who vowed to track down industrial polluters,literally unearthed what has become New Jersey's biggestenvironmental-cleanup problem.   Working as a volunteer for Jersey City, the 300-pound Mr.Aldredge, outfitted as always in his cowboy boots, 10-gallonhat and cowboy shirt with &quot;Toxic Tex&quot; embroidered inrhinestones, discovered white, yellow and green crystalsgrowing on surface soil around the city. State testingverified that the crystals were chromium, a potentiallyhazardous substance.</LP><TEXT>   Sifting through city demolition permits, Mr. Aldredgetracked the chromium waste back to local slag piles. He thenbegan hounding the state to take action. &quot;He was sopersistent that you couldn't ignore him,&quot; says Thomas McKee,the state enforcement agent working on the case.   Eight years later, Mr. Aldredge's persistence has evolvedinto a complicated -- and potentially expensive -- legalwrangle for three companies that the state blames for theslag. The problem is especially nettlesome for PPG IndustriesInc. of Pittsburgh. Until 1964, PPG's plant, located in theheart of the city, processed chromium ore to make paintpigments. The resulting slag -- iron laced with chromium andother chemicals -- was then trucked and used as landfill inat least 58 sites in Jersey City alone, according to the NewJersey Department of Environmental Protection.   Burying industrial wastes was once common in the chemicalindustry. But now, past actions are being judged under newstandards. The upshot: More and more environmental skeletonsare being unearthed and are coming back to haunt companiessuch as PPG.   &quot;Environmental problems always are a potentialblind-side,&quot; says Charles Locastro, a securities analyst atDonaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette. PPG, he says, is well managedand &quot;pretty conscientious about dealing with environmentalproblems.&quot; Yet he expects it to put in reserves as much as$30 million to $40 million annually for a number of years tohandle problems such as those at Jersey City.   The Department of Environmental Protection has ordered PPGto pay $31.5 million to clean up some of the Jersey Citysites, the ones in residential areas. If PPG refuses, thedepartment could go to court and perhaps get that sumtrebled. The order has forced PPG to negotiate on asettlement after years of stonewalling, says Michael Schuit,a state regulatory lawyer involved in the discussions. Mr.Schuit says PPG's attorneys have privately estimated itstotal cleanup costs at $200 million to $300 million. PPGcalls those figures speculative.   During New Jersey's eight-year pursuit of PPG, stateregulators have built their case against the company.Voluminous documents, including sworn statements from formerPPG employees and internal PPG reports subpoenaed by thestate, show that company officials knew back in the 1950sthat the chromium wastes posed at least minor health risks.   PPG says that the state can't prove which slag came fromwhich company, and that PPG won't take responsibility forslag it didn't produce. It also terms the state's cleanupstandards too stringent. Though refusing to disclose theamount it has set aside for future cleanups, PPG says itbelieves its reserves, as well as insurance coverage, cancover anticipated liabilities.   So far, only one of the three slag producers has agreed toclean up chromium-contaminated sites -- some 26 of them, allin neighboring Kearny and Secaucus. In April, Maxus EnergyCorp., a Dallas petroleum producer formerly called DiamondShamrock, agreed to provide up to $51.5 million for cleanup.Maxus also will pay a $2.5 million fine, the largestenvironmental levy New Jersey has ever assessed.   A third company, Allied-Signal Inc., acquired itsliability. In 1954, Allied bought a closedchromium-processing plant in Jersey City as part of itspurchase of Mutual Chemical Co. of America. And though Alliedsold the plant just a few months later, the state holds itresponsible for the plant's slag. Allied's cleanup appearsless complicated, though, because 90% to 95% of the slag isburied at the original dump site.   PPG isn't as fortunate. Hauling records, PPG receipts ofslag sales and sworn statements from trucking people indicatethat its slag was trucked extensively throughout the city. Asa result, its potential liability could grow. Already, ExxonCorp. has sued PPG in state Superior Court seeking removal ofchromium from contaminated oil-storage properties in JerseyCity. (The two other companies are also defendants, thoughwith apparently less exposure.) The Exxon suit in Januaryfollows a similar action, which PPG settled, by UltramarPetroleum Inc.   Such suits could be only the beginning. One Jersey Citylaw firm's ad in a local paper features a skull andcrossbones and asks &quot;anyone living or working close tochromium&quot; to join others filing claims. Health officials,meanwhile, want to conduct clinical studies to determine justhow serious a hazard the slag poses.   For some Jersey City residents, the hazard is apparent.Neil Napolitano used to ride his bicycle in a tiny park nextto his house here. But a year ago, state inspectors foundchromium slag buried there, and the city put up a warningsign. Now, tests show high levels of chromium in the14-year-old boy's body. For years, he had suffered fromrashes on his elbows, severe headaches and respiratoryailments, which his doctor now thinks were allergic reactionsto chromium. Since the boy has avoided the park, his healthhas improved. But his doctor says he can't say what thelong-term effects may be.   Adding to local fears is the grisly death two years ago ofa 60-year-old welder who had worked at a truck terminal innearby Kearny. A state medical examiner attributed the man'sdeath partly to chromium poisoning. The septum of the man'snose, the bridge separating the two nasal passages, had beeneaten away, a condition that was common among chromiumworkers as recently as the 1960s. The chromium alsoapparently had bored a hole through the roof of the man'smouth and turned his skull yellow.   Health concerns have been heightened because the waste isall over Jersey City. It lies beneath vacant lots fenced offwith &quot;Keep Out&quot; signs. Houses are built on or near it; so areparks, libraries and warehouses. Last summer, chromium dustwas discovered in the carpeting, duct work and vacuumcleaners of an elementary school -- and in the children'sblood. PPG, saying the state couldn't prove that any of thedust at the school came from its slag, has refused to pay the$251,500 cleanup bill the state sent it.   Elsewhere in Jersey City, an abandoned discount store sitsnear the site of an abandoned drive-in theater. For years,the area was known as the &quot;yellow lake&quot; becauseyellow-stained rain water would pool there and empty into theHackensack River.   &quot;There's about 950,000 tons of chromium sitting there,&quot;says Mr. McKee, sipping coffee in a nearby diner. Totemporarily prevent slag from moving or blowing about,plastic tarps have been spread over about half of the 30-acresite.   Against this background, Robert Hazen, the stateenvironmental agency's manager of risk assessment, saysJersey City chromium could be more serious than thecelebrated Love Canal case. &quot;It's worse because thatsituation was mostly PCBs and dioxins and only involved onespot,&quot; he says. The Love Canal solvents haven't beenpositively linked to human cancer, but the most hazardousform of chromium, hexavalent chromium, is known to causecancer through inhalation.   Mr. Hazen also notes that the material in Love Canaldidn't climb walls or form crystals blown about by wind. Butchromium, being water-soluble, doesn't always stay put. Itseeps through concrete, is drawn up cinder-block walls andslides around like Jello under buildings. Now, many concretefloors and walls of buildings are buckling throughout JerseyCity.   The leaching process is more mysterious. Ronald Ross, aformer consultant to the Hudson County Regional HealthCommission, says contamination rates can change drasticallyfor no apparent reason. At a warehouse once rented byLeaseway Transportation Corp., for instance, monitoringinitially showed little to worry about. But, when Dr. Rossrechecked a few months later, chromium &quot;suddenly popped outall over the place in a couple of areas in the building,&quot; hesays.   Afterward, says Lynn Clark, Leaseway's director ofenvironmental affairs, the Cleveland-based trucking companyrelocated its eight employees because &quot;we were concernedabout their safety,&quot; both because of chromium exposure andbecause the warehouse's walls became unstable as slag underits footings shifted.   PPG's plant on Garfield Avenue was a popular place inwinter during the 1950s and '60s. Its two- andthree-story-tall mounds of green, black and yellow slagbecame sledding hills for children when the snow fell.   But inside the antiquated, turn-of-the-century plant, thework was hot and dangerous. Orange and yellow dust floatedabout. Kilns, heated to 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit, roastedchrome ore from South Africa into quarter-inch pellets andcrystals. These products were sold to makers of yellow,orange and green paints, and to make chrome for auto bumpersand trim.   Even then, the dangers of hexavalent chromium werewell-known. Studies dating back decades suggested that thedust probably caused lung cancer and commonly destroyedworkers' septums.   Chester J. Milczarek, the plant's manager and chiefchemist from 1957 until 1961, said in a sworn statement in1987 as part of a Jersey City Redevelopment Authority lawsuitagainst PPG that he routinely took air samples because PPGwanted to prevent such injuries. (PPG lost that suit inNewark federal court and was ordered to pay the authority$253,000 to clean up a contaminated site in the city. PPG'sappeal of the judgment failed.)   One of Mr. Milczarek's technicians had a perforatedseptum. Many other employees had &quot;chrome sores,&quot; skin ulcersevidently caused by exposure to chromium. This was especiallytrue, Mr. Milczarek testified, of workers who didn't weargloves; the dust invaded scratches and cuts. The sores almostalways left scars because company nurses, to clean them,picked off the scabs every day; otherwise, untreated lesionswould spread, Mr. Milczarek testified.   Mr. Milczarek testified that his own tests of PPG's slagshowed that at least 1% was the known carcinogin, hexavalentchrome. The company admits to producing about 330,000 tons ofslag.   By the time he left the plant in 1961, Mr. Milczarektestified, most of the slag was gone -- sold as landfill foras little as 10 cents a cubic yard or, in some instances,given away. Donald Dailey, works manager at the PPG plantfrom 1956 until 1964, said in a deposition last year thatpeople were &quot;so anxious to get {slag} that we didn't have anytrouble getting rid of it.   &quot;Sometimes it caused so much traffic congestion that wewould have to tell them to slow down for a while,&quot; said Mr.Dailey, whose sworn statement was taken in connection withUltramar's suit against PPG. &quot;Anything you got out of it wasgravy and solved the problem of storage.&quot; PPG's plant was thesmallest facility of the three in the area, and it simplydidn't have the room to keep the slag.   The slag was prized because plants rarely would grow init, making it a favorite fill for potholes and streetprojects. And a newspaper article in the 1950s quoted JerseyCity's public-works director as saying, &quot;We tested it andfound that it killed off rats.&quot; The article said he had allbut eliminated rodents at the city's big housing projectswith it.   PPG's own records, subpoenaed by the state, show that thecompany was concerned about the chromium for years after itsplant had been dismantled and the site sold. In 1981, forexample, company officials visited the site and noted thehexavalent chrome at a truck-turnaround area and along arailroad embankment. &quot;Runoff from these areas flows to citystorm sewers and into upper New York Bay,&quot; the lower Hudsonand North rivers, the PPG memo says.   Now, some residents say the chromium problem haspractically ruled out any redevelopment in the inner city.Before fears about the slag spread, some redevelopment hadbeen going on because Jersey City is just across the Hudsonfrom lower Manhattan. One suspected PPG slag site is landfillused in Liberty State Park, a reclaimed area on the JerseyCity waterfront close to the Statue of Liberty and EllisIsland.   Only two years ago, Mildred Napolitano, Neil's mother,says she could have sold their house for $169,000. &quot;Now, it'sworth zip,&quot; she says. She says one insurance company hascanceled coverage because of chromium found at the park,which the state contends was produced by PPG. Mrs.Napolitano, an employee of the county welfare department,says she can't afford to buy another house.   What may be worse, she says, is that friends rarely visither anymore out of fear of contamination. &quot;We're living in anightmare,&quot; she says. &quot;I wish the company that dumped thechrome here would buy my house so I could move away.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>