<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900409-0034</DOCNO><DOCID>900409-0034.</DOCID><HL>   U.S., Soviets Gear Up for Summit Talks   But Must Make Progress on Arms Issues   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A5A</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- With just seven weeks to go before the May30 U.S.-Soviet summit meeting and superpower relationsstrained by the Lithuania crisis, the two sides will have tostruggle to settle the major arms-control issues they havepledged to resolve by that conference.   During three days of preparatory meetings here last weekbetween Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet ForeignMinister Eduard Shevardnadze, little progress was made onimportant strategic-arms differences that are supposed to beovercome by the summit. Indeed, U.S. officials privatelycomplain that Soviet negotiators, especially those from themilitary, appeared to backslide on some commitments the U.S.thought it had won at the Baker-Shevardnadze meeting inMoscow in February.</LP><TEXT>   Soviet officials also continued to express strongopposition to a united Germany's membership in the Westernalliance. They conceded that neutrality for Germany isn't theonly solution, but openly admitted they had no alternativeproposal for the status of Germany, leaving that issue alsoin the air as the two German states race toward unification.   But the U.S. added to the negotiators' task by floating anew plan to eliminate some or all land-based multiple warheadmissiles in favor of less-dangerous single-warhead models.Some elements of the ban might be included in this year'sproposed treaty, officials indicated, while others mightawait a follow-up agreement. But the Soviets were cool to thesuggestion, which strongly favors the U.S. because mostAmerican missile warheads are based on submarines, not land.Yuriy Nazarkin, the chief Soviet strategic-arms negotiator,publicly said such a complex new plan couldn't be worked outin just seven weeks.   Mr. Baker will fly to Moscow May 16 for another round ofpre-summit meetings to try and bridge the gaps. Unless thatsession succeeds, the summit could come up short of the mostimportant goal set for it by President Bush and SovietPresident Mikhail Gorbachev when they last met on Malta inDecember: resolution of all the major issues leading to thesigning of a strategic arms reduction treaty, called Start.   The internal Soviet crisis over Lithuania's bid forindependence has placed a chill over the whole U.S.-Sovietrelationship, which has been remarkably smooth for about ayear. The Bush administration has been forced to warn theSoviets that any drastic crackdown there would disruptsuperpower ties. Moscow has been preoccupied with Lithuaniaand anxious to look tough, just when full attention and awillingness to compromise are required for pre-summit dealmaking.   Several senior State Department officials who participatedin the meetings last week said they had the strong feelingthat top Soviet officials, including Messrs. Shevardnadze andGorbachev, have been so distracted by the Lithuanianchallenge that they aren't imposing sufficient pressure onlower-level bargainers to reach compromises. In addition,they said they sensed a new resistance to compromise bymilitary officials, which they speculated might reflect acooling of relations between Mr. Gorbachev and the militaryleadership.   Anxious to remove Lithuania as an obstacle to superpowerprogress, the U.S. has decided for now to limit itself tostern warnings against further armed intervention there. Itcontinued to press for the summit and for superpoweragreements. Mr. Shevardnadze hailed the Americanbusiness-as-usual attitude, saying &quot;when two powers, such asthe Soviet Union and the United States, continue to expandtheir cooperation, even at a more difficult juncture, theworld breathes more quietly.&quot;   Mr. Baker and President Bush urged Mr. Shevardnadze to endthe crisis by holding a referendum in Lithuania onindependence and then negotiating a peaceful economic andterritorial separation if it passes. Those proposals soundsimilar to key portions of Mr. Gorbachev's proposed newsecession law and would be a much slower route toindependence than Lithuania's new non-communist leadersoriginally hoped to take.   Mr. Baker denied the U.S. was siding with Moscow in thedispute, and said Lithuanian leaders, under Soviet armedpressure, have said they might accept a referendum andlengthy talks rather than insisting that their March 11declaration of independence was the last word on the issue.   But the impact of the Lithuania crisis pervaded lastweek's meetings, especially on the Soviet side. The lack offocus by top Soviet leaders was evident beyond armscontrolmatters, U.S. officials said, and showed itself on politicaland economic issues.   On the issue of a unified Germany, the Americans found theSoviet position confused. Mr. Shevardnadze privatelyconcedes, they said, that neutrality isn't the only possiblestatus for Germany.   But, at a news conference after the meetings, the Sovietforeign minister continued to praise the longstanding Sovietdemand for a &quot;neutral and demilitarized Germany&quot; and stronglyrejected as &quot;one-sided&quot; the U.S. demand that the new Germanybelong to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. He welcomedalternative suggestions, but said, &quot;I have no specificanswers or proposals at this point in time.&quot;   Two vague ideas mentioned by Mr. Shevardnadze as worthy ofstudy have both been rejected in the West. One, a proposalthat Germany belong to NATO and the Warsaw Pact, wasdismissed by West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl after ameeting with President Bush in February. The other, a hazynotion gaining popularity across Europe for a new securityalliance to replace both military pacts, was rejected by Mr.Baker Friday as a threat to NATO.   On economic issues, Soviet specialists confirmed duringthe talks news reports that Mr. Gorbachev hopes to have readya radical economic program, including price and currencyreforms, by the time of the next Communist Party CongressJuly 2. But the Soviets were vague about how far the packagewould go and whether it would survive political attacks. TheSoviets also weren't able to guarantee passage by May 30 of aliberalized emigration law, the key condition for waiving ofU.S. trade restrictions at the summit.   The U.S. call for a new move against multiple-warheadmissiles is partly designed to assuage Senate Armed ServicesCommittee Chairman Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), who has insisted theBush administration pursue such curbs if it wants new missilefunding. In addition, it appears aimed at avoiding thegrowing impression that the Start treaty won't drasticallycut nuclear weapons stockpiles.   But the American plan is heavily tilted towards U.S.interests. It would trade the fully deployed Soviet SS-24mobile-missile system for the unbuilt rail-mounted MXmissile. It wouldn't touch the most potent new weapon ineither arsenal -- the U.S. Trident II or the D5, amultiple-warhead submarine-based missile that is the firstsea-launched weapon to match the pinpoint accuracy ofland-based missiles.   The key remaining differences on strategic arms control,include limits on air and sea-launched cruise missiles. Inaddition, the two sides remain far apart on a critical issuein conventional arms control: limits on aircraft in Europe.But the conventional arms disputes aren't scheduled to besettled by the summit, so more time remains to resolve them.</TEXT></DOC>