<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910219-0186</DOCNO><DOCID>910219-0186.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- The Gallery:   Reconsidering the Humble Sheet of Paper   ----   By Roxane Orgill</HL><DATE>02/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A20</SO><LP>   At the New York Public Library and the SmithsonianInstitution are two exhibits that will make you reconsiderthe newspaper in your hand, the milk carton you used forbreakfast, the tissue in your purse, the money in yourwallet, and about 1,000 other things you've used or looked ator thought of today.   The exhibits commemorate the first sheet of paper made inAmerica, at the Rittenhouse mill in Philadelphia 300 yearsago. The library's &quot;On Paper: The History of an Art&quot; followspaper's development from China to Korea, Japan, SoutheastAsia, India, the Middle East, Europe, and finally, America.On view through March 2 are many beautiful papers andapplications of paper. The Smithsonian's &quot;300 Years ofAmerican Papermaking,&quot; at the National Museum of AmericanHistory through December, is more practical. The show,sponsored by Vision 300, a committee of paper producers,industry suppliers and associations, focuses on themanufacture and commercial uses of paper.</LP><TEXT>   The paper trail begins, at the library, with cuneiformwriting on clay tablets in 2450 B.C. It ends, at the museum,with Lucy and Ricky paper dolls from the 1950s -- not, atfirst glance, the apex of intellectual achievement, but justthink what we had to learn in order to get there.   Before paper, people tried writing on all sorts of things:clay tablets; bark that had been soaked and beaten flat;cloth treated with wheat or rice paste; flat bamboo stickscalled slips, joined in a row with string; palm leaves thathad been soaked, boiled, dried and rubbed smooth; andpapyrus. Papyrus, by the way, is related to paper onlyetymologically. Papyrus is woven from strips of the innerbark of papyrus, which the Bible called bulrush, a tallaquatic plant. Paper, as invented in China in A.D. 105, orpossibly earlier, was the result of beating and stirring ragsin water. The macerated fibers were gathered on the surfaceof woven material and left to dry. The thin layer of fiber,peeled off, was a sheet of paper.   The idea to beat the fibers in water, and then remove thewater, was a master stroke, because it enabled the fibers tobe reorganized as a new material. Today, some 2,000 yearslater, paper is made in essentially the same way.   Which fibers are used depends on what's on hand; the listof suitable plants for paper making may be endless. TheChinese used discarded cloth, hemp, mulberry bark and Chinagrass because they were available, while the Arabs, who hadno mulberry, used flax and hemp. Europeans grew flax forlinen cloth, which they recycled into paper, and Americansrecycled cotton rags.   At the library exhibit, some more-exotic fibers can beseen in pages from the 1978 unbound book, &quot;Strange Papers: ACollection of the World's Rarest Handmade Papers.&quot; Theyinclude carrot paper (a faint orange) from Egypt, wasp-nestpaper (gray; looks like it's been fingerpainted) fromSwitzerland, and blue-jeans paper (a deep indigo) fromColorado.   The spirit of &quot;Strange Papers&quot; is playful, but Westernpaper makers of the 18th and 19th centuries weren't foolingaround when, faced with a dwindling supply of rags and agrowing demand for paper, they experimented with seaweed,grapevine, straw, and finally, wood. The suggestion to usewood had come from a French scientist, Rene de Reaumur, whohad noticed in 1719 that wasps use minute wood particles tomake their nests. More than 100 years passed before papermakers applied his work to theirs and figured out how tobreak down wood fibers into pulp. The answer was a grindstoneand a chemical -- sodium sulfate -- and with them, U.S. papermaking took off.   Such mass production would not have been possible withoutthe invention around 1800 of the Fourdrinier (pronouncedFORdrin-ear) paper-making machine, by a Frenchman,Nicholas-Louis Robert, who sold it to the Fourdriniers, twoEnglish paper-maker brothers. This amazing machine, on viewin model form at both exhibits, is still in use today anddoes everything but make pulp. It pours the pulp onto amoving wire screen, forming one continuous sheet, passes thesheet onto a moving felt, removes the water by a series ofpressing rollers, and finally, winds the dry sheet onto aroll.   The trouble with mass production, though, was that thepaper didn't last, something barely mentioned in bothexhibitions. As institutions, the Smithsonian and the NewYork Public, like all museums and libraries, are in despairover crumbling documents, of both rag and wood-pulp paper,from the Civil War onward. The problem began when papermakers started using bleach on colored rags when thewhite-rag supply for paper ran out. The problem withwood-pulp paper was, and is, lignin, the sap in trees. Put anewspaper on the car dashboard and see how fast it turnsbrown: That's the lignin effect. Lignin cuts the fibers,making the paper turn brown and brittle, especially in heatand sunlight, says Douglas Stone, a paper conservator inMilwaukee.   The industry's search for new fibers continues. One reasonis environmental pressure; in the Pacific Northwest, forinstance, paper makers are turning to wheat grass as asubstitute for wood because of pressure fromenvironmentalists concerned about the fate of the spotted owlin dwindling forests. Trees also take too long to grow. ADouglas fir, in Oregon, takes 50 years to reach maturity; thefaster-growing Southern pine, in Georgia, takes 20 years.   Robert Hurter, a designer of paper mills in Ottawa, Ont.,thinks wood's days are numbered. &quot;Within 30 to 40 years,you're going to see a revival of nonwoods,&quot; he predicts.&quot;They're renewable, and you get a new crop every year.&quot;   As the machine-made paper industry was exploding, acountermovement was getting underway. In 1881, just 15 yearsafter the last American hand paper mill closed, L.L. Brownimported craftsmen from England, where hand paper making hadnever languished, to staff his new hand paper mill in Adams,Mass. Dard Hunter, who became a famous paper historian, builtanother hand mill in 1913 along the Hudson River in New York.But the hand paper making revival really got going in the1960s, when the flood of printmakers and small-press printerscreated a demand for fine handmade papers.   Today the U.S. has at least a dozen hand paper millsproducing high-quality blank and decorative sheets forartists and printers and fine stationery for discerningcorrespondents. You can go to Kate's Paperie (8 West 13thSt., New York, NY 10011; 212-633-0570; no catalog) and get athick white cotton sheet of writing paper and a matchingenvelope with a Japanese kozo lining flecked with gold, madeby Madeleine Pestiaux in California, for $9. Twinrocker inIndiana makes watercolor paper that sells for $14.60 and$16.05 a sheet at New York Central Art Supply (62 Third Ave.,New York, NY 10003; 212-473-7705; catalog).   Then there are the imported papers: Fabriano, in Italy,makes elegant stationery of hemp and linen; 50 sheets andenvelopes go for $150 at Kate's. For the confidentwatercolorist, Fabriano offers Exportazione, an all-cottonpaper that's as thick as cardboard and costs $23 for onesheet.   Buyer beware: Salespeople often call paper handmade whenit isn't. One such paper is Crown Mill stationery, fromBelgium, which is very nice but not handmade. Much of thepaper masquerading as handmade is actually mold-made, cratedby a cylindrical mold, or screen, that draws up pulp as itrotates in the vat. One way to tell if a sheet is handmade isby checking the edges. If all four edges are feathery and alittle uneven, they're &quot;deckled&quot; and the sheet is handmade.But the best way to tell a handcrafted sheet is the price,Mr. Stone says. &quot;You can't make a handmade sheet and sell itfor under $7. It's just too much work.&quot;   Even Japanese papers -- fibrous, thin but remarkablystrong, made from such exotic-sounding fibers as kozo,mitsumata, and gampi -- are not always handmade, says Mr.Stone. &quot;Some of them even have wood pulp in them.&quot;   The only way to know what's inside a sheet of paper, hesays, is to cut out a small square, boil it in sodiumhydroxide and water, beat it up in blender, put it under amicroscope and identify each fiber.   Or, you can make it yourself.   ---   Ms. Orgill writes for the Record of Bergen County, N.J.</TEXT></DOC>