<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920116-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>920116-0005.</DOCID><HL>   War Anniversary:   How Saddam Hussein   Survives Sanctions   And Dissent for a Year   ---   Oil Funds Squirreled Away,   Starting in the 1970s, Now   Provide a Lifeline for Iraq   ---   Reign of Terror Is Tight Rein   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and John J. Fialka   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/16/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)</MS><IN>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)PETROLEUM (PET)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)EGYPT (EG)EUROPE (EU)IRAN (IR)IRAQ (IZ)JORDAN (JD)KUWAIT (KU)LEBANON (LBN)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)SPAIN (SP)SYRIA (SY)SWITZERLAND (SZ)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- It is D-Day plus a year, and almosteverything has changed.   One year ago this week, American warplanes opened thesix-week war that drove Iraq from Kuwait. Today, Kuwait isfree, oil prices have fallen by nearly half, Iraq's nuclearprogram is being dismantled, and Arabs and Israelis aretalking peace.</LP><TEXT>   But one thing hasn't changed: Saddam Hussein is stillstanding. In fact, the White House's political woes raise thebizarre possibility that, despite his crushing defeat, SaddamHussein actually could outlast his nemesis, George Bush, inpower.   The story of how Saddam Hussein has survived despitesuffocating economic sanctions and growing internal dissentlies in large part in a cunning, little-understood economicsupport system the Iraqi ruler quietly constructed over thepast two decades. The central question now is whether thislife-support system -- coupled with a well-known system ofinternal terror -- will enable him to grind down the will ofthe international community and outlive the United Nationssanctions designed to strangle his economy.   In conversations with an array of U.S. officials, privateAmerican investigators and exiled Iraqi officials, there isuncertainty about the extent of Iraq's clandestine foreigneconomic activity, but all agree that it has been key to hissurvival. Former Iraqi officials say the story begins in theearly 1970s, when Iraq began siphoning oil revenue into akind of giant political slush fund. This eventually built amultibillion-dollar financial cushion that is now helpingsustain Saddam Hussein despite the U.N. sanctions.   Then, during the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war, Saddam Hussein'slieutenants created a subterranean network of tradingcompanies to feed his war machine. The network now operatesfrom Jordan and Switzerland to maintain a skeletal economyand keep his cronies satisfied despite sanctions.   &quot;We've been in this business a long time, and we've neverseen a procurement network put together like the one used bythe Iraqis in the 1980s,&quot; says Jules Kroll, head of KrollAssociates Inc., the New York investigation firm Kuwait hiredto track down Iraq's money. &quot;We believe they are now busyreconstructing that network using different names.&quot;   Obviously, Saddam Hussein needs more than money tosurvive. Fearful of enemies within, he has been consolidatingpower into an ever-smaller circle of relatives and cronies,many from his hometown of Tikrit. Within the last few months,he has replaced his prime minister, defense minister andinterior minister.   Now, Arab diplomats report tantalizing hints of dissensionwithin even that small circle of confidants. In one recentincident, these people say, the personal guards of the newIraqi defense minister, who is Saddam Hussein's cousin,exchanged gunfire with the security guards of the newinterior minister, who is Saddam Hussein's half-brother.   Both the American and Saudi Arabian governments in recentweeks have broadened their contacts with Iraqi dissidents,sensing that the fractious Shiite, Sunni and Kurdish elementsof the opposition may finally be starting to pull together.Saudi Arabia is trying to arrange an international conferencebringing together the full spectrum of Iraqi oppositiongroups. At least seven opposition radio transmitters arebeaming anti-Saddam messages into Iraq from Saudi Arabia,Syria, Iran, Kuwait and Egypt.   In the U.S., the Bush administration has just completed aquiet policy review that laid new plans to help SaddamHussein's foes if an internal insurrection begins.Administration officials insist that while they would love tosee Saddam Hussein's exit, it isn't crucial to see him go.They argue that the war effectively ended his ability tointimidate his neighbors -- and cite as proof the successfullaunching of the Arab-Israeli peace process despite Iraq'svirulent opposition. &quot;The dark force of Arab politics hasbeen put back in his box,&quot; argues a senior administrationaide.   Nonetheless, Saddam Hussein's continuing presence is anacute political embarrassment for President Bush as he facesa re-election campaign. For the Saudi Arabians, it is worsethan that: They see Saddam Hussein as a standing threat.   Just yesterday, Robert Gates, the U.S. director of centralintelligence, said in congressional testimony that Iraq willremain a &quot;primary&quot; threat to develop weapons of massdestruction as long as Saddam Hussein remains in power.   Iraqi dissidents argue that the time to oust SaddamHussein is this year. &quot;To tell you the truth, I can't putmore than a 50-50 hope on the chances for a change,&quot; saysSalah al-Shaikhly, a former Iraqi government planner who nowis active in the opposition. But, he says, &quot;If that 50% is tomaterialize, it's going to have to happen in the next fewmonths.&quot; Eventually, he says, the clamor for doing businesswith oil-rich Iraq will undermine international support forsanctions.   If Saddam Hussein does outlast the U.N. sanctions, much ofthe credit will be due to a secret decision by the Baathparty in 1972. Back then, when Saddam Hussein was stillrising through the Iraqi leadership, the party'sRevolutionary Command Council decreed that 5% of Iraq'sfuture oil revenue should be set aside for future&quot;eventualities,&quot; says Mr. al-Shaikhly, who was a seniorofficial in the planning ministry at the time. &quot;This moneywas probably invested in Switzerland and Japan and otherEuropean countries.&quot;   Saddam Hussein was one of three officials given power overthe fund, the former official says, and he is the only onestill alive. The other two were Adnan Khairallah, a formerdefense minister who died in a helicopter crash, and AdnanHamdani, a former minister of planning who was executed.   Another exiled official, former Planning Minister JawadHashim, says the fund may have grown to $30 billion by thestart of the Gulf War. Mr. Kroll, the New York investigator,is far more conservative, but still estimates that Iraq andSaddam Hussein's family have placed between $10 billion and$15 billion of liquid assets outside of Iraq. He figures nomore than a third of that is frozen by the sanctions, withthe rest escaping official detection.   (Officially, Iraq informed U.N. humanitarian officials inmid-July that it had a mere $14.8 million in foreign exchangereserves and an unspecified amount of gold bullion. But ithas refused to respond to a Security Council resolutionrequiring it to provide a monthly accounting of its foreigncurrency reserves at home and abroad, U.N. officials say.)   The money in Swiss accounts, Mr. Kroll asserts, isoverseen by Barzan Ibrahim, Saddam Hussein's half-brother,who is a member of the U.N.'s Human Rights Commission inGeneva. Mr. Ibrahim has previously denied the charge.   Whatever the precise source of Iraqi funds, they clearlyare being used to procure goods above and beyond thoseallowed by U.N. sanctions, which prohibit the sale of Iraqioil and limit imports to humanitarian needs such as food andmedicine. Even these restrictions may be loosening a little,as Iraq and U.N. officials negotiate to clear the way for thefirst open sale of Iraqi oil since the war. One sign thatIraq isn't desperate for cash is that it so far has rejecteda plan for it to sell $1.6 billion of oil because terms ofthe proposed transaction called for the U.N. to monitor theuse of the proceeds.   But there is evidence that deals already are being done.Mr. Kroll, U.S. businesspeople and Iraqi dissidents allreport that Iraq has set up a series of front companies andmiddlemen in Jordan to move oil and money out of Iraqi handsand to ship goods into the country. In Amman, Jordanians havebeen struck by the number of middle-class Iraqis holed up intheir city's hotels. &quot;Of course there's business going on,&quot;says one Jordanian businessman. &quot;It didn't stop during thewar, so why should it stop now? Jordan is Iraq's lifeline.Under the table, everyone is cutting deals.&quot;   Mr. Kroll points to what he believes is one such deal. Hedisplays telexes from the Madrid office of Marc Rich andamp; Co., aSwiss trading company, to Dr. Fadhil Othman, head of theIraqi State Oil Marketing Organization, in Amman. The telexoffer, dated last Aug. 26, says Marc Rich is interested inbuying 100,000 barrels of Iraqi oil a day and is alsointerested in selling grain and sugar to Iraq. The telexoffers no indication of the date of the offered transaction,aside from a reference in accompanying documents to Octoberoil prices.   Marc Rich also sent copies of the telex to Jaraco S.A., aGeneva-based trading company that Mr. Kroll says is operatedby Barzan Ibrahim and two Iranian brothers, Esfandiar andBahman Bakhtiar. Iranian exiles identify the brothers as thesons of Taymour Bakhtiar, a former head of Iran's secretpolice who went into exile in Iraq after he was fired by thelate Shah of Iran. Taymour Bakhtiar later was assassinated inIraq, and his widow and sons developed a close relationshipto Saddam Hussein, who is said to treat the Bakhtiar brothersas adopted sons.   Jaraco won't answer questions on the telexes or thecompany's ownership. &quot;We're sorry to tell you that ourcompany's policy is not to give any interviews,&quot; says anemployee who answers the phone at the firm's Geneva office.   Leonard Garment, a Washington lawyer who represents MarcRich in a case involving U.S. tax-evasion charges in NewYork, says Mr. Rich's company is being unfairly singled outby Mr. Kroll. &quot;Everybody and his cousin who is in the oilbusiness is in Amman negotiating arrangements on an `if, asand when' basis as to the lifting of the embargo,&quot; says Mr.Garment. He adds that Marc Rich's telex to the Iraqi oilmarketing organization was only an &quot;expression of interest&quot;and was made subject to the lifting of U.N. sanctions.   But others say the oil and other goods are moving now. Mr.Kroll says hundreds of Iraqi oil trucks arrive in Jordandaily. Mr. Kroll says his firm suspects the shipments gobeyond Jordan's energy needs and may wind up in Syria orLebanon. Similarly, Nathaniel Kern, vice president of ForeignReports, a Washington-based firm that provides political newsto oil and other companies operating in the Middle East, sayshis clients have reported &quot;substantial&quot; deals with Iraq beingtransacted in Amman, although Jordan has started to curbbusiness with Iraq within the last few days. &quot;Iraq's desireis to build up business lobbies throughout the Westernworld,&quot; he says. And Ahmad Chalabi, a London-based banker andleader of the Iraqi opposition, says the Iraqi government hasbeen &quot;getting raw material&quot; through Jordan, including steelto use in weapons-factory repairs.   Jordan insists it isn't sanctioning any sanctions-busting.&quot;I'm not aware of an Iraqi trade organization in Amman,&quot; saysMarwan Muasher, spokesman for the Jordanian Embassy inWashington. &quot;If there is evidence, let him {Mr. Kroll}produce it.&quot; While Iraqi individuals may travel to Ammanbecause it is their only outlet to the West, Mr. Muashersays, &quot;certainly they aren't conducting business on behalf oftheir government.&quot; He adds: &quot;We aren't involved as agovernment in any illegal activity with Iraq.&quot;   U.S. officials take a more cautious approach. They saygoods are indeed moving across the Jordanian border, and addthat they have raised the issue with the Jordaniangovernment. But they assert that the descriptions of heavytrade are overstated and that Jordan has taken steps to slowthe flow and carry out its trade with Iraq under terms ofU.N. sanctions. Perhaps because of pressure on Jordan, therehave been signs lately of an increasing flow of goods acrossthe Turkish-Iraqi border.   No one thinks that Saddam Hussein's economic sleight ofhand is enough to keep his entire country fat and happy. Andindeed there are hints of growing unrest. U.N. officialsreport that when they visit the southern Iraqi city of Basra,a Shiite stronghold, they hear gunfire at night. Thousands ofShiites are believed to be encamped in the swamps of theTigris-Euphrates delta. Recent weeks have broughtincreasingly frequent reports of fights within the army.Iraqi officials acknowledge they are doing house-to-housesearches for arms.   But some opposition leaders fear that Saddam Hussein cankeep enough money and goods flowing to satisfy the needs ofhis political cronies and the Iraqi Army units he needs tointimidate his enemies. According to Mr. Chalabi, thoseinclude three Republican Guards divisions positioned outsideBaghdad, and three divisions of his more elite protectionforce encamped inside the city. &quot;They are the ones who aregetting the best food and equipment,&quot; he says. Meanwhile,Saddam Hussein's foreign adversaries remain concerned thatparts of his nuclear weapons and missile programs remainhidden.   Despite reports of poverty and malnutrition, the Iraqiruler recently raised salaries of government and armyemployees by 20%. As for the rest of the Iraqi population,last weekend they received assurances that they didn't loselast year's war, after all: &quot;When the great confrontationtook place, God decreed that victory once again must go tothe Iraqis because they follow the path of truth while theirenemies follow the path of falsehood.&quot;   ---   Tony Horwitz in London contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>