<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900501-0050</DOCNO><DOCID>900501-0050.</DOCID><HL>   Off the Blacklist:   Did Hospital Supplier   Dump Its Israel Plant   To Win Arabs' Favor?   ---   Audit Committee at Baxter   Probes Venture in Syria;   Firm Denies It Broke Law   ---   Memo From Boycotters' Files   ----   By Sue Shellenbarger   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST BAX</CO><IN>MEDICAL SUPPLIES (MDS)</IN><GV>COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   DEERFIELD, Ill. -- As the world's largest hospitalsupplier, Baxter International Inc. was sorely tempted by theMiddle East's rich and growing health-care market. Increasingthe company's global business was a top priority forambitious Vernon R. Loucks, who became chief executiveofficer of Baxter in 1980, and the Middle East market seemeddestined over the years to produce sales in the billions ofdollars.   But for Baxter, the door was slammed shut. In 1971, Baxterhad built a plant in Israel to synthesize intravenous bodyfluids, and since the mid-1970s had been on the Arab League'sblacklist of corporations that do business with Israel. IfBaxter were to sell the plant for the purpose of getting offthe Arab blacklist, the company would violate Americananti-boycott law.</LP><TEXT>   Then last year, apparently out of the blue, Baxter seemedto get lucky. By doing nothing more than agreeing to a jointventure with a Syrian government agency to build anintravenous fluids plant in Syria, the company insists, itwas removed from the blacklist.   Was it mere coincidence that the previous year, without apublic announcement, Baxter sold its plant in Israel? Baxterinsists it was. It says it had been trying to rid itself ofthe plant for years for economic reasons having nothing to dowith the Arab boycott. The plant, Baxter says, was simply aloser.   At first, pro-Israeli groups that monitor the complianceof corporations with American anti-boycott law seemed willingto accept Baxter's explanation. But they are no longer.   In February, Baxter directors received a copy of anexplosive memorandum allegedly on file in the Arab League'sboycott office in Damascus. The memorandum was sent to thedirectors by a disgruntled former Baxter executive in theMiddle East, Dr. Richard Fuisz, a physician and Washington,D.C., businessman. The memorandum suggests a hithertounacknowledged connection between the sale of the Israeliplant and the Arab League's delisting of Baxter. Dr. Fuiszprovided The Wall Street Journal a copy of the memorandum andother documents dealing with Baxter's involvement in theMiddle East.   According to the boycott committee memorandum, Baxteritself requested removal from the blacklist through its Swisssubsidiary, Baxter AG. In support of the request, Baxter'sInternational Medical Technologies subsidiary in the MiddleEast supplied the Arab boycott committee detaileddocumentation on the Israeli plant sale and even promised notto deliver Israel modern technology or do any other businesswith it, the memorandum says.   Baxter's senior vice president and general counsel, G.Marshall Abbey, says the company hasn't violated the law. Heconfirms, however, that the audit committee of the Baxterboard of directors has commissioned a lawyer from the NewYork firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham andamp; Taft to conduct anindependent investigation. The Commerce Department and theSecurities and Exchange Commission are reviewing Baxter'sMiddle East activities. Neither will comment on the matter.   Influential Jewish leaders who have learned of the affairare demanding a full accounting from Baxter. Thecircumstances &quot;raise serious questions about the processBaxter went through&quot; in getting off the Arab blacklist, saysJess N. Hordes, Washington director of the Anti-DefamationLeague of B'nai B'rith. Mr. Hordes wrote Baxter's Mr. Loucksa letter on April 6 inquiring about evidence suggesting thatBaxter cooperated with the Arab boycott. Mr. Abbey reiteratedin a letter last week that the sale of the Israeli plant wasunrelated to its blacklisting; Mr. Hordes in turn says hestill isn't satisfied.   Baxter insists that it never contacted the boycottcommittee to request removal from the blacklist. Mr. Abbeysays International Medical Technologies never supplied anyinformation directly to the boycott committee. He also saysBaxter never under any circumstances &quot;made a promise not toget involved in Israel&quot; in the future.   The anti-boycott law was enacted in 1977 to discouragecorporations from continuing to seek Arab business withpromises to avoid commerce with Israel. Some companies hadeven refused to deal with other American firms that were onthe Arab blacklist, strengthening the boycott. FormerPresident Jimmy Carter had called the situation &quot;a disgrace.&quot;   The law forbids American companies to participate in anyforeign boycott and requires the public disclosure of anyrequests to cooperate with any boycott and of any acts ofcompliance. It also forbids companies to supply blacklistofficials any information that demonstrates cooperation withthe boycott.   Because of the law, some blacklisted companies have simplyabandoned pursuit of the Middle Eastern market. Others --among them Coca-Cola Co. -- have gradually won access tomarkets in moderate Arab League nations without haltingdealings with Israel. But the incentive to find loopholes inthe law has been strong.   &quot;Large corporations are on the horns of a dilemma,&quot; saysE. John Keller, a consultant in international assetprotection and risk assessment in Southlake, Texas. &quot;If theybelieve the Arab market is a lot larger than the Israelimarket -- and most of them do -- they will go that route. Yetthey are concerned,&quot; he says, about violating anti-boycottlaws or offending supporters of Israel in the U.S. &quot;It's adifficult line for U.S. companies to walk,&quot; he says.   Being shut out of the Middle East market, enriched by theoil boom of the 1970s and eary 1980s, was painful for Baxter.The Middle East promised rich rewards for a hospital supplierwith an early foothold in the region, and Baxter wanted to bethat company. But thanks to the blacklist, every Baxterinitiative in the region turned to sand.   In 1982, Baxter acquired Medcom Inc., a New Yorkmanufacturer of hospital-employee training materials that hadclose relations with Saudi Arabia, for $53 million. Despitethe blacklist, Baxter hoped to use the company's connectionsto sell all kinds of medical supplies in that kingdom.   &quot;As it turned out,&quot; Baxter later said in documents filedin a legal case, it &quot;could not do so.&quot; After losing money onMedcom for more than a year, Baxter executives were told bySaudi officials to &quot;stop wasting their time&quot; in the MiddleEast, according to a Baxter document. Baxter sold Medcom in1986 for just $3.77 million, or 7% of what it had paid forthe company. &quot;The deal from hell,&quot; a lawyer who researchedthe transaction characterized it.   Worse yet, Baxter's biggest acquisition ever, its $3.8billion purchase of American Hospital Supply Corp. in 1985,was also bruised by the blacklisting. American Hospital'sbusiness in Saudi Arabia dried up as soon as Baxter boughtthe company.   The source of all the trouble was just one among dozens offacilities that Baxter operated around the world, a smallintravenous fluids plant in Ashdod, Israel. Building theplant &quot;seemed like a good idea at the time,&quot; says Mr. Abbey,but it was only occasionally profitable. In 1980, Baxtersays, it began seeking a buyer. Mr. Abbey says CommerceDepartment officials at the time told Baxter that a salewouldn't violate the anti-boycott law. The CommerceDepartment won't comment.   There was talk among Baxter employees in the U.S. and theMiddle East that Baxter wanted to dump the plant to expandelsewhere in the Middle East. One of those who heard the talkwas Ghazi Braiche, a former employee of Saudi MedicalServices Ltd., a firm that had served as Saudi agent for aBaxter subsidiary. &quot;I said, `That's practically impossible todo (under the law),'&quot; Mr. Braiche recalls telling a SaudiMedical executive. &quot;How can you hide such a transaction?'&quot;   Baxter's talks with a prospective buyer for the Israeliplant fell through around 1983. Discussions about a possiblejoint venture with the Israeli government also failed, Mr.Abbey says. Mr. Loucks met with the Israeli prime minister atthe time, Menachem Begin, to tell him why Baxter wanted outof Israel, &quot;but Begin was beating him over the head to get usto export. We just couldn't do it,&quot; Mr. Abbey says, becausethe Israeli plant's production costs were too high. &quot;By 1985or 1986,&quot; he says, &quot;it was my conclusion that we would alwayshave an Israeli subsidiary, whether we wanted to or not.&quot;   Another thing seemed clear: If Baxter were ever to windelisting, Arab officials would demand proof that the Israelisubsidiary had been sold.   Nazir Sinan, a prominent Damascus attorney and specialistin boycott affairs, appeared at Baxter headquarters in thisquiet Chicago suburb on a spring day in 1985. Although Mr.Abbey says Mr. Sinan was uninvited, he managed to see Mr.Abbey and discuss delisting. &quot;My recollection is that I said,`Don't call me, I'll call you,'&quot; Mr. Abbey says. He says thatSaudi Medical Services sent Mr. Sinan to Deerfield. AhmedAl-Sanousi, president of Saudi Medical Services at the time,won't comment.   In any case, Mr. Sinan later wrote to Mr. Abbey to outlinethe steps Baxter must take to get off the blacklist. &quot;It isimperative,&quot; one letter said, that a sales contract for theIsraeli operations &quot;should provide that your company has soldthe factory and has terminated fully and finally its legal,technical, scientific, financial, labor and consultativerelations&quot; with Israel. There's no evidence that Baxterpursued the matter further with Mr. Sinan. But the next year,1986, Mr. Abbey flew to Damascus to explore a joint venturewith Syria.   American law doesn't prevent a U.S. company from gettingoff the blacklist by investing in an Arab country. Thetrouble can lie in getting the Arab League to agree that theinvestment alone is sufficient to remove the U.S. companyfrom the blacklist.   Syria, at first glance, wouldn't seem to offer ahospitable entry. It takes an especially hard line towardIsrael and has tolerated anti-Western terrorist groups. Itseconomy, a socialist thicket penetrated mostly bymultinational oil companies, makes profit from any jointventure questionable at best. A severe foreign-exchangeshortage, steep inflation and dubious public-healthconditions had kept many of Baxter's competitors away.   But Syria, as one of the Arab League boycott committee'stoughest members, is also one of its most influential. AndMr. Abbey had a card to play: an offer of Baxter capital andexpertise in building a Syrian intravenous fluids plant, thekind of facility seen critical to national security in thewar-torn Middle East -- and the kind of facility Baxter hadtried to sell in Israel.   After &quot;some false starts,&quot; Mr. Abbey says, Baxterultimately found a joint-venture partner, the GeneralEstablishment for Blood and Medical Industries, whichsupplies military and civilian hospitals. Last year, Baxterand Syria reached a general agreement for Baxter to build theplant in return for payment in Syrian pounds and part of theplant's production. Terms of the agreement, highly favorableto Syria, were finally completed on April 9.   Coincidentally, Baxter says, in 1988 the same potentialbuyer that had lost interest in the Israeli plant in 1983contacted Baxter again. Soon after, Baxter sold the plant tothe Israel concern, Teva Pharmaceuticals, for a price under$20 million, Baxter says. Baxter had stopped referring to theIsraeli plant in its yearly Form 10-K reports to the SECbeginning in 1986. Its 1985 acquisition of American HospitalSupply made Baxter so large, the company says, that thefinances of so small an operation as the Israeli plant wereno longer material.   Last fall, while terms of the Syrian joint venture werestill being negotiated, the boycott committee in Damascusremoved Baxter from the blacklist. The company won theunusual distinction of being sponsored by Syria. In the U.S.,watchdog groups began almost immediately to question thecircumstances surrounding Baxter's delisting. The companyasserted its innocence. In a letter, Mr. Abbey assured theAmerican Jewish Congress that the Israeli plant sale and thedelisting were unrelated.   The Boycott Law Bulletin, a newsletter published inHouston that monitors anti-boycott law compliance, wrote thatBaxter had made &quot;no overt or covert effort of any kind&quot; to beremoved from the blacklist, adding in a headline that Baxterwas delisted &quot;without even trying.&quot; Baxter confirmed theaccount, attributing its delisting to its Syrian jointventure.   Although the Commerce Department and the SEC continued tostudy Baxter's removal from the blacklist, the matter seemedto rest -- until Dr. Fuisz sent his package of documentsalong with a cover letter to Baxter directors on Feb. 2.   Dr. Fuisz, a founder and former chief executive officer ofBaxter's Middle Eastern Medcom subsidiary, had been oustedfrom his job and demoted in 1982. He filed a wrongfultermination and defamation suit against Baxter in federalcourt in New York in 1985. During the litigation Baxter andDr. Fuisz each accused the other of improper payments orgifts to influential Saudi Arabian businessmen and governmentofficials in attempts to win Middle Eastern sales or to getoff the Arab blacklist. None of the allegations were provenor disproven.   In a settlement, Baxter gave Dr. Fuisz an $800,000,five-year consultancy. But Dr. Fuisz remains bitter towardBaxter and unhappy with the outcome of the litigation.   Dr. Fuisz says he spent about $35,000 to send an agent toDamascus to obtain the Arab League memorandum last year. Hesays the agent used $10,000 to pay a boycott office employeeto permit the copying of the memorandum, which Dr. Fuisz sayswas considered secret. Why did Dr. Fuisz go to all thisexpense and trouble? &quot;I didn't do it for money,&quot; he says. &quot;Idid it because -- it may sound dumb, but it's the way I feelabout it -- I feel like I went to a Western movie and the badguys won. I hang with it because I want the Western movie toturn out right.&quot;   &quot;We are looking at it,&quot; John J. Louis, head of Baxter'saudit committee and former American ambassador to GreatBritain, says of the memorandum. As for the implications ofthe document, he says, &quot;We don't know enough to say for sure(what they are).&quot;   Without being specific, Mr. Abbey says the documentcontains &quot;a number of things that are just factually wrong.&quot;But he acknowledges &quot;some connection between the subjectsreferred to in (the memorandum) and materials I furnished ourjoint-venture partner&quot; in Syria. If such a partner gave theboycott committee the anti-Israel assurances described in thememorandum, rather than Baxter itself, Baxter's conduct mightescape sanctions under the &quot;local law exception&quot; to U.S.anti-boycott regulations. To determine whether an incidentqualifies as a local-law exception, a Commerce Departmentofficial says, the circumstances &quot;must be examined veryclosely.&quot;   While the Commerce Department won't discuss its probe ofBaxter, it acknowledges that determining a company'smotivation in the divestment of Israeli operations isdifficult. &quot;If the company did it because of the boycott,that would constitute a violation&quot; of the law, a departmentofficial says. &quot;But if they did it for legitimate businessreasons, it's not illegal. Obviously, we would have anevidence problem . . . in any effort to determine what theirmotives were.&quot;   Whatever the legal resolution of the affair, Baxter standsto take its lumps from anti-boycott groups. The civil finestypically imposed by the Commerce Department for anti-boycottviolations seldom are large enough to punish largecorporations. &quot;The real strength of U.S. anti-boycott law,&quot;says Joe Kamalick, editor of the Boycott Law Bulletin, &quot;isthe power of public disapproval.&quot;   American firms, he says, &quot;really hate being connected in apublic way with any questions about anti-boycott violations.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>