<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900508-0094</DOCNO><DOCID>900508-0094.</DOCID><HL>   In OPEC These Days, Those Nations   With Excess Capacity Set the Agenda   ----   By Allanna Sullivan and James Tanner   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/08/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><LP>   GENEVA -- In OPEC these days, some oil ministers are moreequal than others.   The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries thatwhirled through here last week for an emergency meeting ismarkedly different from the one that hovered over world oilmarkets for three decades. Not long ago, ministers from thetiniest of the 13 member-nations could be found inacrimonious eyeball-to-eyeball debate, and their dissentcould stall talks for days.</LP><TEXT>   Now, a handful of oil superpowers increasingly sets theagenda for and determines the outcome of such meetings, withmuch of the negotiating taking place before meetings.   &quot;Those with the excess capacity have the power,&quot; saysLawrence Goldstein of Petroleum Industry Research Foundationbased in New York.   Only four countries ringing the oil-rich Persian Gulf --Iran, Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia -- plus Venezuela commandthe reserves and pumping ability that will be needed toaddress long-term world demand. That group, founding membersof OPEC, alone accounts for more than 60% of the world's onetrillion barrels of proved oil reserves. Except possibly forthe United Arab Emirates, also on the Persian Gulf, the restof OPEC is believed either to be already pumping at or nearcapacity, or likely to reach that stage soon.   &quot;We've reached a point where eight or nine countries havefactored themselves out of the decision-making process&quot; inOPEC, says Ali Khalifa Al-Sabah, Kuwait's oil minister.   Certainly, the clout of OPEC's bit players is diminishingas the top producers call the shots more than ever before.Consider the just-concluded meeting here:   Diego Tamariz, Ecuador's oil minister, checked intoGeneva's Intercontinental Hotel largely ignored and carryinghis own suitcase. As he did at the previous meeting in Viennalast March, he spent a lot of time in his hotel room alonewhile ministers from OPEC's major producers huddled in hugesuites down the hall.   Mr. Tamariz concedes that he doesn't have much of a rolein such strategy sessions anymore; his oil production of lessthan 300,000 barrels a day is just too small. Ecuador, ranked12th, pumps barely more than 1% of the total 23.5 millionbarrels a day recently being produced by all 13 members ofOPEC.   At least he was here. Gabon and Qatar, two othersmall-scale members, didn't even send their oil ministersthis time -- or last. This is a major turnabout for OPEC'ssmaller producers who only a few years ago were among thecartel's pricing leaders. For example, Libya was the first tobreak the $30-a-barrel level and others followed.   Even more telling were the behind-the-scenes negotiationsleading up to the session.   With prices skidding 25% this year, the oil markets wanteda signal that OPEC would corral output, which by someestimates had been running 1.5 million barrels a day aboveits self-imposed ceiling and two million above demand. In asignificant move, Indonesian minister Ginandjar Kartasasmita,a respected and frequent mediator in OPEC affairs, concludeda full ministerial meeting wasn't needed. He sent a facsimilemessage to Saudi Arabia asking oil minister Hisham Nazer tosimply work out a solution to the crisis with other PersianGulf nations.   Mr. Ginandjar's logic was sound. After all, Saudi Arabia,Kuwait and United Arab Emirates, among OPEC's largestproducers, had sparked the price decline by producing beyondquota and flooding the market. And the three responded with aquick meeting in Jeddah last month, where they promised toadhere to their assigned quotas. But oil prices continued toslide.   With much of OPEC in a near panic, the acting president,Sadek Boussena of Algeria, hastily called an urgent meetingof all the ministers and drew up a script that would makeOPEC appear swift and decisive. But Kuwait and Saudi Arabiamaintained a grip on the process because its success orfailure depended on their willingness to cut output. In theend, they endorsed a plan that, on paper at least, woulderase nearly all the overproduction. The meeting lasted lessthan two days -- one of OPEC's shortest ever.   Appropriately, the same two cartel heavyweights pledged toshoulder almost 60% of the cut, effectively taking onresponsibility for the price of oil for the near future.   The concentration of OPEC's future production ability andpricing power within a few nations doesn't automaticallyspell trouble for oil consumers. Though OPEC accounts for 45%of consumption by the non-Communist world, the leadingproducers are launching multibillion-dollar programs tofurther expand their huge capacities even as the oil fieldsof others play out. Moreover, the current glut suggests thatthe large producers are still more interested in gainingmarket share than in working in concert to force higher andhigher prices.   Within OPEC, of course, the potential implications of amajority of members running out of oil are enormous. In time,OPEC meetings could become meaningless or even disappear. ThePersian Gulf powers -- the only producers with real growthpotential -- could divide up the market in informal talks,perhaps at most asking other ministers to rubber-stamp eachnewly cut bargain.   Some oil ministers insist that it's only a matter of timebefore national production quotas -- necessary in recentyears of excess capacity -- disappear just because mostmembers will be physically unable to pump more oil. &quot;Afterthree or four years, the problem will be prices, not thequotas,&quot; says Fawzi A. Shakshuki, Libya's oil minister.   Already, some members are accepting the notion of runningout of oil. Indonesia so openly acknowledges it has bumped upagainst its production limits that its minister, Mr.Ginandjar, last November broke a logjam by surrendering someof Indonesia's allotment to others. Last week he againvolunteered output cuts to break an impasse. Others arehaving reality imposed on them.   At the November meeting, a request by Mr. Shakshuki thatLibya be granted production parity with Kuwait as part ofthat meeting's pact faced great resistance. In the end, hefinally had to sign onto the settlement, winning nothing.&quot;Who cares what Libya thinks?&quot; one delegate said.   If nothing else, OPEC's meetings are losing their cache.Short-and-sweet gatherings are replacing the drawn-out combatof the past. In bygone days, chaos ruled when OPEC gatheredat the Intercontinental Hotel here. As many as 600 reportersand scores of traders, economists and investors jammed thelobby and hallways, nursing coffee and drinks and watchingministers openly scrap. The crowd, rabid for the slightestscrap of information, would pounce on any official whostrayed by. Fewer than 100 people monitored last week'smeeting, filling less than one-third of the lobby.   The shrinking of OPEC's unused capacity to five millionbarrels a day from the 10 million or 11 million barrels ofless than a decade ago is prompting some to question thefuture role of the organization.   &quot;Why should we limit ourselves only to oil?&quot; asks Felix P.Rossi-Guerrero, a Venezuelan ambassador-at-large. &quot;We couldhold meetings on agriculture. We could talk about trade andthe environment,&quot; he says. Mr. Nazer of Saudi Arabia, whichboasts one-fourth of the world's total oil reserves, alsosees new roles for OPEC, such as oil-related training andtechnical assistance.   Still, it's unlikely that OPEC anytime soon will hold ameeting and no one will come. &quot;The big brothers need theshield of the small fry&quot; so they can retain their claim asdefender of the Third World and avoid becoming known as arich man's club, says one former oil minister. And the smallfry need the superpowers for price protection, bargainingleverage and political prestige. Without the OPEC umbrella,small producers say they would never have been able tonationalize their oil fields or develop them on favorableterms with the international oil companies.   Many, therefore, will struggle to preserve their status,however humble, within the group. That's already happening inMr. Tamariz's Ecuador, where gasoline taxes have been boostedto discourage domestic consumption and maximize the amount ofoil available for export. As a result, bicycles and publictransportation are carrying more and more workers in Quito,the capital, to their jobs.</TEXT></DOC>