<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900625-0074</DOCNO><DOCID>900625-0074.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   Keep Lawyers -- and Legal Fees -- on a Leash   ----   By Hal O. Carroll</HL><DATE>06/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><LP>   The cost of legal defense in the U.S. has become asignificant factor in evaluating the competitiveness of U.S.operations. One multinational manufacturing company based inFrance sells fewer than 25% of its products in the U.S. Yet90% of its legal and insurance expenses were incurred here.There are 30 times as many lawsuits per capita in the U.S. asin Japan.   In addition to placing U.S. operations at a competitivedisadvantage in the global marketplace, fear of exposure tocatastrophic jury awards often distorts major strategic orproduct-development decisions. In a recent Conference Boardsurvey, 47% of the firms contacted reported havingdiscontinued at least one product line because of concernsabout liability litigation.</LP><TEXT>   Large verdicts catch the headlines, but the real cost oflitigation is the cost of defending cases. By restructuringthe purchasing and use of legal services, corporations canbring costs down while preserving or improving the quality oftheir legal services. The following suggestions referspecifically to litigation, but the approach outlined herecan be applied to all legal services.   -- Solicit bids, and hire more than one firm. Insurershave solicited bids on legal costs for decades. But manycompanies that expect and get substantial discounts on thepurchase of large quantities of equipment pay the full ratecharged by expensive law firms. Yet law firms will oftenreduce their hourly rate by 30% or 40% in exchange for acommitment for a minimum amount of work.   Soliciting bids introduces a welcome element ofcompetition into the process, but it is only a beginning. Ifthe bid is awarded to a single firm, the effect of pricecompetition ends as soon as the bid is awarded and the firmmakes itself indispensable. The experience of the militarywith sole source contracts illustrates the foolishness ofgiving all legal work to a single firm, even one selected bya bidding process.   -- Avoid excessive delegation. Companies that facelitigation in many states often employ lawyers in each state,as well as one or more national or regional &quot;supervisingcounsel&quot; to coordinate the work of the others. This iswasteful. Coordination should come entirely from inside thecorporation, thereby eliminating one layer of administration.   -- Bring control of litigation in-house through policiesand guidelines. Eliminating national supervising counsel doesaway with a layer of bureaucracy, but doesn't by itself bringcontrol of legal services inside the corporation. Often theoutside lawyers have near complete power to decide whichservices the client will buy and how much it will pay.   The company must adopt a detailed set of criteria for whenspecific work should be done, how long it should take andwhat it should cost. The starting point is that seniormanagement must get involved in the control of legal costs.Legal expenses are too important -- and too high -- to beleft to the lawyers. If purchasing is left to staffattorneys, they and the outside attorneys as suppliers tendto settle into patterns of doing business that arecomfortable but costly.   -- Institute a legal triage system: sort cases by exposurerisk. In the medical profession, &quot;triage&quot; is the sorting ofinjured persons according to the seriousness of theirinjuries. Seriousness in litigation is a function of the sizeof the possible verdict or settlement and the probability ofthat outcome. The precise categories depend on the nature ofthe litigation, but as a general rule, cases can be sortedinto three categories, and each category should be handleddifferently:   a) Low exposure cases should be handled by paralegals, forquick settlement. These cases involve claims for smallamounts of money. They are typified by breach of warrantycases with no personal injuries. In-house paralegalassistants can be trained to handle these and given authorityto settle them up to a specific amount.   b) Mid-range exposure cases should be handled by newerattorneys. These cases become a training ground for new lawfirms, which will first bid against one another and theneventually compete with more experienced lawyers to handlehigh exposure cases.   c) High exposure cases should be entrusted to experiencedtrial counsel. For these cases, as for the others, thereshould be more than one law firm, to preserve competition.   -- Senior management should participate in settinglitigation defense policy. A lawyer who wins is popular withthe client; a lawyer who loses is not. For the lawyer,therefore, the question of how much to do to win a case isalways an easy one: do everything possible. This may be asensible approach if the company has only one lawsuit, but itdoesn't work for a company with the full range of legalproblems.   All litigation decisions involve risks. Defending each andevery case results in legal fees out of proportion to theexposure. On the other hand, settling every case will quicklyidentify the corporation as an easy mark and settlement costswill go up. A balance is necessary.   -- Implement a detailed cost monitoring system. The use ofcomputers makes it possible to set up a detailed costmonitoring system. The company can require law firms tosubmit invoices with services categorized in a way thatpermits detailed analysis of time and cost. The analysisprogram will make it possible to perform detailed evaluationsof the invoices, comparing the cost of similar services bydifferent firms or by the same firm in different cases or atdifferent times in the same case. The service categorieswould include, as examples: meetings, pleading preparation,motion hearings, research, witness preparation, dispositionsand preparation of answers to interrogatories.   Controlling legal expenses is not just a task for thelegal department. The need for legal services will not goaway, but if senior management will take an active role inreviewing the way the work is handled, in selecting among thealternatives to find the most cost-effective approach and inmonitoring the result, it can substantially reduce the costof those services.   ---   Mr. Carroll is an attorney practicing in Pinckney,Michigan.</TEXT></DOC>