<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910426-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>910426-0095.</DOCID><HL>   Smelly Imports:   As Eastern Landfills   Reach Capacity, States   Send Garbage West   ---   Some Small Towns Are Awash   In Trash; Anger Is Building   In Little Center Point, Ind.   ---   Riding With the Dump Patrol   ----   By Rose Gutfeld   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MAW</CO><MS>INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><RE>ILLINOIS (IL)INDIANA (IND)KANSAS (KS)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NEW YORK (NY)OHIO (OH)PENNSYLVANIA (PA)</RE><LP>   CENTER POINT, Ind. -- As a cold rain drizzles onto herbeat-up Pontiac parked beside a country road, Terri Moorewatches and waits. She is on &quot;dump patrol.&quot;   Suddenly, an 18-wheeler rounds the bend. Mrs. Moore jumpsfrom the car, peers through her binoculars and barks into atape recorder:</LP><TEXT>   &quot;New Jersey truck plate. More trash from the East.&quot;   The truck is headed to the Center Point Sanitary Landfill.   Just a few years ago, only about two trucks a day woulddump trash at the facility, and it was local trash. Now, 20or 30 semitrailers roll into this town of 250 people everyday carrying bales of garbage. Most aren't from Center Point,or even Indiana. &quot;We've become a dumping ground for NewJersey and New York,&quot; fumes Marcene Hutchison, a Dump Patrolmember who has lived here for 26 years.   States along the East Coast are running out of places tostash their trash. But they have found a great place to dumpon: the Midwest. Private haulers ship trash hundreds ofmiles, to states with more open space and lower dumping fees.It's a quick and dirty expedient but it saves trouble backhome.   In the first three months of this year, about 75% of thetrash pouring into the Center Point town dump came from NewYork, New Jersey and the Philadelphia area.   One recent afternoon, landfill debris included a checkdrawn on an Englewood, N.J., bank, a copy of the PhiladelphiaInquirer and a Jericho, N.Y., check made payable to the ErieCounty clerk in Buffalo. This is hardly good, old Indianarefuse. And residents complain the trash-truck invasion hasdramatically changed their town 60 miles southwest ofIndianapolis for the worse. The air is filled with the soundof bulldozers backing up and, of course, the stench ofgarbage. What's more, the traffic has done considerabledamage to country roads.   Does this portend a modern war between the states? SomeMidwesterners are definitely fighting mad. &quot;We're sick andtired of accepting other peoples' garbage,&quot; complains IndianaGov. Evan Bayh. Armed with photographs and videotapes, groupssuch as the Dump Patrol and Hoosiers Opposed to Pollution ofthe Environment, or HOPE, are pressing for tougher landfillrestrictions. So are groups in Ohio and Illinois.   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency says that about75% of the nation's existing landfill space is scheduled tobe used up or closed over the next 10 years. And cities havea growing problem, particularly as environmental standardsbecome stricter and opposition to landfills and incineratorsin the neighborhood (anybody's neighborhood) gets more vocal.The stopgap solution for many East Coast localities can besummed up in two words: Westward, Ho]   What is really a national crisis struck first and hardestin densely populated states like New Jersey, where only 11landfills remain, down from more than 300 in the 1970s, andin New York, where disposal costs dwarf those in the Midwest.According to the National Solid Wastes ManagementAssociation, about 15 million tons of trash was shippedbetween states in 1989. Of this, more than 50% came from NewJersey (5.5 million tons) and New York (2.4 million tons).Meanwhile, trash imports in Indiana rose to between 20% and30% of the state's total trash in 1990, up from virtuallynothing in 1987.   Allen Moore, president of the wastes managementassociation, says the two Eastern states are just doing whatis simplest for them: &quot;It's easier to pay a large premium toship out of state than to pay the political price to expandcapacity at home.&quot;   But other states are growing less hospitable. Ohio allowslocal solid waste planning districts to set so-called tippingfees for out of state trash three times as high as fees forlocal trash. These fees, which amount to a surcharge ondisposal costs, typically run $1 or $2 per ton. The governoralso has called for setting up border inspections of trucks.In Christian County, Ill., near Springfield, a citizens groupis fighting trash shipped by rail from Brooklyn.   In Pennsylvania, where the rise in truck traffic en routeto Midwest dumps has been accompanied by an increase intraffic fatalities, the state has created Operation Trashnet.Pennsylvania conducts random checks to see that trucks areproperly covered and appropriately identified, among otherthings.   Interstate trash dumping will be a focus of congressionalefforts to rewrite federal waste-disposal law this year. Oneproposal would allow a state to impose and maintain higherfees on out-of-state waste if it has an approved plan to dealwith its own trash. Ultimately, states would be able to turnaway shipments from states that don't have such plans.   But so far, nobody has figured out how to turn back thetide of trash in places like Center Point, a town so small itdoesn't even have a gas station or restaurant. Its trash pit,however, is major league.   The trouble here all started in 1989 when a Camden, N.J.,partnership called Center Point Landfill Co. bought the towndump from local owners and began turning it into a landfillfor out-of-state trash.   This did not please Mrs. Moore, her husband, John, andtheir two children who had been living in their &quot;dream house&quot;half a mile away for two years. They have a 25-acre lot, afive-acre lake and, these days, a certain lack of peace andquiet.   The trucks, Mrs. Moore recalls, began rumbling in on aFriday in July. By Monday, the Dump Patrol had been born. Itsaim: to document which trucking companies were hauling wasteinto the state and how much they were hauling. Such evidence,they figured, might come in handy in court or the statelegislature. And it would help them publicize their cause. Atfirst, the truckers were as curious about the odd lot of DumpPatrollers along the side of the road as Mrs. Moore and herfellows were about the truckers. Some would stop to talk,mistaking the activists for employees of the landfilloperator.   As the weeks wore on, the group, which started out withfewer than a dozen people, grew in size and sophistication.Members began operating -- armed with binoculars, taperecorders, clipboards and cameras -- in two-person shiftsfrom a trailer donated by a local store, Thatcher's Camping andamp;Trailer Sales. One patroller would interview the drivers(many of whom claimed not to know what they were hauling)while the other recorded data.   Soon, the whole town felt besieged. For Mindy Huffman,part-owner with her twin sister Cindy of a craft shop calledCinamin, &quot;it is like living on a superhighway. Trucks comethrough almost 24 hours a day.&quot;   Scott and Cindy Rohrabaugh cite 30 instances of damage totheir property caused by wayward trucks. The local powercompany moved a utility pole into the Rohrabaughs' yard aftertrucks had knocked it over several times. Speeding truckshave damaged sewer lines and left tread marks on lawns.Residents put up a sign: &quot;East Coast Garbage Go Home.&quot;   After two weeks of data collection, Mrs. Moore headed forthe state legislature with the evidence. She left a room oflobbyists and politicians speechless.   But not for long. By the beginning of the 1990 legislativesession, members had proposed more bills on environmentalissues than on anything else. Included was one aimed atcurbing interstate dumping by imposing fees as high asshippers would have had to pay at a landfill close to home.The bill passed and was signed into law in March 1990.   The Dump Patrol, meanwhile, grew to 70 people doing shiftwork at the landfill seven to 10 hours a day. They also heldchili suppers, bake sales and recycling drives to pay theirlegal expenses. And someone wrote an anthem they sing now andagain that goes like this: &quot;Local dumping we don't mind.Out-of-state dumping is unkind. Here comes a semi round thebend. Oh when will this ever end?&quot; And so on.   Enthusiasm reached its peak in March last year when thenew law on interstate dumping took effect: The trucks stoppedcoming, and Center Point returned to normal. People huggedeach other in the street, and the Dump Patrol went onvacation.   But, as quickly as they had left, the trucks returned. Thestate law was struck down by a federal judge in Indianapolison the ground that it interfered with interstate commerce.The Dump Patrol returned from its hiatus.   The trash war between the states went national last summerwhen Indiana Republican Sen. Dan Coats ran for the Senateseat he had been appointed to when Dan Quayle left to becomevice president. Sen. Coats's campaign used a TV spot showinga cigar-chomping New Jersey thug in a Cape May T-shirtdumping a bag of garbage on the doorstep of an Indianacouple. Sen. Coats was also backing a bill allowing states toprohibit out-of-state garbage.   New Jersey officials were insulted. And Sen. Coats's billwas defeated, thanks largely to the efforts of New Jersey'stwo Democratic senators, Bill Bradley and Frank Lautenberg.(Sen. Coats has reintroduced his bill this year.)   Sen. Bradley argues that today's trash importers may betomorrow's trash exporters. &quot;Today, New Jersey exports a lotof solid waste,&quot; he says. &quot;However, other states may findthemselves in a very similar position when they are forced toclose the many facilities that operate in violation ofstricter environmental standards.&quot;   Officials in Eastern States generally concede thatexporting trash to the Midwest makes little environmentalsense, but they say they have no alternative. &quot;New Yorkdoesn't send its trash to Indiana&quot; as a matter of statepolicy, says Thomas Jorling, commissioner of the state'sdepartment of environmental conservation. &quot;It's just that themarketplace makes it a cheaper place than otheralternatives.&quot; He and other officials note that the privatelyowned Midwest facilities that accept East Coast trash aremaking money providing a service, which is good for localeconomies.   Indeed, some localities welcome trash imports for thatvery reason. Penn Township, near Pittsburgh, gets $1 a tonfor waste its landfill takes in from three local counties and$1.25 a ton for waste from other places, including New Yorkand New Jersey. Robert Geiger, chairman of the Penn Townshipcommissioners, says &quot;the landfill has been operating verywell.&quot; An open house is planned at the dump in June.   The township landfill is owned by Mid-American WasteSystems Inc. of Columbus, Ohio, which also acquired theCenter Point facility last June. In Center Point, the companyis talking with Clay County about reducing or haltingshipments from out of state, according to Jay Roberts, vicepresident of landfill operations. But he says it isn't clearthat local or regional waste would suffice to make thelandfill profitable should imports be stopped. And as for theDump Patrol, he says residents &quot;have to recognize it's nottheir landfill, it's ours.&quot;   The Dump Patrol is undeterred. Dump Walkers also nowstroll around the landfill regularly checking that a properdirt cover is put over the garbage. More anti-trashlegislation is pending in the state legislature. But localsconcede that it is probably too late for Center Point toreturn to small-town ways and good old days.   The dump has grown to 62 acres from 18. Mrs. Hutchison cansee the 30-foot mound of garbage from her backdoor. Residentsworry about leakage, about the safety of their water supply,about the resale value of their homes.   At a town playground, children are accosted by theconstant sound of bulldozer back-up alarms and, of course,the stench, which has replaced the smell of pine trees. Crowsand buzzards seem to have displaced songbirds.   Julie Parsons, a longtime resident, says she is oftenawakened by the noise of the 18-wheelers. &quot;What used to be anice, quiet town,&quot; she complains, &quot;is now a truck stop.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>