<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911002-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>911002-0107.</DOCID><HL>   Change of Heart:   Venezuela Now Woos   Oil Firms It Booted   In '70s Nationalization   ---   That Is Good News for U.S.;   Many Countries Now Vie   For Expertise and Capital   ---   President Perez's Turnaround   ----   By James Tanner   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/02/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   AN BP BTN C.PDV ELF G.VEB I.ENI J.MIB P RD SC XON</CO><MS>ENERGY (ENE)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>OIL-DRILLING AND EXPLORATION (DRL)DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIAL (IDD)HEAVY MACHINERY, FARM EQUIPMENT (MAC)OIL-EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES (OIE)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><NS>JOINT VENTURES (JVN)ORGANIZATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (OPC)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)</NS><RE>AFRICA (AF)CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)ILLINOIS (IL)ITALY (ITA)JAPAN (JA)NIGERIA (NI)NETHERLANDS (NL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)OKLAHOMA (OK)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)TEXAS (TX)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)VENEZUELA (VE)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   CARACAS -- When he was president of Venezuela in themid-1970s, Carlos Andres Perez booted out foreign oilcompanies. Now, president again, he is trying to get themback.   Mr. Perez makes no apology for the turnaround. Times andnations have changed, he tells some visiting foreignjournalists over breakfast at the Miraflores Palace here.&quot;Remember that in the past, warships even came to Venezuelato claim debts,&quot; he says.</LP><TEXT>   Now, Mr. Perez envisions a major new role for foreigncompanies -- especially multinationals such as Exxon Corp.and Royal Dutch/Shell Group, with their technology and deeppockets -- in a $40 billion-plus plan to speed development ofVenezuela's vast energy base.   The heart of the expansion plan is a 40% leap inoil-producing capacity, a net gain of a million barrels aday, in just five years. &quot;Our goal, and we stand firm on it,is to produce 3.5 million barrels per day for the year 1995,&quot;says Mr. Perez.   Mr. Perez's change of heart is part of a world-widepattern. From the Soviet Union to Peru, governments that onceshunned Western oil expertise and capital now are vying toattract them. The turnaround is especially remarkable incountries such as Venezuela, where oil is so closely tied tonationalism. Even now, Mr. Perez may have some persuading todo at home, where Venezuela's congress still must approve anydirect private roles in oil and gas projects.   Venezuela's new direction holds particular significancefor the U.S. Venezuela helped found the Organization ofPetroleum Exporting Countries, but it long has been a leadingand reliable supplier of oil to the U.S., even during theArab oil embargo. Venezuela provides nearly one millionbarrels a day, or nearly 7%, of the oil used by the U.S. Thatranks it third as a source of U.S. oil imports, behind onlySaudi Arabia and Canada.   Among the handful of countries that still have spareproducing capacity -- basically the five founders of OPEC --only Venezuela is outside the volatile Persian Gulf region.The others are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran.   Venezuela's oil reserves are respectable even by MiddleEast standards. Its proven conventional crude reserves areestimated at 60 billion barrels. That is 6% of the world'stotal. Counting the Orinoco Belt's huge deposits ofextra-heavy oil, Venezuela's recoverable reserves reach anastonishing 330 billion barrels. Orinoco's oil is not highlyprized because it is hard to pump, hard to refine and dirtyto burn, but all of those are problems that can best be fixedwith the technology of big oil companies.   Michael Skol, the U.S. ambassador here, calls Venezuela&quot;the Saudi Arabia of the Western Hemisphere.&quot;   To get the international oil companies back, however,President Perez must convince them that Venezuela not onlyoffers fewer political risks but bigger economic rewards thanother oil lands. It is suddenly a buyers' market for theseoil companies, largely because of the producing nations'urgent need for more revenue.   It is generally assumed that oil prices will remain flat,after adjustments for inflation, over the next several years.With the oil exporters no longer able to bank on escalatingprices, they must produce more barrels to produce moreincome. But their older oil fields are running dry. Thatmeans new technology and substantially more capital areneeded to rejuvenate these fields and develop new ones.   Even most members of the 13-nation OPEC are reaching forcapital and technical assistance from the oil companies. E.John P. Browne, British Petroleum Co.'s chief executive forexploration, estimates that OPEC needs investments of $150billion to meet the demand for its oil over the next decade.   BP already is going back into some OPEC countries whereformer &quot;concessions&quot; had been expropriated or nationalized.Only a few weeks ago, it resumed its search for oil inNigeria, where operations had been taken over in the 1970s ina spillover of a political dispute between the Nigerian andBritish governments over policies toward South Africa. &quot;Ourbreath has been taken away by the speed&quot; in which producingnations are putting out the welcome mat, Mr. Browne says.   BP has begun technical studies in Venezuela. It also isparticipating in a venture that developed and is marketing anew boiler fuel -- Orimulsion -- in which water is mixed withextra-heavy oil from Orinoco in a process that uses anemulsifier. In addition to BP, four other oil companies havesigned &quot;strategic association&quot; agreements with Petroleos deVenezuela, or PDVSA, the state-owned oil company, so far thisyear. The agreements are designed to lead to possiblejoint-venture megaprojects in which the foreign companieswill help build multibillion-dollar refineries in Venezuelaor abroad that can process Orinocotype oil.   PDVSA, according to its president, Andres Sosa Pietri,would own less than 50% of each of these associations, inorder to keep them attractive to foreign investors. Also, theforeign firms may get a crack at exploring for the morevaluable conventional crudes. &quot;The heavy oil is less and lessattractive in today's green-type environment, but if theygive us the linkage of exploring lighter crude areas, it willchange the picture considerably,&quot; says an official of one oilcompany holding talks with PDVSA.   Other companies already signed up for the &quot;association&quot;agreements are Veba A.G. of Germany, Elf Aquitaine of France,Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi of Italy and Amoco Corp. of theU.S. Other multinationals and smaller oil companies aresending technical teams to investigate.   In addition, a subsidiary of PDVSA and units of Exxon,Royal Dutch/Shell and Mitsubishi Corp. recently signed apreliminary development agreement for the huge CristobalColon project. This is a proposed $3 billion liquefiednatural gas project on Venezuela's Paria Peninsula, whereChristopher Columbus first landed in South America.   The project is still in its early stages -- economicstudies must be done and the congress must approve it beforeanything happens -- but Venezuelan oil officials see it as atest case for the first direct hydrocarbon activity byforeign firms since the nationalizations.   President Perez cites Cristobal Colon as the best evidenceof what he calls the &quot;new reality&quot; in relations betweenVenezuela and the foreign oil companies. &quot;If need arises tohave objective proof,&quot; he says, &quot;we can look at Shell andExxon, two nationalized oil companies in our country thathave renegotiated with us.&quot;   In fact, international oil companies, most of them basedin the U.S., were the chief developers of Venezuela's oilindustry, which began when oil was discovered in 1922, and somuch flooded out that world oil prices crashed. But Venezuelawas a world leader in wringing better terms from the oilcompanies and, by the 1960s, oil nationalism was beginning tosurge. In 1971, the Venezuelan congress decided that as oilconcessions ended, they wouldn't be renewed, but insteadwould revert to the government.   Although the first concession wasn't due to expire until1983, the oil companies promptly began to slow theirinvestments. Venezuela's oil production plunged. That led toanger toward the companies and set the stage for the 1976nationalization. Meanwhile, the architect of thenationalization, Mr. Perez -- then considered Latin America'sleading economic interventionist -- won a landslidepresidential victory.   During his first term, from 1974 to 1979, the oil bountywas plentiful. Oil prices were surging, thanks in part to the1973-74 Arab oil embargo, when Venezuela pumped flat out. Oilprices were expected to escalate forever. Waste was rampant.Venezuela spent billions on superhighways and luxury imports.But then, less than a decade later, the heady days were over.Oil prices were plunging. Venezuela's market share begandrying up. By the time Mr. Perez became president again, in1989, Venezuela was nearly bankrupt.   To provide the harsh medicine Venezuela needed to recover,Mr. Perez came into office the second time as a free marketerrather than a free spender, ready to undo what he had wroughtearlier. He reduced tariffs, removed price controls, raisedinterest rates and began a painful task of restructuringthrough privatization and deregulation. Some banks alreadyhave been privatized. Up for sale are the airline andtelephone companies.   When Iraq invaded Kuwait last August, once again pointingup the instability of Middle East oil, Mr. Perez and othersin Venezuela saw an opportunity to attract oil investmentanew.   Fortunately, President Perez had not burned his bridges tothe oil companies. He had used a pragmatic approach to thenationalization, which was handled in a businesslike way.Generally, the oil companies' compensation was consideredfair, although many of the companies grumbled about theterms.   Now, a few major oil firms such as Phillips Petroleum Co.are snubbing Venezuela's overtures. &quot;We have priorities inother parts of the world,&quot; says C. J. Silas, chairman ofPhillips. But one firm indication of the attractionsVenezuela holds for foreign oil companies came this summerafter PDVSA called for &quot;expressions of interest&quot; on a newprogram to resurrect washed-out oil fields. That brought morethan 200 inquiries.   Some of those fields were discovered as long ago as the1920s and 1930s, and most have been closed for 30 years aftercumulative oil production of 1.4 billion barrels. One PDVSAofficial calls them &quot;squeezed oranges.&quot; Still, with theirreactivation by foreign firms, &quot;we expect to increaseVenezuela's production by 150,000 to 200,000 barrels a day,&quot;says Celestino Armas, minister of energy and mines.   One company interested in the fields is Benton Oil andamp; GasCo. of California, a small oil and gas producer. &quot;That is ourniche: old fields that the majors leave behind which stillhave enough oil and gas that a company like ours can make aprofit,&quot; says Clancy Cottman, a Benton vice president. Also,he says, Venezuela is a stable country with good relationswith the U.S. and very large oil and gas reserves. &quot;If youwant to be a player there,&quot; he says, &quot;it might do you well toparticipate&quot; in the marginal fields program.   In addition, many oil people point out that Venezuela hasthe infrastructure that oil companies need -- the roads toget their rigs in and the pipelines to get the oil out. Italso has a large number of refineries, both at home and inEurope and the U.S. And, in Petroleos de Venezuela, it hasperhaps the world's most highly regarded and efficientstate-owned oil company.   Before nationalization, the oil companies were largelystaffed by Venezuelans, and by the time of thenationalization some 95% of all the employees in the oilindustry -- including many in top management -- wereVenezuelan. As a result, the successor companies were runessentially as they had been before the nationalization, withthe same people but with a new owner, the Venezuelangovernment.   Since nationalization, PDVSA has tripled Venezuela'sreserves with new finds. Its oil sales now total more than$14 billion a year. A recent Salomon Brothers report calledPDVSA &quot;the fourth-largest oil conglomerate in the world.&quot;   Oil companies still have some concerns about Venezuela'sinternal politics. Bringing in foreign companies remains ahighly charged issue, and the policy reversals of Mr. Perezaren't being welcomed wholeheartedly in Venezuela. There wereriots when gasoline prices were raised soon after he tookoffice. Subsidized gasoline prices, still dirt cheap by thestandards of most other countries, continue to increase, butgradually.   In addition, there is a hot debate over whether oil policyshould be set by the oil industry or the government. PDVSA'spresident, Mr. Sosa Pietri, says the government is just ashareholder in the industry and should limit its role tosupervision of the budget at the annual meeting. Mr. Armas,the oil minister, sees it differently. &quot;The ministry is notthe manager of the {oil} industry, but the controller whosets the policy,&quot; he says.   Foreign companies are watching. &quot;The politics casts alittle fresh doubt on the Venezuelan deals,&quot; says an officialof one major oil company, &quot;but everything wouldn't crater ifSosa Pietri lost his job tomorrow.&quot;   Mr. Perez will likely have the last word. He appointedboth men. &quot;There is no dispute,&quot; he says.</TEXT></DOC>