<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900823-0098</DOCNO><DOCID>900823-0098.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   There's No Turning Back Against Iraq   ----   By Hodding Carter III</HL><DATE>08/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   The United States is at war.   The buildup in the Arabian desert is a prelude to victoryor defeat. It cannot be anything else.</LP><TEXT>   This will not be another comic opera engagement, the giantof 250 million citizens scoring a famous victory over avacation island of 125,000, as in Grenada. It will not be alightning police action designed to replace our ownhand-picked, carefully trained bully boy, as in Panama. Thisis already a high-stakes war, of nerves now but almostinevitably of bloody victory or humiliating defeat. Onlystunning luck or incredibly deft diplomacy can forestall oneor the other, barring an unlikely cut-and-run by SaddamHussein.   To describe what President Bush has ordered as anythingother than undeclared war is sophistry. We are attempting toquarantine an aggressor. We are blockading the enemy, turningback his shipping on the open seas. Much of what we are doingis in cooperation with others, under a UN Security Councilmandate -- liberally interpreted -- in response to aninvasion which violated international law and threatens theworld's economic well-being.   Behind the facade of a common front, however, stands theunadorned reality of America as unilateral actor. If fightingbegins, we will do most of it. When assessments are made, theU.S. will be measured first.   It is too late to debate the president's wisdom on eachand every decision. For the record, let me say that I thinkPresident Bush has acted with intelligence, courage and speedin the wake of Iraq's seizure of Kuwait. He has acted for theright reasons and for reasons of necessity -- which are notentirely the same. But let me add that the Bushadministration's inclination to appease right up to themoment of unavoidable rupture has reaped its predictableharvest with Iraq, as it did with China. The president andhis chief lieutenants bear major responsibility for theunchecked growth of Saddam's appetite and capacity forserious mischief.   When the war is over, they should be held accountable; forthe moment, however, past appeasement and our individualresponses to what has been done in the nation's name arebeside the point. What matters is that the U.S. is committed.What is imperative is that we remain committed until Kuwaitis no longer occupied and Iraq is neutralized.   Suddenly, what seemed important only yesterday has beentrivialized, the looming obsessions of public debate reducedto relative insignificance. &quot;Just Who Is David Souter?&quot; askedthe cover of Time Magazine on Aug. 6. &quot;Who cares?&quot; is thereply two weeks later. Europe has all but vanished; SouthernAfrica's turmoil and Liberia's bloodletting are so much newsfrom nowhere; NASA's failures in space stray beyond thepublic's sight.   A large sign in the main waiting room of the Bangor,Maine, international airport says it all:   US Military: Good Luck, Hurry Back.   President Bush has put significant numbers of Americanservicemen and women in harm's way for the first time sinceVietnam. They will not be coming home any time soon. Nomatter whether Saddam Hussein backs off or hunkers down, tensof thousands of Americans will be stationed in the MiddleEast for months, and perhaps years.   The President and Congress must therefore promptly agreeon our national goals in the Persian Gulf and make them clearto the American people and to our friends and enemies abroad.Absent such a consensus, time is on Iraq's side, barring onlyall-out war.   Time is against us anyway, with or without consensus. Thelonger American troops are in Saudi Arabia, the more certaina fierce Arab reaction against their presence becomes.Considering the region's history over the past two centuries,Western expeditionary forces are hardly welcome, whileneither the widely rich sheikdoms nor the Saudi monarchyexcite much support in the Middle East. It will beexceedingly difficult to hold even the most pro-Western ordependent Arab states in a U.S.-run coalition for long. Veryfew months are going to pass before the United States becomesthe enemy of virtually the entire Arab world.   Time is our foe for another reason. If weeks stretch intomonths and Saddam Hussein remains implacably in place, hewill achieve the popular support he has always sought in theMiddle East. Reaction against his aggression, of moreinterest to Arab leaders than to their people in any case,will be marginalized, while he will be admired for hiscourage in standing up to Washington. Nothing succeeds likesuccess.   Time is on Iraq's side because we are an impatient people.This war is going to be costly -- in both military andeconomic terms. Public support will erode the longer it dragson without a resolution. Saddam is already playing skillfullyon the American psyche, holding U.S. citizens as hostages inwhat he repeatedly asserts will be a very long game. Storiesabout their families' grief and fear are prime time staples.   All these considerations underline the pressing need for adeclaration of explicit goals to go with the implicitdeclaration of war. The rationale for what we are doing mustbe publicly presented, openly debated and formally endorsed.   Central to forging a consensus is the proposition that weare in this to win, whether in concert or alone. Thealternative is unthinkable, not least because Saddam Husseinis no one-of-a-kind demon. There is a baker's dozen more cutfrom his cloth from one end of the earth to the other, eachwith an itch to march across frontiers. Let Saddam succeed,or escape unscathed, and there will be no restraining them.That way lies a world more unsafe than at any time since theheight of the Cold War.   Losing is also unthinkable because it would almostcertainly remove the United States from the world scene as anactive player. We have been internationalist for almost 50years because we feared world domination by powerfultotalitarians. That threat has all but vanished. If whatreplaces it is a series of humiliations arising from theassumption of responsibilities shunned by others no lessdirectly affected, the public outcry will not be long incoming. Broad-based and populist rather than right- orleft-wing, it will be overwhelming. Eighteen years afterGeorge McGovern made it his mantra at the Democraticconvention in Miami Beach, &quot;Come home, America&quot; will be therallying cry for a new national majority.   So, to say last what might as well have been said first,this is a conflict which requires a congressional declarationof war the moment that American forces engage in combat. TheWhite House should seek every congressional approval requiredor implied by law, starting with the War Powers Act. It isgoing to a very long haul. That is why President Bush shouldsee to it that the requirements of the Constitution are ashonored as those who die fighting in its name and under itsauthority. That's not only good government -- it's the way toensure that the nation will stay the course in what promisesto be a protracted and bloody crisis.   ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads atelevision production firm.</TEXT></DOC>