<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910219-0165</DOCNO><DOCID>910219-0165.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Soviet Peace Initiative Offered to Iraq   Seems to Demand Unconditional Pullout   ---   Proposal Offers Assurances   That Baghdad Regime   Would Be Left Intact   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A24</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST EUROP</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The Soviet Union offered Iraq a plan to endthe Persian Gulf war that appears to demand an unconditionalwithdrawal from Kuwait but offers in return some assurancesthat the anti-Iraq coalition won't seek to change Iraq'sgovernment.   In addition, early reports said the plan included at leasta vague Soviet pledge to press for action on other MiddleEast disputes, including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Ifthat part of the package would commit the U.S. to some courseof diplomacy, it is likely to be rejected by the White Houseas unacceptable &quot;linkage.&quot; But if it is general and onlybinds Moscow, President Bush might find it politicallydifficult to dismiss the plan.</LP><TEXT>   The White House neither accepted nor rejected the Sovietplan, saying only that it appreciated receiving SovietPresident Mikhail Gorbachev's account and adding that &quot;ourmilitary campaign remains on schedule.&quot; But last night, someadministration officials voiced skepticism about theproposal, which they said was relayed in the form of alengthy, confidential letter from Mr. Gorbachev.   They asserted that the plan appeared to offer SaddamHussein more of a reward in the form of linkage between theKuwait occupation and the Palestinian problem than the U.S.wants to give. The administration, they suggested, may simplyremain silent on the Soviet proposal in order to avoidfriction with Moscow while waiting to see whether Iraq islooking for a way out.   If Iraq rejects the proposal, the U.S. may never have tocommit itself. If Iraq accepts, the U.S. will have to decidewhether the plan is acceptable or whether it wants to rejectit and risk friction with allies favoring an end to the war.&quot;It doesn't require any response from us,&quot; White Housespokesman Marlin Fitzwater told reporters. &quot;In other words,this is between the Soviets and Iraq.&quot;   The Soviet peace proposal could represent the last chanceIraqi leader Saddam Hussein has to accept a political exitthat prevents even more large-scale destruction of hisnation's armed forces in a ground war. For President Bush,the plan appears to offer a clear political victory -- butwithout the guaranteed dismantling of the Saddam Husseinregime he seems to desire.   One factor that may make Mr. Bush reluctant to end the warnow in a compromise is a strong level of confidence amongsenior civilian officials that the U.S. Army will be able tomake short work of Iraqi troops in any ground war.   Certainly, Saddam Hussein will have to move extremelyquickly to capitalize on the Soviet proposal if he wants toavoid a ferocious ground war against his troops in Kuwait,which could begin at any time. Military officials in thePentagon say allied ground forces over the weekend finishedputting in place all of the troops and equipment needed tolaunch an assault to drive Iraq's army from Kuwait.   They say the assault could begin whenever President Bushorders it, and administration officials hinted that such anorder could well be issued this week. Last night's WhiteHouse meeting was certain to cover not only the Soviet peaceplan but war planning as well.   In preparation for a ground war and to gatherintelligence, special operations forces are being usedextensively by the U.S. against Iraqi units, officials said.And the U.S. has begun to take its air battle directly to theline fortifications of troops in Kuwait. As part of theirdefenses, Iraqi forces had filled ditches with crude oil, forexample, and U.S. military officials confirmed that alliedplanes have begun to target these earthworks and set fire tothe heavy oil.   In addition, the U.S. continued to apply powerfulspecialized bombs both to open a path through the Iraqi linesand to play havoc with the waiting Iraqi troops. According toa U.S. official, a fuel-air bomb, which disperses flammablegas over an area before exploding, was used in one case overan airfield. In another instance, a so-called daisy cutter, a15,000-pound bomb that can be used to clear mine fields, wasdropped on an Iraqi position and then followed by leaflets aspart of a campaign aimed at weakening morale.   Ships also appeared to be moving into position to supporta ground assault. Two U.S. warships were damaged by mines asthe American fleet gathered in the northern Persian Gulf tosupport a possible Marine amphibious landing in Kuwait orsouthern Iraq. American, British and Arab forces clashed withIraqi reconnaissance patrols and a U.S. F-16 jet crashed inenemy territory, but the pilot was rescued in a daringmission behind Iraqi lines.   The Soviet peace proposal is specifically aimed at headingoff full ground combat, though. Soviet presidential spokesmanVitaly Ignatenko, who attended a three-hour meeting at whichPresident Mikhail Gorbachev presented the plan to IraqiForeign Minister Tariq Aziz, said the proposal is fullyconsistent with United Nations resolutions demanding Iraq'sunconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.   The plan also appeared to contain assurances that Iraqwouldn't be dismantled and that the anti-Iraq coalition,which Moscow has generally supported, wouldn't interfere inIraqi internal affairs.   &quot;The message is . . . you leave unconditionally, but youknow at least that if you leave you can survive and therewill be no further interference in the internal affairs ofIraq,&quot; Sergei Gregoriev, a deputy spokesman for Mr.Gorbachev, told Britain's Independent Television News. Mr.Gregoriev said the plan signals Saddam Hussein that &quot;maybenot he but that his administration will survive.&quot;   But Soviet officials also hinted that the plan may includesome vague link between a withdrawal from Kuwait and progresstoward settling other Middle East disputes, particularly thePalestinian question, something President Bush considersflatly unacceptable.   Mr. Ignatenko, who attended the Gorbachev-Aziz meeting,said the Gorbachev plan &quot;envisions a wide spectrum of issueswhich could be settled in the Gulf region.&quot;   As sketched out by the Soviet comments, the planapparently would force Saddam Hussein to back out of Kuwaitwithout gaining any of the grandiose political and economicconcessions Iraq demanded in its peace offer Friday.   Even if the allies leave Iraq alone after a withdrawal,the outcome of the crisis could be so humiliating that SaddamHussein could lose his office or even his life.   Mr. Bush would achieve his overriding political goal. Buthe might not have any guarantee that his chief unspoken goal,the removal of Saddam Hussein as a troublemaker in theregion, would be met.   Though Mr. Bush hasn't made removal of the Iraqi leader anofficial policy goal, those who have talked privately withthe president in recent days say it has become clear he isafraid the Gulf region could remain unstable if SaddamHussein survives the war. And on Friday, Mr. Bush for thefirst time explicitly called on the Iraqi people to overthrowSaddam Hussein.   U.S. officials insist, though, that an Iraqi withdrawalfrom Kuwait now, coupled with the destruction of a largeportion of Baghdad's military machine and its chemical andnuclear weapons facilities, would be such a clear politicalvictory that Mr. Bush would accept it.   They also insist that they are prepared to stop the war atany time if a visible and massive Iraqi withdrawal begins.The war can be stopped even if significant ground combat isunder way, officials insist.   Still, the odds of achieving a political settlement seemlikely to diminish drastically if one isn't hammered outbefore a ground offensive has begun. U.S. officials say thecontemplated ground attack on Iraqi troops inside Kuwait willbe a lightning-fast, all-out assault combining massivefirepower on land with unrelenting air attacks and landingsfrom the sea.   &quot;It will be the fiercest, fastest ground campaign everseen,&quot; predicted a top Army officer privy to the war plan.The officer wouldn't discuss details of the plan, includingits timing. But he insisted that if the campaign goesaccording to plan, &quot;it could all be over in a couple ofweeks.&quot;   Optimistic Army officials say the plan envisions bypassingthe two-thirds of Iraq's army that is arrayed along Kuwait'ssouthern border and attacking the tough forces to their rear-- the Republican Guard and mobile reserves.   U.S. forces would punch through Iraq's front lines atseveral points and also sweep around them, moving deep intoIraq to the west of a Kuwaiti canyon called Wadi Al Batin.Meanwhile, the Marines may land in northeast Kuwait and raceto link up with their Army counterparts.   Once on the move, the U.S. troops would seek to defeat orsurround the Republican Guard and reserves, who they hope tofind weak and disoriented from weeks of unceasing alliedbombing. The Iraqis would face not only U.S. tanks andhelicopters but also continued pounding from the air. Armyplanners hope many of the Iraqi units would simply flee northor surrender after they witness the power of the assault.   High-tech equipment would still be showcased, particularlysophisticated radar and electronics equipment such as theairborne JStars electronic monitoring system. That allows theallies to track tanks and other armored vehicles from adistance far outside Iraqi artillery range.   A key feature of the plan, senior officers say, is that itfocuses on destroying Iraqi weapons rather than on randommowing down of enemy troops. &quot;The best thing for us would beto spare as many Iraqis as possible,&quot; said one war planner,&quot;treat them well as prisoners, then send them back withouttheir tanks to ask Saddam some hard questions.&quot;   But despite such efforts, the nature of the war is sure tofundamentally change once a ground battle starts. Instead ofdestroying things -- bunkers, bridges or runways -- thecampaign would be directed against Iraqi troops, and theimages of death will be more immediate for both the watchingArab world and Americans at home.   What's more, the Army's optimism could well be misplaced.Iraq's Republican Guard commander yesterday insisted hisforces are largely intact and ready to repel U.S. troops.Some U.S. commanders in the Gulf have told reporters theyfear Iraq will try its own pre-emptive strike.   And even if the ground campaign goes by the book, Americancasualties are sure to surge. Army officials concede that inthe first few hours alone, as U.S. forces punch throughIraq's front-line defenses, American deaths could match thesix-month total of 154 killed so far in combat and accidentsduring the air war and the long buildup that preceded it.   Those risks might be enough to push President Bush towardaccepting the kind of political end to the fighting offeredby the Soviet proposal. The Soviets seem to be playing offthe signal that Iraq sent by issuing its own peace proposalFriday. That plan linked an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait withIsraeli withdrawal from all Palestinian lands, demanded thatIraq receive war reparations and be forgiven its foreigndebts, and insisted that all foreign troops leave the regionwithin four weeks. Though the proposal was clearlyunacceptable to the U.S., it may have indicated that SaddamHussein has become concerned that he can't survive a militarydefeat from the U.S. and allied forces.   For the Soviets, the decision to offer their own peaceplan reinforced the view that Mr. Gorbachev hopes to positionhimself now as a peacemaker with an eye on claiming a keyrole in any new postwar order in the region. It also was adisplay of typical high-stakes boldness by Mr. Gorbachev: Ifsuccessful, he will be hailed the world round, but, at thesame time, he risks alienating anyone from the harshestSoviet hard-liner to Mr. Bush.   ---   David Rogers in Washington and Elisabeth Rubinfien inMoscow contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>