<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910603-0070</DOCNO><DOCID>910603-0070.</DOCID><HL>   Board of Contributors:   The Conservatives Find a Leader   ----   By Irving Kristol</HL><DATE>06/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS, TRENDS, INDEXES, PROJECTIONS, ANALYSES (ECO)TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   In the three days prior to the Memorial Day weekend, sometwo dozen conservative Republicans met in conclave to examinethe condition of the conservative movement. &quot;Movement&quot; is thekey word here.   The conference was sponsored by William Buckley's NationalReview, and most of those attending regarded themselves asconservatives first and Republicans second. By the end of themeeting, a significant reversal had occurred. It turned outthat, under current circumstances, most were Republicansfirst and conservatives second. George Bush may not havedisarmed Saddam Hussein, but he has in large measure disarmedthe conservative movement.</LP><TEXT>   Two important, interesting and unexpected revelationsoccurred during those days. The first involved the issue offoreign policy, the second the issue of abortion.   Foreign policy was simply not mentioned. The media havebeen full of stories of how the end of the Cold War hasgenerated a sharp division among conservatives, with somecommitted to &quot;exporting democracy,&quot; others urging a new&quot;realism&quot; based on our national interest, and still otherstrying to revive a version of preWorld War II isolationism.These divisions of opinion are real enough, but they seem notto have had any noticeable political repercussions.   The explanation is simple: George Bush has managed toembrace them all -- except perhaps the more ardentisolationists, who are by far the smallest faction. He isconducting an eclectic, ad hoc foreign policy that blursthese ideological distinctions, a policy that entirelysatisfies no one but doesn't entirely dissatisfy anyoneeither. The upshot is that conservatives have, in effect,entrusted the issue of foreign policy to President Bush. Thismay not last, but for the time being there is nothing thatcan be called a specific conservative agenda -- as distinctfrom a spectrum of conservative views -- on foreign policy.   Much the same thing can be said of the issue of abortion,which was mentioned in passing but sparked no controversy.Most of those present favor, as individuals, the principlesof the right-to-life movement. But they have come to realizethat, given the state of American opinion today, theseprinciples cannot be automatically translated into apolitical agenda. Mention was made of the poll data thatconsistently find some 20% of Americans in favor of makingabortion illegal, another 20% favoring abortion on demand,with the majority of Americans somewhere in between,generally supporting modest government restriction on, andregulation of, the practice of abortion.   This middle ground is now where the kinds of people whowere at the conference are prepared to relocate. They willfind it close to impossible to support a Republican candidatewho is unequivocally pro-choice. But if a Republicancandidate will at least support the end to governmentfinancing of abortions, he will be minimally acceptable.   To be sure, this was not, and did not pretend to be, ameeting representing all shades of conservative opinion, andthere is a right-to-life segment that is utterlyuncompromising on the question of abortion. It can beexpected that it will, where possible, field independentcandidates who could draw votes away from a Republicancandidate. But it is also fair to predict that, for theforeseeable future anyway, they will draw fewer votes thanhas hitherto been the case. With the cooperation of theSupreme Court, the abortion issue is going to be fought outwithin the framework of state politics rather than nationalpolitics, and will focus on matters of degree, wherecompromise is always possible. In any case, for conservativesgenerally, abortion has ceased to be a life-or-death issue.   What, then, is left of the (or a) conservative agenda? Thesharpest debate centered on economic policy, and especiallyon how conservatives are to cope with the consequences of thebudget agreement that the White House struck with theDemocratic majority in Congress.   There is little doubt that, without exception, all thosepresent strongly disapprove of the budget agreement, feelingthat in abandoning his &quot;no new taxes&quot; pledge, President Bushhas sorely disabled the Republican Party, depriving it ofmuch of its political identity. They would have preferred aconfrontation with the Democratic Congress and a bold&quot;sequestration&quot; under Gramm-Rudman. This policy might havethrown the government into temporary disarray but would havedrawn the party lines in an unambiguous and meaningful way.   But what's done is done, and the issue today is whatstrategy makes the most conservative sense. A small minorityargued that conservatives could not and should not try tolive with that budget agreement. Could not, because theDemocrats are already busy subverting the agreement and willput Republican congressmen in the impossible position ofvoting against popular legislation (health care, veterans'benefits, etc.). Should not, because the economy is in sosickly a condition that tax reform, both of the income taxand the capital-gains tax, is a precondition both of recoveryfrom the current recession and of future economic growth.   Every conservative nerve responded favorably to thisReaganesque approach, but most conservative minds did not.And this for two reasons:   First, it has become clear that while the budget agreementwas, from the conservative point of view, a bad deal -- inits terms as well as in principle -- it was not a deal inwhich nothing was gained. Indeed, something worthwhile wasgained, namely severe restrictions on congressional spendingover the next several years. The Congressional Budget Officehas forecast that if these restrictions are respected, by1995 we could be close to eliminating the budget deficit -- atraditional conservative goal. In addition, theserestrictions are politically frustrating for Democrats inCongress, many of whom are now in open rebellion against theagreement.   Second, President Bush is going to defend the budgetagreement to the bitter end. He paid a high price for it, andhe is not about to give up the gains he foresaw. He willsurely veto any and all Democratic efforts (already underway) to circumvent the agreement, and will then go to theAmerican people arguing that the Democratic Congress, onceagain, is engaged in its familiar strategy of taxing andspending, with negative consequences for the country'seconomic, social and political future. There is no wayconservatives could refuse to support him in thisconfrontation.   In sum, President Bush is now the leader of theconservative movement within the Republican Party. He is nottheir leader of choice, but he is their leader. To aconsiderable degree, of course, this results from hisdecisive leadership of the nation in the Gulf War and hisensuing popularity. If the economy continues to stagnate, orbegins to deteriorate, his popularity will erode and hisleadership will be called into question. But as things nowstand, conservatives are, much to their own surprise, loyalmembers of his constituency.   ---   Mr. Kristol, an American Enterprise Institute fellow,co-edits The Public Interest and publishes The NationalInterest.</TEXT></DOC>