<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900615-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>900615-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Don't Despair -- Middle East Peace Is Still Possible   ----   By Daniel Pipes</HL><DATE>06/15/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   American and Israeli officials have finally admitted thatthe Middle East peace process is dead. As a result, Secretaryof State James Baker asked the Israelis on Wednesday to setdown their realistic conditions for talking to thePalestinians. But rather than wait for Israel to move,Americans can get the ball rolling with some new ideas -- andhere is one.   Stand back from the details of the Arab-Israeli conflictand a remarkable symmetry becomes apparent: Palestinians wantfrom Israel what Israel wants from the Arab states --recognition and legitimacy. Thus, Palestinians seekconcessions from Israel and Israel seeks concessions from theArab states. Conversely, the Arab states try to avoid direct,public negotiations with Israel and Israel tries to avoidsuch negotiations with the Palestinians. This symmetrysuggests a fruitful new approach to the Arab-Israeliconflict.</LP><TEXT>   For over 40 years, Israelis have striven to get the Arabstates to accept first the existence and ultimately thelegitimacy of a Jewish state in Palestine. This central goalof Israeli diplomatic and military policy has been crownedwith partial success, including a peace treaty with Egypt andan acceptable working relationship with Jordan. But HosniMubarak of Egypt warned Israel that its actions could &quot;blowup the peace march and put the whole region on the verge of anew bloody confrontation,&quot; while Saddam Hussein of Iraqrecently threatened that &quot;our fire shall devour one half ofIsrael.&quot; And the Arab summit just held in Baghdad was themost bellicose conclave in over a decade.   In public (in private is another matter entirely), Arabsinsist that Israel must accept a Palestinian state on landnow controlled by Israel. For decades, the Arabs haveresorted to every form of pressure, from terrorism todiplomacy, to win this acceptance. Here too, some progresshas been made. Israel recognized Palestinian rights at CampDavid in 1978 and the Palestinian cause is the most visiblenationalist movement in the world, winning widespreadsympathy (even in Israel itself). Yet like Israel's quest,the Arabs' is still unsuccessful. The PLO controls not aninch of Palestine.   We see before us a parallelism of failure and frustration:Israel cannot get what it wants from the Arab states, and thePalestinians cannot get what they want from Israel. But thisvery parallelism potentially offers opportunity. Resolutionof the Arab-Israel conflict in its entirety requires thatboth aspirations be addressed, so why not yoke them together?   As an honest broker, the U.S. government should linkconcessions to Israel by the Arab states with Israeliconcessions to the Palestinians. That is, when the Arabstates give Israel something it wants, Israelis should then-- and only then -- be expected to give something in turn tothe Palestinians.   Trade-offs can be small or large. If, for example, theSaudis would end their economic boycott of Israel, Israeliscould increase Palestinian access to underground water on theWest Bank. Damascus might reduce the size of its standingarmy by 5% a year; in return, Jerusalem would cease toestablish new Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.When Saddam Hussein signs a peace treaty with Israel, YasserArafat would be invited to Jerusalem. And finally, when allthe Arab states sign peace treaties with Israel, thePalestinians get their state.   These are merely hypothetical illustrations, for it is notpossible to predict what actual deals would be cut. It ispossible to predict, however, that the parties would spendlong hours trying to find a just balance. The devil is in thedetail; but that is fine, for hammering out quid pro quoswould be a constructive process, and one that could beextended to most issues in the Arab-Israeli conflict,including the compensation of refugees, Arab rights inIsrael, the control of territories and even the dispositionof Jerusalem.   Everyone would gain. The Arab states achieve what they sayis their main goal, justice for the Palestinians. Israel getspeace. Palestinians have their state.   This new peace process bleaches out polemics. Rather thanconcentrate on hypothetical intentions (has Mr. Arafat reallyaccepted Israel? Will the Israelis expel West Bankresidents?), it focuses on practical matters ofgive-and-take. It places the burden of the initiativesquarely on the Arab states -- where it should be, for it isCairo, Damascus, Baghdad and the other capitals (and notIsraelis or Palestinians) that ultimately decide whether theconflict continues or ends. If, as many suspect, the Arabstates are not really interested either in peace with Israelor in a Palestinian state, this process gets that fact out inthe open.   Above all, this approach helps Israelis and Palestiniansto discover the vital interest they share in common: an endto the Arab states' hostility to Israel. In the future,Palestinians would exert pressure on the Arab presidents,kings and emirs to make concessions to Israel -- and what astartling change for the better that would be.   The Israelis have in effect already endorsed this plan. AsPrime Minister Yitzhak Shamir told The Wall Street Journalearlier this week, &quot;Activity of the U.S. hasn't only to beconcentrated on talks with Palestinians: There has to beeffort also with Arab countries.&quot; It is now futile to addressIsraeli or Palestinian aspirations in isolation. All thepieces of the problem have to be wrapped together and dealtwith at the same time. The U.S. government should leavebehind the desultory efforts of past years and try somethingwith fewer risks and better chances of success.   ---   Mr. Pipes, the director of the Foreign Policy ResearchInstitute in Philadelphia, is the author of &quot;The RushdieAffair,&quot; (Birch Lane Press, 1990).</TEXT></DOC>