<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910826-0009</DOCNO><DOCID>910826-0009.</DOCID><HL>   Crisis in the Soviet Union -- Forces of Fission:   Soviet Upheaval Stirs   Worry That U.S.S.R.   Just Might Unravel   ---   Republics Seek Independence   As Communists Collapse;   Is a New Union Emerging?   ---   Fears of Hard-Liners Linger   ----   By Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- Is the Soviet Union, long glued together by fearand force, starting to fly apart?   With a speed that few thought possible, and perhaps evenfewer can control, many of the republics of the U.S.S.R. aredeclaring their independence from the center -- unilateraldeclarations that bespeak a new self-confidence andincreasing nationalism. Such insubordination would have beeninconceivable in decades past; the KGB would have uncoveredit, tanks would have crushed it.</LP><TEXT>   But the hard-line coup that failed last week has leftbehind such disarray that independent action of almost anysort seems possible. Over the weekend, Mikhail Gorbachevstepped down as head of the Communist Party and repudiatedits role in the coup. With the party -- which had long boundthe republics in its grip -- thus eviscerated, the movestoward independence gathered even more speed.   &quot;Things are happening so quickly,&quot; says Tiia Raudma, aspokeswoman at the Foreign Ministry in the Baltic state ofEstonia. &quot;We are taking advantage of opportunities we didn'thave before.&quot;   On Saturday, the Ukraine declared independence, subject toa referendum on Dec. 1. It is the U.S.S.R.'s secondmost-populous republic and its breadbasket. Vladimir Leninonce said that &quot;losing the Ukraine would be like losing ourhead.&quot;   Byelorussia, which in the past was a stalwart supporter ofthe central regime, said Sunday it too wanted greaterself-rule. The republic also booted out Communist PresidentNikolai Dementei for not opposing the coup.   Moldavia is expected to declare its independence tomorrow.And Latvia and Estonia formally declared their independencelast week, following the lead of Lithuania which did so lastyear; all three Baltic states also outlawed the CommunistParty. Over the weekend, the three were recognized by therepublic of Russia and even some Western nations.   Meanwhile, others of the 15 far-flung republics haveeither declared independence in earlier months or voiceddemands for greater sovereignty.   Clearly, some of the declarations may simply mark thenation's evolution into a still-unified but different sort ofconfederation. Much now depends on whether the country'sleaders can work to avoid anarchy and ensure a swifttransition to a new power structure to fill the void left bythe collapsing Communist Party.   If the leaders succeed, the abortive coup may turn out tohave been the catalyst for a far more rapid transformation ofSoviet society than many had thought possible. If they fail-- and that remains a real possibility -- some are alreadywarning of economic and political chaos, and perhaps evenanother attempt by hard-liners to seize power.   &quot;If intelligent people in the country don't carry thevictory,&quot; contends Vitaly Tretyakov, a leading liberalcommentator and editor of the Independent Newspaper, &quot;therewill be other imbeciles to replace the last ones&quot; whoattempted the coup.   Already, the Kremlin has virtually imploded. Thegovernment, which supported the coup, has been dismissed andreplaced by an interim four-man team that includes IvanSilayev, the Russian premier, and Grigory Yavlinsky, a youngSoviet economist well-known for his radical plan to set up amarket economy in the U.S.S.R.   Boris Yeltsin, the elected Russian president and now theleading Soviet political figure, seized KGB and CommunistParty archives, took control of government communicationsand, in effect, forced President Gorbachev to endorse hisradical measures. Communist Party involvement in the army andlaw-enforcement agencies, including the KGB, has beenformally outlawed.   But most stunning of all were Mr. Gorbachev's moves todestroy the Soviet Communist Party, which, as recently asThursday, he had defended and pledged to reform. In briefstatements read on Saturday's television news, he announcedhe was stepping down as general secretary and wasrecommending to the ruling Central Committee that it dissolvethe entire 15-million-strong party. Sunday night, the CentralCommittee meekly agreed. Mr. Gorbachev also ordered all partyproperty, which includes most of the nation's printingpresses and some of its prime real estate, to be turned overto local governments.   Explaining his decisions, Mr. Gorbachev criticized theparty's leaders for not opposing the coup, and accused someof being active conspirators. But some people view all thiswith skepticism. They believe that Mr. Gorbachev isdestroying the party simply to catch up with the nation'spolitical mood and match the radicalism of Mr. Yeltsin, whohas already usurped many of the Soviet president's powers.   Mr. Gorbachev's radical actions are fueling sentimentswidely expressed in the U.S.S.R. that he is trying to provehe wasn't involved in the coup and is trying to divertattention from his role in establishing the preconditions forit -- namely, appointing the conspirators to high governmentpositions.   &quot;The opinion is spreading that Gorbachev is taking thesesteps to prove that he was not involved,&quot; says VladimirLyakishev, a longtime Gorbachev supporter and member of theCommunist Party's Central Committee. Like others who say it'splausible that Mr. Gorbachev may not be telling all he knows,Mr. Lyakishev doesn't have hard evidence to prove hissuspicions.   But the conspiracy theorists hammer away at the fact thatthe plotters consisted of virtually all of Mr. Gorbachev'shandpicked and closest aides, including his chief of staff,whom he said he &quot;trusted implicitly.&quot; Marshal SergeiAkhromeyev, Mr. Gorbachev's personal military adviser and aman who hadn't yet been linked with the coup attempt,committed suicide Sunday, raising suspicions that he, too,may have been involved.   Moreover, people here have noted that, after they werearrested, several members of the coup's leadership appearedbewildered at the turn of events, suggesting they themselveshad been betrayed or misled.   &quot;It seems to me that many {of those involved in the plot}were caught up in a different game from the one theythought,&quot; contends Valentin Pavlov, the former prime ministerand himself a leader of the coup. &quot;The majority was sincerelyconvinced that they were taking good measures and didn't haveany intention of staging a sort of {coup}.&quot;   Such remarks may just be an after-the-fact defense. Butthey are helping to discredit Mr. Gorbachev and diminish hisrole in rebuilding the nation while Mr. Yeltsin just keepsgetting stronger. The Soviet president is expected toindicate more clearly how he sees his immediate tasks -- andhow he plans to deal with Mr. Yeltsin -- at a special sessionof the national parliament, which opens today.   Political leaders in the country face two crucial issuesthat need to be resolved quickly: What's to become of the newfederal treaty and what should the new system of publicadministration look like.   After three months of painstaking work, a draft uniontreaty that would have transferred sweeping powers from theKremlin to individual republics was to have been signed byMr. Gorbachev and three republics, including Russia, lastTuesday. Its provisions -- essentially stripping centralgovernment of most major economic and political functions --are what angered the country's hard-liners and prompted thePutsch.   Mr. Yeltsin and other leaders now say they want to revampthe treaty to take into account the new balance of power inthe U.S.S.R. Among the most contentious points, Russia istalking about setting up its own national guard.   The Ukraine's declaration of independence could also havea major effect on the fate of the treaty. Even before thecoup, the republic's Communist leader, Leonid Kravchuk,advocated a loose confederation of independent states, ratherthan the treaty's closer-knit federal structure. In declaringindependence, the republic's parliament also voted to assumecontrol of all Soviet military personnel currently stationedin the Ukraine, believed to number more than one million men-- effectively one of the biggest armies in Europe.   For once, almost all the feuding factions in the UkrainianParliament agreed on the radical step. &quot;The most paradoxicalthing is that those people who rotted in prison for anindependent Ukraine and those who imprisoned them both votedto declare independence,&quot; says Vyacheslav Chernovil, a formerpolitical prisoner who heads the Lvov region council.   Revamping the union treaty to take into account all thenew demands of the republics could take considerable time.The Ukraine says it is in no hurry to sign any agreement. Andthe extremely complex process of negotiating economicagreements with the individual Baltic republics and otherswho don't want to join the new union has barely got underway.   Yet time is of the essence, say many people. They fearthat the absence of any treaty could create a vacuum of powerthat enables hard-liners to claw their way back. At today'sparliament session, for example, leaders of the Soyuz groupof deputies, who have long fiercely criticized Mr. Gorbachev,are expected to renew their attacks on the treaty.   What's more, the emergence of Mr. Yeltsin as the strongestnational political figure, has raised ethnic sensitivities insome non-Russian republics that fear being bulldozed by theRussian president. Mr. Kravchuk, the Ukrainian leader, toldparliament, &quot;I am alarmed by calls in Russia for mostportfolios in a new union government to go to Russiancitizens.&quot;   Filling the vacuum of power left by the Communist Partymay be an even more complex task than making final the uniontreaty. Its role has been declining steadily since 1988, whenMr. Gorbachev unveiled his political reform program thataimed to transfer power to elected state bodies. Even so, theparty's destruction will inevitably leave big gaps in thesystem of public administration, especially in the provinceswhere reformers haven't yet taken strong hold. It also raisesthe risk that party opponents of Mr. Gorbachev who stillwield positions of power in local government could easilyblock the more radical reforms he and Mr. Yeltsin are likelyto introduce.   Viktor Goncharov shows why the party has become such areactionary stronghold, and how its dissolution could causeproblems.   Mr. Goncharov is a parliamentary deputy in his 30s fromYenakiyevo, a grimy coal-mining town in the Ukraine. He is astrong supporter of Mr. Gorbachev, a man he describes as &quot;ademocrat, one of us.&quot; He rose through the ranks of theCommunist system but soon discovered that life in the partywasn't easy, even in the Gorbachev era. In Yenakiyevo, heconstantly clashed with what he calls the &quot;partocracy,&quot;entrenched local bureaucrats who blocked Mr. Gorbachev'sreforms or just ignored them, clinging to their seats becauseof privileges such as nice homes and special food deliveries.Unlike them, Mr. Goncharov says, he believed, and stillbelieves, in some of the ideals forwarded by Marx, Engels andLenin. &quot;I don't worship them, but I find a lot that ishealthy in them.&quot;   Exasperated by his colleagues, he took a drastic step justover a year ago: He resigned from the party. &quot;I left becauseI didn't think it could be reformed,&quot; he says, with somesadness.   Many have done likewise. Over the past 18 months, somefour million members have turned in their red party cards,leaving a still substantial 15 million people in the party.Many, though not all, of those who stayed on are partyfunctionaries; the ones who left tended to be the moreliberal thinkers.   &quot;There are now 15 million utterly bewildered Communists,&quot;complains Mr. Lyakishev, the central committee member. Heopposes Mr. Gorbachev's decision to dissolve the party andbelieves it can be renewed, given a new social-democraticorientation and streamlined to exclude the hard-liners.   Mr. Goncharov, however, supports Mr. Gorbachev's move.Watching the president's declarations on the party read ontelevision Saturday night, he rubbed his hands and exclaimed:&quot;That's the right path.&quot; After thinking over the implicationsfor a moment, however, he added, &quot;It's a first step, but it'snot one that will solve all our problems.&quot;   The reason is that the party continues to play animportant role in society, particularly in the still-rigidSoviet economy. Until recently, it all but ran the nation'sindustry, ensuring that commands made by planners in Moscowwere implemented locally. Now the country's factories reportto a variety of ministries and local and state officials;notably, no single entity has overall control the way theparty used to. That, it turns out, has led to considerablechaos in many areas of manufacturing.   Given this new decentralized system, Mr. Goncharov worriesthat more hardline factory managers may just ignore demandsfor reform they disagree with. Moreover, says Mr. Lyakishev,if the nation pushes veteran members of the Communist Partyout of administrative positions, it will lose &quot;colossalexperience.&quot;   Even local authorities in reform-minded cities haven'tfound a way to resolve such problems. In Moscow andLeningrad, where radical mayors took office promising a purgeof hard-liners, the results have often been chaotic, withnobody obeying their instructions.   Mr. Yeltsin is also angered at the way some of his decreesare simply ignored locally, and is talking about the need torevamp the way the nation is run. In a recent speech, hecalled for the establishment of government inspectors, whowould travel around the country and act as his &quot;eyes andears.&quot;   Many reformers believe the abortive coup will spur theprocess of finding a system of public administration toreplace the Communist Party. &quot;It's clear we can't go on likethis any more,&quot; says Moscow's mayor, Gavriil Popov. &quot;Thetransformation of society has to get started.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>