<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900403-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>900403-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   FBI Staff Found Too Small for Sandamp;L Cases   ----   By Paul M. Barrett and Martha Brannigan   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   LATAM LABOR J.NOM EUROP FREST</CO><IN>SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The House Government Operations commerce subcommittee saysthe Federal Bureau of Investigation lacks sufficient agentsto investigate savings-and-loan fraud.   Accusing the Bush administration of failing to match itsrhetoric with manpower, the subcommittee is relying on anauthoritative source: an FBI study.</LP><TEXT>   Rep. Doug Barnard (D., Ga.), chairman of the House panel,has asked the House Appropriations Committee to allocate $75million for Sandamp;L enforcement for fiscal 1991, which beginsOct. 1. The administration has requested $50 million.   In a study of 59 field offices last year, the FBIconcluded it needed 425 new agents to begin work on some2,300 &quot;inactive,&quot; or unaddressed, fraud and embezzlementcases involving savings and loans. In December, AttorneyGeneral Dick Thornburgh announced the deployment of 202agents -- less than half of what the FBI wanted.   &quot;It just looks like there isn't a serious-enough effort inthe Justice Department,&quot; said Mr. Barnard. The allocation herequested includes money for additional federal prosecutors,which Mr. Barnard contends are also badly needed.   In testimony before the committee, Edward Dennis Jr.,chief of the Justice Department's criminal division,responded testily to Mr. Barnard's call for more agents andprosecutors. He conceded, however, that &quot;numerous districtshave a significant unaddressed backlog&quot; of Sandamp;L cases.   Thomas Jones, the FBI's chief of white-collar crimeinvestigations, said that staffing decisions were madejointly with the Justice Department. &quot;We can always use morepeople; the more we have, certainly the better job we cando,&quot; he said.   An Appropriations Committee staff member observed that theadministration is &quot;primarily focused, as is Congress, ondrugs. Getting them to focus on bank fraud is going to takesome time.&quot;   Meanwhile, Sandamp;L fraud cases, which burgeoned in the 1980safter the Reagan administration deregulated the industry,continue to increase. The reason: As regulators close morefailed Sandamp;Ls, they frequently uncover criminal allegations andrefer the cases to the Justice Department.   ---   MANUEL NORIEGA'S LAWYERS put the U.S. invasion of Panamaon trial.   At a hearing in U.S. district court in Miami, attorneysfor the deposed Panamanian dictator argued that the U.S.invasion of Panama was so outrageous that drug-racketeeringcharges against him must be dismissed.   Ramsey Clark, a former U.S. attorney general andhuman-rights activist, was subpoenaed by the defense andtestified that obtaining an accurate death count in Panamahas proven impossible. However, he said, some estimates rangefrom 3,000 to 6,000 dead.   Mr. Clark recalled that during a fact-finding visit hemade to Panama in January shortly after the invasion, helearned of &quot;a great deal of death and destruction.&quot; He said achild playing in a cemetery led him to a mass grave, and anindependent human-rights commission heard testimony ofincidents in which body bags were packed with several corpseseach.   Frank Rubino, one of Mr. Noriega's attorneys, played avideotape assembled from television news footage thatdetailed the death and destruction.   But a key witness that Noriega's attorneys had hoped tocall wasn't in court yesterday. Prosecutors persuaded U.S.District Judge William M. Hoeveler to quash a defensesubpoena for Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs ofStaff. Mr. Rubino said he had hoped to extract testimony fromthe military chief about the invasion and to compel him toproduce documents detailing U.S. pre-invasion estimates ofcasualties and the sophisticated weaponry used.   Federal courts have held that the way a defendant isapprehended is irrelevant to a court's jurisdiction and rightto try him. However, Mr. Noriega's lawyers argue the Noriegacase is unique and the U.S. government's conduct in Panama isso &quot;immoral and illegal&quot; that the charges have to be thrownout. The defense lawyers implored Judge Hoeveler to &quot;treadnew territory&quot; and &quot;go where no man has ever gone before.&quot;   Mr. Rubino cited several cases, including that ofFrancisco Toscanino, a federal drug defendant who claimed hewas beaten and abducted in Uruguay, tortured in Brazil by hiscaptors, and spirited to the U.S. to stand trial. The SecondCircuit Court of Appeals said that if Mr. Toscanino's claims,including alleged U.S. involvement in his ordeal, were true,they were so shocking to the court's conscience that Mr.Toscanino had to be freed.   Judge Hoeveler hasn't yet ruled on whether to hold anevidentiary hearing on the issue of the invasion. Federalprosecutors contend that no such hearing is necessary.   They note, among other things, that even if the assertionsabout the brutality are true -- which they dispute -- thecase against Mr. Noriega can proceed.   ---   CALIFORNIA COURT RULES that a Nomura unit can arbitrateage-bias claim.   Employers contend arbitration is more efficient and lesscostly than court trials for employment-discrimination cases.However, some plaintiffs' lawyers argue that employers simplyare trying to avoid the big damage verdicts that juriessometimes hand out in wrongful termination and other job-biascases.   In this case, J. Robert Hall, a 60-year-old stockbroker inNomura Securities International's San Francisco office, hadsued the firm in state court, claiming he was fired becauseof his age and previous medical problems. Nomura is a unit ofJapan's Nomura Securities Co. The suit was brought under aCalifornia statute barring job discrimination because of ageor physical handicap.   However a state appeals court in San Francisco agreed withNomura's contention that Mr. Hall was bound by an arbitrationprovision in his employment contract and by New York StockExchange rules requiring arbitration of employment disputes.Citing federal legislation favoring arbitration agreements,the court last week rejected Mr. Hall's contention that hewasn't bound by the contractual clause because his claim wasbrought under state law.   Robert A. Dolinko, an attorney in the San Franciso officeof Epstein Becker Stromberg andamp; Green, counsel for Nomura,termed the ruling &quot;significant,&quot; saying it's the first time aCalifornia appeals court has compelled arbitration of anemployment-discrimination claim under such circumstances.   James Paul Green, a San Francisco attorney who representedMr. Hall, said he will appeal the ruling. &quot;We are not pleasedwith the decision, to put it quietly,&quot; he said.   ---   QUICK ACTION UNLIKELY on key proposals of a federal-courtsstudy panel.   The Federal Courts Study Committee, authorized by Congressand appointed by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, yesterdayissued more than 100 recommendations after 15 months ofdebate. But the proposals will get a mixed reception,according to lawmakers and congressional aides.   The quickest action is likely to be on legislationcarrying as many as two dozen &quot;technical&quot; proposals, such aseliminating a special court created in 1971 to handle casesarising from oil and gas price controls, or allowing partiesin civil suits to agree to have their case heard by amagistrate. This &quot;housekeeping&quot; bill, as one congressionalaide called it, will be worked out in meetings among the fourlegislators who were part of the 15-member panel: Sen. HowellHeflin (D., Ala.), Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa), Rep.Robert Kastenmeier (D., Wis.), and Rep. Carlos Moorhead (R.,Calif.).   Another possibility for action this year, although farmore controversial, is legislation creating more federaljudgeships. Two years ago, the federal courts asked for some75 additional slots, and the need is now closer to 100. Nobills have been introduced yet, and proposals for morejudgeships typically involve much partisan negotiation amongDemocrats and Republicans.   Other proposals may languish for some time. Among thecontroversial proposals are putting all tax appeals in aspecial tax court; eliminating from the federal courts suitsbetween citizens of different states over state law issues;abolishing mandatory minimum prison sentences passed byCongress in some recent criminal laws; and limiting the kindsof drug prosecutions that may be filed in federal court, inorder to keep more cases in state court.   The study committee watered down its earlier call, in adraft, for Congress to abolish the Sentencing Commission andthe federal criminal sentencing guidelines it issued, towhich many federal judges object.   The study committee went out of existence yesterday afterissuing the report at a Supreme Court ceremony.   But the committee's director, William Slate, is expectedto set up a lobbying effort for the proposals through aWashington nonprofit group called the Council for CourtExcellence.   ---   ARBITRATION GROUP takes alternative dispute resolution toEastern Europe.   East Germany's Chamber of Foreign Trade and its Court ofArbitration have agreed to recommend the use of AmericanArbitration Association techniques to help resolve disputesbetweem U.S. and East German businesses. The Austrian FederalEconomic Chamber has agreed to allow Vienna to serve as aneutral site for resolving those contract disputes.   AAA President Robert Coulson says U.S. companies hadpushed for the neutral site, because they were leery of theexisting East German arbitration system that is dominated bygovernment personnel. Mr. Coulson added that theassociation's role is to promote these kinds of agreementsand then to educate foreign arbitrators about Americandispute resolution.   Already, similar agreements are in effect with chambers ofcommerce of Hungary, Bulgaria, Poland, Czechoslovakia and theSoviet Union.   ---   ANTI-MARCOS PROTESTERS plan to greet Imelda Marcos atcourt today.   Opening arguments are slated in her racketeering case inManhattan federal court. Opponents of Mrs. Marcos and herlate husband, Ferdinand, the ousted president of thePhilippines, kept a low profile during jury selection for thecase; they feared they would be accused of trying to swayprospective jurors.   Filipinos opposing the 20-year Marcos regime begansoliciting volunteers at the Philippines consulate inManhattan last week during a forum on the trial. Fliers werecirculated asking people to help monitor the case anddemonstrate at the courthouse.   Mrs. Marcos is accused of stealing more than $160 millionfrom the Philippines and illegally concealing most of themoney through real-estate investments in Manhattan.</TEXT></DOC>