<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900914-0037</DOCNO><DOCID>900914-0037.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   U.S. Firm Sues Iraq in Attempt   To Claim Portion of Frozen Assets   ----   By Eduardo Lachica and Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   MDEST PNC RBSA LLY MHP WILLA NWS TMC PCI LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)DIVERSIFIED INDUSTRIAL (IDD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)CONSUMER andamp; HOUSEHOLD SERVICES, LAWN CARE, TAX PREPARATION (CSV)TRUCKING (TRK)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES (SCR)BANKS (BNK)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A New Jersey engineering firm sued the Iraqi government inwhat is apparently the first attempt by a U.S. litigant toclaim a portion of Iraq's frozen assets.   In its complaint filed in federal district court inWashington, Consarc Corp. of Rancocas, N.J., and its Britishsubsidiary seek $62 million in actual and punitive damagesresulting from the collapse of an $11 million transaction tosupply Iraq's Ministry of Industry and Minerals with severalindustrial furnaces. Consarc charged that the deal came apartbecause Iraq &quot;misrepresented&quot; the purpose for which theequipment was being bought.</LP><TEXT>   The Iraqis certified early last year that the furnaceswould be used to make artificial limbs for victims of theIran-Iraq war. Last June, however, U.S. authorities blockedthe shipment because of suspicions that the ovens could beused instead to fabricate parts for nuclear devices. TheIraqi invasion of Kuwait later prompted President Bush tofreeze all U.S. transactions with Baghdad, including that forthe Consarc furnaces.   The Treasury Department indicated that Consarc is thefirst U.S. business or individual to be given a license toseek recovery of Iraqi assets. All such litigants require thepermission of the Treasury's Office of Foreign AssetsControl.   The Consarc suit also named the state-owned Rafidain BankIraq; Pittsburgh National Bank, a unit of PNC FinancialCorp.; and the Royal Bank of Scotland as defendants. Rafidainholds blocked accounts relating to the Consarc contract inNew York and London, while the Pittsburgh and Scottish bankshandled letters of credit related to the financialtransactions, according to the suit. Officials of PittsburghNational Bank said they hadn't seen the suit and declined tocomment. Royal Bank of Scotland couldn't be reached forcomment.   Consarc's British subsidiary, Consarc Engineering Ltd.,was to have supplied part of the aborted Iraqi order.   It isn't known whether Iraq will contest the suit. TheIraqi Embassy didn't answer telephone calls yesterday.However, shortly after the U.S. froze the Consarc shipments,Ambassador Sadiq Al-Mashat said the U.S. suspicions were&quot;completely without basis.&quot;   Consarc could win its case by default if the Iraqis choosenot to respond to it, said lawyers familiar with thecomplaint.   ---   COURT OVERTURNS BAN on selling book about Israeliintelligence service.   The appellate division of the New York Supreme Courtyesterday lifted an order barring St. Martin's Press fromselling &quot;By Way of Deception: The Making and Unmaking of aMossad Officer.&quot; The book was written by Victor Ostrovsky,who is now in hiding in Canada and claims he spent two yearsas a Mossad agent.   Earlier this week, State Supreme Court Justice Michael J.Dontzin signed an order temporarily halting the sale of thebook and ordered the New York publishing house to recallapproximately 18,000 copies that had already been shipped.   A four-judge appellate panel ruled that the Israeligovernment had failed to demonstrate that the lives of itsagents would be endangered by the book's publication.   The Israeli government &quot;has failed to overcome the heavypresumption against prior restraint on publication,&quot; thepanel wrote. The panel noted that the distribution of thebook to 1,500 wholesalers, as well as to book reviewers atmajor publications, meant that the order would beineffective.   David N. Kaye, a lawyer for St. Martin's, said that thecompany immediately began shipping copies of the book tostores yesterday, and that there would shortly be 150,000copies in print.   Jonathan Lerner, a lawyer for the Israeli government, saidit is unlikely his client will seek a further review. But hesaid Israel may pursue an action seeking damages against St.Martin's.   &quot;If St. Martin's knew, or should have known, that Mr.Ostrovsky was under contract not to publish any secrets, thenthe proceeds from the publication of the book should go tothe Israeli treasury,&quot; said Mr. Lerner, a lawyer with the NewYork law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom.   ---   SUIT FILED AGAINST ELI LILLY makes allegations aboutProzac.   The son of a man who killed eight people sued Eli Lilly andamp;Co., the maker of the anti-depressant drug Prozac, which hisfather was taking. In the suit, James Thomas Wesbeckeralleged that Lilly failed to test properly Prozac and shouldhave known that it was unsafe for use for the treatment ofdepression.   Joseph Wesbecker entered the Standard Gravure printingplant on Sept. 14, 1989, killed eight people and wounded 12before killing himself. Mr. Wesbecker, on medical leave fromthe Louisville, Ky., company, was on Prozac for five weeksbefore the shootings.   The law suit, filed in Jefferson Circuit Court inLouisville, is among the first to blame criminal behavior onProzac, widely acclaimed as an especially safe and effectiveanti-depressant. Other defendants in the case include DistaProducts Co., a unit of Lilly, and Mr. Wesbecker's formerpsychiatrist, Dr. Lee Coleman. Five other parties involved inthe Wesbecker shootings have filed suits against Mr.Wesbecker's estate, Lilly and others. A one-year statute oflimitations will expire today.   A number of lawyers recently have started trying to usewhat they are calling a Prozac defense to prove that the drugmade their clients commit murder and should not be heldresponsible, said Michael O'Brien, director of research forthe Citizens Commission on Human Rights, a Los Angeles groupestablished by the Church of Scientology that wants Prozacremoved from the market.   Last week, for example, a Utah judge ordered JosephCharles Gardner to undergo a psychiatric evaluation todetermine whether he was influenced by Prozac when he fatallyshot Janice Fondren last July, said Alan D. Boyack, the St.George, Utah, lawyer representing Mr. Gardner.   The suits have been sparked by a report in the Februaryissue of the American Journal of Psychiatry by MartinTeicher, a Harvard University psychiatrist. The articleidentified six people who developed violent suicidal thoughtswhile taking Prozac. None had previously experienced suchthoughts, the article reported.   Edward West, a spokesman for Indianapolis-based Lilly,said more than 11,000 people participated in clinical trialsof Prozac, which was approved by the Food and DrugAdministration in 1987, and more than two million patientsworld-wide have been treated with the drug.   &quot;Unfortunately, assaultive behavior is common in oursociety. Mr. Wesbecker had a lengthy history of psychiatricdisturbance, including suicide attempts and homicidalthreats, prior to taking Prozac. Other drugs were found inMr. Wesbecker's blood following his death,&quot; Mr. West said.Dr. Coleman couldn't be reached for comment.   Plaintiffs' lawyers acknowledge it is difficult todetermine whether Prozac or their clients' underlying mentalproblems caused their behavior. But Leonard L. Finz, thelawyer for Mr. Wesbecker's son, said that despite Mr.Wesbecker's psychiatric history, he had never committed actsof violence prior to taking Prozac.   ---   PUBLISHERS TEAM UP in case involving unauthorizedanthologies.   The trial, which pits eight of the biggest U.S. bookpublishers against Kinko's Graphics Corp., a photocopyingchain, began this week. A decision in the closely watchedcase before federal Judge Constance Baker Motley in Manhattancould clarify the legal use of copyrighted material foreducational purposes.   At issue is the growing business of photocopying excerptsfrom college textbooks and then compiling them in customizedversions to be sold to a professor's class. As a result, theprofessor can assign chapters from several sources withoutrequiring students to buy each book.   Kinko's, a 520-store chain based in Ventura, Calif.,defends its service as a practical way to meet students'educational needs. The publishers, however, seeking toprotect their $2 billion-a-year college-textbook market, wantJudge Motley to rule that such anthologies violate thecopyright law and should be banned.   The plaintiffs are Harper andamp; Row Publishers Inc.,McGraw-Hill Inc., Penguin Books U.S.A. Inc., Prentice-HallInc., Richard D. Irwin Inc., William Morrow Co., Basic BooksInc. and John Wiley andamp; Sons Inc.   Both the publishers and Kinko's &quot;are in a marketplacecompeting for student dollars,&quot; said Ronald Rauchberg, anattorney for the publishers, in opening arguments earlierthis week. &quot;The plaintiffs do it with respect for thecopyright laws, paying royalties to the authors who createthese books. Kinko's doesn't do it that way.&quot;   Kinko's says it's merely following the practices that havebeen prevalent on college campuses for years and accusedpublishers of trying to gouge students.   &quot;It would cost a fortune for a student&quot; to buy all thetextbooks used in one anthology,&quot; said Dean Olds, an attorneyfor Kinko's, in his opening statement. &quot;If {the court'sdecision} deprives the students of this smorgasbord ofsources . . . their educational process is going to suffer.&quot;   ---   THE TEAMSTERS HAVE RETAINED a new lawyer.   Brendan Sullivan of the Washington law firm of Williams andamp;Connolly has been tapped by the International Brotherhood ofTeamsters, according to people familiar with the union.   For the past two years, the Teamsters union, the nation'slargest union, has been represented by lawyers at the NewYork law firm of Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, Alexander andamp; Ferdon.The firm has challenged the government's authority to overseeunion affairs under the terms of a 1989 settlement ofracketeering charges brought by the U.S. attorney inManhattan.   But in recent weeks, say Teamsters insiders, TeamstersPresident William J. McCarthy has expressed dismay over thelaw firm's failure to win on any of its motions involving thesettlement. Other members of the Teamsters executive boardpressured Mr. McCarthy to replace Mudge Rose when it becamepublic that the union paid the firm nearly $6 million,according to people familiar with the change.   Mr. Sullivan has represented Oliver North. Williams andamp;Connolly represented former Teamsters President Jimmy Hoffa,as well as former United Mine Workers President Tony Boyle,who went to prison for the murder of a man who challenged hisleadership.   ---   FORMER MONEY MANAGER Peter Jeffer pleaded guilty to onecount of wire fraud in connection with an allegedinsider-trading ring. He was accused of trading oninformation he received from Steven Glauberman, a formerassociate at Skadden Arps. Mr. Jeffer, who is cooperatingwith prosecutors in the case, entered his plea before JudgeMiriam Goldman Cedarbaum in federal court in Manhattan. Mr.Glauberman pleaded guilty to three insider-trading-relatedcounts Wednesday.   ---   A THIRD OFFICER of a New Jersey company pleads guilty tobank fraud.   Richard Bober, former vice president, secretary anddirector of Coated Sales Inc., pleaded guilty in federalcourt in Newark, N.J., to charges involving a fraud schemethat netted him $12 million.   Mr. Bober admitted that he and other officers of thedefunct textile converting company lied about the amount ofthe company's assets to secure a $52 million restructuringloan from BancBoston Financial Co. He also admitted toviolating U.S. securities laws.   Martin Greenberg, Mr. Bober's attorney, said, &quot;Mr. Boberis anxious to have this matter put behind him and iscooperating with the government.&quot;   Shortly before Coated Sales filed for bankruptcy-lawprotection in June 1988, it was considered one of thefastest-growing companies traded on the over-the-countermarket, according to U.S. attorney Michael Chertoff.   ---   Wade Lambert and Ann Hagedorn contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>