<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910716-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>910716-0012.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>07/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   ALLIED TROOPS ENDED their three-month occupation ofnorthern Iraq.   As the last troops crossed over into Turkey, however,their U.S. commander said the soldiers would return ifnecessary to protect the Kurds from Saddam Hussein'sgovernment. Meanwhile, Iraqi Prime Minister Hammadi saidBaghdad is taking steps to defend itself against a possibleU.S. strike on military and nuclear sites. The Iraqispresented to the U.N. a new list of their nuclear activities,but U.S. officials immediately dismissed it as inadequate.</LP><TEXT>   Washington said it is consulting with its allies on waysto provide vital supplies to Iraq's people, and believes thiscan be done without lifting sanctions.   ---   THE CENSUS WON'T BE ADJUSTED upward to correct for anundercount.   Commerce Secretary Mosbacher announced the long-awaiteddecision on the 1990 census, which will affect congressionalreapportionment in four states and the distribution of anestimated $59 billion in federal assistance. In choosing notto adjust the count, Mosbacher overruled the Census Bureau'sdirector and members of a bureau panel who cited apost-census survey that estimated an undercount of 2%, orroughly five million people.   Although he conceded there was an undercount, Mosbachersaid evidence in favor of an adjustment was both&quot;inconclusive and unconvincing.&quot;   ---   BAKER IS PLANNING to launch a new round of Middle Eastshuttle diplomacy.   The latest U.S. initiative, which could put the secretaryof state on a collision course with Israel, was spurred by apositive response from Syria on Sunday regarding a Bush planfor a regional peace conference. Baker will go first toDamascus in an attempt to nail down details of Syria's reply.He then will try to persuade Jordan to join the process and,finally, travel to Israel. Baker's itinerary will includestops in Saudi Arabia and Egypt.   Shamir, who has rejected the U.S. plan, yesterday said hewould stand by this position. But Israel said it welcomedefforts toward direct talks.   ---   Federal health officials said self-policing amongphysicians and dentists -- and not mandatory AIDS testing --is the best way to protect patients from health-care workerswho might be infected with the AIDS virus.   ---   An FDA advisory panel ruled, for the second time in fourmonths, that more studies are needed before it couldrecommend releasing the first drug proposed for treatingAlzheimer's disease. The action dimmed prospects thatWarner-Lambert soon would receive approval to market thedrug, called Cognex or THA.   ---   Chile's Supreme Court voted to reopen an investigationinto the 1976 assassination in Washington of former cabinetminister Orlando Letelier. The court named a special judge tolead the probe, acting on a formal request by PresidentAylwin's government.   ---   Texas joined a nationwide budget struggle as Gov. AnnRichards convened a special legislative session and urgedapproval of a state lottery. In California, 8,000 stateworkers missed paychecks. Budget negotiations were continuingthere and in Pennsylvania, Maine and Connecticut.   ---   Panamanian lawmakers approved a legal assistance treatywith the U.S. that they hope will help Panama shed its imageas a money-laundering and drug-trafficking center. Thetreaty, signed in April by both nations, would let U.S.officials review secret Panamanian bank accounts andgovernment records when investigating crimes.   ---   A coup attempt was thwarted in the West African nation ofMali, President Amadou Toure said in a radio broadcast.Toure, who seized power in March, said the governmentarrested all dissident officers and their reputed leader,Lamine Diabira, the country's territorial administrationminister.   ---   European Community observers arrived in Yugoslavia amid afresh round of fighting in the republic of Croatia. The ECteam will be monitoring a cease-fire agreed to after thefederal army launched an assault on the republic of Slovenialast month.   ---   India's minority government won a vote of confidence inParliament after appealing to the opposition forunderstanding regarding tough measures taken to ease aneconomic crisis. Prime Minister Rao pledged to unveil soon aprogram for privatizing some state-run industries and easingrules for joint ventures with foreign concerns.   ---   Angola announced a general amnesty under which thousandsof government opponents who were jailed during a 16-yearcivil war could be freed. The amnesty, which took effectimmediately, covers all crimes against state security up toMay 31, the date on which a peace agreement to end the civilwar was signed in Lisbon.   ---   Five Central American leaders opened a three-day meetingin San Salvador focusing on economic and politicalintegration. Leftist Salvadoran guerrillas declared a partialtruce for the talks, saying they won't stage any attacks inthe capital. Police, nevertheless, imposed tight securitymeasures.</TEXT></DOC>