<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900521-0112</DOCNO><DOCID>900521-0112.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   In Randamp;D, the Next Best Thing to a Gut Feeling   ----   By Amal Kumar Naj</HL><DATE>05/21/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   MRK USW</CO><LP>   The tendency of Japanese companies to take advantage ofinnovations devised in the U.S. is almost automaticallyattributed to Japan's lower capital costs and its supportivegovernment-industry alliances. But it's often overlooked thatfrom the very start U.S. corporations put their emergingtechnologies at an enormous disadvantage because of thetechniques they use to evaluate payoffs. The rigid equationsand models currently used unfortunately have replaced theinstinct and intuition that once guided U.S entrepreneurs.   The fundamental test used in most U.S. companies is: Doesthe return exceed the cost of capital over the life of theproject? To find the answer companies subject the project toa variety of discounted-cash flow measures.</LP><TEXT>   Dozens of assumptions go into this methodologicaloverkill. Many of the assumptions aren't reliable. Some aretenuous at best. And if it's a long-term project that wouldtake, say, 10 years to commercialize (five years being theouter limits of American corporations' horizon), the distantestimates are considered highly speculative and are heavilydiscounted. Even the &quot;terminal value,&quot; the value of the plantand other assets upon commercialization, is assumed to bezero. When all is said and done, the payoff estimatesproduced by the quantitative analyses are usually too low.They stand little chance of beating that ultimate yardstick--  the cost of capital. Nine out of 10 projects, on average,fail the test.   Perhaps the most fundamental problem with the currenttechniques is that they fail to take into account theconsequences of not pursuing a technology. An auto maker maygive up on ceramic engines, because technically they seemunfeasible. But a rival who makes prosaic ceramic parts withthe aim of one day using the knowledge to build a ceramicengine -- as the Japanese are doing -- can quickly change thecompetitive balance.   How to get American companies to act on their intuitionagain? There is a new technique that will go a long waytoward that. It deserves wide attention, for it comes closestto simulating the old-fashioned gut feeling.   Designed after well-developed stock-options theories, thetechnique works something like this: Suppose there are twoemerging technologies, X and Y, that have some bearing on thecompany's main business. The X may involve a well-understoodtechnology and a market. The Y may involve a wide range ofpossible outcomes and new markets but with, say, 40% chanceof technical failure. The benefits of X are easilyquantifiable, and hence salable to top management forfunding. The Y is unsalable because it's unquantifiable, eventhough it seems more promising.   Instead of ignoring Y, the company commits small amountsto develop the technology, in effect taking a &quot;call option&quot;on the underlying technology. The option allows Randamp;D people toexplore its technical possibilities, market opportunities,development costs and competitors' strategies. If these don'tbecome clear within the time period of the option, the optionis allowed to &quot;expire.&quot;   The loss is limited to the small initial funding (thevalue of the Randamp;D option), just as in the stock option. &quot;Theimportant thing to realize is that the initial expendituresare not directed so much as an investment as they are towardcreating an option,&quot; says William Hamilton of the Universityof Pennsylvania's Wharton School, who has co-authored a paperon options valuations of Randamp;D with Graham Mitchell, directorof planning at GTE Laboratories in Waltham, Mass.   Randamp;D options, fundamentally, help identify the unapparentoutcomes that may be the most important reasons forundertaking the investment. Consider:   -- In 1984, W.R. Grace decided to invest in a newtechnology for catalytic converters for the automobileaftermarket. The discounted-cash-flow analysis -- which useda generous &quot;terminal&quot; value -- showed that it was an&quot;attractive&quot; project. What looked like a sure-fire technologynow can't compete on price. &quot;We didn't accurately predict theprice-performance requirement we needed in the aftermarket,&quot;says Peter Boer, chief technical officer.   Grace would have dropped the project, except that otheropportunities for that technology intervened. The recentclean-air legislation has created applications incogeneration plants, in planes to reduce ozone emissions, andin utilities to control emissions. Suppose the automotivecatalyst technology had been given a thumbs-down by thequantitative techniques, but the other downstream marketsloomed on the horizon. Could Grace have overturned thenegative signal and invested in the automotive catalystanyway? &quot;I don't think I would have been able to communicatethat to the finance people,&quot; says Mr. Boer.   -- In the early 1980s, General Electric initially ignoredthe emerging magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology formedical diagnosis. The MRI market was unclear. And mostimportant, it would have cannibalized the market for GE'sexisting CT diagnostic machine, which uses X-rays. GEoverruled the directive of the discounted-cash-flowtechnique, as it realized that if it didn't cannibalize theCT market, someone else was going to. Walter Robb, directorof GE's Randamp;D, says he doesn't have much use for quantitativetechniques now. &quot;The challenge is to find 30 projects a yearthat will pay off not by NPV (net present value) but by theseat of our pants,&quot; he says.   -- It's the downstream rewards that are allowing thepharmaceutical company Merck andamp; Co. to plan extensiveautomation. When it considered the idea first for a drugpackaging and distribution plant, the labor savings didn'tjustify the investment. Moreover, with no prior experiencewith robots, Merck also wasn't certain about the technicalsuccess.   &quot;It was a tricky thing to convince the management. Butoptions valuation allowed engineers to articulate a wholerange of outcomes and their benefits,&quot; says Judy Lewent,chief financial officer at Merck. The management agreed totake an &quot;option&quot; on automating the plant, and results fromthe pilot project since early this year have clarified thepotential future benefits to the point that the company isnow willing to expand automation to its diverse manufacturingoperations.   -- U S West, a telecommunications concern in Denver, facedwith fast-changing technologies in its industry, also hastaken the options approach. It's pursuing technologies --that it otherwise wouldn't be able to justify -- aimed atmaking its cellular phones and paging devices moreuser-friendly. &quot;Our company doesn't have the maturity andexperience to act on gut feelings,&quot; says David Sena,strategic technology planner of U S. West, a company spawnedin 1984 by the ATandamp;T breakup.   The options technique needs refining (how to calculate thevalue of an Randamp;D option is a subject of debate, for instance).But it is the first clear mechanism for Randamp;D people tocommunicate with their finance men.   ---   Mr. Naj covers technology from New York for the Journal.</TEXT></DOC>