<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910822-0002</DOCNO><DOCID>910822-0002.</DOCID><HL>   Collapse of the Soviet Coup -- Capitalist Medicine:   True Market Reform   May Now Be Possible   In Soviet Economy   ---   Things Are So Bad Already   That Even Shock Therapy   May Be Welcome Change   ---   New Pressure for Western Aid   ----   By Alan Murray and Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CHV</CO><MS>ENERGY (ENE)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)FOREIGN EXCHANGE (FRX)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)PETROLEUM MARKET (PET)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The retreat of the Red Army from the streets of Moscowclears the way for a sweeping reform of the Soviet economy.It also increases demands for money from the West to supportthe reform effort.   The leaders of the failed coup represented the largestpolitical obstacle to genuine economic reform in the SovietUnion. They were backed by powerful industrial andagricultural lobbies that twice in the past year blockedproposals for moving to a market economy. Now, their defeatreinvigorates efforts for an overhaul.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;The failed Putsch attempt will lead to a rapidradicalization of reform,&quot; predicts Gleb Yakunin, a RussianOrthodox priest and reform-minded member of the RussianParliament.   But rising prospects for reform also bring rising callsfor Western assistance. Soviet officials consider foreign aidessential to ease the transition to a market economy. ManyWestern experts agree.   &quot;This puts tremendous pressure on the West to comethrough&quot; with more aid, says George Soros, a New Yorkinvestor with extensive ties to the Soviet Union and EasternEurope. &quot;There will be real reform. And there has to be realsupport from the West.&quot;   Already, some officials have begun to reassess their aloofattitude toward aid. West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl andFrench President Francois Mitterrand called yesterday formore aid to help the Soviets. And the European Bank forReconstruction and Development, a new multilateral bank setup to help Eastern Bloc economies, will hold a special boardmeeting tomorrow to discuss ways to expand or hasten aid tothe troubled superpower.   Mr. Gorbachev has avoided outright requests for largeamounts of aid. But in the past, he has indicated a desirefor foreign money to buy consumer goods that would fillSoviet shelves and ease the transition to a market economy.He also has hinted at a desire for a stabilization fund toback convertibility of the ruble into foreign currencies, andat a rescheduling of Soviet foreign debts. Foreign debt issoaring, and the country is finding it increasingly difficultto meet its debt payments.   But U.S. officials reacted to calls for more aid withrestraint. President Bush said at a news conference that &quot;wewill look at it,&quot; but then went on to reaffirm the minimalassistance agreed to at the economic summit in London earlierthis summer. And Secretary of State James Baker said inBrussels: &quot;You're not going to see the Soviet Union succeedeconomically through the mechanism of check writing byothers.&quot;   The administration also rejected suggestions that a moregenerous package out of the London summit would have helpedavoid a coup. &quot;I don't think any serious observers think youcould have bought your way out of the coup,&quot; saidpresidential press secretary Marlin Fitzwater.   The U.S. reluctance to provide aid is partly due topolitical considerations. Leading Democrats have alreadystarted criticizing President Bush for being more interestedin bailing out the Soviet economy than in helping thestruggling U.S. economy. Additional aid would only encouragesuch attacks. Moreover, U.S. budget woes make it extremelydifficult for the administration to get Congress to agree toany increased aid.   In Congress yesterday, the reaction was mixed. Rep.Richard Gephardt, Democratic majority leader of the House,called on the U.S. and its allies to &quot;move while the iron ishot&quot; and indicate to Soviet leaders that they are willing toprovide substantial financial rewards if the Soviet Unionmoves toward real reform. But Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley ofNew Jersey was far more cautious. &quot;There is no reason to sendAmerican taxpayer dollars to the Soviet Union now, any morethan there was a reason to send massive amounts of Americandollars to the Soviet Union prior to the coup,&quot; he said.   Sen. Bradley and many other observers say it is still fartoo early to know whether the Soviet Union can muster thedetermination to undertake real reform. Its problems, afterall, are immense. Startlingly inefficient state industriesare being propped up by a government budget deficit expectedto reach 25% of the nation's total output this year -- theequivalent of a trillion-dollar deficit in the U.S.   To finance the deficits, the government has been floodingthe economy with rubles. Inflation is running at an annualrate of between 40% and 100%, according to many Sovieteconomists; there are no reliable official figures. The rubleis held in such low esteem that much of the economy isresorting to barter. &quot;It's still not a good credit risk,&quot;Sen. Bradley says.   Moreover, Mikhail Gorbachev, who has now been returned topower, has demonstrated little aptitude for dealing witheconomic problems. &quot;One of the ironies of this thing,&quot; notesGOP Sen. Richard Lugar, a former chairman of the SenateForeign Relations Committee, is that President Gorbachev has&quot;absolutely no road map whatever of how to get to Step 2 or 3in a market economy. He clearly doesn't like privateproperty. He doesn't understand market economics.&quot;   But the failed coup has clearly elevated Boris Yeltsin,the leader of the Russian Republic. And although Mr. Yeltsinalso lacks any deep understanding of market economics, he hasbeen willing to latch onto the ideas of the radicalreformers.   As a result, recent events could lead to the re-emergenceof the economic plans of Grigory Yavlinsky, a young Sovieteconomist who presented a &quot;500-day&quot; plan for reform lastAugust and then updated that plan in a program worked outlast spring with experts from Harvard University.   The Yavlinsky proposals, a modified version of theeconomic shock therapy adopted two years ago by the Polishgovernment, envisages a variety of stages in the transitionfrom central planning.   The initial stage, lasting about six months, is designedto prepare the way for more radical steps later. The Sovietswould start small-scale privatization of housing and retailoutlets, liberalize some prices and seek to prune the budgetdeficit by freezing social spending programs and reducingsubsidies to factories. In return, the West would start tosend food, medical aid and technical assistance. In fact, theWest has already taken some of the measures envisaged,including offering the Soviets associate membership in theInternational Monetary Fund and World Bank.   The crunch would come over the next year or so. TheSoviets would slash spending to balance the budget, cuttingback on all subsidies, foreign aid and military spending.Price controls would be almost entirely eliminated, and anattempt would be made to achieve some convertibility of theruble. The Soviets would also open up their economy tointernational trade, introducing strong elements ofcompetition for domestic industry, which would then have abig incentive to produce quality goods for export. In return,the West would grant full IMF and World Bank membership andstart large-scale financial aid.   Thereafter, land reform and conversion of defenseindustries would be accompanied by creation of a modernbanking system. As a final step, large-scale industry wouldbe sold off to the public and the rigid labor market would beliberalized. By then, Western financial aid could drop.   Even before such a plan might go into effect, &quot;it's almostcertain that more of the preconditions for a sensible aidprogram are going to be met now,&quot; says Stephen Sestanovich, aSoviet expert at the Center for Strategic and InternationalStudies in Washington. He predicts a shakeup of the Sovietbureaucracy, a more sweeping endorsement of the idea ofprivate property, and a &quot;breaking of the power of themilitary-industrial complex.&quot;   Indeed, even some who had been staunch opponents of aidshowed some softening yesterday. &quot;There are things we oughtto do, things we should be prepared to do, for a Soviet Unionthat is profoundly reformist that we weren't prepared to dowhen there was a struggle between the reformist and thecenter,&quot; says Richard Perle, a top Pentagon official in theReagan administration.   But Frank Gaffney, who heads the Center for SecurityPolicy and is a former aide to Mr. Perle, warns that theremay be less to the coup than meets the eye and that it maynot lead to such profound political change. &quot;Granting massiveaid now would be a Pavlovian reaction,&quot; Mr. Gaffney says. &quot;Itwould tend to reward those who may have staged a Potemkincoup.&quot;   In addition to urging government aid, the Soviets areeager to encourage large-scale private foreign investment. Ona news show last night, Deputy Prime Minister VladimirShcherbakov virtually begged foreign companies not to abandonthe Soviet Union, and he urged them to be patient.   And some American companies familiar with the Soviet Unionwere encouraged by events. &quot;What I've seen on televisionreinforces the fact that the feeling of Westernization hasbeen inbred in people, and they are willing to fight to keepit,&quot; says James McClung, vice president, international, ofFMC Corp. &quot;From a business perspective, that's a goodfoundation.&quot;   But for other American companies, which were extremelyreluctant to invest even before the coup, the risks may nowseem even higher. &quot;Potential investors clearly face a highrisk of expropriation, since the coup happened in the firstplace,&quot; says Keith Johnson, an international economist atJ.P. Morgan andamp; Co. in New York. &quot;It can happen again.&quot;   One area where the Soviets especially need aid is the oilindustry. Oil exports have kept the economy afloat for morethan 20 years; but after hitting a peak in 1988, oilproduction is in a free fall. The drop stems from badextraction technology, aging fields and poor management.   To help address those problems, Chevron Corp. has beennegotiating a huge joint venture with the Soviets to developthe Tengiz oil field near the Caspian Sea. If completed, themultibillion-dollar project would be the largestSoviet-American business venture ever. In San Francisco, aChevron spokesman said the oil company is &quot;encouraged byevents that seem to have taken place in the last while,&quot; butcautioned that &quot;it's too early to make any decisions.&quot;   However, Marshall Goldman, a Soviet expert visiting Moscowthis week, notes that one hangup for the Chevron deal hasbeen a conflicting response from the authorities inKazakhstan, where the field is located, and those in Moscow.By highlighting the role of Russian President Yeltsin, thefailed coup complicates the question of where power reallylies -- in Moscow or in the republics. As a result, Mr.Goldman says, &quot;For investors putting up a lot of money, thisis still a scary time.&quot;   Another area where the Soviet economy is badly in need ofhelp is agriculture. Roughly a quarter of Soviet agriculturalproduction is lost between the field and the stores becauseof a chronic lack of infrastructure, including unpaved roads,no proper storage facilities, a shortage of refrigeratedtrucks, and theft. Shortages of most basic foodstuffs arecommonplace; meat, cheese, butter, sugar and other items areroutinely rationed.   Some Western officials predict their countries may becalled on for large amounts of humanitarian aid in the nextyear. &quot;The people will have to be kept fed,&quot; says Mr. Soros,the investor.   But perhaps the biggest problem facing the Soviets is howto overhaul their massive and outmoded industry. State-runmonopolies currently guzzle huge amounts of energy to producegoods that are shoddy and unwanted. The defense industry hasbeen given the highest priority in the past, and Mr.Gorbachev has been trying -- with little success so far -- toconvert some of his military factories to consumer goods.   The inefficiency of Soviet industry is illustrated by acalculation made by Alexander Arbatov of the Soviet Academyof Sciences. He estimates the country could shut down 25% ofits industry, pay the workers not to go to work, and turn aprofit. That's because the raw materials and energy thefactories now use to make products nobody wants could be soldabroad for precious hard currency.   The industrialized nations have offered Mr. Gorbachevtechnical help in making his outmoded industries moreefficient. Before this week's coup, the World Bank was on theverge of approving a $30 million program of technicalassistance for the Soviets -- and now that the coup hasfailed, that program is likely to go through. But it's farfrom clear how much simple technical assistance can do.   Mr. Soros says the U.S. and its allied governments shouldconsider encouraging foreign investment in Soviet industryand business by developing a large program of political-riskinsurance, so that foreign investors won't have to shoulderthe full risk of investing in the Soviet Union.</TEXT></DOC>