<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0084.</DOCID><HL>   Wonder Drug:   Sandoz Corp.'s Clozaril   Treats Schizophrenia   But Can Kill Patients   ---   And Blood Tests to Prevent   The Lethal Side Effects   Are Costly, Controversial   ---   Who Is Going to Pay $8,944?   ----   By Ron Winslow   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   Z.SAN BAX Z.HR</CO><IN>DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><GV>VETERANS AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT (VET)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><LP>   For 10 years, Ann Jones believed she was God and thoughtshe controlled the weather. Diagnosed as schizophrenic, shewas in and out of hospitals 35 times and was put on justabout every anti-psychotic drug available.   Then, last year, she began taking a drug whose brand nameis Clozaril and, finally, something worked for her. Herdelusions disappeared. She hasn't been inside a mentalhospital since. In the fall, the 37-year-old Ms. Jones plansto take courses toward a teaching degree. The change in herlife, she says, &quot;is really wonderful.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   The drug, known generically as clozapine, is the mostsignificant advance in anti-psychotic drugs in 20 years, andit offers hope to at least 200,000 people in the U.S. -- manyof them locked away in mental wards or roaming homeless incity streets -- for whom conventional treatment has failed.But few of them are getting the drug or are likely to get itanytime soon. The reason is money: Clozapine costs $8,944 ayear, and nearly everyone who stands to benefit from it ispoor.   In many states, mental-health agencies and Medicaidprograms, strapped for cash, can't -- or won't -- pay forclozapine. Some private insurers are balking at coverage.Even where money is available for initial treatment,physicians are reluctant to prescribe the medicine withoutassurance that patients will be able to go on taking it.   &quot;Clozapine is a rich man's drug for a poor man's disease,&quot;says Larry Lehmann, associate director for psychiatry at theU.S. Department of Veteran's Affairs in Washington.   The drug spotlights -- much as the costly AIDS drug AZThas -- the conflicts that arise between companies seeking tomarket and profit from new medicines and the welfare ofpatients who need them. It raises tough questions abouttrade-offs necessary when beneficial treatments also havepotentially devastating side effects. And in the near-term,at least, it poses an economic challenge to a health caresystem already saddled with huge costs. Lawyers around thecountry are contemplating legal action to require states tomake clozapine available to those who might benefit. At thecurrent price, that could cost somebody $2 billion.   As a consequence, the nation's mental-health system, whichalready spends more than $7 billion a year to treatschizophrenia, has been in an uproar ever since SandozPharmaceuticals Corp. introduced the drug on Feb. 5. Thecompany packages the drug along with a mandatory andexpensive blood-monitoring system designed to detect a sideeffect that could otherwise be fatal to as many as 2% ofpatients. Without its proprietary system, Sandoz says, somepatients will die and the drug will inevitably be pulled fromthe market.   The blood monitoring is the more expensive part of thepackage and, because of it, critics say, few will be able toafford the drug anyway. So state mental-health leaders,Medicaid officials, pharmacists, members of Congress and thesecretary of veterans affairs have mounted an intense, andthus far unsuccessful, effort to force Sandoz to uncouple thedrug from the blood-testing program -- or at least itemizethe costs -- and cut the price. The issue is the subject of amajor forum today at a meeting of the American PsychiatricAssociation in New York.   &quot;People are desperate to use this drug,&quot; says MonaBennett, the deputy commissioner for mental health inMassachusetts. &quot;We can't not use it.&quot; But treating thestate's eligible patients would cost $5 million, &quot;which wesimply do not have.&quot;   Schizophrenia is a mysterious, little-understood mentaldisorder that typically strikes people in their late teensand early 20s. It affects about 1% of the population, orabout 2.5 million Americans. On any given day, schizophrenicsoccupy 25% of the nation's hospital beds, according to astudy by John Talbott, a psychiatrist at the University ofMaryland.   Its victims suffer from paranoia, hallucinations anddelusions -- they hear voices, converse with telephone poles,send brain waves through televisions and radios and believesecret agents, presidents or aliens are out to kill them.Psychiatrists call these the &quot;positive&quot; symptoms. The&quot;negative&quot; symptoms include apathy, lack of motivation andphysical and emotional withdrawal.   About 25% of schizophrenics suffer only infrequentpsychotic episodes, and another 50% can be treated adequatelywith such drugs as Thorazine, Haldol, Mellaril and Prolixin.These medicines, however, usually don't alleviate thenegative symptoms that rob schizophrenics of their ambition,and they cause nasty side effects -- stiffness andrestlessness in more than 60% of patients, and more severetwitching and involuntary body movements called tardivedyskinesia -- in about 20% of patients.   The remaining 20% to 25% -- perhaps as many as 500,000people -- don't respond to any conventional medication, ordevelop side effects so severe that they can't take thedrugs. Considered &quot;treatment resistant,&quot; they live lives thatamount to &quot;a roller-coaster ride through hell,&quot; as onepatient describes it.   The trip sometimes starts in private institutions, wherecosts can amount to $200,000 a year or more and can thusquickly deplete insurance benefits and family resources.Unable to hold even menial jobs, patients often end up onpublic assistance. Many are either confined in state mentalhospitals or admitted so frequently that the wards become asecond home. As many as 20% attempt suicide.   Sandoz is the U.S. subsidiary of Sandoz Ltd., the Swissdrug giant, which first developed clozapine in 1961 andintroduced it in Europe 10 years later. The drug sparked agreat deal of interest in the U.S. in 1988, when HerbertMeltzer, a psychiatrist at Case Western Reserve University inCleveland, John Kane of Long Island (N.Y.) Jewish Hospital,and other researchers published a study showing that the drugworked far better than traditional treatments for manyhard-to-treat schizophrenics -- and essentially withoutdebilitating side effects.   For the first time, a drug relieved the negative symptomsof schizophrenia, giving patients back their interest in theworld around them. Many have been able to live independentlyand hold jobs. &quot;They come out of the woodwork,&quot; says Dr.Meltzer. &quot;They want to experience pleasure. That is one ofthe key advantages to this drug. It's definitely a medicalbreakthrough.&quot;   But it isn't a cure. At least 40% of the targeted patientsdon't respond or can't take it; for the lucky 30% to 60%,levels of improvement vary widely. The drug must be takenindefinitely. And nearly all patients need intensivepsychotherapy and social and vocational rehabilitation ifthey are to re-enter society. &quot;One patient compared herselfto Rip van Winkle,&quot; Dr. Meltzer says.   The drug's biggest drawback is that it can kill people.Sandoz learned that the hard way in 1975, when severalpatients in Finland died, victims of virulent infections thatdeveloped after clozapine induced agranulocytosis, acondition that blunts the body's ability to produceinfection-fighting white blood cells. Sandoz yanked the drugfrom the market temporarily. Clinical trials in the U.S. werecanceled.   In the mid-1980s, the FDA agreed to reconsider clozapine.And, on the basis of the &quot;amazing&quot; results of the 1988 study,says Paul Leber, director of the agency'sneuropharmacological drug division, the FDA took steps toapprove it despite the danger. Through the mid-1980s, Sandozsays, 43 patients died among 112 who developedagranulocytosis world-wide. (More recently in the U.S., 18 of1,800 users developed the condition, but it was successfullyreversed in each case when patients were taken off the drug.)   &quot;Everyone involved understood that there would probably bedeaths,&quot; Dr. Leber says. &quot;The question was, is the bang bigenough to make it worth this kind of risk. The {FDA's expertadvisers were} fairly convinced that this was a dramaticthing.&quot;   The agency was even more enthusiastic when Sandoz decidedthat the drug would be dispensed only in concert with amonitoring system. In approving the drug last October, theFDA says it didn't designate a specific approach, but toSandoz, there is only one -- its own Clozaril PatientManagement System -- and that is at the heart of the furor.   The company negotiated exclusive contracts with BaxterInternational Inc.'s Caremark home-care division to takeweekly blood samples from each patient and to dispense thedrug, and with Roche Biomedical Laboratories Inc., asubsidiary of Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., to analyze the bloodfor white cells. No other company, agency or hospital candeliver the medicine, and each patient has to submit to ablood test each week. &quot;The motto is: `No blood, no drug,'&quot;says a Caremark employee.   The price -- no matter how much of it the patient istaking or where in the U.S. he lives -- is the samenationwide: $172 a week, $8,944 a year. At that price, annualrevenue could ultimately reach at least $600 million.Sandoz's annual U.S. pharmaceutical sales currently total$750 million.   Sandoz says the drug will eventually save states thousandsof dollars per patient over the $66,000 it costs on averageto treat hospitalized schizophrenics for a year. But statesmaintain that any savings are long-term at best. Vacated bedswill be filled with other patients. &quot;To save money, we haveto close a wing,&quot; one official said. And patients onclozapine will need new therapy, housing and rehabilitation,all of which cost money too.   &quot;This is the most expensive treatment we've encountered,&quot;says Dr. Stephen Shon, medical director of California'smental-health department. &quot;We don't have any history with adrug that has a whole laboratory attached to it,&quot; addsNorwood Knight-Richardson, assistant director of the statepsychiatric institute in Alaska, where winter storms are adaunting problem for home-care teams heading to remotevillages to draw blood and dispense clozapine.   In Oklahoma, the cost of treating eligible patients wouldexceed the state's total mental-health budget. Texas, whichranks 48th among the 50 states in per-capita spending for thementally ill, would have to budget almost $100 million ayear. For California, it could be $300 million. In SouthDakota, despite Sandoz's one-price-fits-all policy, officialssay they are contending with Caremark over transportationcosts to reach patients in remote areas.   Critics charge that there is more marketing than medicinein the &quot;system,&quot; that it is a clever ploy that helped speedregulatory approval and that will camouflage hefty profit ina package price -- before the company's exclusive right tomarket the drug runs out in 1994. While they agree that bloodmonitoring is necessary, they maintain the Sandoz system isunnecessary and much too expensive. Doctors and hospitalsroutinely monitor patients on other medicines -- includingAZT and some cancer drugs -- at least as life-threatening asclozapine. The VA's Dr. Lehmann says his agency can do theblood work for $1.86. Doctors and pharmacists also say thesystem pre-empts their clinical judgment.   Moreover, Sandoz sells the same drug in Europe at pricesas low as $20 to $32 a week, according to several reports,and without requiring the same blood-monitoring frequency.&quot;We think we're getting the short end,&quot; says Tom Ahrens,senior consulting pharmacist for Medi-Cal, California'sMedicaid program. &quot;The whole country is.&quot;   Sandoz has rebuffed all efforts to negotiate. The VA, forinstance, proposed its own monitoring system, with acomputerized &quot;lock-out&quot; to prevent the dispensing of the drugto patients whose blood hasn't been tested. Medi-Cal said itwould pay $117 a week for the package. Sandoz said no toboth. The company has also refused to itemize the costs ofthe package, thus confounding insurers, Medicaid programs andother payers which usually consider medication, home care,doctor visits and lab fees separately in determining how muchto pay in reimbursement.   For its part, Sandoz says its aim is to protect patientsand the drug. The different pricing and monitoring in Europereflect local regulatory costs, policies and price controls.Besides that, in the U.S. &quot;we want to and can meet a higherstandard of patient safety,&quot; says Gilbert Honigfeld, Sandoz'sdirector of scientific communications, who has supervisedclinical research on clozapine since 1973.   But Sandoz stands firm on its U.S. price. The company, Mr.Honigfeld argues, deserves a fair return on a drug it pursueddespite long odds against marketing approval. &quot;People forgetwe're a business,&quot; he said, &quot;we're not a charity.&quot;   Sandoz won't sanction other monitoring systems, he added,because it would be liable for their quality under theFDA-approved labeling. A strict system is necessary, thecompany and some psychiatrists say, because schizophrenicpatients are particularly hard to track, and many statemental-health programs are already understaffed. Even incarefully designed clinical trials, some patientsinadvertently went several weeks between blood checks, Mr.Honigfeld says, which is evidence that no matter howconscientious a hospital, certain patients will slip throughthe cracks.   &quot;If there were a number of deaths, we would feel compelledto take Clozaril off the market,&quot; Mr. Honigfeld says. &quot;Itwould be a tremendous loss for the many other patients whodon't develop this problem.&quot;   Stuck in the crossfire are the patients. Hardly thrilledwith the price, the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill,an advocacy group -- mainly patients' families -- isreluctant to criticize the company. &quot;I don't know whether thecompany has priced this fairly,&quot; says Laurie Flynn, executivedirector of NAMI. &quot;I just want it to be available.&quot; And shethinks the cost controversy raises another issue.   &quot;The Medicaid system is willing to spend $50,000 a year onkidney dialysis,&quot; per patient, she says, &quot;but they don't wantto spend $9,000 on schizophrenia. We feel there is a stigma,that there's a feeling these people aren't worth it.&quot;   Currently, about 4,000 patients are on clozapine,including 1,500 who began the treatment as clinical researchsubjects. Sandoz is continuing to carry the research patients&quot;while the states are getting their act together,&quot; Mr.Honigfeld says. So far, about 15 state Medicaid programs payfor the drug, and 23 mental-health agencies have earmarkedfunds for it.   Sandoz projects its first-year sales at 8,000 to 10,000patients. While the total market ultimately depends on howmuch those who pay the bills can afford, Mr. Honigfeld seesit topping out at about 70,000.   Some students of the subject think that estimate is toolow. Dr. Meltzer, a champion of the drug who supportsSandoz's view of the controversy, says that at least 300,000people in the U.S could benefit from it. &quot;I would hope thatif it gets scaled up, the price could come down,&quot; he says.   As the first of a new class of drugs, clozapine may leadto better drugs without such potentially dire side effects --or expensive monitoring systems. Scientists and major drugfirms already are working with sister compounds that lookpromising. But products are at least three to five years fromthe marketplace.   For now, the stand-off has created questions so vexingthat some doctors think it is unethical to treat impoverishedpatients with clozapine. For instance, New York state hasbudgeted $2 million of mental health funds for clozapine,mostly for patients confined to hospitals. Those who get wellenough to leave the hospital would look to Medicaid forcoverage. But so far, it won't pay. Even if it did, patientswho find jobs could quickly earn enough money to lose theirMedicaid eligibility -- and then not be able to afford to buythe drug that keeps them well enough to work. Says JohnOldham, chief medical officer for New York's mental-healthagency: &quot;The result you want from this drug puts you in atremendous dilemma.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>