<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900809-0036</DOCNO><DOCID>900809-0036.</DOCID><HL>   Confronting Saddam: A Model Danger   ----   By Albert Wohlstetter and Fred Hoffman</HL><DATE>08/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP FORGN FREST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   Make no mistake. Saddam -- &quot;He Who Confronts&quot; -- is aworld problem. Not an Arab problem. Nor a problem simply forthe Japanese and the Europeans, who derive even more of theiroil from the Persian Gulf than does the U.S. Nor a short-termproblem the world can soon forget after oil marketsaccommodate Saddam's actions with a modest increase in theprice of a barrel of oil to the $25 mark that he had beenpressing on OPEC. Nor is it a long-run problem that the U.S.can dispose of simply by reducing U.S. dependence on importedoil.   Iraq's invasion of Kuwait -- if not reversed -- will be aneconomic and political disaster of global proportions. Itwill affect the First, Second and Third Worlds. SaddamHussein is a murderous neighborhood bully bent on expandingindefinitely the neighborhood he terrorizes. Perceptions ofthat fact, with varying degrees of clarity, have evoked theextraordinary sanctions voted in the United Nations and thebelated but at last swift actions taken by the U.S., Europe,the Soviet Union and even China, and by developing countries,including key Arab states. The Soviet position is importantnot only because it makes possible the U.N. consensus, butbecause the changes in the Soviet Union free the U.S. and itsallies to use force if necessary in the Persian Gulf withoutfear of opening vulnerabilities to Soviet attack.</LP><TEXT>   The oil shocks starting in 1973 marked the end of thepost-World War II &quot;Golden Age&quot; of unprecedented economicgrowth in the industrial democracies. Between 1973 and 1986,Japanese gross domestic product slowed to an annual growthrate of about 4% from nearly 10%. Other industrial countriesslowed to about 2% from 4% or 6%; the growth-retarding effectof the oil shocks accounted for much of this decline. Thecumulative loss in GDP due to the oil shocks exceeded $10trillion in 1986 dollars. (A good deal of that damageresulted from price controls and other governmentinterventions aimed at spreading the damage more equitably.)Saddam Hussein can do much more harm. He can impose amilitary discipline far more effective than any OPECconsensus.   Nor will the disasters be exclusively economic. Saddam hasshown that he won't hesitate to use force. If he thinks hecan get away with it, he'll move into Saudi Arabia to seizedirect ownership of this largest pool of low-cost oilreserves. He plainly intended his cool lies about invadingKuwait to support a &quot;free Kuwait&quot; independence movement todisplay his contempt for world condemnation and socalculatedly to inspire fear.   He is neither grateful nor appeased by the plentifuleconomic and military aid he has received from the neighborsand industrial democracies he now threatens. Hitler sometimestalked eloquently of peace and played on British guilt aboutthe harshness of Versailles. Saddam is never Mr. Nice Guy. Heexploits his reputation for unswerving brutality. As we facehim down, we should take care not to save face for him sothat, frustrated now, he can simply try again.   The foreign ministries and intelligence agencies of Europeand the U.S. long ignored the obvious about Saddam Hussein.He has made clear the extent of his ambitions and theruthlessness with which he moves to achieve them for at least15 years. He wants to control oil markets to realizepolitical aims that go far beyond economic power. He has, ofcourse, demanded that all foreign powers stay out of the Gulfand the Indian Ocean. But his interests cover theMediterranean as well. Ten years ago, for example, his twotop ministers told a thrilled interviewer that his aimsincluded &quot;the removal of American bases in Portugal, Spain,Greece, Turkey and Cyprus.&quot;   Anyone who dominated oil markets solely to maximizelong-term economic gain would pursue &quot;moderate&quot; pricepolicies. That's not Saddam. In the short run he would setextortionate prices to recoup quickly the enormous costs ofhis disastrously miscalculated attack on Iran. Onceestablished in control, he'd use sudden and massive changesfor large political ends.   One major political end would be to quicken the increaseof his already formidable military power and extend itsreach. His million-man army and 5,500 tanks, etc., strikefear in his neighbors. But to extend the range of hisintimidation he has already tested a ballistic missile of800-to-1,000-kilometer range, and a space-launch vehicle witha very large first stage. Such a vehicle makes feasible anintermediate-range ballistic missile carrying a 500-kilogramwarhead that would menace Southern Europe -- as well as theMiddle East and much of the Soviet Union. With the wealth hewould accumulate if unchecked, it would not be hard for himto buy the development of an even larger space launch vehiclethat could be adapted, with appropriate guidance, to carrylethal warheads to intercontinental distances.   What is more, increased oil revenues would help himaccelerate his development of warheads for mass destruction.He has bought from the Western democracies the capacity tomake chemical weapons and is pushing the development ofnuclear weapons. The Israelis destroyed the nuclear researchreactor he bought from the French. But they did not touch thefacilities sold by the Italians that can separateweapons-grade plutonium from spent reactor fuel -- which, asa world-wide problem of waste disposal, is in plentifulsupply.   In short, if we do not confront Saddam Hussein now, wewill find it much harder when he has extended the range ofhis intimidation.   The U.S. and its allies must face these facts squarely.The widespread condemnation, including that of the SovietUnion, is all to the good. The U.N. sanctions are even betterand have undoubtedly helped to induce swift internationalaction against Iraq. The U.S. has been moving the naval unitsneeded for an effective blockade of a kind contemplated inChapter 7 of the U.N. Charter. As soon as our forces are inposition we should put it into effect to enforce the U.N.economic embargo and to prevent the embargo from slowlydissipating. Both the British and the French have said theywould support a naval blockade and we are moving ships toeffect that support.   But the more effective the embargo, the greater Iraq'sincentives to apply counterpressure by shutting off Saudiproduction; and Saddam has shown he is a risk-taker. Iraq hasa formidable regional force, but if it moves on Saudi Arabia,it has vulnerabilities that the U.S. can exploit -- withappropriate access en route and in the theater and with thehelp of our allies.   Experts, who during the Iran-Iraq War repeated the foolishstereotype that &quot;Iraq can lose but only Iran can win&quot; nowtalk as if Iraq is invulnerable to forces that could bebrought into the area. It's not. Saddam's moves into SaudiArabia will almost surely face resistance by U.S. airborneand mechanized divisions and air forces based in SaudiArabia, Oman, Diego Garcia and Turkey, with possible supportby British and Arab forces. Iraq's extended lines of supplythrough featureless desert without cover would make itsforces ideal targets for precisely applied land-based airpower of sufficient range.   Precise weapons, stealth and other advanced techniques forpenetrating defenses should also make possible highlyeffective and discriminate air attacks against key militarytargets -- including Iraq's air and missile forces, andstocks and production facilities for chemical or nuclearweapons. Ironically, precise air attacks against refineriesand stocks of refined products could leave Saddam awash incrude oil while denying the fuel to support his military andalso avoiding widespread and long-lasting impairment of crudeproduction capacity. They could avoid indiscriminatecollateral damage to civilians in a war likely to be foughtbefore television cameras. Avoiding as much harm as possibleto Iraq's terrorized population is a political as well asmoral necessity.   Turkey, it should have always been clear, has a keymilitary as well as economic role to play in Persian Gulfcontingencies. But NATO, in the past two decades,increasingly took the view that the defense of the massiveinterests of NATO members in the Persian Gulf was not a NATOaffair. Implicit was the threat that an attack on one of itsmembers that grew out of a Persian Gulf contingency would notinvoke the NATO guarantee.   Turkey, therefore, reserving the use of its NATO bases forNATO contingencies, has understandably refused any plans forusing its bases in the Persian Gulf. Turkey's shabbytreatment by the European Community and by a NATO preoccupiedwith implausibly extreme contingencies on the inter-Germanborder has reduced Turkish ardor to be helpful. But Mr. Bushand Mrs. Thatcher, said Monday that an attack on Turkey, amember of NATO, would be an attack on all NATO. That is acrucial step in making the Turkish bases recently occupied byU.S. F-111s available to counter an Iraqi invasion in theGulf. If that is now NATO policy, it will reverse a longhistory of deterioration starting with President Johnson'sstatement in 1964 that the NATO guarantee might not applyeven in the case of a Soviet attack on Turkey that grew outof the Cyprus crisis.   In sum, if either the economic embargo or a blockadeenforcing it should lead Mr. Hussein to make his threatenedinvasion of Saudi Arabia, he will get more than he bargainedfor. Now is the time for closing the economic vise.   Now is also better than later for confronting him in theoil market. Consuming countries are in a strong position tocontinue indefinitely the embargo on Iraq and Kuwait with thecooperation of most of the other OPEC countries, especiallySaudi Arabia and Venezuela. Unused production capacity inOPEC countries other than Iraq and Kuwait is enough torestore OPEC production to its average level during 1989.Once panic subsides, that should be more than enough to keepcrude oil prices at or below their levels before the invasionof Kuwait. Moreover, oil stocks in the consuming countriesare high as a result of government stockpiling and the steadygrowth in OPEC production over several years. These stocksgive insurance even against a temporary disruption of Saudiproduction, if that should result from further aggression byIraq.   The U.S. Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy, inits report of January 1988, emphasized that the U.S.government and NATO have neglected military dangers in thePersian Gulf and in other places where they have massiveinterests. The U.S. and NATO mistakenly took these criticallyimportant contingencies as if they were &quot;Lesser IncludedCases&quot; of the two extreme attacks that have preoccupied us:an unrestrained nuclear attack on the U.S., and a massiveconventional invasion through the Fulda Gap in West Germany.These extreme contingencies were always far-fetched. In 1989,half of this key commission conclusion became transparentlyobvious as the countries in Eastern Europe moved toindependence and disintegration became evident within theSoviet Union itself. We may be lucky that Saddam Hussein hasmade the other half equally clear sooner rather than later.   With the increasing spread of weapons of mass destructionand high technology for delivering them, new strategy, forcesand technologies need elaboration; the plausible importantcontingencies are not &quot;lesser included cases&quot; of theextremes. These cases call for smaller but different forces,rather than the proportionate reductions that members ofCongress, eager to reduce budgets and at the same timeprotect weapons production and bases in their districts, arelikely to provide. This is particularly so since the airspace and bases to which the U.S. needs access in order toprotect its critical interests overseas are not in anycongressman's district.   The ability of the U.S. to project suitably discriminatepower in a timely way in the Persian Gulf or other threatenedareas has eroded as it has lost such access. It will erodefurther unless the administration and Congress recognize themassive changes that have taken place -- and the greatdangers that will persist and grow. According to the New YorkTimes, just before the crisis in Kuwait, Defense SecretaryRichard Cheney had been moving toward a strategy that soundsvery much like what's required. The present crisis shouldgive a powerful impulse not merely to prevent excessive cutsbut, even more essential, toward reshaping U.S. forces tomeet the real dangers.   The present crisis will test Europe's willingness to joinin the defense of its most important interests. It will test,also, the future of NATO and its ability to develop strategy,force structure and technology appropriate to the massivechanges under way in the world.   A U.S. military presence in Europe will continue to have arole in protecting U.S. interests in that vital region.Europeans still want that presence. But it can't be justifiedby the contingency of a massive Warsaw Pact invasion throughthe center of Europe. More plausible contingencies, like thepresent one in the Persian Gulf, call for a forward forceflexible enough to react quickly and for the bases to providea sustained defense against aggressions that affects ourinterest.   Saddam Hussein, who needs to be thrown out of Iraq as wellas from Kuwait, illustrates what should have been obvious allalong: that even as communist empires break up and many oftheir parts move toward democracy and free markets, the worldwill continue to present military dangers to criticalinterests of the U.S. and its allies. We need a strategy andforces shaped to meet these very real dangers.   ---   Mr. Wohlstetter is president of Pan Heuristics, a researchgroup in Los Angeles, and a fellow at the Rand GraduateSchool. Mr. Hoffman consults on energy and defense mattersfor Pan Heuristics and other organizations.</TEXT></DOC>