<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910412-0049</DOCNO><DOCID>910412-0049.</DOCID><HL>   Brought to Earth:   Junk-Bond Deals Trip   Insurer as State Seizes   Unit of First Executive   ---   California Moves on Firm,   An Ex-Client of Milken,   To Protect Policyholders   ---   Hope of Rescue by Europeans   ----   By Frederick Rose and David B. Hilder   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   F.CLC FEXC ITT LABOR</CO><MS>CONGLOMERATES (CGL)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)LIFE INSURANCE (INL)INSURANCE (INS)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)CORPORATE PROFILES (PRO)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)DELAWARE (DE)FRANCE (FR)NEBRASKA (NE)NEW YORK (NY)</RE><LP>   LOS ANGELES -- The junk bond era claimed another casualtyyesterday: Fred Carr and his highflying First Executive Corp.   Worried that the company was near collapse, Californiaregulators took control of First Executive's largestinsurance subsidiary, Executive Life Insurance Co. Mr. Carr'scompany had been a key part of Michael Milken's junk-bondnetwork, and had soared during its heyday. When the junkmarket disintegrated, First Executive's foundations began tocrumble.</LP><TEXT>   The state action effectively marks the largest failure ofan American insurance company. It seemed inevitable afterFirst Executive last week reported that it had a $465.9million fourth-quarter loss and auditors questioned itsability to remain a going concern. Yet Mr. Carr, thecompany's soft-spoken, avuncular chairman, continued publiclyto hold out hope of finding outside financing to restructurehis company.   California's move to place the Executive Life unit into acourt-supervised conservatorship means months of uncertaintyfor the more than 400,000 Americans who put substantialassets -- in some cases their life savings -- into itsinsurance policies and annuities. Thousands of them areinvoluntary Executive Life clients: employees of companiesthat funded pension plans by buying Executive Life annuitiesor Guaranteed Investment Contracts. Others were buyers ofmunicipal bonds whose proceeds were invested in ExecutiveLife investment contracts.   &quot;The fallout from the junk bond era continues to rain oninnocent American investors,&quot; said John Garamendi,California's insurance commissioner, at a news conference.&quot;One casualty is the Executive Life Insurance Co.&quot;   It's too early to say what, if any, losses face holders ofExecutive Life's $46.11 billion of life insurance in force atDec. 31. New York regulators didn't make any immediate moveto seize First Executive's other major unit, Executive Lifeof New York, which is about a third the size of theCalifornia unit. New York, which has been more stringent inits oversight, last week stopped the unit from writing newpolicies and required it to boost its reserves.   Though Mr. Garamendi held out hope of a relativelypainless restructuring, policyholders and other creditorscould be exposed to hundreds of millions of dollars inlosses. On Dec. 31, First Executive's bond portfolio, carriedon its books at $9.85 billion, actually had an estimatedmarket value of only $6.79 billion.   &quot;To the schoolteachers and hard-hats, secretaries anddoctors, hear this message loud and clear,&quot; Mr. Garamendisaid: &quot;We are going to do everything in our power to see thatyour money is there when you need it.&quot;   Retired employees of Pacific Lumber Co., whose pensionswere converted to Executive Life group annuity contractsafter a Milken-backed takeover of the company, could dolittle but hope. &quot;The only thing I'm worried about is mypension,&quot; said Wiley Lacy, of Fortuna, Calif., who retiredfrom Pacific Lumber in 1985 after 42 years. &quot;If I lose thatI'll have to sell my home.&quot;   For an indefinite period, California won't let ExecutiveLife policyholders redeem, or &quot;surrender,&quot; their policies ortake out loans on them. It will let the company make paymentson medical claims and death benefits and continue regularmonthly annuities.   Mr. Garamendi said Mr. Carr &quot;is fully cooperating in thetransition.&quot; The executive and the company wouldn't comment.According to the regulator, Mr. Carr has stepped down aschairman and chief executive of the California and New Yorkinsurance units but remains head of the parent FirstExecutive.   Yesterday's action, the beginning of what the commissionercalled &quot;the biggest, most complicated rehabilitation in thenation's history,&quot; appeared fraught with uncertainties. Inhis court filing seeking takeover authority, Mr. Garamendiasserted &quot;a serious danger of ultimate insolvency.&quot; But thefiling also said Executive Life hasn't at the moment beenfound to be either impaired or insolvent. A court in LosAngeles granted the order permitting state takeover.   Mr. Garamendi tried to put the best face on hisannouncement, saying that &quot;we start the rehabilitation with awilling buyer in hand.&quot; He was referring to a consortium ledby the Altus Finance affiliate of Credit Lyonnais, the largeFrench bank. Mr. Garamendi termed the consortium'sinvolvement a &quot;definitive program&quot; to rehabilitate FirstExecutive, but regulators in other states are more skeptical.&quot;We know little of it, but it's hard to see how you can makegold out of dross,&quot; said a regulator in one Midwestern state.   The consortium had begun discussing a possible acquisitionof Executive Life early last month, according to individualsfamiliar with the negotiations. On Tuesday, Altus decided itwanted to complete a deal for First Executive, theindividuals say. But, concerned that the company wasinsolvent and that it couldn't work out a deal with Mr. Carr,Altus's negotiators went directly to Mr. Garamendi. Thatapparently gave him another reason to decide to seek aconservator quickly to stem further losses and policysurrenders.   Mr. Garamendi made clear that California regulators hopeto restructure all of the company rather than sell any singlepiece of business.   The state action put on hold the months-old negotiationsbetween First Executive and Hartford Life Insurance Co., anITT Corp. unit. Hartford has been considering buying $2.3billion of individual life insurance liabilities fromExecutive Life. A spokesman said Hartford &quot;would still liketo negotiate with Executive Life.&quot;   First Executive officials didn't learn of the insurancedepartment's decision until yesterday morning, according topeople familiar with the company. Trading in the stock washalted just before the announcement; it resumed briefly, andthe shares closed at 28.125 cents, down 12.5 cents, or 31%,in the over-the-counter market.   Based on rescues of other large troubled life insurers,policyholders of Executive Life may find their funds frozenfor a period, but still stand a good chance of recoupingtheir original investments.   In the case of Baldwin-United Corp., the 1983 bankruptcyand largest previous life-insurance failure, holders of about$3.3 billion of annuities didn't lose any of their principal,but got lower interest rates than promised. Annuity holdersgot about 7.5% for several years on annuities that hadoriginally offered as much as 14%.   The action by the California insurance commissioner tosuspend policy surrenders, the normal procedure forpolicyholders to get their money out immediately, also meansgreater inconvenience for an undetermined period. In theBaldwin-United case, policyholders had only very limitedaccess to their funds for several years.   &quot;The policyholders who are on claims or death benefitswill probably find that their interests are the most highlyprotected,&quot; said William Bitterli, an insurance analyst atNorthington Partners, Avon, Conn. &quot;They're going to make goodon all the death benefits.&quot;   &quot;People with accumulation-type contracts are going to findthey're worth less than they thought,&quot; he added.   One of the most likely repercussions is that, as in thecase of Baldwin-United, some Executive Life policyholderswill be paid lower interest rates on their policies. But amajor question is which policies would have their interestrates cut most.   A likely target will be the Guaranteed InvestmentContracts, or GICs, that Executive Life issued to six stateand local government agencies to support $1.7 billion ofmunicipal-bond issues, several investment bankers said. Theagencies took the proceeds of their bond sales and investedthem with Executive Life, expecting to be paid a fixed rateof interest that would allow them to make payments on thebonds and earn a profit. GICs technically aren't insurancepolicies and therefore may not have as high a priority in theinsurance department's deliberations. Executive Life has alsosold GICs to pension funds.   Mr. Garamendi cautioned that Executive Life &quot;is not out ofthe woods&quot; and that, even under the best of circumstances,&quot;as in most rehabilitation plans, there would be arestructuring of liabilities&quot; -- meaning changes in paymentsto policyholders and annuitants.   Also likely to take big losses are more than 50international banks, mostly Japanese, that have about $245million in loans to First Executive Corp.   Executive Life Insurance had $10.17 billion in assets atDec. 31. Executive Life of New York had $3.17 billion atyear-end.   A spokesman for the New York insurance department saidregulators there haven't taken control of the New York unitbecause the state hasn't completed an analysis of thecompany. Mr. Garamendi said he expects New York to takecontrol of the subsidiary. The New York unit is believed tobe in somewhat better shape than the California company.   Nebraska yesterday put under supervision three small FirstExecutive units in that state: Lincoln Liberty Life InsuranceCo., Lincoln Indemnity Insurance Co. and First Landmark LifeInsurance Co. It forbade them to write new business, acceptpolicy redemptions or issue policy loans. Nebraska Gov. E.Benjamin Nelson, a former insurance regulator, was a FirstExecutive director from 1988 until last year.   In Delaware, the insurance department said no action hasbeen taken on First Stratford Inc., 49%-owned by FirstExecutive and a major reinsurer. The rest of First Stratfordis held by a group of partnerships tied to the Milken familyand ex-employees of Drexel Burnham Lambert.   California has hired a battery of advisers to deal withExecutive Life, chief among them Blackstone Group, aninvestment banking concern. Also named was an advisory groupof prominent businessmen that includes Warren Hellman, apartner in Hellman andamp; Friedman; Roger Shinn, former presidentof Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.; Jack McDonald, professorof finance at Stanford; and Walter Gerken, former presidentof Pacific Mutual Life Insurance Co. of California. Keymanagers for the insurer in conservatorship are expected tobe picked in a week or so.   While the regulatory takeover was anticipated,California's hand appears to have been forced by a renewedrush of policy redemptions. From an average of 60 to 70surrender requests a day in the first quarter, demands forthem swelled to 260 a day earlier this month, the Californiainsurance department said. Last year, holders redeemed $3.5billion in policies and annuities.   The California department said policy or annuity holderswho have initiated surrenders in recent days, but haven't yetreceived their checks, are out of luck for now since thosetransactions are being frozen.   More U.S. insurance companies may now be interested inacquiring Executive Life's businesses because the companywill be stabilized and controlled by regulators. MetropolitanLife Insurance Co., which bought the annuity businesses ofboth Baldwin-United and Charter Co., is &quot;following thesituation very closely,&quot; a spokesman said yesterday.   As regulators pick up the pieces of First Executive, theman who built it into an industry powerhouse with $60 billionof life insurance in force and $19 billion in assets will belooking on from the sidelines. The 60-year-old Mr. Carr grewup in Los Angeles's Watts neighborhood, the son of aRomanian-born peddler. He poured asphalt driveways, sold someinsurance and at age 32 got into the brokerage business. Helater became head of research at the Beverly Hills investmentcompany of Kleiner, Bell andamp; Co., and then managed a smallmutual fund portfolio for the Enterprise Fund.   Money poured in to that fund as it posted huge gains forseveral years, and Mr. Carr's reputation soared. He departed,and, shortly thereafter, a bear market sent the fund into atailspin. Some of its assets had been invested inunregistered stock of smaller companies and were largelyunmarketable. Several shareholder suits against the fund weresettled for $1.1 million without any finding of fault.   Mr. Carr took over First Executive in 1974 when it wastiny and deep in debt. He expanded it by giving independentagents a share of profits on policies that continued to stayin force. His team also developed new kinds of policies andannuities. By the late 1970s, he had discovered the potentialin junk bonds, and soon teamed with Mr. Milken of DrexelBurnham.   First Executive would become an integral part of Mr.Milken's junk-bond machine. Mr. Carr needed high-yieldinvestments so he could price insurance products lower oroffer higher yields than competitors. Mr. Milken needed tosell vast quantities of the bonds. First Executive's hugepurchases of Drexel-underwritten junk bonds made Mr. Carr oneof the key players in the corporate takeovers andrestructurings of the 1980s. From 1979 to 1983, for example,First Executive participated in at least two-thirds ofDrexel's junk-bond offerings.   First Executive's assets soared to more than $19 billionat the end of the 1980s from less than $1 billion at thebeginning of the decade. The growth came from innovativefinancial products, including policies designed to be as muchsavings vehicles as life insurance. But the key washigh-yield, but risky, corporate bonds.   As First Executive's operations grew, they from time totime ran afoul of insurance regulators, particularly in NewYork, where officials objected to company reporting andreinsurance practices.   With the end of Drexel's hegemony in junk bonds and thecrash of that market, First Executive's junk-laden investmentportfolio -- totaling $8 billion or more at its peak --soured. The company's fortunes turned abruptly in January1990, when it announced a stunning write-down in its bondportfolio that eventually would total $859 million.Policyholders began heavy redemptions.   Mr. Carr secretly built up a $2.5 billion cash cushion byearly last year to try to weather the storm. But asredemptions surged, the company's better investments wereliquidated.   Worried state insurance regulators formed a nationalworking group to try to salvage the Executive Lifeoperations. But by late last year, Massachusetts and NewJersey each demanded that the company make deposits of $500million in their states to back up policies -- demands thatother states blocked but that fractured the delicatealliance.   The decline and fall of Executive Life is likely to shinethe spotlight on insurance regulation and the stability ofthe industry. Industry officials, noting that First Executiveis by far the largest holder of junk bonds, insist that otherlarge companies are secure.</TEXT></DOC>