<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910508-0003</DOCNO><DOCID>910508-0003.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Court Affirms Verdict in KAL 007 Crash   ----   By Bob Davis and R. Gustav Niebuhr   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/08/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   C.KAL SO</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)TECHNOLOGY (TEC)UTILITIES (UTI)</MS><IN>AIRLINES (AIR)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ELECTRIC UTILITIES (ELC)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)SOFTWARE (SOF)</IN><NS>BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>GEORGIA (GA)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)SOUTH KOREA (SK)NEW YORK (NY)</RE><LP>   A federal appeals court affirmed that Korean Air Lines wasguilty of &quot;willful misconduct&quot; in the 1983 downing of one ofits passenger jets by the Soviet Union, but the court threwout a $50 million punitive damage award to families ofpassengers who were killed.   Even without punitive damages, the airline still facessignificant payouts over the incident. By upholding a jury'sfinding that KAL was guilty of willful misconduct, theappeals court allowed the families to sue for damages basedon the earnings potential of the people killed in thedowning. Had the appeals court rejected the willfulmisconduct ruling, the families would have been limited todamages of $75,000 each.</LP><TEXT>   The three-judge panel ruled, 2-1, that punitive damages --designed primarily to punish wrongdoers rather than tocompensate victims -- were precluded by an internationalagreement called the Warsaw convention. The federal appealscourt in New York has taken the same position in a separatecase.   KAL flight 007 was shot down by a Soviet fighter on Sept.1, 1983, after it strayed into Soviet airspace over the Seaof Japan. All 269 persons on board were killed. Lawyers forthe deceased argued in a jury trial that the airline was atfault because an error in the navigation system allegedly ledthe KAL jet to veer into Soviet air space. The plaintiffsargued that the crew must have known about the error, butdecided to proceed rather than turn back and face possibledisciplinary action.   The appeals court in Washington said in a 3-0 ruling thatthe jury could reasonably believe this explanation and letthe finding of willful misconduct stand.   George Tompkins Jr., a lawyer for KAL, said the airlinewould appeal the ruling on willful misconduct. &quot;The jury wasallowed to say the plane was shot down because of the willfulmisconduct of the airline,&quot; he said. &quot;That defies logic.&quot;   Donald Madole, a lawyer for the families of the deceased,said the group is considering whether to appeal the decisionregarding punitive damages.   Mr. Tompkins, the KAL lawyer, said that the airline hadalready settled the cases of about 160 of those killed,paying the families $100,000 each. About another 110 casesare yet to be resolved, he said.   ---   SOUTHERN'S insurer agrees to pay $1 million in death case.   The out-of-court settlement was reached one day afteropening arguments in a wrongful death suit brought by thewife of Jacob F. Horton, a senior vice president of SouthernCo.'s Gulf Power Co. unit who died when a King Air 200turboprop aircraft crashed into an apartment building justafter taking off from Pensacola, Fla., in 1989. The twopilots were also killed.   The trial was held in federal court in Key West, Fla.,after extensive pretrial publicity in the Florida Panhandlecaused the case to be moved from Pensacola. The company saidthat the insurer, U.S. Aviation Insurance Group, agreed tosettle &quot;purely for financial reasons&quot; and that the settlementdidn't imply negligence or error by the company or itspilots.   Shortly before the crash, Mr. Horton had been advised thathe was being dismissed from his job because an investigationhad showed that he was involved in a scheme to inflate andfalsify company invoices to funnel Gulf Power funds intoillegal campaign contributions to politicians.   Last July, federal officials investigating the crash saidthey were unable to determine the cause of the on-board firethat brought the plane down. The company contends that Mr.Horton himself caused the fire and that it wasn't negligent.In opening statements Monday, a company attorney said anexpert witness would testify that a sophisticated analysis ofa voicebox recording of the flight discloses that in the lastmoments before the plane crashed, Mr. Horton said, &quot;You arewasting your time.&quot; A voice identified as one of the pilotssaid, &quot;Jake, you are under arrest.&quot; The expert witness alsowas expected to testify that scuffling sounds were heard inthe cockpit just before the crash.   In a statement after the settlement, Southern reiteratedits position, saying that Mr. Horton was &quot;primarily or solelyresponsible for the crash.&quot;   In late 1989, Gulf Power pleaded guilty to U.S. charges ofmaking illegal political contributions and paid a $500,000fine.   A federal grand jury under way in Atlanta for more than 21/2 years is continuing to examine various matters related toSouthern, including whether its pension fund was managed in amanner to benefit the son of its chief executive officer,Edward L. Addison, and whether the company was involved inother illegal political contributions.   ---   SETBACK FOR INSLAW in long-running battle with JusticeDepartment.   A federal appeals court in Washington, D.C., threw out therulings of two lower courts that the Justice Department hadstolen a valuable computer program from a smallhigh-technology concern and then conspired to destroy thecompany.   The decision by the appeals court is a major setback forInslaw Inc., whose charges of U.S. Justice Departmentcorruption under former Attorney General Edwin Meese haveprompted two congressional investigations and voluminouspress coverage.   But in its unanimous opinion, a three-judge panel didn'taddress the merits of Inslaw's allegations. Instead, thecourt said that as a procedural matter, the bankruptcy-lawjudge who originally ruled in favor of Inslaw in 1987 hadexceeded his authority.   The appeals court said that a bankruptcy court lackedjurisdiction to decide a &quot;traditional contract action wherethe defendant is before the court only because the plaintiffhas previously filed a petition for reorganization in thatcourt.&quot;   Inslaw, which had stood to win almost $8 million indamages and attorneys' fees under the lower courts' rulings,said it would continue its fight against the JusticeDepartment. William Hamilton, who with his wife Nancy ownsand runs the firm, said, &quot;Whatever we have to do, whetherit's appeal or file a new lawsuit, we will do.&quot;   The appeals court specifically suggested in its opinionthat Inslaw could still go back to the federal district court-- as opposed to the bankruptcy court -- to sue the JusticeDepartment for allegedly stealing its trade secrets orbreaching contract agreements. Before taking such action,Inslaw is more likely to petition the appeals court for arehearing.   The Justice Department applauded yesterday's ruling.Assistant Attorney General Stuart Gerson said the opinion&quot;vindicates the position the government has taken from theoutset -- that notwithstanding the intensity of theunderlying dispute between Inslaw and the department, this isfundamentally a matter of commercial and contractualdisagreement and should be handled as such.&quot;   The Inslaw controversy began with what appeared to be aroutine dispute over a $9.6 million contract, under which thecompany agreed in 1982 to provide the Justice Department witha computer program for tracking legal cases. In 1985, Inslawfiled for court protection from its creditors under Chapter11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. The firm charged that seniorJustice Department officials, operating with then-AttorneyGeneral Meese's permission, had stolen the computer program,known as Promis, and tried to force Inslaw into liquidation.Inslaw's owners contended that the attempt to ruin thecompany was part of a larger plot to allow cronies of Mr.Meese and former President Reagan to acquire the Promissoftware.   Without directly addressing the conduct of Mr. Meese orother officials, the U.S. bankruptcy court ruled in 1988 thatthe Justice Department had stolen an &quot;enhanced&quot; version ofPromis and had tried to drive Inslaw out of business.   ---   JEAN HARRIS fails in appeal of law denying book profits tocriminals.   New York's highest tribunal, the state Court of Appeals,ruled that the state's &quot;Son of Sam&quot; law, designed to preventconvicted criminals from profiting from their crimes, did notviolate Ms. Harris's free speech rights.   The ruling is the first by the state Court of Appeals toaddress the validity of a 1977 law that was passed inresponse to efforts by convicted serial killer DavidBerkowitz, the so-called Son of Sam, to profit from hiscrimes. The federal government and 35 states have adoptedsimilar laws.   Yesterday's unanimous ruling was limited to New York'sconstitutional law. Whether the statute is constitutionalunder federal law remains to be seen. In the fall, the U.S.Supreme Court will hear another challenge to the law broughtby Simon andamp; Schuster over profits from its 1986 publication,&quot;Wiseguy,&quot; which was later adapted into the movie,&quot;GoodFellas.&quot;   In the case decided yesterday, Ms. Harris's attorney, LeonFriedman, argued that his client's autobiography did not fallunder the statute because only a portion of it dealt with Ms.Harris's crimes. The book, &quot;Stranger in Two Worlds,&quot; containstwo chapters that cover Ms. Harris's version of the killingof Dr. Herman Tarnower. Ms. Harris wanted most of the $90,000in royalties to be donated to the children of fellow inmates,the book's key subjects. Ms. Harris is serving 15 years tolife in the Bedford Hills state prison.   New York's attorney general's office, which argued onbehalf of the Crime Victims Board of the State of New York,contended that under the law, the royalties must be held inescrow for the sisters of Dr. Tarnower.   The statute regulates only the criminal's receipt ofmoney, not the right to speak about the crime,&quot; the courtopinion said in explaining why the law doesn't infringe FirstAmendment rights. The opinion added that a criminal caneventually collect money above the amount claimed by thevictims or their survivors.   Mr. Friedman said he is going to seek review before theU.S. Supreme Court even though the court will rule on the&quot;Wiseguy&quot; case first.   ---   PSYCHIATRIC RECORDS of crime victims are made available todefense.   The highest court in Massachusetts overturned the rapeconviction of Jonathan Stockhammer and ordered a retrial,ruling that his lawyers should be allowed to examine thealleged victim's psychiatric records to help determinewhether or not she might have had a motive to lie.   The woman has alleged that during her freshman year atBrandeis University in 1988, she was raped by Mr.Stockhammer, a fellow student. Massachusetts is only thesecond state, after Pennsylvania, to rule that defenselawyers have a right to inspect a victim's psychiatricrecords without a judge first reviewing the records.   The Massachusetts high court said that the defendant'sstate constitutional right to a fair trial required thatdefense lawyers be allowed direct access to the records. Thedecision recognizes that &quot;it's enough for judges to judge.They are not defense lawyers and cannot always see how anentry in a record would be beneficial to a case,&quot; said AndrewGood, a Boston lawyer representing Mr. Stockhammer.   While the ruling could affect a wide variety of criminalaccusations, psychiatric records are most commonly sought inrape cases, said Thomas F. Reilly, the prosecutor in thecase. Mr. Reilly said that his office would ask judges toimpose strict rules requiring that defense lawyers keep theinformation confidential.   Nonetheless, victims' rights and women's advocates saidthey feared the ruling would intimidate crime victims fromcoming forward.   &quot;Victims are encouraged to seek counseling and help. Nowdefense lawyers are going to use these records to go on afishing expedition,&quot; said Ruth Jones, a staff attorney withthe NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund.</TEXT></DOC>