<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900810-0034</DOCNO><DOCID>900810-0034.</DOCID><HL>   U.S. Efforts to Isolate Iraq Gain Ground;   Bush Decides Not to Release Oil Reserves   ---   Fears Grow for Americans   Trapped in the Region;   Arab Solution Is Hinted   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/10/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)AEROSPACE (ARO)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The U.S. effort to isolate Iraqi PresidentSaddam Hussein gained ground, but fears mounted for Americansand other foreigners in Iraq.   Iraq's military threat to Saudi Arabia remained worrisomebut showed signs of stabilizing, and the Bush administrationgave its strongest signal yet that it's prepared to use anaval blockade to stop Iraqi exports. And speculation grewthat an Arab meeting postponed until today in Cairo couldconsider a negotiated solution under which Iraq wouldwithdraw from Kuwait in return for huge financial and otherconcessions from the Kuwaitis.</LP><TEXT>   Iraq was set back when the two Arab nations that haveappeared sympathetic to the invasion of Kuwait appeared toabandon it. Yemen voted in the United Nations SecurityCouncil to approve unanimously a resolution rejecting Iraq'sannexation of Kuwait. And Jordanian officials indicated todiplomats they will abide by a U.N. trade embargo of Iraq --potentially helping to cut off food imports.   U.S. satisfaction with these diplomatic advances wastempered by the inability of most foreigners to leave Iraq orKuwait. The official Iraqi position is unclear, but thenation appears to be refusing to let non-diplomaticforeigners leave, and 38 Americans remain in a Baghdad hotel.   The Bush administration doesn't consider the Americans tobe hostages and is gratified that they seem to be receivingthe same treatment as other foreigners. But these and otherAmericans could become pawns in a prolonged U.S.-Iraqistandoff. Another group of Americans, including somegovernment officials, were turned back when they tried todrive across the Iraqi-Jordanian border, and some 3,000Americans are in Kuwait.   Iraq continued to fortify its positions on theKuwait-Saudi border, but U.S. and diplomatic officials saidthey saw no significant preparations for an invasion. Asenior Bush administration aide estimated that Iraq, with anestimated 120,000 soldiers in Kuwait, could invade with lessthan a day's preparation. Saddam Hussein moved some forcesfrom central Iraq south toward Kuwait. But officialsinterpret the movements as efforts by Iraq to consolidatepositions it holds.   While the U.S. isn't leading an international navalblockade to stop Iraqi oil exports, officials said U.S.,British and French ships are stationed near ports throughwhich Iraq exports oil and are prepared to stop shipmentsshould customers resume purchases of Iraqi crude. Reutersnews service said Australia is going to send two guidedmissile frigates to the Persian Gulf. &quot;I would anticipatethat we would take some steps to interfere with the export ofpetroleum products,&quot; a senior administration official toldreporters.   An Iraqi-chartered tanker waiting to be filled with Iraq'soil outside the Saudi Arabian Red Sea port of Yanbu continuedto wait, according to oil industry sources. So far, Saudiauthorities have not given it permission to enter the port,which is the terminus of an export pipeline for Iraqi oil.   One significant snag continued to impair the U.S. effortto keep Iraq out of Saudi Arabia while inflicting enougheconomic pain to push the nation out of Kuwait. Other Arabnations haven't agreed to send troops to Saudi Arabia to joinU.S. and British forces. The U.S. and Saudi Arabia want Arabmilitary support to avoid making the Saudis appear asinstruments of Western will.   The Arab meeting in Cairo -- called partly to create anArab military force to send to Saudi Arabia -- was postponedwhen one of Saddam Hussein's top deputies and the exiled emirof Kuwait, to great surprise, both arrived to attend.   That led to a series of backroom discussions among Arableaders, and some analysts speculated that they might havebeen exploring a deal in which Iraq would receive a disputedoil field, a strategic Kuwaiti island and a big cash paymentfrom Kuwait's royal family in return for withdrawing. ButBush administration officials and senior Arab diplomats inWashington said they hadn't heard of any such deal anddiscounted the rumors. One official acknowledged, though,that the U.S. has worried that some Arabs might be moretempted to buy off Saddam Hussein rather than push him out ofKuwait.   The force in Saudi Arabia could grow through the additionof more Western troops. France, which has warships in thePersian Gulf, indicated it would be &quot;sympathetic&quot; to arequest for ground forces, a senior U.S. official said.   U.S. officials said about 3,000 non-Saudi Arab soldiersare in Saudi Arabia, including a contingent from nations inthe Gulf Cooperation Council, a gulf defense alliance thatwere on routine assignment. Those soldiers will be consideredpart of a multinational force.   After meeting with Turkey's leaders, Secretary of StateJames Baker left Ankara optimistic that Turkey would lendmilitary support. Although plans were still being developed,the moves could include lifting restrictions on U.S. rightsat NATO air bases in Turkey so they could be used to stagemissions over Saudi Arabia or Iraq.   &quot;In the event that there were to be full-scalehostilities, I'm quite confident that we could count on ourallies, the Turks,&quot; an administration official told reporterstraveling with the secretary of state.   To induce the Turks to help militarily -- and to rewardthem for their earlier step of shutting down Iraqi pipelineshipments through Turkey -- Mr. Baker carried a pledge fromthe wealthy former rulers of Kuwait to reimburse Turkey foroil-related losses of as much as $2 billion. Mr. Baker alsopledged U.S. support for loans and loan guarantees from theWorld Bank and similar institutions and from the U.S.Export-Import Bank.   An Iraqi-U.S. clash remained possible, with Iraq facing aburgeoning U.S. force in Saudi Arabia and elsewhere in theregion. About 6,000 U.S. troops are on the ground in SaudiArabia, and the numbers are growing rapidly. The U.S. hastold Saudi Arabia it intends to ship in a &quot;minimum deterrentforce&quot; of more than 40,000 troops by the end of the month,according to Pentagon officials. Only a portion of the troopswill be based in Saudia Arabia, with the rest likely to be inTurkey and perhaps other Arab nations.   In the event of an Iraqi invasion, Pentagon plans call forputting in 100,000 or 150,000 troops, the officials said. Andthat intention, according to one senior military official,&quot;has been conveyed unambiguously through diplomatic channels&quot;to U.S. allies.   According to U.S. intelligence sources, the U.S. actionshave caused Iraq to move to protect its tanks, aircraft andtroops from possible attack. Based on satellite pictures andIraqi military communications monitored by the U.S., Iraqitroops appear to be preparing for a long standoff, militaryofficials said.   Only a trickle of reinforcements have moved from Iraq andKuwait toward the Saudi border, officials said. The number ofIraqi tanks and troops in that area hasn't changed.   Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams told reporters that theIraqis &quot;seem to be in a defensive posture.&quot; Instead ofpreparing for an attack, he said, Iraqi generals seem&quot;determined to hold on to what they have acquired.&quot; He added:&quot;We don't see any movement of {Iraqi} military forces inreaction&quot; to U.S. actions.   Bush administration aides declined to say whether the U.S.will call for a naval blockade to stop Iraqi oil exports,insisting that international arrangements for enforcing theU.N. trade sanctions are being negotiated with other nations.   But officials suggested the U.S. has decided againstdeclaring a blockade. Nevertheless, the U.S. and allies haveassembled the naval forces needed to stop Iraqi oil shipmentsthrough the Red Sea, Mediterranean Sea and Persian Gulf. TheU.S. hopes exports will be stopped voluntarily -- but issignaling that it is prepared to institute a blockade ifnecessary.   Meanwhile, the chances for expanded U.S. arms sales toSaudi Arabia seemed to be growing. U.S. officials said theadministration had decided to revive a stalled sale of 20F-15 jet fighters to Saudi Arabia. The sale was held up byopposition in Congress, but the officials indicated it wouldgo forward.   At the same time, Congress began reconsidering its effortto prohibit arms sales to Saudi Arabia. The Saudi Air Forcelacks much capability to destroy tanks, and the pilots arestill training to use British-built Tornado attack jets thatthe Saudis bought because they could not buy the equivalentU.S. F-15E.   Congress has also rejected a sale of advanced infra-redguided Maverick missiles, the U.S. Air Force's preferredantitank weapon. Saudi F-5 pilots use an older version of theMaverick that is guided by television cameras that can't seethrough haze or dust and that can't distinguish a camouflagedtank against the desert floor.   Congress has also limited the number of older model F-15fighters the Saudis could have in Saudi Arabia. The limit wasset at 60 in 1987. To reinforce the Saudis, President Bushdeclared a national security crisis to waive the restriction.   Officials in the State and Defense departments said theywere ready to review prior Saudi requests for arms.   ---   Walter S. Mossberg and John J. Fialka contributed to thisarticle.   (See related story: &quot;White House Move Comes As SeveralCompanies Reduce Gasoline Prices -- WSJ August 10, 1990)</TEXT></DOC>