<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910319-0125</DOCNO><DOCID>910319-0125.</DOCID><HL>   Businesses Invest More Defensively in '91   ---   Concerns Spend on Computers,   Tools to Promote Efficiency   ----   By Ralph E. Winter   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), NO PAGE CITATION</SO><CO>   DH</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FORECASTS andamp; ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)BROADLINE RETAILERS, DEPARTMENT STORES (RTB)</IN><LP>   American businesses are investing more defensively thisyear, but they're likely to spend about the same amount as in1990.   Few executives feel aggressive enough to build new officebuildings or factories in 1991. Instead, they're orderingcomputer systems to make existing plants, stores and officesrun more efficiently, and new machine tools that will producemore competitive cars and appliances.</LP><TEXT>   Unless a prolonged Middle East war demoralizes thecountry, rising purchases of high technology equipment appearlikely to offset a drop in spending for buildings andbulldozers.   Some see that as good news. Capital spending ordinarily isone of three major drags on the economy during recessions,says Adrian T. Dillon, chief economist for Eaton Corp.,Cleveland producer of truck parts and electrical products.The other two are housing, which has been very weak in recentmonths but may be revived by lower mortgage rates, andinventory investment.   If capital spending is virtually flat this year, or risesslightly as Mr. Dillon forecasts, the recession should bottomout once inventory cutting has been completed. That couldoccur in the next few months. Companies cut inventoriessharply since the downturn began last August, and stocksweren't badly out of line to begin with.   Consumer spending for goods and services, which ordinarilyshows modest gains during recessions, rose slightly inNovember and more briskly in December. While auto salesremain weak, they may rebound if the U.S. and its alliesappear to be winning the Middle East war. Meanwhile, exportsare rising and government spending goes on climbing, helpingto lift the economy out of recession.   The most recent Commerce Department survey of capitalspending plans made last October and November indicated thatinflation-adjusted spending would rise slightly in 1991,despite the recession already under way. A slightly latersurvey by Dun andamp; Bradstreet Corp. of 5,000 companies acrossthe country also points to a modest rise.   Furthermore, orders for non-defense capital goods in the1990 fourth quarter were higher than for any other quarter oflast year. Actual spending on buildings and equipment duringthe final quarter dropped only 1.2% from the third period andwas slightly higher than in the 1989 fourth quarter.   &quot;Spending for computers and other information processingequipment does pretty well even in bad times,&quot; says RobertDye, senior economist with the WEFA Group., Bala Cynwyd, Pa.,economic research organization. Furthermore, he says, theMiddle East war and growing instability in the Soviet Unionwill require high spending for technologically advancedweapons systems, which can't be produced without highlysophisticated capital equipment.   Mr. Dye expects a decline in first-quarter capitalinvestment, followed by a fairly brisk rebound that willboost spending for the year to $518.7 billion in 1982dollars, a 0.9% rise from 1990.   The growing importance of communications,information-handling and other high-technology equipment isthe key factor in the capital spending stability during thecurrent downturn. Purchases of high-technology equipment in1991 will top $200 billion and account for more than 40% oftotal capital outlays. By contrast, such equipment made uponly 20% of capital expenditures when the last recessionbegan just over a decade ago.   Sales are being fueled by a new generation of mainframecomputers, work stations and personal computers that offermore computing power for the dollar. Also, there is fiercepressure on companies to become more efficient, which oftenmeans employing better equipment.   In addition, while few companies are totally immune fromthe recession, many have been brushed rather lightly so far.At Gerber Products Co., for instance, the primary factorgoverning 1991 capital spending is the time engineers need tocomplete major plant upgrades, rather than the recession, aspokesman says. The big Fremont, Mich. baby food concern,will spend between $42 million and $48 million during theyear ending March 31, and roughly the same amount in fiscal1992. Spending in fiscal 1990 was about $40 million.   Other companies say they have no choice but to continuetheir modernization and cost-reduction programs even thoughthe recession is hitting them pretty hard. Competitors, bothdomestic and foreign, are forging ahead, fully aware of theadage, &quot;He who hesitates is lost.&quot;   The auto industry provides a classic illustration. Thereis a huge surplus of production capacity in North America,and auto sales are lousy. Yet General Motors Corp. isresponding with a modest 5% cut in capital spending, to anestimated $7 billion this year from about $7.4 billion forboth 1989 and 1990. By contrast, GM slashed spending nearly30% in 1982 from the average of the two prior years andchopped it another 35% in 1983 as the economy began to emergefrom the severe 1981-82 recession.   &quot;We've long known that we're in a cyclical business,&quot; saysa spokesman at Ford Motor Co. He says Ford isn't throttlingback because of the recession. Spending on plantmodernization and tooling for new vehicles &quot;is absolutelyvital to our remaining competitive in the world auto market,&quot;he says.   For example, Ford last month announced plans to invest$500 million at its Batavia, Ohio, plant to produce a newelectronically controlled four-speed automatic transmission.Four-speed automatics produce better acceleration and fueleconomy than three-speed automatic transmissions.   As evidence that other U.S. manufacturers also areplanning beyond the current downturn, they ordered $253.6million of U.S.-made machine tools during December, 44% morethan a year earlier.   &quot;It's the high-tech products that provide the big salesthrust,&quot; says Stephen M. Peterson, vice president sales forGiddings andamp; Lewis Inc. the Fond du Lac, Wis., machine toolbuilder. Companies are buying sophisticated machine tools andmanufacturing cells that automatically load parts, adjust forhardness of the metal being cut and measure each part forproper dimensions, he says. And sales of automated assemblysystems &quot;are really going great guns.&quot;   Commercial aircraft shipments also will increase smartlythis year, based on orders already on the books. Airlines arehurting; the recession and fear of Iraqi terrorism reducedtravel while fuel costs rose. But they can't afford to backaway from the efficient new planes while competitors rebuildtheir fleets.   On the other hand, the outlook remains absolutely dismalfor the most visible part of capital spending, constructionof offices, stores and other commercial buildings. Vacancyrates are high, and lenders have practically stopped makingconstruction loans after writing off billions of dollars inlosses. Fortunately, commercial building will account forless than 8% of this year's capital investment. Furthermore,this will be the sixth consecutive year of decline.   Spending on heavy industrial equipment such aspaper-making machines and lift trucks probably will declinemodestly, industry executives say. Part of the dip is adirect result of the recession, as companies patch up oldlift trucks to run them another year. However, someindustries were completing a major investment cycle as thedownturn hit. For instance, a spate of new paper machinesordered in 1987 or 1988 are just coming into production,creating surplus capacity for many types of paper.   Quite understandably, construction machinery sales aredepressed by the dismal prospects for new building.   Recession-reduced earnings will limit spending for somecompanies, particularly those that borrowed heavily in the1980s for acquisitions or restructurings to avoid takeover.However, total corporate cash flow is rising becausedepreciation provisions go up in bad times as well as good.And depreciation last year was more than twice as large asafter-tax profits. By contrast, back in 1980, depreciationwas only 19% greater than earnings.   Furthermore, declining interest rates make some companiesless reluctant to borrow for capital projects. A growingnumber of companies are selling bonds as long-term rates comedown.   Despite the generally cautious attitude, a few companieswith strong balance sheets are plowing ahead with majorexpansions while their competitors hunker down. Dayton-HudsonCorp., Minneapolis, will invest $1 billion this year, about50% more than the average of recent years. At a time whenother retailers are closing stores, Dayton-Hudson will open46 Target discount stores, 15 to 20 moderate-price Mervyn'sdepartment stores and two Dayton department stores. Thecompany also plans to remodel 63 existing stores.   When the prosperity returns, Dayton-Hudson expects to havea leg up on its competitors.</TEXT></DOC>