<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911217-0058</DOCNO><DOCID>911217-0058.</DOCID><HL>   No Deal:   U.S. May Be Missing   Rare Chance to Obtain   Soviet Spy Technology   ---   A Space Reactor Is Offered,   But the Administration   Can't Agree to Buy It   ---   The Long Ordeal of `Topaz'   ----   By John J. Fialka and Laurie Hays   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/17/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)SCIENCE andamp; TECHNOLOGY (SCN)</NS><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   In January 1989, Nikolai Ponomarev-Stepnoy, leader of aSoviet design team that built a top-secret military spysatellite, came in from the cold.   Speaking to a group of U.S. space experts in Albuquerque,N.M., he described in rich detail the exotic innards ofTopaz-2, the satellite's lightweight nuclear reactor, whichU.S. intelligence agencies had spent years trying to fathom.His audience, as one participant later put it, was &quot;blownaway.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Most surprisingly, Mr. Ponomarev-Stepnoy's overture wasn'ta furtive attempt to sell intelligence to the West. He wasoffering a straight-up business deal, providing the firstclear signal that Moscow was willing to sell some of itsprecious high-tech military secrets.   Incredibly, here was the director of the KurchatovInstitute of Atomic Energy -- established by the founder ofthe Soviet atomic bomb program -- proposing to sell, for afew million dollars, an item that the National Aeronauticsand Space Administration and the Defense and Energydepartments were in the process of developing themselves at acost of $1.6 billion.   Almost three years later, however, the deal hasn't beenconsummated. But don't blame the Soviets. In a reversal ofCold War stereotypes, the supposedly unwieldy andhyper-secretive Soviet military bureaucracy has been preparedall along to sell Topaz. But the U.S. side has dithered,bogged down by a debate among Bush administration officialsover whether and how to buy Soviet military technology.   The lengthy impasse is even stirring fears in Washingtonand Moscow that if the U.S. can't find a way to employ thethousands of experts whose brainpower fueled the Sovietmilitary apparatus, others will.   &quot;After World War II we had this great contest over who gotthe German scientists,&quot; recalls Sam Nunn, chairman of theSenate Armed Services Committee. With the breakup of theSoviet Union, he says, &quot;We could have an explosion of expertswho made the biological, chemical and nuclear weapons. Thosepeople could be dispersed all over the world unless we helpthem get control of their weapons and engage in some jointscientific projects.&quot;   At the moment, Topaz is frozen -- literally. Many U.S.experts believe that technology derived from Topaz couldprovide the ideal power source for distant space probes,lunar exploration and giant communication satellites. ButTopaz sits idle on an ice-covered pier in St. Petersburg,awaiting U.S. government permission to let the sale gothrough.   In Moscow, meanwhile, Mr. Ponomarev-Stepnoy, a balding,professorial 62-year-old, is beginning to wonder if the dealis jinxed. &quot;I'm very worried that the equipment may bedamaged&quot; sitting on the pier, he says. &quot;But if we took itback, the whole process goes backwards.&quot;   Mr. Ponomarev-Stepnoy knows well how projects can go awry.In the early 1960s the Kremlin gave him a top-secret order tobuild a nuclear reactor for a space satellite. It had to be&quot;absolutely reliable&quot; for three to five years, and of &quot;higherquality than anything anybody had ever seen before,&quot; herecalls.   The Soviet engineer won't say what the reactor wasoriginally intended for, but U.S. intelligence expertsbelieve it was being developed to power a new radar satellitethat could help Soviet submarines and ballistic missilestarget U.S. carrier fleets anywhere on the globe.   To meet the Kremlin's wishes, Mr. Ponomarev-Stepnoy and ateam of scientists and technicians designed a nuclear reactorthat used exotic metal alloys and could operate attemperatures of up to 3,100 degrees Fahrenheit -- twice whatprevious space reactors could withstand. They employed asuper-efficient power-generation process, called thermionics,that required no moving parts to derive power from a streamof electrons.   But suddenly, after 20 years of labor and two test flightsthat proved that Topaz worked, officials told Mr.Ponomarev-Stepnoy that the military no longer needed Topazand that Moscow had no money to develop it for commercialuse.   But Topaz got a new lease on life in 1988 when, amid ageneral thawing in Cold War tensions, the Kurchatov Institutereceived two unusual visitors. They were John Kiser and GlenMcDuff, U.S. businessmen acting as consultants for thePentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative, or SDI, which wasscouring the world for technology that could be used in largesatellites envisioned in President Reagan's &quot;Star Wars&quot;anti-missile defense system.   Mr. McDuff, who had worked on nuclear weapons for theEnergy Department, says that, once the Soviets decided theU.S. feeler was serious, they agreed to send a delegation tothe January 1989 conference in Albuquerque on the uses ofnuclear power in space.   The Soviet presence at the conference caused a stir.Soviets had never been allowed to visit Albuquerque, letalone the space conference, which attracted scientists fromU.S. weapons laboratories as well as experts from the CentralIntelligence Agency and the Defense Intelligence Agency.According to Mr. McDuff, the Department of Energy nervouslywithdrew all the numbers from the papers its experts werepresenting.   But the Soviets, it turned out, weren't there to gleanU.S. technical secrets, but to shed light on some of theirown. That became clear when Mr. Ponomarev-Stepnoy stepped upto the podium and described for the assembled group theblueprints for Topaz. The top-secret reactor, he explained,was for sale.   &quot;The stuff he presented I had seen before, but only inintelligence documents stamped classified,&quot; says Mr. McDuff.&quot;And there he was handing it out to anyone. You could justsee {U.S. intelligence officials} cringing in their seats.&quot;   The revelations unnerved U.S. officials. One EnergyDepartment expert told the Soviets, &quot;You are not welcomehere. Go home.&quot; At a banquet toast, another U.S. participantwarned that any deals with the Soviets would cost the U.S.jobs.   U.S. officials even instructed businessmen at theconference not to talk to the Soviets. But Joe Wetch, a SanJose, Calif., engineer who had designed some of the firstU.S. nuclear-powered space satellites, ignored the warningand arranged a meeting with Mr. Ponomarev-Stepnoy.   It was the start of a deep friendship. The two mendiscovered that, though they came from opposite poles in theshrouded world of Cold War science, they had much in common.Both had been top designers of space-satellite reactors. Eachworked on programs to spy on the other's military. They wereeven the same age.   Driving to dinner in Albuquerque, they confided in eachother and discovered that they shared the same dream: toadapt a nuclear-powered satellite to a space-based televisionsystem capable of broadcasting to half the earth at once.   At that point the car screeched to a halt, and the two mengot out to shake hands in the middle of the road. Mr. Wetch,who had retired from the government, agreed to form acompany, Space Power Inc., that would market Topaz in theU.S. The two then dined on lobsters and a great many gin andtonics.   Slowly, news of Topaz began to seep through the U.S.defense, space and foreign policy bureaucracies. Manynon-government scientists greeted the offer as an unusual andwelcome opportunity.   &quot;It would enable us to do things we couldn't otherwisedo,&quot; says Steven Aftergood, a senior analyst for the private,Washington-based Federation of American Scientists. He isespecially excited by prospects for using a Topaz-typereactor on deep space missions, where it could provide powerfor remote maneuvers, and as a power source for extendedexplorations on the moon or Mars.   Air Force planners, meanwhile, are considering adapting aTopaz-style reactor for a spy radar that could trackmovements on half the earth at once. And SDI scientists aretoying with the idea of using a Topaz-derived reactor topower satellite-based beam weapons, such as lasers.   But nothing has been concluded to date, partly because theU.S. government lacks guidelines for buying high-techequipment from the Soviet Union, and partly because some U.S.agencies worry that Topaz could curtail expensive governmentprograms and cost U.S. industry some jobs. For two years, Mr.Ponomarev-Stepnoy has attracted the attention of a series ofU.S. experts, but no commitments on a deal.   It's not that the Soviet side hasn't tried. Last January,with financing from Mr. Wetch, the Soviets shipped a Topaz --minus its nuclear fuel -- to another meeting of nuclear spacepower experts in Albuquerque. They unveiled Topaz with theflair of a Detroit auto maker exhibiting the latest model.The reactor was covered with a green tarpaulin with a redSoviet flag on top and surrounded by Christmas decorations.The tarp was lifted to reveal what looked like a high-techChristmas tree; a few strands of tinsel were even hangingfrom Topaz's black, 14-foot conical reactor. As thescientists broke out vodka to celebrate, the problems thathad bogged down the deal seemed to be lifting.   But more trouble would follow. Mr. Wetch had hoped thatthe U.S. would buy the display model, but that, too, wouldhave involved transactions that weren't covered by any U.S.regulations. Mr. Wetch then tried to ship Topaz back toMoscow. But he was told that this would violate the amended1954 Atomic Energy Act, which prohibits the export ofsensitive nuclear technology from the U.S.   &quot;We got word that this thing might be considered a nuclearfacility,&quot; says Mr. Wetch. &quot;I said this doesn't have any fuelin it. It is no more a nuclear facility than a barrel ofbeer.&quot;   But the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission wasn'tconvinced. It took eight months for Mr. Wetch, his lawyers,the Soviet government, the State Department and ultimatelythe White House to persuade the NRC to grant an exceptionthat would permit Topaz to return home.   Finally this spring, elements of a deal seemed to befalling into place. The Defense Department's SDI unit agreedto pay $15 million to buy and test the electronics of an-other Topaz model. According to Mr. Wetch, the deal wouldn'timpose restrictions on any resulting U.S. uses ofTopaz-derived technology, nor would it oblige the U.S. toshare any technical secrets.   Based on economics, the deal seems favorable for the U.S.The closest thing to Topaz that the U.S. is working on isSP-100, a satellite-borne nuclear power reactor beingdeveloped jointly by NASA and the departments of Energy andDefense. The eight-year-old program has consumed $420 millionand, by the year 2002, it is projected to cost $1.6 billion-- more than 100 times the cost of SDI's Topaz. Unlike Topaz,which has been flight-tested, SP-100 has yet to produce&quot;flyable&quot; hardware.   Yet political problems continue to hold up the deal. Thedepartments of State, Defense and Energy and NASA all havevoiced objections to the National Space Council, which comesunder the aegis of Vice President Dan Quayle.   The Energy Department views Topaz as a potentialcompetitor to the SP-100 program. NASA and the DefenseDepartment are worried about job losses in the U.S. aerospaceindustry if work is farmed out to emigrating Soviet expertswho might be willing to work cheaply. State Departmentofficials argue that launching nuclear-powered satelliteswill cause environmental problems.   At the Pentagon, meanwhile, deputy defense secretaryDonald Atwood has introduced a potential new obstacle,decreeing that he must personally approve any high-techmilitary deals with the Soviets.   After a recent trip to Russia, Mr. Atwood told reporters,&quot;I feel that {the Soviets} have got to get away from thisobsession with high technology, which is directed towardweapons and toward missiles and things of that nature.&quot; Anysales to the Pentagon that perpetuated that technology, hesaid, would send the &quot;wrong signal.&quot; Mr. Atwood said he wantsto see Soviet scientists working instead on improvements insuch areas as food processing, transportation and fixing thetelephone system.   But outside experts worry that the Soviets will seek othercustomers for their high technology, rather than abandoningit to make more mundane products. John Kiser, head of KiserResearch, the Washington-based firm that first located theTopaz technology, says, &quot;No company in a country that wantsto stay competitive can afford to give up its technologybase.&quot;   As for Mr. Ponomarev-Stepnoy, he remains patient. &quot;Ifthere's a problem, it should be overcome,&quot; he says. However,if the U.S. won't buy, he may turn to Japan. But, he says,despite three years of frustration, the Soviets still preferto sell their technology to the U.S.   &quot;This process may be something longer than Mr. Stepnoywould like,&quot; says Douglas Graham, a deputy assistantsecretary of defense for space policy, &quot;but one has to keepin mind that this is something of a trend-setter. This isgiving the U.S. government an opportunity to look throughthese issues for the first time.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>