<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910626-0078</DOCNO><DOCID>910626-0078.</DOCID><HL>   In Kuwait, Democracy Now or Chaos Later   ----   By Hillary Mann</HL><DATE>06/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)KUWAIT (KU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)</RE><LP>   While Americans are focusing their attention on humanrights abuses in Kuwait, they are overlooking the crisis oflegitimacy that is crippling the government of Kuwait. Thiscrisis has become so acute that military and police officershave started to resign en masse or refuse assignments.   Three months after the liberation of Kuwait, most Kuwaitisare frustrated by their government's impotence andincompetence. The government has been unable to restoreeffective security or central authority. Without an effectivelegal outlet, such as a free press, a legislature or evenresponsive government authorities, for their frustrations orcomplaints, Kuwaitis have been unable to heal theirdivisions. Resentments between the people who stayed in thecountry during Iraq's occupation and those who fled, as wellas between religious, family and &quot;national&quot; (read Palestinianversus Kuwaiti) groups fester. Many Kuwaitis are frightenedthat a &quot;fifth column&quot; of subversive Palestinians and Iraqisremains in Kuwait; they worry too that Iraq might attackagain. Nearly everyone in Kuwait today is either armed or haseasy access to weapons left behind by the Iraqi army.</LP><TEXT>   Before the August 1990 invasion, the ruling Sabah familytried to diffuse demands for greater political participationthrough tribal patronage, control of the media, and theexploitation of religious and ethnic tensions. These methodsare no longer working. The patronage system is strapped forcash: The Kuwaiti government is borrowing hundreds ofmillions of dollars on the international market, and 500 oilfires are burning away the country's wealth. Meanwhile,Kuwaiti businessmen lack the confidence to bring theircapital back to Kuwait, or invest in rebuilding the economy.   Controlling the media and exploiting religious and ethnictensions -- the Sabah family's other two traditional devices-- are dangerous tactics to use with a traumatized,frustrated and armed population.   The situation in postwar Kuwait is therefore explosive.Many fear a Lebanonization of Kuwait, with armed factions ofShiites, Sunni fundamentalists, young Sabah sheikhs andothers paralyzing the country. In this scenario, the Sabahgovernment, like the Maronite president of Lebanon, wouldbecome just another armed faction. So would the Palestinians,who constitute 15% of the population, live in concentratedareas, are poorly treated and blocked from leaving Kuwait --and who also have access to arms.   Last week's announcement by the emir that parliamentaryelections will be held in October 1992 was an importantindication that he recognizes the problem. The announcementrepresents a shift in the Sabah family's policy of refusingto be tied to a timetable for democratization. In the bazaarof Middle Eastern politics the announcement is being read asthe government's opening bid in the inevitable haggling withthe pro-democracy movement over the timing and substance ofdemocratization. The public announcement of a date forelections provides the U.S. with the opportunity to promotedemocratic institutions in Kuwait.   Since liberation, a Kuwaiti democracy movement has gainedunprecedented momentum. It has staged one majordemonstration, issued a dozen pamphlets criticizing thegovernment and convened scores of planning sessions. However,the planning sessions have not yet produced a coherentstrategy and the pamphlets have been more reactive thaninspiring.   Now that a formal date has been set for elections, thechallenge for Kuwait's eight pro-democracy groups is to electleaders formally, draft platforms, hone demands and clearlyexplain to the public what they hope to accomplish. Americanscan provide critical assistance to the pro-democracy movementto prepare for these elections, as they have done in EasternEurope and Central America.   Unfortunately, Kuwait's various pro-democracy groups haveseparate agendas, which may inhibit their ability to worktogether. Three of the groups are based in Kuwait's largelySunni, but secular-minded, business community, which isseeking better business opportunities in a democratic Kuwait.Another group is based in Kuwait's educated middle class,which contains many Shiites, who want to break up the elitemonopoly that has dominated Kuwait in the past. Another threegroups are Islamic fundamentalists, and have as their aim thestrict implementation of Islamic rule in Kuwait. In additionto this group of seven, there is the clandestine &quot;August 2movement&quot; of dissident military and police officers.   The pro-democracy movement does not include the Bedouin(who have traditionally been loyal to the Sabah family), theruling Sabah family themselves or the Palestinians. It does,however, represent a diverse cross-section of Kuwaitisociety. The presence of Islamic fundamentalists in thepro-democracy movement is particularly important. They arehighly organized with access to two of the most powerfulinstitutions in an Islamic society: the mosque's loudspeakerand prayer ground. In Kuwait, as in Iran before therevolution that brought Ayatollah Khomeini to power, theauthorities are hesitant to break up dissident gatherings inmosques or pull the plug on mosque loudspeakers.   Rather than attempt to maneuver between the Islamicfundamentalists and its restive middle and business classes,the Kuwaiti government (and the U.S.) would do well topromote real democratic institutions and peaceful changewhile there's still a chance.   ---   Miss Mann is a research fellow at the Washington Institutefor Near East Policy. She has just returned from two monthsin Kuwait.</TEXT></DOC>