<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900626-0018</DOCNO><DOCID>900626-0018.</DOCID><HL>   Struggling Feds:   U.S. Finds It Tough   To Establish Crimes   In Savings andamp; Loan Mess   ---   Case Against Sammy Spikes,   Others Took Three Years,   Numerous Wrong Turns   ---   An Ex-Wife Supplies Lead   ----   By Paul M. Barrett   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Last week the federal government held a peprally for its prosecutors.   President Bush attended the Friday session, promising withthe help of the assembled U.S. Attorneys a new crackdown onsavings-and-loan criminals. Three times the lawmen stood toapplaud the boss. Then the Marine Corps Band struck up &quot;GodBless America.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   But earlier last week, in a nondescript federal officebuilding in Dallas, the real work of trying to put Sandamp;L crooksin jail was being carried out by Murray Neighbors and RussellShelton of the Internal Revenue Service. And they were in nomood for cheering.   The two investigators unfurled a three-by-four-footschematic diagram of a $32 million Texas Sandamp;L loan gone bad.The pyramid-shaped map of intersecting arrows, circles anddollar signs showed how dozens of insiders, real-estatedevelopers and middlemen purportedly looted the thrift bymeans of the complex loan arrangement.   The IRS team has tracked this one loan for 2 1/2 years.With a little luck and a few cooperating witnesses, there maybe as many as 15 indictments in the case -- a year from now.   Even then, the charges will probably be narrow tax-evasioncounts -- not the kind of sweeping fraud charges thattaxpayers are clamoring for. Finding enough solid evidence toprove a larger conspiracy allegation &quot;could take the rest ofour lives,&quot; Mr. Neighbors says glumly. &quot;We've been throughmillions of {pages of} documents already.&quot;   If there were an Sandamp;L equivalent of &quot;Hawaii Five-O,&quot; itwould be in Dallas, the apparent epicenter of Sandamp;L fraud andnow the showcase of the federal crackdown. But in a close-uplook at a successful prosecution, it's clear why so few ofthe perpetrators have so far gone to jail. The bottom line:There's no smoking gun or hidden-camera videotape in an Sandamp;Lheist. The evidence is a complex paper trail, a chain ofevidence that's usually ice-cold by the time prosecutors laytheir hands on it.   &quot;Incriminating stuff doesn't just roll off the truck,&quot;says Michael Santimauro, an FBI supervisor in Dallas, where amultiagency task force has filled 14,000 square feet ofoffice and warehouse space with subpoenaed documents.   What's more, no matter how many convictions the governmentpiles up, little of the tens of billions of dollars lost inthe nation's Sandamp;L debacle will ever be recovered. Criminalfines and court-ordered restitution in a given case rarelyexceed several million dollars. And big chunks of the thriftindustry's losses are sunk into failed shopping malls andempty condominium developments. Most failed Sandamp;Ls didn'tcollapse directly because of criminal activity; egregiousmismanagement and feckless regulation were more often theculprits.   Still, American taxpayers, bracing for decades of highertaxes from the scandal, demand to know whether those who didsteal money from the loosely regulated Sandamp;Ls are being broughtto justice. Thus, both Democrats and Republicans increasinglyfixate on the criminal aspect of the Sandamp;L debacle, imbuing theissue with fiercely partisan hyperbole and outrightmisstatement.   Democrats charge that the Bush administration has beensoft on Sandamp;L crime. &quot;Not one indictment has been handed down,&quot;says Rep. John Tanner of Tennessee.   That statement is wrong. The three-year-old Dallas taskforce, after early organizational troubles, has in factbrought charges against 77 people and obtained 52convictions, with only two acquittals. Increasingly,defendants are getting prison terms, including a 30-yearsentence for the former chief of the defunct Vernon Savings andamp;Loan in Dallas.   At the same time, though, President Bush has exaggeratedthe adequacy of the federal dragnet. In Denver, for instance,where 30 failed financial institutions are under criminalinvestigation, the Federal Bureau of Investigaton doesn'thave &quot;anywhere near the people we need to keep up,&quot; says thearea's special agent in charge, Robert Pence. &quot;Do we have alarge backlog?&quot; asks Denver U.S. Attorney Michael Norton.&quot;Yes, we have a big backlog.&quot;   In Oklahoma, U.S. Attorney Tim Leonard has a mere fivelawyers available to supervise some 40 investigations inOklahoma City alone. Until very recently, he acknowledges,&quot;these cases were stagnating.&quot;   The Bush administration's claim that it has respondedsufficiently to the avalanche of Sandamp;L cases even has beenundercut by the Justice Department's own calculations. In astudy of 59 field offices last year, the FBI concluded itneeded 425 new agents to begin work on some 2,300 languishingthrift fraud and embezzlement cases. Attorney General DickThornburgh has since deployed 202 additional agents -- fewerthan half of what the FBI requested.   A look at the government's successful INFOUR investigation-- named for the &quot;infamous four&quot; institutions controlled bySammy Wayne Spikes, a West Texas wheeler-dealer, illustratesjust how difficult these Sandamp;L cases are.   The Spikes case dates to 1984, when four of thefinancier's banks went belly up almost at once. Bankingregulators came in to clean up the mess -- making sure thatdepositors were made whole, for instance. But while theregulators have civil police powers, they aren't criminalinvestigators. That job belongs to the FBI.   In January 1985, the regional FBI office in Dallas begansorting through dozens of referrals from the regulators --all suggesting areas of inquiry, such as suspicious-lookingloans, but that's it. Regulators typically don't look for, orpass along, specific incidents of criminal misconduct.   The number of these pending referrals lies at the heart ofthe burgeoning partisan conflict in Washington. CongressionalDemocrats, eager to embarrass the Bush administration, havestressed that the FBI has a backlog of nearly 7,000 criminalreferrals from Sandamp;L regulators.   But agents in the field insist that many of these alertsdescribe stupid or negligent business practices, falling wellshort of possibly illegal conduct. &quot;We've got to have areasonable belief that a crime has been committed,&quot; saysThomas Rupprath, a senior FBI agent in Dallas.   With their limited manpower, investigators perform a kindof legal triage, saving and throwing out referrals on thebasis of whether they can be easily and quickly tied to aspecific criminal statute. Another consideration is whichreferrals will get the attention of the prosecuting attorney.In the Spikes case, regulators repeatedly referred cases inwhich the thrifts exceeded their lending limits. But the FBIruled out such referrals. To interest a busy prosecutor,&quot;you'd have to have something with a lot more meat on it,&quot;explains Dale Hogue, one of three FBI agents assigned to thecase.   Like some of his colleagues with the Dallas task force,Mr. Hogue, a 14-year veteran, has an accounting degree andexperience working on conventional financial fraud cases. TheSpikes case went far beyond his training and expertise. Thiswasn't embezzlement -- something that the FBI iswell-equipped to investigate. This was essentially areal-estate case -- involving home-grown transactions thelikes of which he had never seen during an earlier postinvestigating bank fraud in Boston.   &quot;I felt like I was going back to school,&quot; he says.   The Spikes case sent him chasing down numerous blindalleys. He began stitching together other suspicious-lookingtransactions, including cases where Mr. Spikes appeared to beshuttling bad loans from one institution to another, keepingjust one step ahead of the regulators. The agent spent monthsissuing subpoenas and deciphering records. But he ultimatelyabandoned that aspect of the investigation because it seemedtoo complicated to explain to a jury.   The winnowing process involved several million pages ofpersonal financial statements, loan applications, canceledchecks, land title statements -- even divorce records, whichrevealed the location of houses and bank accounts. Theinvestigations consumed three offices on the fourth floor ofthe federal building in Lubbock. &quot;We took off Christmas Day,New Year's Day and I think Thanksgiving,&quot; recalls RogerMcRoberts, an assistant U.S. Attorney.   Although the proof lies in the paperwork, in this as inall criminal cases the best leads often come from humanbeings, not documents. In this case, the vengeful ex-wife ofa Spikes associate described some kind of funny businessinvolving a land transaction. &quot;She was wrong on all the facts-- the state, the people and land involved, everything -- butshe did know the name of a lawyer&quot; who was familiar with thedeal, recalls Mr. Hogue. The lawyer, in turn, named anow-defunct Colorado thrift called Key Savings andamp; Loan. Thethrift, they found, had made a large loan integral to acomplex and illegal set of transactions called a land flip.   The participants had set up a series of dummy corporationsto buy and sell 8,000 acres of useless New Mexico desert. Thefraudulent exchanges, orchestrated by Mr. Spikes and some ofhis cronies, pushed the real estate's &quot;price&quot; from $800,000to nearly $4 million, increasing its value as collateral. Thegreater the collateral, the greater the sums that could be --and were -- borrowed against it.   &quot;You don't have to be real sophisticated to understandthat, so we went with it,&quot; says Mr. McRoberts.   Elapsed time so far: two years.   Mr. Hogue relied on his accounting experience to createornate handwritten spreadsheets on each participant'sday-to-day financial dealings. One tracked dozens ofhigh-flying deals made by a shill for Mr. Spikes who washimself on the edge of bankruptcy but was still getting asurprising amount of bank and thrift credit.   Rather than leaving that entire aspect of the case to somefinancial esoterica, the prosecutors struck a deal with theborrower -- under which he pleaded guilty to lesser chargesand provided essential testimony for the government.   In the end, Mr. Spikes also pleaded guilty in December1986, and is now serving a 10-year term in Big Springs PrisonCamp south of Lubbock. Three defendants went to trial, whereprosecutors had to balance simplicity against the demand toprove a crime beyond a reasonable doubt. It wasn't easy.Complex appraisals, some of them fraudulent, had beenconducted on the New Mexico real estate involved in the landflip. But what prosecutors say grabbed the jury were thephotographs of sand and sagebrush -- land supposedly worth $4million. The three were convicted in 1987.   The best cases are the &quot;live&quot; ones -- the referralsinvolving actual crimes under way at the time, whenwitnesses' recollections are strong and when the suspectshave left fresh tracks through the paper trails.Unfortunately, the opportunity for most such prosecutions hascome and gone. Prosecutors realized too late thatderegulation of the thrift industry, beginning in 1980, wouldinevitably create new opportunities for wrongdoing.   &quot;With 20-20 hindsight, it seems maybe law enforcementshould have been better prepared,&quot; says Dallas U.S. AttorneyMarvin Collins, a Republican named by former PresidentReagan. &quot;But at the time, that didn't occur to people. Itcertainly didn't occur to me.&quot;   To the investigators, there are rewards even from aconviction on narrow grounds after years of work. &quot;We takethis personally here,&quot; says Mr. Neighbors of the IRS. &quot;Ibought a house here a few years ago that's worth about$25,000 less now because of this Sandamp;L bull.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>