<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910613-0140</DOCNO><DOCID>910613-0140.</DOCID><HL>   The Front Man:   How a Saudi Helped   BCCI Scandal Spread   From Miami to Encino   ---   Ghaith Pharaon and His Allies   Shifted U.S. Bank Funds   To European Institution   ---   The Bert Lance Connection   ----   By Peter Truell   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>ARABIAN PENINSULA (ARA)CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)FLORIDA (FL)GEORGIA (GA)LUXEMBOURG (LU)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PAKISTAN (PK)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   The BCCI bank scandal just keeps spreading.   It is already the talk of Washington, and with goodreason: First the Luxembourg-based bank pleaded guilty lastyear to a huge money-laundering scheme. Then it turned outthat BCCI for years had held a secret controlling stake inFirst American Bankshares, Washington's biggest bankingcompany.</LP><TEXT>   That, in turn, tarred Clark Clifford, the venerableDemocratic Party figure who still serves as chairman of FirstAmerican, and Robert Altman, the high-powered lawyer whoremains First American's president. Both have said they wereshocked at the recent allegations that BCCI secretlycontrolled their bank.   But it turns out there's a lot more. It involves thesecret ownership of a bank sold by Bert Lance, PresidentCarter's old friend and budget director, plus a bank inCalifornia, a thrift institution in Miami, wining and diningof the Georgia Legislature and some secret money transfersthat mean profits from the U.S. banking system and capitalfrom First American were helping to prop up the ricketyLuxembourg bank.   And at the center of this, it now emerges, is financierGhaith Pharaon, son of an adviser to Saudi kings and onceassumed to be one of the world's wealthiest people.   In fact, Mr. Pharaon was a front for BCCI.   His involvement with U.S. financial institutions hasbecome a focus of the BCCI-related investigations beingconducted by the Manhattan district attorney, a federal grandjury in Miami, the Federal Reserve's enforcement divisionand, most recently, the Justice Department. Last week, theSenate Foreign Relations Committee subpoenaed reams ofdocuments from BCCI, including many concerning Mr. Pharaon.   In London, Mr. Pharaon is conducting an intensive legalcampaign to have authorities withhold from U.S. regulatorsdocuments detailing his relationship with BCCI, which standsfor Bank of Credit andamp; Commerce International. And what arelationship it was: A previously undisclosed report fromPrice Waterhouse, BCCI's auditors, says he had $316 millionin borrowings outstanding from two BCCI units at the end of1989.   Once an eager interview subject, Mr. Pharaon, 50 yearsold, declined to provide comment for this article.   The story starts in 1959, when Mr. Pharaon arrived in theU.S. as a student at the Colorado School of Mines. In 1962 hetransferred to Stanford, where he got a bachelor's degree inpetroleum engineering. After picking up an MBA at Harvard in1965, he headed back to what was then the Saudi capital ofJidda, a port city on the Red Sea, where he became a partnerof many international companies eager to sell to the richkingdom.   At about that time, a Pakistani banker named Agha HasanAbedi was looking to diversify. Sensing that his governmentwould soon nationalize Pakistan's banks, he decided to breakinto international banking through a partnership with SanFrancisco-based Bank of America. They established ajoint-venture bank, BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg) S.A., inlightly regulated Luxembourg.   Mr. Abedi took charge of the joint venture's operationsand quickly demonstrated his visionary powers. Realizing thatsurging demand for Saudi oil would leave the kingdom awash incash, he arranged for BCCI to provide financing for Mr.Pharaon's first big projects: hotels in Jidda. Mr. Pharaonalso had a thriving licensing and importing business. Buyingcement for Saudi Arabia's construction bonanza became aspecialty.   Drawing on his engineering training and tapping theconnections of his father, the royal adviser, Mr. Pharaonplunged ever more deeply into Saudi Arabia's constructionboom, and BCCI was there at every step. He moved directlyinto oil himself, taking over the operations of London-basedAttock Oil Co., a refining and exploration group, which Mr.Abedi had acquired in the late 1970s. He and Mr. Abedirecruited Messrs. Clifford and Altman, BCCI's lawyers inWashington, to function as counsel to Attock's shareholders.   Soon Mr. Abedi stepped up his ambitions, hoping to breakinto the U.S. banking business. Initially, his partnershipwith Bank of America presented an antitrust obstacle.However, Bank of America, a unit of BankAmerica Corp., wasgrowing concerned about BCCI's loose controls and laxmanagement, and began selling its stake in BCCI. That freedMr. Abedi to purchase U.S. banks.   But other impediments loomed. BCCI's operating bases inLuxembourg, the Cayman Islands and other banking sanctuarieswere unorthodox. BCCI was not the kind of financialinstitution that inspired confidence among regulators in theU.S. When it tried to buy New York's small and troubledChelsea National Bank in 1975, regulators rejected thepurchase out of hand.   Clearly, BCCI would get nowhere in U.S. banking acting inits own name. Mr. Abedi needed a stalking horse -- a&quot;nominee,&quot; in the discreet jargon of banking. And the smoothand U.S.-educated Mr. Pharaon, a rich Saudi with royalconnections, was perfect for the job.   Bert Lance's bank became the first substantial target. Mr.Abedi, who has refused comment on BCCI, had met Mr. Lance afew years earlier through an oil man who served in theGeorgia Senate. First National Bank of Georgia was strugglingat the time. In stepped Mr. Pharaon, offering to take theinstitution off Mr. Lance's hands. Mr. Lance today says thathis financial problems were the result of a politicallyinspired campaign against him. &quot;This wasn't a bail-out,&quot; hesays of the sale to Mr. Pharaon.   Mr. Pharaon's purchase of the bank for a total of almost$20 million in 1978 was readily approved by one regulatorybody after another. And why not? Mr. Pharaon was a financier-- a Saudi financier, at that -- of seemingly unimpeachablefinancial resources.   Yet according to BCCI's own records, the Luxembourg bankwound up with a controlling stake in National Bank ofGeorgia. Two people formerly associated with BCCI say itcontrolled National Bank of Georgia from the start. And a1986 memo obtained from someone close to the transactionstates that although the bank's shares were owned by Mr.Pharaon's operating unit, those shares were subject to a 1985&quot;memorandum of deposit&quot; in favor of BCCI, signed by Mr.Pharaon. The controversial bank had effective, but secret,control of them.   In the late 1970s Mr. Abedi and BCCI set their sights onWashington. Mr. Abedi first sought to team up with Mr. Lanceto buy Financial General Bankshares. But Mr. Lance, dogged byfinancial problems, would have been unacceptable to bankregulators. And at the time, BCCI could not make Mr. Pharaonits front man in Washington because, so far as the regulatorsknew, he already owned a bank in Georgia. At the time,regulations still barred such interstate banking.   But a group of investors -- mostly from Saudi Arabia andAbu Dhabi, at least some of them using funds borrowed fromBCCI and pledging their shares as collateral -- did go on tobuy Financial General Bankshares, which they renamed FirstAmerican Bankshares. This made them the owners of record of apolitically connected bank with a branch network spanningfive states in the eastern U.S. It soon grew into the capitalcity's biggest bank holding company. Messrs. Clifford andAltman, who had publicly represented BCCI as lawyers inWashington, were installed as chairman and president.   Robert Bennett, a lawyer representing Messrs. Clifford andAltman, says his clients have acted properly as the topexecutives of the institution. &quot;We have looked into this caseextensively, and in our view there was nothing illegal orimproper or in any way unethical which was done by Mr.Clifford or Mr. Altman, and they at all times acted in theinterests of First American,&quot; he says.   While Mr. Pharaon was becoming more publicly visible inU.S. banking, his primary businesses back home in SaudiArabia had crumbled. As oil prices plunged in the mid-1980s,construction in Saudi Arabia dropped off, and with it thedemand for cement. As orders dried up and payments slowed,Mr. Pharaon's Saudi company, called Redec, was unable to payinterest on an estimated $330 million owed to foreign banksother than BCCI. In 1985, Redec slid into rescheduling talkswith lenders, and eventually into bankruptcy proceedings.   Mr. Pharaon's reputation in Saudi Arabia plunged. Rumorsbegan to circulate about his deteriorating relations with theSaudi royal family. A story made the rounds that he had beenslapped at a &quot;majlis&quot; by King Fahd. Mr. Pharaon denied that,but the rumor itself said a lot about his changedcircumstances.   Financial problems, meanwhile, were also occurring atBCCI. The bank had concentrated its lending on a small numberof borrowers, some of whom weren't servicing their loans,according to former bank officials and to Price Waterhouse'saudit. Then the bank in 1986 suffered a huge andwell-publicized loss in the highly speculative market foroptions on Treasury securities. At the time, BCCI officialsadmitted this loss amounted to $150 million; now former bankofficials and other sources say it may have totaled as muchas $450 million.   BCCI needed cash. And its prime properties in theU.S.-National Bank of Georgia and First American, flush withU.S.-insured deposits -- held a potential solution.   In June 1986, First American told the Fed it wasinterested in buying National Bank of Georgia from Mr.Pharaon. A big obstacle stood in the way, however: Georgialaw prevented out-of-state banks from acquiring financialinstitutions in the state unless Georgia banks had reciprocalaccess to the state of the acquiring bank. That excluded aD.C.-based bank.   An all-out lobbying campaign went into full swing in theGeorgia legislature. The cost of all the wining, dining andpublic relations reached several hundred thousand dollars,according to former BCCI officials. The campaign wassuccessful. And the tab was paid not by Mr. Pharaon, but byBCCI, the same former officials say.   Other banks considered buying National Bank of Georgia.For instance, NCNB, the aggressive regional bank, took a lookand judged the Georgia bank to be worth less than $200million, according to people who were close to the situation.In addition, NCNB would have paid with its stock, whereasFirst American was willing to pay cash, and a lot of it: atleast $220 million and perhaps as much as $260 million,taking account of all the terms of the transaction. FirstAmerican was paying extremely rich terms, even in those headydays for U.S. banking. Outsiders had no way of knowing thatBCCI secretly controlled both institutions. Working throughnominees, BCCI was arranging to sell the Atlanta bank toitself.   Mr. Bennett, the lawyer for Messrs. Clifford and Altman,says: &quot;The National Bank of Georgia transaction was anarms-length transaction.&quot;   The transaction caused a large sum of capital (more than$220 million) to shift from a federally insured institutioncontrolled by BCCI (First American) into the pockets of astruggling BCCI borrower (Mr. Pharaon). Then Mr. Pharaonimmediately repaid about $150 million of the huge sums he hadborrowed from BCCI, helping the Luxembourg bank through itscash shortage, according to a former BCCI official and topeople interviewed in connection with the New York probe.   So BCCI looked healthier -- but First American, by payingsuch a handsome price, had weakened its own capitalstructure. In effect it was transferring retained earnings toBCCI.   Richard Lawler, a New York lawyer representing Mr.Pharaon, declines to comment substantively on this or anyother aspect of Mr. Pharaon's dealings. &quot;Mr. Pharaonpurchased National Bank of Georgia, owned it and sold it toFirst American,&quot; he says simply.   The National Bank of Georgia purchase was not the onlytime that money was whisked around with the effect of helpingthe BCCI empire repair its tattered finances. For example,Messrs. Clifford and Altman in 1986 and 1987 invested a totalof $74 million of First American money in certificates ofdeposit issued by a Cayman Island unit of BCCI, helping toboost the resources of the bank. First American had toldregulators that this money would be used to fund itsexpansion in the U.S.   Meantime, California beckoned BCCI. In 1986, Mr. Pharaonpurchased Independence Bank of Encino for $23 million. Thistime, Mr. Pharaon was free to act as the purchaser of recordbecause he was selling his Georgia bank. To bank regulators,he couldn't have appeared more qualified: His personal assetsstill totaled $584.2 million, according to a statement of hisfinancial condition he presented to them. He valued his yachtalone at $10 million, his antiques and jewelry at $25million.   But a series of Telex messages made it clear that BCCI wasnot only providing the cash, but going to some lengths tohide the fact. For instance, BCCI transferred some $8 millionin Mr. Pharaon's name to Banque Arabe et Internationaled'Investissement, a Paris-based bank. No problem with that.But BCCI's London office went on to wire Banque Arabe withspecific instructions for notifying California bankregulators that Mr. Pharaon had the $8 million on hand to puttoward the purchase price. The BCCI Telex even spelled out,word for word, the language that Banque Arabe should use incommunicating with the regulators. Banque Arabe didn't balkat the directives; after all, it was headed by a banker whowas also a BCCI director.   Before long, Mr. Pharaon and BCCI had diversified into theU.S. savings and loan industry. Mr. Pharaon agreed to buyroughly 20% of the common stock of troubled CenTrust Bank ofMiami in a 1987 transaction for about $12 million. Soon, withthe thrift institution continuing to founder, BCCI invested$25 million in an issue of CenTrust debt securities, helpingto keep the institution afloat. This time BCCI acted in itsown name; the purchase by a major international bank helpedto get the struggling securities issue off the ground.   Despite the backing, CenTrust ultimately went under,costing U.S. taxpayers $2 billion in one of the mostexpensive thrift failures ever. But BCCI had quietly redeemedits CenTrust securities at 100 cents on the dollar, whileother debt-holders got barely half that.   Today, banking regulators continue lowering the boom onBCCI. The Fed and the California superintendent of banks haveordered BCCI to divest itself of any interest the Encinobank. Although Mr. Pharaon, through his lawyer, still claimsto own 100% of the bank, the Fed says it believes BCCI ownsat least 25% of it. Regulators have also required BCCI tosell shares it holds in First American and National Bank ofGeorgia.   The crackdown hasn't dulled Mr. Pharaon's enthusiasm forbanking. He is spending more time with Mr. Abedi in Pakistan,where the government is reversing the verybank-nationalization policy that spawned BCCI in the firstplace. According to people in Pakistan, they are thinking ofonce again going into the banking business, only this time inPakistan.</TEXT></DOC>