<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911210-0106</DOCNO><DOCID>911210-0106.</DOCID><HL>   Maxwell's Sons, Other Company Officials   Could Be Prosecuted, Investigator Says   ----   By Nicholas Bray   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   AXP BTZ G.BRT LABOR U.MGN U.MXC</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>ACCOUNTING (ACC)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)CONSUMER andamp; HOUSEHOLD SERVICES (CSV)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)CONSUMER AND HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS AND SERVICES (HOU)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)PUBLISHING, INFORMATION SERVICES COMPANIES (PUB)SECURITIES (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)</IN><NS>ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING NEWS andamp; ISSUES (ACC)BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)MUTUAL FUNDS (FND)LABOR, UNIONS, STRIKES, WAGES, RECRUITMENT (LAB)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)</GV><RE>EUROPE (EU)GERMANY (GE)NEW JERSEY (NJ)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   LONDON -- The net is tightening around Kevin and IanMaxwell.   As the search continued for about #427 million ($775million) missing from Maxwell company pensions funds, aninvestigator into the affairs of Robert Maxwell's collapsedmedia empire warned that the late tycoon's two sons couldface prosecution.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;It is clearly conceivable that they and other officers{of Bishopsgate Investment Management} could face criminalproceedings,&quot; said Neil Cooper, head of corporate recovery ataccountants Robson Rhodes.   Though he declined to indicate what charges might bebrought, Mr. Cooper pointed out that U.K. company directorshave specific responsibilities in relation to general companylaw and financial services legislation.   Bishopsgate, chaired by Robert Maxwell until his deathNov. 5, was at the heart of an operation under which Mr.Maxwell allegedly channeled securities and other assets frompension funds at Mirror Group Newspapers PLC and MaxwellCommunication Corp. to other areas of his business.   Mr. Cooper was appointed provisional liquidator ofBishopsgate on Sunday, at the request of its two remainingdirectors, to make payouts to pensioners and try to recovermissing assets. All but two of the directors, including Kevinand Ian Maxwell, resigned last week, and the company iscurrently under investigation by Britain's Serious FraudOffice.   Yesterday, a court granted an injunction at Mr. Cooper'srequest freezing Kevin Maxwell's world-wide personal assetsup to a total of #450 million. The court also ordered Kevinand Ian Maxwell to surrender their passports pendinginvestigations into the missing pension fund assets.   However, Kevin Maxwell won an appeal in Britain earlyTuesday for the return of his passport so he could fly to NewYork for talks on a bid to save the Maxwell-owned New YorkDaily News, the Associated Press reported.   Separately, in Washington, the Labor Department said it isinvestigating whether the collapse of the Maxwell empire hasaffected funding of pension plans at the Daily News. Thedepartment's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration is&quot;looking into the entire pension situation surrounding {theU.S. companies owned by Mr. Maxwell} and trying to followwhat paper trail there is,&quot; said Johanna Schneider, aspokeswoman for the department. The aim is to &quot;uncoverwhether or not there has been misuse or abuse of pensionfunds,&quot; she said.   The separate Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp., the federalagency that insures defined-benefit pension plans, said itsreview yesterday of the Daily News showed that the agency hasinsured eight such plans. So far, there &quot;does not appear tobe a problem,&quot; as all but one of those plans are paying PBGCpremiums on a basis that indicates they aren't underfunded,said Jane Hoden, a spokeswoman.   Meanwhile, as fresh evidence emerged of the two brothers'increasingly desperate efforts in recent weeks to shore uptheir faltering empire, Kevin Maxwell's wife, Pandora,announced plans to sell the couple's family home in London'sfashionable Chelsea district.   The four-story neo-Georgian house, with an estimated valueof #900,000 to #1.7 million, is not yet on the market butwill be put up for sale soon, Mrs. Maxwell told reporters.&quot;It's our decision. We have a mortgage like everyone else,&quot;she said, speaking on the pavement outside her house. &quot;Myhusband doesn't have a job, so we are going to have to sellthe house.&quot;   Kevin and Ian Maxwell resigned last week as chairmen ofMaxwell Communication and Mirror Group, respectively, afterless than a month in charge of the two flagships of theirfather's empire. Since then, evidence has been mounting oftheir involvement, both at his side and after his death, inattempts to plug financial holes.   During Mr. Maxwell's lifetime, both brothers were on theboard of Bishopsgate, and Mr. Cooper said their signature hadbeen found on papers at the company. In the weeks since theirfather was found dead in the sea near his yacht off theCanary Islands, they appear to have continued his strategy ofswitching assets from one part of the empire to another in awhirl of transactions that investigators are now attemptingto unravel.   &quot;Their father's death did not terminate the activities ofBishopsgate,&quot; Mr. Cooper said. Though he declined to go intodetails, he said investigations so far had uncovered &quot;primafacie evidence&quot; that identical batches of securities may havebeen pledged as collateral in more than one loan transaction.   In one of the most glaring examples so far of the doubleuse of securities, Swiss Volksbank yesterday confirmed it hadtaken over ownership of an undisclosed quantity of shares inMaxwell Communication's language-teaching unit BerlitzInternational after the failure last month of a Maxwell unitto pay a $35 million debt.   The bank said the shares had been given to it as securityfor the $35 million transfer effected Nov. 13 on behalf ofone of the Maxwell family's closely held companies, RobertMaxwell Group. Only a few days earlier, on Nov. 7, MaxwellCommunication had announced the sale of Berlitz Internationalto Fukutake Publishing Co. of Japan for $265 million. Butwhen it sought to carry out the sale, it discovered that someof its Berlitz shares were missing.   In a similar move, Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.'s Londonoperations took control of 1.9 million Berlitz shares --valued at more than $30 million -- that Mr. Maxwell hadpledged as collateral for a stock-loan agreement. Shearson, aunit of American Express Co., took control of the shares Nov.6, the day after Mr. Maxwell died. Shearson declined tocomment on the move.   The Maxwells' frantic search for money seems to haveextended to all areas of their personal and their publiclylisted interests.   Yesterday, a unit of German publishing group BertelsmannAG said that Kevin Maxwell two weeks ago took six millionmarks ($3.83 million) in the form of a &quot;loan&quot; from a jointlycontrolled newspaper-printing venture in Berlin.   A spokeswoman for Bertelsmann unit Gruner andamp; Jahr AG saidKevin Maxwell at that time &quot;advised&quot; the chairman of a Berlinprinting company called Kurt Friedrichshain to lend him thesix million marks &quot;because he was short of money.&quot; Thechairman acceded to the request because &quot;he didn't feel freeto say no.&quot;   Gruner andamp; Jahr and Robert Maxwell Holding, one of theMaxwell private companies, acquired 55% control of theprinting company in March in their purchase of the formerCommunist Party newspaper Berliner Zeitung. When Gruner andamp;Jahr found out about the loan Dec. 2, it protested in anurgent fax message to Kevin Maxwell, the spokeswoman said.   He responded two days later with a promise to repay thefunds. But the same day, he resigned as chairman of MaxwellCommunication, leaving his German partner to join the ranksof Maxwell creditors.   Meanwhile, prospective buyers continued to come forwardfor the remnants of the Maxwell empire.   A management team at British International Helicopters,owned by Robert Maxwell Group, made a buy-out bid for thehelicopter transport company. British InternationalHelicopters employs 480 people at four coastal locations inBritain, and most of its business is in providing air linkswith North Sea oil rigs.   Trading conglomerate Lonrho PLC has added its name to thelist of suitors for Mirror Group, alongside publishing andentertainment group Pearson PLC and a management buy-out teamled by the editor of the Daily Mirror.   Partners of accounting firm Arthur Andersen, appointedlast week as administrators for the Maxwell privateinterests, are said to have received a number of offers forthe European, the pan-European newspaper that was RobertMaxwell's personal brainchild. The paper's 150 employeesoffered to continue working without pay to produce thisweek's issue.   But the specter of the missing millions from the mainMaxwell companies' pension funds continued to hang over theseand other negotiations. At Mirror Group, top executives spentmost of yesterday in talks with bankers over an appeal forcash to keep the company afloat.   Late last night, Mirror Group Chairman Ernest Burringtonissued a brief statement saying the company had held &quot;aconstructive meeting with its bankers on the continuedprovision of banking support.&quot; But he gave no details of whathad been decided, and banking sources said only a modestquantity of extra cash was being provided to tide the companyover.   Leading British banks are believed to be trying to getother banks to join them in a #25 million financial net forMirror Group to take it past Christmas and the New Year.Because of the extent of losses already suffered, however,the negotiations appear to be proving tough.   In other developments yesterday, Robert Maxwell's youngestdaughter, Ghislaine, resigned as a director of Oxford United,the struggling soccer team formerly owned by Robert Maxwell.The Maxwell family has been seeking to sell its interest inthe club for around 18 months. Yesterday it recalled #2million in loans, forcing the club to put all its 28professional players up for sale.   The financial difficulties that led Robert Maxwell intohis alleged pilfering from the Mirror Group and MaxwellCommunication pension funds appeared to have beenintensifying since July, investigators say.   According to accountants at Coopers andamp; Lybrand Deloitte,who last week prepared a report on the state of the pensionfunds, Mr. Maxwell siphoned off a further #220 million fromMirror Group and Maxwell Communication company coffersbetween July and October.   Of a total of around #647 million from these sources,Coopers officials say, as much as #80 million went to coveroperating losses and interest payments at private Maxwellinterests, including the New York Daily News and theEuropean.   About #120 million, in the form of securities belonging tothe pension funds, was pledged as collateral with creditorbanks, a Coopers official said. A further #100 million wasused to meet an obligation by the private Maxwell intereststo the pension fund of BPPC PLC, a British printing companythat Mr. Maxwell sold to its management two years ago.   Evidence has emerged that Mr. Maxwell was aware in theweeks before his death of growing management disquiet atMaxwell Communication and Mirror Group regarding hisfinancial dealings. This has revived speculation that he mayhave committed suicide by jumping into the Atlantic Oceanfrom his yacht, Lady Ghislaine, instead of falling in after aheart attack, as has been widely supposed.   According to a source quoted by the Associated Press, theautopsy report soon to be released by Spanish pathologistsgives no clear verdict on his death but suggests a fall aftera heart attack as the most likely cause. According to thissource, the autopsy found that some stretches of Mr.Maxwell's coronary arteries were more than 70% clogged,meaning that he could have died from that condition at anytime.   The pathologists &quot;found positive proof that he sufferedfrom a previous chronic heart ailment,&quot; the source said,adding that the evidence suggests &quot;it was aggravated on deckaround the time of his fall.&quot; However, the source said, thereport doesn't rule out either suicide or drowning.   Maxwell Communication, Mirror Group and his closely heldcompanies had taken out a personal accident policy on Mr.Maxwell for #20 million. However, this sum only becomespayable if the companies can prove that he died as a resultof an accident. It would not be payable if he was found tohave died from heart failure before hitting the water or ifhe committed suicide.   ---   Albert R. Karr in Washington contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>