<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911021-0062</DOCNO><DOCID>911021-0062.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Coarse Was Clear: Laws Can Cure or Kill   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>10/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A19</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   At first glance, there seemed little connection betweenRonald H. Coase winning the Nobel prize in economics lastweek and concurrent events in Bangkok, where chief Sovieteconomist Grigory Yavlinsky was pleading for IMF and WorldBank financial aid. But Mr. Yavlinsky's problem, how to cleanup the economic wreckage left behind by what the oldBolsheviks chose to call &quot;communism,&quot; is best addressedthrough the work of Ronald Coase.   Prof. Coase's specialty was the study of how legislativeactions, administrative rules and court precedents affectbusiness decisions, and thus, in a broad sense, the workingsof an economic system. His theorems describing how propertyrights are constantly reallocated through contracts won him aNobel in economic &quot;science.&quot; But much of what he contributedto public knowledge came from his long association with theJournal of Law and Economics. Its case-by-case analyses oftenhave been highly germane to whether pending legislation wouldbe economically useful or destructive. At his post at theUniversity of Chicago's law school he was a natural ally ofthe free-market economists holding forth at the sameuniversity's school of business.</LP><TEXT>   It might be thought that his work has no application tothe Soviet Union because Prof. Coase was addressing how toget the most out of capitalist organizations within a systembased on the primacy of law. Both are foreign to communism.But some things are universal and one of them is propertyrights. Contrary to the airy-fairy propaganda of theBolsheviks, property rights always existed in the SovietUnion, for the very simple reason that property will bynecessity be under someone's control. The fundamentaldifference under communism was that Lenin and Stalin, intheir fervor to consolidate power, put all property rightsthat amounted to anything in the hands of the CommunistParty. Because the party was strictly hierarchical, theproperty of a vast nation was effectively in the hands of asingle person, the party general secretary.   The general secretary used property as he saw fit,providing luxury apartments and country dachas -- managed bythe KGB -- to officials while they were in favor, puttingfarms and factories into the hands of party &quot;soviets,&quot; andsetting up a vast party-controlled bureaucracy for allocatingshelter to ordinary folks. What was missing was the otherpart of the Coase equation, contracts. People who ownednothing could hardly contract with others for the transfer ofland, shelter or the tools for work. There could be no suchthing as a market.   No one in the world -- with the possible exception of afew old Bolshies hanging on to power in Peking, Hanoi andPyongyang and maybe some cloistered academics in the West --still believes that such a system is viable. It is doubtfulthat even Lenin or Stalin believed in it deeply; they simplywanted absolute political power.   But with all the discussion in Bangkok and elsewhere aboutsetting up &quot;market systems&quot; in former communist lands, onething should be kept in mind: It cannot be done without firstcreating a legal system that protects the right of allindividuals to hold, buy and sell property and withoutcorresponding legal protections for the contracts throughwhich those transactions are conducted. In short, as Prof.Coase himself suggested last week, a system of contract lawand the means to enforce it are fundamental. Neither the IMF,the World Bank nor anyone else can do anything useful for Mr.Yavlinsky and the floundering Soviet republics until such asystem is in place. How well that is understood byWashington's aid bureaucrats is by no means certain.   Which brings us back to Mr. Coase and his efforts toeducate the capitalist world on the importance of thesefundamentals. The United States is a constitutional democracyand the rule of law has been paramount from the beginning.When the U.S. and other Western democracies have beencompared with totalitarian or authoritarian states, it hasoften been noted that a democracy's great political andeconomic strength derives from the rule of law.   Prof. Coase, however, approached law and economics notmerely as theory but through its nuts and bolts. He soughtthe reasons why men and women bond themselves together injoint stock companies, dividing up labor and ownershipthrough written or implied contracts and contracting to buytools, materials and supplies from others and to sell othersproducts or services. He wanted to know which laws andregulations inhibited or promoted these voluntary alliancesdesigned to manage work more efficiently.   Laws of contract aided that efficiency by keepingownership rights orderly and thus facilitating buying andselling. But government intrusions through, for example, thesetting of ceilings on what price an owner could obtain forhis property just as clearly inhibited commerce. New York'sdisastrous experience with rent controls, which has turnedmuch of the city into a vast slum, is a case in point. So wasthe U.S. economic debacle of the 1970s, attributable in greatpart to the sweeping decision by Congress and President Nixonin 1971 to impose price controls. Oil price ceilings remainedfor a decade, which is why there were periodic &quot;energycrises.&quot;   The U.S. may be a nation where law is paramount, butrecent decades have seen a lessening of judicial constraintson government's ability to compromise ownership rights.Infringement of contracts of all kinds by administrative orlegislative fiat has become relatively commonplace as courtshave allowed an erosion of constitutional protections.   State infringement of private rights was rolled backsomewhat in the 1980s by Ronald Reagan and a Supreme Courtthat began to tilt toward stricter constitutionalinterpretations. That other drama last week, the Senate fightover the confirmation of Clarence Thomas to the U.S. SupremeCourt, had to do very much with whether this trend towardstrict constructionism will be further strengthened by theappointment of justices who believe, as Judge Thomas does,that the Constitution's meaning should be preserved.   But that is only one battle won. On another front,economist Paul Craig Roberts writes of a new &quot;explosion&quot; infederal regulation -- primarily in the fields of environment,physical disability and bankingwith potential threats toeconomic growth. While Mr. Yavlinsky is struggling to restorewhat state power has wrecked, the U.S. may again be driftingtoward more pervasive state intrusions into economic life. Itis an appropriate time for Ronald Coase, who has counted thecosts of such regulatory excesses, to win a Nobel prize.</TEXT></DOC>