<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ901226-0027</DOCNO><DOCID>901226-0027.</DOCID><HL>   REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):   The Deukmejian Boom</HL><DATE>12/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE 6</SO><LP>   California Governor George Deukmejian shortly will joinRonald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher in private life. As heleaves the helm of the world's eighth-largest economy, theliberal pundits say his state is in disarray. His eight yearsin office have been much like those of the nation at largeover the same years: explosive growth and change, dividedgovernment and, in the end, malaise.   In some ways, California has simply been more manic.Already a megastate, it grew by fully a quarter in the pastdecade. Much of that influx came from abroad: Mexico,especially, and East Asia, but also in large numbers fromplaces you might not expect, such as Iran and India. As lateas 1982, more citizens were naturalized in New York state,but now California has twice as many yearly. In the years1982-88, foreigners accounted for 1.1 million of California's3.6 million new residents. The smaller number doesn't includechildren born after their parents' arrival.</LP><TEXT>   Much as we like to see the doors to opportunity in thiscountry open, there's no denying the tumult that accompanieslarge-scale immigration. Urban schools are jammed, hospitalemergency rooms become doctor's offices of first resort,uninsured motorists contribute to traffic havoc and, yes,some newcomers are disposed to long-term welfare and crime.Where Californians sense wear and tear on their society, muchof it is caused by demographics beyond the control of anyGovernor.   Mr. Deukmejian nevertheless prided himself on prudentgovernance, and the state's high bond rating testifies to it.In some areas, such as mental facilities and thriftsupervision, managerial corners were cut. But with all theCalifornia commotion came a remarkably pliant and robusteconomy; one in every seven new American jobs was to be foundthere. But prosperity isn't purely a natural phenomenon; itcan be squashed under a load of taxes and regulation. Underpolitically difficult conditions, George Deukmejian mostlyacted to check that burden.   He was not considered the conservative choice when firstnominated in 1982, having initially opposed the tax revoltthat began to sweep the state four years earlier. But heacted to safeguard most of the tax-relief measures that putCalifornia's burden near the middle of the 50 states insteadof the top. And beginning with his first budget, he showedthe tremendous power that a line-item veto can wield. Helopped $6.8 billion from state spending in that manner.   As with Ronald Reagan's presidency, the liberals havenever forgiven Mr. Deukmejian's refusal to allow them ageneral tax increase. They call this a failure of leadership.Yet with the Democratic Legislature, state spending grew bydouble-digit percentages for most of his term.   The Governor did make one major concession -- in our view,a mistaken and fateful one. This past June, he led a&quot;bipartisan&quot; drive to double the state's gasoline tax andrelax its constitutional limits on spending. He did sobecause he believed it was the only way to gain significanthighway improvements and provide some budgetary leeway theschools lobby had sought to deny him. With Democrats backingthe plan, it carried narrowly and briefly gave rise totax-revolt obituaries around the country.   Like others across the nation, Mr. Deukmejian'stransportation department has opened up to market-orientedapproaches to cutting congestion, but as long as freeways areexpanded they will continue to fill up because they are . . .free. Meanwhile, with the Governor's partial blessing,California has set off on a rail-transit binge that will costtaxpayers dearly before it is over.   Mr. Deukmejian is a former prosecutor, and his heart hasalways been in putting criminals behind bars. He and otherfactors have had enormous impact in that area -- California'sprison population has tripled, the number of supervisedparolees quadrupled. Yet the justice system buckles under thecaseload weight, many arrestees walk, and the state may notend up a good test of whether locking up large numbers ondrug-related charges will improve society's lot.   On many other issues, the Governor has greatly deferred tothe traditional Republican constituency of organizedbusiness. Where that orientation has led him to contest aculture of overregulation and high ancillary costs such asworkers' comp and torts, his restraint has helped the broaderentrepreneurial climate.   The Governor's admirable fortitude in so often saying&quot;no,&quot; however, was not always complemented by imaginative,affirmative policies to enhance liberty. Empowermentinitiatives have yet to gain a powerful voice in California.For all his battles with the education claque, Mr. Deukmejianwouldn't take up the choice mantle. And his best shot atshelter for the masses was billions in &quot;affordable housing&quot;bonds. We suspect a &quot;new paradigm&quot; is likely to provenecessary to break free from entrenched poverty, stagflationand crime.   Still, California's outgoing chief executive strikes amodel politicians in other states and future times shouldponder. In the course of the political horse trading thatwill accompany and often dilute bold concepts, voters arealso going to value officials with the steadfast, quietconservatism George Deukmejian embodied.</TEXT></DOC>