<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920225-0161</DOCNO><DOCID>920225-0161.</DOCID><HL>   Mid-Life Mission:   A Businessman Turns   His Skills to Aiding   Inner-City Schools   ---   Martin Koldyke Does What   He Can to Lift Quality   Of Teaching in Chicago   ---   Eye-Opening Classroom Visit   ----   By Alex Kotlowitz   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/25/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (FIS)</IN><RE>ILLINOIS (IL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   CHICAGO -- If Charles Dickens were around today, he mightinvent a character like Martin &quot;Mike&quot; Koldyke: a millionaire,silver-haired grandfather and a bridge between the best andworst of times in America.   In 1971, Mr. Koldyke founded Frontenac Co. and built itinto a venture-capital firm that today manages about $275million. A lifelong Republican, he raised a family in thefancy suburb of Kenilworth, joined two country clubs,acquired three vacation homes and even got an occasionalmention in local society columns.</LP><TEXT>   But at 59, he has left much -- though not all -- of thatlife behind. Seven years ago Mr. Koldyke started devotingmuch of his time to helping the poor. The decision changedthis ordinarily jocular man, leaving him at times angry,fearful and depressed.   &quot;I still lead a pretty good life,&quot; he says. &quot;But I'llnever be able to go back to worrying about my golf handicap.&quot;   He isn't alone. In recent years, a disparate collection ofbusiness people have been venturing outside their executivesuites to help rebuild the nation's ghettos.   William Edgerly, the chairman of Boston's State StreetBank, has worked with nonprofit groups to develop 2,000 unitsof affordable housing. Joe Kellman, chairman of the privatelyheld Globe Group, an installer of replacement auto glass,three years ago started a corporate-community school ininner-city Chicago. And Brad Butler, retired chairman ofProcter andamp; Gamble Co., crisscrosses the country urgingbusiness and political groups to support increased governmentfinancing of early childhood programs, including prenatalcare and Head Start.   Many such well-intentioned efforts often seem like dropsin a bucket of desperate, seemingly insoluble problems. Andwhat looks like noblesse oblige often is resented by peoplewho have been in the trenches for years fighting poverty.Still, there have been tangible effects. After five chiefexecutives testified last March on the need for the SpecialSupplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children,Congress forked over more money.   Mr. Koldyke's personal journey, from which he expectsnever to return, has been bumpy and frustrating. An impulsiveman, who his friends good-humoredly say has one good idea forevery hundred that occur to him, he has had mixed success.But along the way he has inspired conservative businessmen tobecome activists and made friends with workers on the frontlines.   Mr. Koldyke, who is still chairman of Frontenac, gotinvolved somewhat inadvertently. One night in the mid-1980swhile watching the Academy Awards on TV, he asked his wife,Pat: Why couldn't there be a similar awards program forteachers? Mr. Koldyke had taught school briefly while in histwenties.   He answered the question by founding an organizationcalled the Golden Apple Foundation. He contributed $50,000 ofhis own money and raised another $250,000, some of it fromfriends. Initially, the foundation's only purpose was to handout one-semester scholarships at Northwestern University, a$2,500 stipend and a computer to extraordinary Chicago-areateachers.   But Mr. Koldyke eventually expanded its mission to helppay for the college education of students willing to committhemselves to teaching in Chicago public schools. Thefoundation makes them loans, which it forgives if therecipient spends five years teaching in a school whosechildren come from poor families. Teachers who stay thecourse also get a bonus of $12,000. To date, the Golden Appleprogram has sponsored 79 would-be teachers.   The foundation brought him into contact with the harshreality of inner-city education. In 1986, he visited CraneHigh School, one of the city's roughest, and was stunned byconditions there: lockers without locks, graffiti all overthe walls and teachers who looked like ghosts. &quot;It wasclearly a place that didn't work,&quot; he says. &quot;I realized thatthe people who were sending their kids to Crane werepowerless. . . . My good neighbors in Kenilworth wouldn't putup with that for more than five minutes.&quot;   Probably most disturbing to Mr. Koldyke, though, was thetime in 1990 he met a girl who graduated third in her classat DuSable, another inner-city high school. He learned,however, that her standardized test scores placed her in thesecond percentile nationally, about as close to the bottom asone can get. He couldn't imagine tolerating a school systemwhose top graduates tested so poorly. He pounded the table ata meeting of school principals. &quot;This can't happen again,&quot; hesaid.   &quot;It was almost as if he was ready to punch somebody,&quot;recalls Lula M. Ford, principal at the Beethoven ElementarySchool.   His frustrations with incompetence at all levels in theschools has become a common theme for him -- and it sometimesgets him into trouble. At a meeting with elementary-schoolprincipals and faculty, he shouted, gesturing wildly, &quot;Inevery school, there must be four teachers who need to befired. Don't protect those nitwits.&quot;   His comments didn't go over very well. Who was he, afterall, but an interloper? A big booster of the teachingprofession, he immediately regretted his outburst and leftthe room apologizing profusely.   But people do admire his candor. &quot;He's a very hands-onguy. This is not for show and that's why he gets soimpatient,&quot; says Marilou von Ferstel, executive vicepresident, general manager at Ogilvy, Adams andamp; Rinehart, apublic-relations firm. She is a friend of Mr. Koldyke's.   Mr. Koldyke, the father of four children, all grown, callshimself a &quot;do-gooder from the suburbs.&quot; But he doesn't likebeing considered one of President Bush's thousand points oflight; he bristles at the thought. The idea that volunteerismcan solve the problems of the poor, he says, &quot;furtherlegitimizes a governmental indifference to the bottom thirdof society.&quot; He supports government intervention. Indeed, hisown privately funded programs, applauded as they are, havemade only a small dent in the problems of Chicago's schools.   Still, Mr. Koldyke -- along with other business leaders --is speaking for the urban poor at a time when povertyprograms have all but vanished from public discussion. &quot;Mikerealizes there's more to life than just making money,&quot; saysGordon Segal, president of housewares retailer Crate andBarrel and an early contributor to the foundation.   He continually preaches to business groups, summoning upall the fury he can muster. In a speech to realtors two yearsago urging them to get involved, he cried. In Mr. Koldyke'smeeting with businessman Tom Dittmer, chairman of futurestrading firm Refco Inc., Mr. Dittmer was so impressed hepledged $250,000 to Golden Apple on the spot.   These days, if one asked Chicago civic leaders who MartinKoldyke is, the descriptions pouring forth would have littleto do with his demonstrated business achievements. He iscalled a &quot;reformer&quot; and an &quot;activist.&quot; He has been comparedto the late Saul Alinsky, the Chicago community organizer --albeit an Alinsky in a Dobbs hat and tasseled loafers.   &quot;I'm better off working from within the establishment,&quot; hesays. &quot;I want my friends who really do have power to trustme, to think that the things we're doing are right.&quot; Hisinfluence is evident in his own family. His wife works fulltime at the Golden Apple. His daughter-in-law, DeirdreKoldyke, sits on the foundation's board. And his youngest sonBenjamin teaches English at an all-black private school onthe west side of Chicago.   With Golden Apple going strong, the peripatetic Mr.Koldyke has moved on to other ideas. He has started aprogram, Teachers for Chicago, that makes it possible forpeople in midcareer to become teachers without having to taketime off to go to school. Instead, they teach under theguidance of mentors while attending summer and eveningclasses. The program, which is just getting under way, comesat an opportune time for Chicago because the city schoolsystem will lose about 21% of its faculty to retirement overthe next five years.   But by far his most logistically difficult effort is aproject intended to get city agencies, neighborhood groupsand schools to work together toward common objectives. Infour communities, neighborhood schools are to shareresources, the parks department is to staff school gyms sothey can be kept open after school, and the public-housingauthority is to staff study halls in the high-rises.   Putting together that venture gave vent to Mr. Koldyke'sgreatest talent: his ability to bring even potential foestogether.   The idea took shape one weekend when Mr. Koldyke invitedthe heads of the Chicago Housing Authority, the schoolsystem, the parks department and two community groups to hisvacation home on Lake Michigan. Later, Mr. Koldyke shored upsupport for the plan from Chicago's mayor, Richard Daley,after having him down to his New Mexico ranch. He also tookthe head of the teachers' union to lunch at a Chicagobusiness club.   But official enthusiasm aside, the rugged realities ofinner-city life intrude. Last fall, Mr. Koldyke visited theprincipal at Farragut High School seeking to persuade him tosupport the cooperative venture. But when he got to theschool, nobody had time to talk about much of anything. Justa few hours earlier, black and Hispanic students had beeninvolved in a small riot, hurling chairs -- and fists -- inthe lunchroom. The police were called, and school closedearly. One teacher and 17 students were injured in the melee.   As the usually garrulous Mr. Koldyke entered the mainoffice, he fell silent. Five beefy security guards walkedpast him. The coach of the school's soccer team, which hadwon the city championship the day before, sat at a deskdejected, with his head in his hands.   Mr. Koldyke then entered the office of the principal,Steven Newton, who was so stressed out by the day's events hecouldn't focus on the conversation. The soccer trophy waslying on the floor. There had been no celebration. And Mr.Koldyke, shaken, was in no mood to attend to his own businessthat afternoon.   &quot;What is really scary is that society may fail,&quot; he saidthe next morning over coffee, upset about the day before.But, he continued, &quot;you've got to do something about it.&quot;Racial tensions in the neighborhood around Farragut wouldhave to be addressed.   &quot;Mike gets down a lot now,&quot; says Mrs. Koldyke. &quot;Maybe partof it is pushing 60 and realizing he may not be able to seethe changes. Maybe part of it is that many of our friends areretiring and spending time in Florida.&quot; She laughs. &quot;We stillhave a life style that doesn't fit this Saul Alinsky typedown-and-dirty stuff.&quot;   Mr. Koldyke still earns a bundle of money. But much haschanged in the past seven years. He no longer thinks ofretiring to Florida; he talks of moving to the city, leavingthe suburbs. While he intends to remain at Frontenac for afew more years, he plans to devote his retirement to workingwith the poor. The Koldykes have opened up their lakesidehome to weekend retreats for young Golden Apple scholars andfor civic leaders.   Though he doesn't advertise it, he no longer considershimself a Republican. He finds himself, he says, in &quot;apolitical never-never land.&quot; He denounces what he contends isPresident Bush's indifference to the issues he cares about;he contributed to last year's election of Democrat HarrisWofford to the U.S. Senate from Pennsylvania.   &quot;His measure of success has changed,&quot; says his daughterElizabeth, 26. &quot;It used to be `How's the company doing?' or`Do we have enough houses?' Now he's worried about whethersome kid's going to make it.&quot;   Sitting in his mahogany-paneled office, Mr. Koldyke tellsof a brief encounter that continues to haunt him. A couple ofyears ago, he met a fourth-grade pupil at the Robert TaylorHomes, one of the city's most troubled public-housingcomplexes. As he was about to leave, the girl approached him.&quot;Mr. Koldyke,&quot; he recalls her saying, &quot;you'll be back, won'tyou?&quot; Mr. Koldyke's eyes fill with tears. He presses hisfingers to his lips. It's hard for him to continue.   &quot;I told her I'd be back,&quot; he says.</TEXT></DOC>