<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911001-0086</DOCNO><DOCID>911001-0086.</DOCID><HL>   Gaining an Edge:   How a Car Dealer's Son   Made It in Hollywood,   While Alienating Many   ---   Burt Sugarman Plays the Role   Of Producer, Doing Deals;   Now, His Future Erodes   ---   A Suit From Arnold Palmer   ----   By Ralph T. King Jr.   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/01/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GPO MEGA RLLY X.BRS</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>BUILDING MATERIALS, CONCRETE, GLASS, PAINT (BLD)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY (REC)RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><GV>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (DC)KENTUCKY (KY)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOUTH CAROLINA (SC)UNITED STATES (US)VIRGINIA (VA)</RE><LP>   He is best known on Wall Street as a small-scale corporateraider who tried to take over Media General Inc. He is bestknown in Hollywood as a producer of the acclaimed film&quot;Children of a Lesser God&quot; and as the husband of Mary Hart,co-anchor of &quot;Entertainment Tonight.&quot; But people who havesued him over the past 25 years would have you believe BurtSugarman should best be remembered as an assiduousdouble-dealer.   The son of a used-car salesman, the 52-year-old Mr.Sugarman has come a long way. He has made a lot of money, notjust in stock-market investments but in cement andtelevision, and he has made famous friends. He has fosteredthe careers of noted movie makers Peter Guber and Jon Peters,and he has played a producer's role in such oddly disparateofferings as television's &quot;The Gong Show&quot; and the film&quot;Crimes of the Heart.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   &quot;He is a very important guy in town because, like MarvinDavis, you find him in a lot of deals,&quot; says Norman Brokaw,chairman of the William Morris Agency, who has known Mr.Sugarman for more than 30 years and represents Ms. Hart, Mr.Sugarman's fourth wife. &quot;When a guy like Burt . . . speaks,you better listen. He's a good businessman, and a goodbusinessman is tough.&quot;   It's the enemies he has made that are the problem. Troubleand controversy have been constant companions of Mr.Sugarman, who has been accused of looting public companiesand self-dealing. That side of his life isn't widely known.Although he sometimes parties with Mr. Davis, the Los Angelesbillionaire, and attends lots of Republican Party functionsMr. Sugarman is a secretive and in some ways reclusive man.   Not far from his desk stands a paper shredder, andvisitors to his Beverly Hills office are observed viaclosed-circuit television as they sit in a windowless waitingroom. Alfred Strickman, a former lobbyist who represented oneof Mr. Sugarman's companies in Sacramento, says, &quot;He is aparanoiac about being a public person. Any time his nameappears in print, it bothers him.&quot;   He is getting some attention now because of a Los AngelesSuperior Court case that opened last week. He faces civilfraud charges brought by Michael Tennenbaum, a vice chairmanof Bear, Stearns andamp; Co., the New York investment bank. Mr.Tennenbaum, who advised Mr. Sugarman on several deals,alleges that he lost about $1.5 million after investing in apartnership set up by Mr. Sugarman in 1989 to finance thepurchase of shares in Rally's Inc., a hamburger chain.   Neither party to the suit will discuss it. Mr. Sugarmandeclined to be interviewed for this article, referring callsto his attorney, Robert King of the firm of Debevoise andamp;Plimpton, who is representing him in the case. &quot;This is notideal timing from our point of view,&quot; Mr. King says.   Mr. Tennenbaum's isn't the first such suit against Mr.Sugarman, nor is it the only problem he faces. He currentlyis spending most of his time trying to fix Rally's and thecompany that controls it, Giant Group Ltd., a public companythat Mr. Sugarman controls. The shares of both have declinedin price by about 70% in recent years. Giant, which is basedin Harleyville, S.C., is primarily in the business of makingcement. It has suffered from the real-estate slump. Rally's,based in Louisville, Ky., has been hurt by a price war in thefast-food business. As a result, Mr. Sugarman's net worth,which once may have exceeded $50 million, has dwindled to afraction of that.   Mr. Sugarman grew up in Beverly Hills but in the shadow ofthe wealth he now enjoys. He was not an indolent rich kid.His father owned a used-car lot a few blocks from the Wattsneighborhood of Los Angeles -- he called it Burton Motorsafter Burt, his only child -- and young Burt pitched in. &quot;Hedid not grow up slugging rats in alleys, but he did gothrough the school of hard knocks,&quot; says Milton B. Scott, alongtime family acquaintance.   After finishing college in 1961, Burt Sugarman opened hisown dealership, hoping to attract a more affluent clientele.Eventually he was selling Maseratis. Some of his customerswere in show business, and some of them introduced him tofamous people, including golfer Arnold Palmer, who later, tohis regret, invested money with Mr. Sugarman.   Mr. Sugarman also met -- and in the 1960s came close tomarrying -- actress Ann-Margret. (She backed out on the wayto the Las Vegas courthouse to get a marriage license.)Still, the relationship led to a collaboration between hermanager, Pierre Cossette, and Mr. Sugarman, who contributedsome of the profit from his car business to form CoburtProductions. The pair produced a 1970 TV special featuringAndy Williams, Burt Bacharach and Jose Feliciano.   &quot;I wanted to make shows, and he wanted to be HowardHughes,&quot; says Mr. Cossette of Mr. Sugarman. &quot;He had ideasabout going public, and I wanted no part of it.&quot; Mr.Cossette, now a successful Broadway producer (&quot;The WillRogers Follies&quot;), says the two men had disagreements aboutmoney and split up after about two years. Over the nextdecade, Mr. Sugarman worked on the financial side of variousHollywood projects, TV music specials mainly. His biggestsuccess was a latenight rock concert series called &quot;TheMidnight Special.&quot;   In 1982, he got a chance to play out his fantasies and toprofit from running a public company. With Hollywood earningsplus some borrowed money, he paid $4 million for acontrolling stake in Giant, the cement company, which wasplagued by losses. Soon after Mr. Sugarman became chairman,Giant turned profitable, largely because it got regulatoryclearance from South Carolina to burn hazardous waste alongwith coal in its cement production. This slashed its fuelcosts, and producers of the waste were willing to pay Giantto get rid of it.   Giant allegedly agreed to share fees thus generated with aCoatesville, Pa., company called Delaware Container Inc.,that was to supply the waste. But the fees were never shared.Delaware Container sued for breach of contract, and aPhiladelphia federal court decision resulted in Giant'spaying nearly $2 million in 1989.   Mr. Sugarman hated visiting Giant's aging, dirty cementplants. He told a former Giant executive that he burned hissuit and shoes after each tour. But the company provided asteady flow of cash for his salary, bonuses and perquisites.Giant also was the source of funds for stockmarketspeculations. Through it, he made hostile bids --unsuccessful but ultimately lucrative -- for control ofPly-Gem Industries Inc., a wood-products company; ClarkEquipment Co., a producer of forklifts; and TRE Corp., amaker of specialty metals. He took $3 million in greenmailfrom Ply-Gem -- getting bought out for a higher price thanwas available to other holders -- and chased TRE into thearms of Aluminum Co. of America.   The Securities and Exchange Commission conducted a13-month investigation of Giant's public disclosures in theTRE bid, and the role of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. andJeffries andamp; Co. in orchestrating the bid. The SEC is believedto have been looking into whether purchasers of TRE stockacted in concert and didn't say so to the SEC. Mr. Sugarmanwas a &quot;principal&quot; in that investigation, the SEC says, but nocharges resulted.   In any event, Mr. Sugarman was making out much better inGiant than his public shareholders were. While Giant's shareprice plunged from more than $30 in early 1987 to a current$9.375, Giant directors issued him stock options that liftedhis original 28% stake to a potential 42% today. When thestock's decline rendered his options worthless, the boardreduced their striking price so Mr. Sugarman and other Giantexecutives -- though not other shareholders -- could profitfrom them if Giant were to recover.   Last year, Mr. Sugarman drew $2.5 million in salary andbonuses from Giant -- which had barely profitable operationson sales of $87 million.   The shareholders at another public company Mr. Sugarmancontrolled got similar treatment. In late 1986, Chuck Barris,the founder of Barris Industries Inc., sold Giant hisinterest in the publicly traded producer of &quot;The Gong Show&quot;and other programs. Mr. Sugarman lost no time getting thetiny company to finance certain perks for himself. One of thefirst things he did with Barris Industries' cash, plus fundsfrom Giant, was to buy a $5.5 million Gulfstream jet (sincesold); he used it not only for corporate trips but also forweekend jaunts to his condo in Aspen and for pleasure tripsas far away as the South of France, according to formerBarris executives. Jeff Wald, a former Barris manager,confirms that he refused to sign company checks for what hefelt were not Barris-related expenses despite Mr. Sugarman'sthreats to fire him.   In addition, Mr. Sugarman had Barris Industries pay him$1.15 million for rights to rerun or to produce shows of Mr.Sugarman's. Barris Industries eventually wrote off theinvestment. Barris also paid up -- $500,000 plus stockoptions that Mr. Sugarman eventually sold for $1.8 million --for movies that Mr. Sugarman was developing but that thecompany never made and, for the most part, wrote off.   Budd Granoff, who was president of Barris Industries for22 years, says he objected. &quot;He sold {to the company}properties that I felt were worthless. He enriched himself atstockholders' expense,&quot; Mr. Granoff says, adding, &quot;I wantedto run as soon as he got control. I don't like the way theguy does business.&quot;   Mr. Sugarman's methods eventually riled two men who werelater to become among the most powerful in Hollywood, Mr.Peters and Mr. Guber. In January 1988, Mr. Sugarman hiredthem to manage Barris. The move turned the maker of lowbrowgame shows into a film production company that accumulatedsuch credits as &quot;Rain Man&quot; and &quot;Gorillas in the Mist.&quot;   But, according to former Barris associates, Messrs. Guberand Peters disliked Mr. Sugarman's style, and they brought inan investor to buy Giant out in March 1989. (Messrs. Guberand Peters won't comment.) The sale gave Giant a reasonablereturn, but Giant apparently could have received at least $12million more had it sold out six months later; at that time,the two men sold a Barris successor to Sony Corp. (and agreedto run Sony's newly acquired Columbia Pictures studio).   Mr. Sugarman's tactics also upset many people, evenbackers, when he launched a proxy fight in 1988 against themanagement of Media General Inc., the Richmond, Va.,publishing and broadcasting concern. Through Giant andBarris, he bought up $100 million of Media General's stockwith the aid of a Drexel Burnham junk-bond offering. Then helobbied institutional investors with the help of formerPresident Gerald Ford, former Ohio governor Richard Celeste,several members of Congress and Charles Keating Jr., theformer chief of failed Lincoln Savings.   Some investors were inclined to back him for at least oneseat on the board. Then Media General announced that Mr.Sugarman had offered to drop his fight in exchange for acontrolling interest in its cable-TV operations. Oneinstitutional investor, Harry Schermer at NationwideInsurance, angrily telephoned Mr. Sugarman, who denied havingsolicited greenmail personally but left open the possibilitythat his investment advisers had done so without his consent.Mr. Schermer says he concluded that Mr. Sugarman had&quot;misrepresented what he was trying to do,&quot; and he decided,along with some other big investors, to vote against Mr.Sugarman, costing him the board seat he wanted and increasingthe risk to his investment.   But in January 1989, Media General bought out Mr.Sugarman's stake in exchange for $44 million in cash and anewsprint-recycling mill in Pomona, Calif., that MediaGeneral and Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. valued at $56 million. Thatmight seem like an even trade. But 16 months later, Giantsold the mill for $96 million, netting a $30 million profit(after subtracting $10 million spent on capital projects inthe interim).   Part of that windfall may have been due to Media General'shaving given Giant a property really worth more than the $56million value cited; a senior manager at the mill contends itwas worth much more. But another part of Giant's profit cameby way of Sacramento. During the period Giant owned the mill,the California legislature passed a bill requiring newspaperpublishers in the state to use recycled newsprint. This was abonanza for the mill, the only such facility in California.   Mr. Sugarman's fingerprints are all over the bill, saysMr. Strickman, one of his lobbyists. &quot;I think it was a goodbill,&quot; Mr. Strickman says; &quot;I wrote it.&quot;   Mr. Sugarman, who normally is a big contributor toRepublican politicians, later had Giant give two $10,000donations to Democrat Willie Brown, the powerful stateassembly speaker. A spokesman for Mr. Brown says there was nolink between the donations and his support of the bill.   In 1989, Mr. Sugarman got into more hot water buying up$25 million of Rally's initial public stock offering, withfunds from Giant and five partners, including Mr. Tennenbaum.The SEC charged in a civil complaint that Mr. Sugarman didn'tdisclose his intentions for at least eight days, during whichtime he bought two-thirds of the offering, purchases thateffectively gave him control of the company at a reducedprice.   The partners were also a sticky problem. Mr. Tennenbaumsays he had oral assurances from his longtime client that hewould get back his money, plus 25%, within six months.Another partner, Kenneth Malamed, who isn't suing, testifiedin a court deposition that he had heard essentially the samepitch. Rather than pay them the hefty interest plusprincipal, Mr. Sugarman decided to dissolve the partnership,handing the stock back to the partners.   But the stock's price subsequently plunged, in partbecause Mr. Sugarman was no longer buying up shares. Thissaddled the partners with large paper losses, leading to Mr.Tennenbaum's lawsuit. Mr. Sugarman mollified Mr. Malamed bygiving him an option to sell his Rally's shares in early 1994at a price that is nearly three times what they sell fortoday. And Mr. Sugarman settled the SEC suit, withoutadmitting or denying wrongdoing, by paying $620,000 to aDistrict of Columbia federal court, which will decide how todisburse the funds.   But none of this cost Mr. Sugarman a dime personally.Giant Group -- and its public shareholders -- paid the SECsettlement, plus legal costs of $545,000. The company alsoagreed to assume the cost of the Rally's option given to Mr.Malamed.   No one is quite sure why Mr. Sugarman gets mixed up in somuch controversy. One former employee contends it is allabout gaining an edge. One example: Small knobs on the feetof Mr. Sugarman's chair in his boardroom enable him to sitslightly higher than those around him. Mr. Strickman, Mr.Sugarman's Sacramento lobbyist, says: &quot;He doesn't just definethings, he controls them.&quot; A former manager tells of Mr.Sugarman's once launching into a 45-minute tirade aboard theprivate jet after its crew served him sweet rolls forbreakfast instead of croissants.   In any case, Mr. Sugarman's problems with other investorsdate back nearly 25 years. In one of his first deals, in1967, Mr. Sugarman persuaded Arnold Palmer and four others toinvest a total of $155,000 with him in acquiring the site fora golf course in Los Angeles's Benedict Canyon. In a suitlater filed in Los Angeles Superior Court, the investors saidthe managing partner in the deal, Mr. Sugarman, told them theseller was a bit naive and that he, Mr. Sugarman, could getthe land cheap.   The men bought the pitch and the property, but they builtno golf course; and by 1972, with construction costs risingand land values declining, their investment had effectivelybeen wiped out. Full of apology, Mr. Sugarman advised hisfriends to stop making mortgage payments and walk away,abandoning their interest to the beneficiary of the trustdeed.   That might have been the end of a sad story had not one ofthe partners noticed something odd: Mr. Sugarman himself heldthe deed of trust. Not only that, it turned out Mr. Sugarmanhimself had been the naive seller of the land, according tothe suit, which was filed in 1977 by Mr. Palmer and theothers.   But the investor group enjoyed a happy Hollywood ending.Mr. Sugarman gave them back their money in an out-of-courtsettlement.</TEXT></DOC>