<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910716-0009</DOCNO><DOCID>910716-0009.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Nomination of Robert Gates for Top CIA Post   Is Turning Into a High-Stakes Gamble for Bush   ----   By Walter S. Mossberg and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>AFRICA (AF)CHILE (CI)IRAN (IR)IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOUTH AFRICA (SF)SOUTH AMERICA (SM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush's nomination of Robert Gatesto head the Central Intelligence Agency, which appeared atfirst to be a low-risk political gamble, is turning into ahigh-stakes roll of the dice for the White House.   It is suddenly certain that Senate consideration of Mr.Gates will drag on for weeks or months, and will feature anextensive review of the Iran-Contra scandal and otherclandestine activities involving the CIA during the Reaganadministration, when Mr. Gates served in high CIA posts andMr. Bush was vice president.</LP><TEXT>   And President Bush, who initially expected his nominee tobe approved with a minimum of fuss, may have to use a lot ofpolitical capital in the battle over the nomination, evenallies seem to acknowledge.   &quot;We have an obligation to get as much information aspossible,&quot; Alaska Sen. Frank Murkowski, a Gates backer andthe ranking Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee,said in an interview yesterday. &quot;It's doubtful we can finishtill October,&quot; when the special prosecutor investigating theIran-Contra scandal is likely to conclude his inquiry.   Even Oklahoma Democrat David Boren, the committeechairman, who is a big Gates backer and supporter of the CIA,has been privately unnerved by the new situation.   &quot;Another page of Iran-Contra is turning, and with everypage you have a chance to solve another piece of the puzzle,&quot;says New Jersey Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley, a leading Gatescritic on the committee.   The rapid change in prognosis is almost entirely theresult of last week's guilty plea by former CIA official AlanFiers, who conceded that he knew about the central feature ofIran-Contra: the diversion of funds from Iranian arms salesto the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.   Mr. Gates has said he didn't know about the diversion, andMr. Fiers hasn't directly contradicted him. But he has saidhe told Clair George, who headed covert operations at the CIAand was just one step below Mr. Gates, then deputy directorof the agency.   Before it votes on Mr. Gates, the panel is trying toarrange to question Messrs. Fiers and George under oath tofind out what they know about Mr. Gates's knowledge ofIran-Contra. But Mr. Fiers is refusing to appear unless he isgranted immunity from further prosecution. Congressionalsources say Mr. George, who appears to be under investigationby the prosecutor, is also refusing to talk unless he getsimmunity. Sen. Murkowski said yesterday he doubts either mancan be heard from until the prosecutor is finished with themin the fall.   When Mr. Bush chose Mr. Gates for the post, he was bettingthat the controversy over the Iran-Contra scandal, whichforced Mr. Gates to withdraw his 1987 nomination for the samejob, had died down. And the White House hoped that Mr.Gates's performance since 1989 as deputy national securityadviser had won enough friends in Congress to bolsterconfidence in his integrity.   Mr. Gates still has strong supporters on the committee. &quot;Idon't think opinion has shifted on the committee because ofthe new developments,&quot; Sen. Boren says. Among many committeemembers, Mr. Gates benefits from a widespread sense that heis a good bureaucratic operator who won't be afraid to ordersignificant changes in the way the U.S. intelligencecommittee does business in the changed world of the 1990s.   While Sen. Bradley and a fellow Democrat, HowardMetzenbaum of Ohio, have been vociferous critics of Mr.Gates, some other committee Democrats, such as Arizona Sen.Dennis DeConcini and South Carolina Sen. Ernest Hollings,might be more willing to side with President Bush and hischoice. And there are few obvious defectors among the15-member committee's seven Republicans.   There are also some influential outside voices defendingMr. Gates's integrity. Retired Adm. Bobby Inman, who like Mr.Gates served for a time as deputy CIA chief to William Casey,says Mr. Casey enforced a system where the covert-operationsstaff reported directly to the director, and around thedeputy. &quot;That's why I accept Bob Gates's direct assurances tome that he wasn't involved,&quot; he says.   Mr. Gates isn't returning reporters' phone calls, but Sen.Murkowski, who spoke to him yesterday, says the nominee &quot;isready to go&quot; with the hearings, and isn't consideringwithdrawing his name from consideration.   Ideally, the White House would like the committee to votebefore Congress starts its summer recess Aug. 5. But thatisn't in the cards. Instead, the committee is weighing twooptions, neither of them pleasant for the White House: eitherwaiting until fall to begin the hearings, or starting themsoon to allow Mr. Gates to testify -- then recessing untilthe fall when it may know more about what the prosecutor isturning up.   The committee is planning to meet today to discuss whichof those options it will choose. &quot;It's pretty much up to theWhite House,&quot; says Sen. Murkowski, who says he thinks theWhite House favors an early start no matter when the hearingswould end. Either way, Mr. Gates would be left hanging forweeks, while rumors swirl of his involvement in variouscovert operations.   The process could be speeded if the panel votes to grantMessrs. Fiers and George immunity from prosecution. Committeesources say that's a possibility in the case of Mr. Fiers,who has already pleaded guilty to misleading Congress. Butthe committee would probably be reluctant to vote immunityfor Mr. George, who hasn't been charged with any crimes. AndMr. George, a bureaucratic foe of Mr. Gates's, might be amore important witness.   Sens. Boren and Murkowski insist that the panel's roleisn't to broadly investigate either Iran-Contra or the CIA,just to focus narrowly on Mr. Gates's personal activities.But a number of other issues seem likely to slow andcomplicate the Gates hearings, committee officials say.   One is the recently disclosed existence of a CIA tapingsystem for recording calls between agency officials and theirfield officers. The system wasn't illegal, but its scopewasn't fully appreciated in Congress, even during theIran-Contra probe. The committee may want to know if Mr.Gates was involved in hiding the existence of such tapes, orif the tapes contain new information on his activities duringthe Iran-Contra operations.   A second issue concerns reports that the CIA played somerole in the unfolding financial scandal involving BCCIHoldings (Luxembourg) S.A. And a third matter involvesallegations, including some aired by ABC News and publishedin the Financial Times, that the CIA tolerated or evenassisted Iraqi efforts to smuggle out U.S. weapons technologyduring the Iran-Iraq War through Chile and South Africa. ABCasserts, and the White House denies, that Mr. Gates met witha Chilean arms dealer to discuss the effort. The CIAyesterday denied it ever provided military aid to Iraq.   Like the taping system, the alleged Iraqi weapons-supplyoperation wouldn't necessarily have been illegal; unlikeIran, Iraq wasn't then banned as a weapons recipient, andU.S. policy at the time favored helping Iraq to win the war.But Congress might want to know why it wasn't informed of amajor effort to arm Iraq.   To further complicate the hearings, Mr. Gates has madeenemies at the CIA in his years in the government, and someof them have secretly gone to the intelligence committee withtheir complaints. There always has been a cultural divide andantagonism at the agency between analysts -- Mr. Gates'sbackground -- and covert operators. Operations officers&quot;don't have anything specific against&quot; Mr. Gates but areleery because he comes from the other side of the CIA house,says Kenneth deGraffenreid, who oversaw intelligence programsas a National Security Council officer in the Reaganadministration. In particular, Mr. Gates pushed forbureaucratic changes that compelled operations officers towork together with analysts on new task forces looking atsuch issues as terrorism and drugs.   Supporters say Mr. Gates also has ruffled somebureaucratic feathers over the years among his analystcolleagues by pushing them to make their work less academicand more closely attuned to questions posed by policy makers.Views of him are &quot;split along the lines of people who thinkthat he's innovative vs. people who are more comfortable withthe traditional ways of doing business,&quot; says Roy Godson,head of the Consortium for the Study of Intelligence.   ---   David Rogers contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>