<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910509-0143</DOCNO><DOCID>910509-0143.</DOCID><HL>   Europtimism Dies;   Two Suspects   Held Responsible   ----   By Karen Elliott House</HL><DATE>05/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><RE>EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)GERMANY (GE)GREAT BRITAIN (UK)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   BERLIN -- The dream of Europe 1992 as something more thana bigger bureaucracy in Brussels is receding.   The vision of a genuinely new Europe -- economically andpolitically cohesive, and fully competitive with the U.S. forglobal leadership -- rested on two assumptions that a yearago seemed reasonable. The first was that a reunified Germanywould assume a positive and pre-eminent role as Europeanleader -- that Germany's vision and values would extendbeyond its own borders and interests. The second was that theSoviet Union, no longer a conventional military threat, wouldoffer Western Europe significant market opportunities whileposing few political threats -- in short that the SovietUnion would wind up a political eunuch with a set of satiableeconomic appetites.</LP><TEXT>   Both those assumptions now appear to be pipe dreams.   Germany is bogged down in the swamp of its own internalintegration. This wasn't entirely unexpected nor is thisproblem insurmountable. Germany, however, has become notmerely more self-absorbed but also increasingly selfish onissues ranging from coordination of continental interestrates to cooperation with the rest of the Western alliance inthe Persian Gulf.   During the Gulf war, Germany not only took refuge inconstitutional technicalities to avoid even minimal militarycommitment but also proclaimed its unwillingness to helpdefend, if attacked, its Turkish NATO ally. The new EuropeanEmperor -- portly though he was with economic power --suddenly was unclothed. Germany's ensuing scramble to repairthe damage by sending a few aged aircraft to Turkey was toolittle too late.   Some Germans are busy looking at themselves in the mirrorthese days and aren't pleased with what they see. But theyare more interested in changing the reflection than therealities. At a recent German-American conference here thefull spectrum of German political opinion, from rulingChristian Democrats to radical Greens, was put on display totry to convince Americans of Germany's good will and bestefforts in the Gulf.   Perhaps sensing that the position was less thanpersuasive, one prominent German participant finally said infrustration, &quot;I'm tired of hearing about common values;countries don't have values, only interests.&quot; It's not themessage Americans or other Western Europeans want to hearfrom Germany. But it's one that's resonating across thecontinent these days.   Meanwhile, the Soviet Union is turning out to be somethingvery different from the benign entity Western Europeenvisioned a year ago. Rather than emerging as a hungry mouthto be filled with Western European credit and goods, theSoviet Union has become so sick that it's unable to digesteven spoon-fed doses of what Europe has to offer. Indeed, theSoviet mouth appears more likely to spew forth a massive flowof hungry and angry refugees.   When this happens, Germany could wind up being to Sovietrefugees what Turkey is to Iraq's Kurds. And while therewould doubtlessly be much hand-wringing throughout the Westabout mass Soviet emigration, the rest of the West could windup viewing this largely as Germany's problem to be solvedwith billions of marks rather than dollars, pounds or francs.   The Soviet Union has become an active political andeconomic threat to Western Europe. The sick man is in thethroes of spasms and no one knows what the next stages ofthis illness will be.   &quot;This is the first historical example of an empirecollapsing without any external interference,&quot; says HeleneCarrere D'Encausse, a French historian and Soviet watcher.&quot;The Soviet Union now is totally lawless and people seek someauthority. But in such a vast country with such decayinginstitutions, even the military can't impose authority forlong.&quot;   That the Soviet Union and Germany have fallen far short ofthe expectations of Europtimists is not all bad for the restof Europe or America. Indeed, German self-absorption andSoviet self-destruction have been more than offset byincreased self-confidence in France, Britain and the U.S. inthe wake of the Gulf war. Relations between these threeallies are closer than they've been in many years.   The Bush administration's early and passionate flirtationwith Helmut Kohl's Germany, a not-so-subtle shift from RonaldReagan's longtime love affair with Margaret Thatcher'sBritain, has decidedly cooled. Mr. Bush's unambigious supportfor German reunification at the critical moment when bothMoscow and much of Europe were skeptical wound up beinganswered with a very ambiguous German response to U.S. callsfor unity and support in the Persian Gulf. Not surprisingly,Mr. Bush and many in Congress once again feel morecomfortable in the embrace of old friends in London andParis.   Within Europe, the British and French have regained astrong measure of confidence. Germany clearly remains thecontinent's economic engine but it increasingly appears aspolitical caboose, which is what the British and French hadsecretly hoped for all along. Neither, of course, had beennearly as entranced as Germany with the positive potential ofthe Soviet Union.   Given a basic strain of Europessimism, of course, someFrenchmen and Englishmen still can find bad news in the goodnews. They worry about a frustrated Germany and a flounderingSoviet Union finding common cause in their adversity. WhileGerman-Soviet alliance is the ultimate nightmare of the restof Western Europe, this prospect seems far-fetched.   More likely, Germany's bid for European leadership hassimply been slowed rather than derailed. But even that ismoderately favorable for a Western Europe that isn't yetready to be overwhelmed by Germany, for a U.S. that isn't yetready to deal with the consequences of a Germanled unitedEurope, and, indeed, for a Germany that isn't yet ready tolead.   ---   Ms. House is vice president, international, of Dow Jones andamp;Co.</TEXT></DOC>