<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900614-0141</DOCNO><DOCID>900614-0141.</DOCID><HL>   Creative Energy:   GE's Latest Invention --   A Way to Move Ideas   From Lab to Market   ---   With Nurturing Environment   And `Cross-Pollination,'   Research Thrives, and Sells   ---   A GM Pilgrim in Schenectady   ----   By Amal Kumar Naj   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   GE GM</CO><IN>ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT (ELQ)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><LP>   Piero Bonissone never fancied himself a salesman. Quitethe opposite: He's intense, bookish and a top scientist atGeneral Electric Co. A few years ago, he developed anartificial intelligence program to pinpoint problems inlocomotives. But now Mr. Bonissone has come up with asurprising new version of his program with a quite differentpurpose: identifying corporate takeover targets. And he'sjust sure it can earn bundles of money for GE.   So now the 39-year-old scientist finds himself in theunlikely position of stalking Gabriel Samothrakis, who alsoworks for GE -- as a technology expert in its Kidder Peabodyandamp; Co. investment banking unit.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Bonissone plots his strategy carefully. He figures ahard sell won't work. So he invites Mr. Samothrakis to ameeting of academics and bankers at which he reveals just ahint of his invention. And then, with Mr. Samothrakis'sappetite whetted, Mr. Bonissone plans to set up a one-on-onemeeting, moving in for the kill.   What's going on here? It's a part of the life of aresearcher at GE, where Mr. Bonissone sits in a chaoticoffice surrounded by books on computational logic andesoteric journals, but says: &quot;I also have to beentrepreneurial.&quot;   GE is turning around the equation of U.S. business.Instead of pushing marketers to come up with ideas and thenasking scientists to make them work, the company increasinglygives researchers wide berth to imagine and invent -- andthen shop the invention around GE's divisions.   The result: GE and its scientist-salesmen regularly manageto transfer technology from the laboratory to the market, atransition that frequently baffles American business.   U.S. companies lead the world in inventing and innovating,but often drop the ball after that. &quot;I give Americancompanies C-minus when it comes to nurturing and managingtechnology,&quot; says William Sommers, a technology expert at theconsulting firm Booz Allen andamp; Hamilton Inc. &quot;Those that dorelatively well are too few.&quot;   A big reason may be that the companies' research anddevelopment culture itself stifles commercialization. &quot;Theright environment alone can raise productivity 75% to 100%,&quot;says Walter Robb, the head of GE's Randamp;D, who has gone tounusual lengths to promote technology transfer.   GE's record is hardly flawless. The company developed anew compressor for its refrigerators, failed to consideradequately its potential for failure, and ended up losing$450 million when it turned out to be unreliable. Even so, of250 technology projects GE undertook between 1982 and 1986,an internal study done by Booz Allen found that 150 producedmajor applications. The average for U.S. industry is one in10. Most companies fail to &quot;identify and spread their coretechnologies,&quot; says Booz Allen's Mr. Sommers.   At GE, because researchers are supposed to sell theirideas around the whole company, they sometimes findapplications far afield from the original intentions.Something invented to protect coal-spraying nozzles in anexperimental locomotive ended up creating a new generation ofenergy-saving light bulbs. A medical diagnostic technologyused for imaging the human body became a cost-saving devicefor inspecting jet engines. Sophisticated coating andmachining techniques developed for aircraft engines gottransferred to GE's power generation business.   Competitors and analysts say the cross-pollination oftechnology and the ability to find a profitable use for itare major factors in GE's three straight years ofdouble-digit earnings growth and its optimistic long-termoutlook. It's also helping the $55 billion company shed itsimage as a hodgepodge conglomerate in lighting, medicalequipment, plastics, power generation and aircraft engines.&quot;The synergies aren't obvious, but they help GE dominate inits markets,&quot; says David Gardner, an analyst who follows GEat Nomura Research.   Not surprisingly, this attracts a host of rival executivesto GE's Schenectady, N.Y., research center to learn how GEcycles new technology through the company. &quot;We have thefinest technologies we need, but getting them into productionis where we need to make improvement,&quot; says Donald Runkle,vice president of General Motors Corp.'s advanced engineeringstaff and a recent Schenectady pilgrim. Mr. Runkle says he isstudying &quot;rules and incentives that set the environment fortransferring technology&quot; from the laboratory to the market.&quot;We think GE has something to offer us.&quot;   That example starts with the nurturing climate at itsSchenectady Randamp;D hub, a sprawling complex on 600 acres with1,800 researchers, including 500 Ph.D.s.   Mr. Robb, research and development chief since 1986, isthe first Randamp;D director at GE with experience in manufacturing(plastics and medical operations). Manufacturing types areusually bottom-line oriented. But Mr. Robb has increasedfunding for risky, long-term basic research by more than 50%,although he will not reveal specific figures. GE's total Randamp;Dbudget is $1.33 billion.   At the same time, he is working to foster close, informalcontacts between researchers of different disciplines. Heinsists, for example, that they vary their table-mates in thecafeteria.   Researchers are regularly treated to art exhibits (mostrecent: Leonardo da Vinci) and classical-music concerts inthe atrium of the corporate research and development center,also known as CRandamp;D.   Mr. Robb says he wants to emphasize creativity, whetherthat means art or a new kind of plastic. Mr. Robb, a singer,formed the CRandamp;D Choral Group, and the notice of the firstperformance hangs on bulletin boards next to announcements ofsuch meetings as one on &quot;the design and operation of amunicipal mass-burn incinerator.&quot;   Mr. Robb also has started a regular Friday evening &quot;freebeer and pretzel party.&quot; The gathering starts with hisannouncement of the price of GE stock and sometimes includeshis card tricks or a pat on the back for a scientist. Butmostly it's an occasion to trade ideas and schmooze.   This informality has produced concrete results. GEtheoretician Richard Messmer gave a talk one day in 1988about how a plastic molecule could be rearranged so it wouldconduct electricity. Clifford Spiro, a chemist who hadattended the talk, then dropped into the beer and pretzelsocial hour. William Banholzer, an engineer, was there, too.The chemist and the engineer got to talking about Mr.Messmer's theory. And then they got to work.   Late this month, they will file for a patent coveringtheir technique. Mr. Spiro says it will have electronicapplications, including plastic batteries. Says Mr. Spiro:&quot;At informal gatherings you talk to people you wouldn'tnormally on a problem.&quot;   Four years ago, metallurgist Harvey Cline was developing amethod of measuring the surface topography of silicon chips,which would show the wafers' defects. The techniqueessentially involved measuring three dimensions of hair-thinsurfaces. Then one day, GE's medical division sent a man fromMilwaukee to talk at the Randamp;D center about the need forthree-dimensional imaging for medical purposes.   Mr. Cline thought he could use his research in chips tosolve the medical problem. He teamed up with a computergraphic designer, William Lorensen. Mr. Cline says that forweeks he worked with Mr. Lorensen without seeking approvalfrom his manager. &quot;Interdisciplinary work is encouragedhere,&quot; he says. &quot;Then, when my manager in electronics sawwhat I was doing, he was encouraging.&quot;   Mr. Cline says he then switched departments and workeddirectly for the Milwaukee-based medical division, withouthaving to leave Schenectady.   &quot;I didn't know any medical physics,&quot; says Mr. Cline. Ittook him three years to learn about human bone, tissue andmuscle, often using a medical CT (computed tomography)scanner on Mr. Lorensen. He was able to apply a novelmathematical technique drawn from his silicon days. And hefinally succeeded.   Although the technology is still being developed,three-dimensional imaging will help pinpoint targets in brainsurgery and other complex operations. These machines areaimed at the estimated $100 million-a-year market for 3-Dimaging, where currently two-dimensional data areextrapolated into three-dimensional images, says Philip Drew,a medical-equipment consultant in Concord, Mass.   GE's culture allows a researcher who hits a brick wall inone department to move to another. Dominic Cusano, aphysicist at the Randamp;D center, had long believed that GE's CTmachine was inefficient, converting only a third of theX-rays it scanned to images. The problem was the xenon gasused to detect the X-rays. But in 1980 the medical divisiongave up looking for a substitute.   Mr. Cusano, however, did not. He walked across the hall atthe Randamp;D center to a ceramic lab, where Charles Greskovich wasusing ceramics to make a &quot;lamp envelope,&quot; the small chamberinside a light bulb that holds filaments. &quot;I said, Charlie, Iam stuck,&quot; recalls Mr. Cusano.   Although Mr. Greskovich knew little about CT machines, hedid know how to build complex crystal structures. The paircollaborated informally for three years, often on Fridayafternoons. Management supported their efforts because bothhad excellent track records.   Sure enough, they eventually developed a crystallinesolid-state detector to capture X-rays for imaging. GE saysthis device produces images five times better than thoseproduced by xenon gas. The new scanners have brought in morethan $100 million in sales.   And the researchers were able to show other divisions ofthe company how they could benefit from the development. Thescanners now not only serve the medical division, but arealso used to inspect the inside of GE's jet engines and steerlaser drills in the manufacture of turbine blades, savingmore than $2 million a year in labor and material costsalone.   N.V. Philips' director of CT marketing and sales support,Walter Cullen, concedes that GE's solid-state detector givesGE machines &quot;an advantage&quot; by producing better images. &quot;Butsolid state is more expensive to maintain and run,&quot; he says.   It wasn't always like this at GE. Lowell Steele, a formerGE Randamp;D planner, recalls his frustrations in the late 1970strying to apply the company's knowledge chips, circuitry andother electronics to process the transactions of GE Capital,a financial arm. &quot;I got some scars from pushing thattechnology,&quot; says Mr. Steele.   Similarly, in the late 1970s, GE's medical division was socontent with its CT machines that it turned a deaf ear to itsengineers' proposal to develop a magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) diagnostic machine, which uses a powerful magneticfield to develop images of the inside of the human body. &quot;Iwas told it was too researchy,&quot; recalls Rowland Redington,the father of GE's MRI research.   Only after competitors' machines hit the market did GEturn to Mr. Redington's team at the Randamp;D center. That latenessmight have doomed GE's effort.   However, once GE got started, it managed to produce an MRIjust a year after Philips, Siemens and a dozen small U.S.companies had. GE recovered quickly by pulling togethertechnology from different businesses. For the powerfulmagnets used in MRI, it drew upon the design expertise at itspower generation business, and circuitry from militaryelectronics. Now GE dominates the American MRI market with anestimated 46% share.   To ensure such cross-pollination, about 35 of the Randamp;Dcenter's 1,800 researchers transfer annually to various GEmanufacturing operations.   William Hackett, an electrical engineer, has moved fromappliances to power generation to the electrical distributionand control business (EDandamp;C), and then to electronics,aerospace and lighting -- cross-pollinating technology allthe while.   At EDandamp;C, for example, he applied a painting technique fromthe appliance business to electrical switch gears, saving$300,000 a year in labor and material because of the improvedprocess. &quot;The process also increased durability of the switchgear and it became a marketing feature for us,&quot; Mr. Hackettsays. &quot;What appears unique in one area is transferable.&quot;   General Motors is one company taking its cue from GE tochange its Randamp;D approach. GM recently decreed that itsresearchers spend 15% of their time pondering what technologythey could transfer and where. Mr. Runkle, the head ofadvanced engineering, says GM also has begun transferringresearchers who develop a technology to the site ofapplication.   That jump is hard to take, as Mr. Bonissone, the GEartificial-intelligence expert, can attest. His program,which at first identified problems with locomotives, wasmodified to find problems in jet engines and plastics. Thenit was modified for use by the Pentagon on ships, submarinesand fighter planes to prepare them for instantaneous countermeasures in enemy attacks. So it makes perfect sense to himthat Kidder Peabody should use the program. &quot;As in war,&quot; hesays, &quot;you have raiders and targets in mergers andacquisition.&quot;   But Mr. Samothrakis is not convinced. The technology &quot;mustprove that it can make money for us,&quot; he says.   Their meeting will probably be later this summer. Says Mr.Bonissone: &quot;It's clearly going to be a selling job.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>