<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910227-0058</DOCNO><DOCID>910227-0058.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   USX Agrees to Pay $41.8 Million   To Settle Bias Case, Is Sued by EPA   ----   By Clare Ansberry and Stephen J. Adler   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/27/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   X LABOR CNA BLR UK FREST</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)STEEL MANUFACTURERS (STL)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)INSURANCE (INS)FULL LINE INSURANCE (INF)DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)</IN><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   USX Corp. agreed to pay $41.8 million to settle along-running discrimination case, and it faces another legalbattle on the environmental front.   The nation's largest steelmaker agreed to pay $41.8million to settle a class-action suit alleging discriminationagainst about 10,000 black job applicants at its FairlessHills, Pa., plant in the 1970s. The settlement resolves a15-year-old case that had been before the appeals court twiceand the U.S. Supreme Court once.</LP><TEXT>   Separately, the Environmental Protection Agency is seekinga court order preventing USX from operating its Clairton,Pa., coke ovens in violation of the federal Clean Air Act.The suit, filed by the U.S. Attorney on behalf of the EPA inU.S. District Court in the Western District of Pennsylvania,is also seeking civil penalties of up to $25,000 a day foreach violation cited in the complaint as well as legal costs.Total damages weren't specified.   The suit alleges that USX used contaminated water to coolhot coke produced at the Clairton coke ovens and released rawcoke oven gas, which contain suspected carcinogens, into theair. Pittsburgh-based USX said it has already addressed thealleged violations by allocating $100 million forenvironmental improvements. The company also said the allegedviolations concern incidents that occurred several years ago.   As for the discrimination case, the company had beenordered to pay damages of $12.4 million, plus interest, in1986 for violating the Civil Rights Act. However, that amountescalated to $41.8 million when plaintiffs won their battleto seek additional interest payments, as well as so-calledfront pay -- or payments that workers would have received hadthey been working since 1986.   The $41.8 million settlement, which also includes $7million in legal fees and costs, avoids the need for furthertrials to determine whether the 1986 judgment should beincreased.   USX had deposited $21.8 million of the settlement into anaccount in November, when the U.S. Supreme Court refused thecompany's request for a further review of the case. Theagreement, which must be approved by U.S. District JudgeClarence C. Newcomer in the Eastern District of Pennsylvania,calls for the company to pay $20 million by March 15.   &quot;It took 15 years, but we're glad we have an agreementwith USX that will fairly compensate the class members forwhat happened at Fairless Hills,&quot; said Creed C. Black Jr. ofPhiladelphia-based Ballard, Spahr, Andrews andamp; Ingersoll, anattorney for the plaintiffs.   USX, which denied any wrongdoing, called the settlement&quot;distressing&quot; and noted that an appeals court found that thediscrimination wasn't deliberate. In fact, the company said,it hired a &quot;significantly larger percentage of blackapplicants than the percentage of blacks in the labormarket.&quot; The company added that the only way it could haveavoided court discrimination rulings would have been to use aracial hiring quota system.   The double legal whammy comes at a time when USX's steeloperations are struggling as steel orders and prices continuetheir industrywide freefall. Although USX's steel businesswas one of the few major steelmakers to report operatingearnings in the fourth quarter, it is expected to post lowerfirst-quarter operating profit. Results will reflect not onlydismal demand, but costs incurred when the company geared upfor a potential labor strike. In the year-earlier firstquarter, the steel unit had operating profit of $60 millionon sales of $1.3 billion.   ---   JURORS CAN BE ALLOWED to take notes, ask questions, astate court rules.   In two separate decisions, the Connecticut Supreme Courtsaid that a jury verdict couldn't be reversed just becausethe judge had allowed jurors to take notes or to askquestions of witnesses.   The court said that judges can allow note-taking andquestion-asking -- or forbid the practices -- at theirdiscretion. The decisions were consistent with those of mostother courts that have addressed these issues.   Traditionally, judges haven't allowed note-taking byjurors, maintaining that note-takers would gain an unfairadvantage in deliberations over those who didn't take notes,and that a juror's faulty notes might lead other jurorsastray. In addition, some judges fear that jurors who takenotes will miss important testimony while taking down anearlier statement.   Allowing jurors to ask witnesses questions has been evenmore controversial because it interjects jurors into theactive trying of a case, a role that has been reserved forlawyers. Opponents say such question-asking can interrupt alawyer's line of questioning and disrupt his presentation, aswell as possibly introduce irrelevant or prejudicialquestions into the case.   However, jurors' frustration with their passive role, andsome judges' view that jurors would remember more of a trialif they took notes, has softened judicial opposition of late.And several experiments involving such practices have provensuccessful, participants say.   In the Connecticut ruling on note-taking, Justice David M.Borden wrote that, although no state law prohibits it, &quot;thelongstanding judicial understanding in this state has been tobar jurors from taking notes during a trial. . . . Whateverthe source of that understanding, however, we now abandonit.&quot;   Justice Borden added, &quot;The human memory is fallible, andnotes may significantly aid in recalling evidence. Judgessitting as trial courts routinely take notes, as do students,business persons, journalists and people in all walks of lifewho are intent on being able to recall later the specifics ofwhat they see and hear.&quot;   The high court said the trial judge who allowednote-taking correctly instructed the jury that notes shouldbe used merely as aids to their memories and should notsupersede their recollections; that jurors who have not takennotes should rely on their own memories and not be influencedby anyone else's notes; and that jurors should not allowtheir note-taking to distract them in court.   In the case concerning jurors' questions, the appealscourt approved a process in which the trial judge permittedthe jury to ask witnesses questions as part of a programconducted by the American Judicature Society. To ask aquestion, a juror had to submit it in writing to the judge,who reviewed it and considered lawyers' objections to it outof the jury's hearing. The judge instructed the jury not tohold it against either party if the judge refused to allowthe question to be asked.   &quot;These are potentially progressive decisions,&quot; said Prof.Richard Lempert, a jury scholar at the University of Michiganlaw school. &quot;While note-taking and question-asking may mot besuitable in all cases, these might be ways to improve manyjury trials.&quot;   ---   MALPRACTICE INSURERS hit with $52 million judgment inHome-Stake case.   The judgment, entered last week in federal court in Tulsa,Okla., requires three insurance companies to cover some ofthe claims against accountants and lawyers for the defunctHome-Stake Production Co.   Home-Stake collapsed in 1973 after more than 1,500investors, including many well-known entertainers andbusiness figures, had invested in the company's purportedoil- and gas-drilling ventures as tax shelters. Securitiesinvestigators and lawyers found that Home-Stake was actuallya so-called Ponzi scheme, in which investors were paid&quot;returns&quot; from the funds of later investors.   Many of the investors sued in 1973 and won a judgment inNovember 1989 for $132 million in damages against Home-Stakefounder Robert S. Trippet and the company's accountants andlawyers. Many of these advisers are now deceased or no longerin business.   The judgment signed last week by U.S. District JudgeManuel Real of Tulsa will allow the investors to collect someof their damages from the insurance firms that wrotemalpractice coverage for the accountants and lawyers. Thebulk of the judgment was assessed against ContinentalCasualty Co., a unit of CNA Financial Corp., Chicago, whichhas asked the judge to reconsider his decision.   The insurers' cases could be affected by the outcome of anappeal of the $132 million judgment against Mr. Trippet, hisaccountants and his lawyers. Arguments in the appeal arescheduled for May 6 before the federal appeals court inDenver.   ---   PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY is charged in alleged generic-drugscheme.   Federal prosecutors in Maryland yesterday charged BolarPharmaceutical Co., a Copiague, N.Y., generic-drug company,with mislabeling three generic drugs, distributing six othersnot approved by the federal government and obstructing aninvestigation of the company. Bolar faces a maximum of $10million in fines.   Gary Jordan, an assistant U.S. attorney handling the case,said the company reaped over $140 million from sales of oneof the unapproved drugs between August 1987 and January 1990.   The charges against Bolar stem from a nearly three-yearfederal investigation that has already netted guilty pleasfrom three former Bolar managers. Mr. Jordan said the formerexecutives are cooperating with the investigation and morecharges are expected against former employees.   A lawyer for Bolar said the company had no immediatecomment.   ---   BHOPAL CASE lawyers in U.S. are rebuffed in fees request.   The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattanaffirmed a lower-court decision rejecting the plaintiffs'lawyers request for reimbursement of about $750,000. Theattorneys, including Stanley M. Chesley and F. Lee Bailey,were seeking payment for work they did on the case againstUnion Carbide Corp. before it was taken out of the U.S.courts and turned over to the courts of India.   The lawyers filed suit in the U.S. on behalf of hundredsof thousands of victims injured or killed when gas leakedfrom a Union Carbide subsidiary's plant in Bhopal, India, in1984. In 1989, about two years after the case was moved toIndia, Union Carbide agreed to settle the litigation bypaying $470 million to the Indian government. That moneyhasn't yet been distributed to the victims.   The attorneys requesting the fees didn't participate inthe Indian proceedings and didn't ask the Indian governmentfor a share of the settlement fund. Lionel Alan Marks, one ofthe U.S. plaintiff attorneys, said the lawyers now intend topursue their request for compensation in India.</TEXT></DOC>