<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900529-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>900529-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Sober Summit:   Despite Arms Progress,   New Tensions Mark   U.S.-Soviet Relations   ---   Bush and Gorbachev Disagree   Over Germany, Lithuania   And the Soviet Economy   ---   Girding for Thursday's Talks   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Peter Gumbel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/29/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   When Soviet advance men visited Washington to plan thisweek's summit between George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev,White House aides treated them to a night out at a WashingtonCapitals hockey game.   Sitting in a plush skybox at the Capital Centre sportscomplex, the Soviets wolfed dozens of hot dogs, guzzled mixeddrinks and amused their hosts with a running critique ofAmerican hockey. They also illustrated that U.S.-Sovietrelations have improved to the point that presidential aidescan have a rollicking good time planning a summit.</LP><TEXT>   Unfortunately, their bosses may not have quite as much funwhen they meet this week.   Publicly, the Bush-Gorbachev summit that begins Thursdayis sure to be hailed as a big success. That's largely becausethe two leaders are expected to declare that they have agreedon the major elements of a long-awaited treaty slashingstrategic nuclear arms.   But after those headlines are forgotten, this summit islikely to be remembered for the sober and businesslike newtone it sets in superpower relations and for how it shapesthe future of Europe. The honeymoon with Mr. Gorbachev isover. Nuclear arms aside, the U.S. and Soviets are unhappilybogged down in disputes over issues that constitute a higherpriority for both: reunification of Germany, conventionalarms cuts across Europe and the fate of the Baltic states.These are the issues that will determine the face ofpost-Cold War Europe.   Now, says Secretary of State James Baker, push is comingto shove. &quot;Moscow's willingness to make hard choicesinternally and externally will affect the course and future&quot;of its relationship with Washington, he says. In particular,the hopes raised at the Malta summit last December for broadU.S.-Soviet economic cooperation have faded, and disagreementover Lithuania has nearly eliminated the chances that tradeliberalization will be enacted at this summit.   &quot;Both sides are likely to feel uneasy during the talks&quot;because of the new tensions, predicts Andrei Kortunov, apolitical analyst at the U.S.A. and Canada Institute, aSoviet government think tank in Moscow.   Mr. Gorbachev last week took steps to ease some of thetension with Washington by telling Lithuania that it might beable to negotiate its freedom within two years if it suspendsits declaration of independence. But it's far from certainthat such a trade-off is acceptable to Lithuania's leaders,and Mr. Gorbachev has also threatened to tighten his grip onthe republic if his deal is refused.   As the Soviet leader slides deeper into domestic trouble,Mr. Bush's ability to wrest concessions at the negotiatingtable may be declining. The acute Soviet economic crisis, forexample, directly affects European troop talks because itmakes it harder for Mr. Gorbachev to bring the Red Army home:The Soviets say they have neither houses nor jobs forreturning soldiers. The Soviet military is alreadyincreasingly inclined to criticize him. Mr. Gorbachev will bevulnerable to charges that he is giving away the store to theAmericans if he makes further concessions on the crucialquestion of whether a united Germany can be part of theWestern military alliance. Moreover, his economic problemsare clearly more immense than any economic assistance fromWashington could remedy.   &quot;I don't think our leverage was ever as great as wethought it was,&quot; says Ed A. Hewett, a specialist on theSoviet economy who recently returned from Moscow and has justbriefed President Bush. &quot;We had a kind of illusion of greatleverage.&quot;   Over the weekend, Mr. Gorbachev's troubles took anotherturn for the worse. A new government plan to raise the priceof bread and other goods set off a wave of panic buying incities throughout the Soviet Union. Mr. Gorbachev was forcedto go on television to try to calm the country's citizens.And in Armenia, Soviet troops clashed with nationalists ingun battles that left at least 21 people dead, and againinflamed passions in the region.   While President Bush's domestic concerns aren't asserious, he too feels new constraints. He's already underattack from American conservatives for supposedly giving awaytoo much to Mr. Gorbachev in bargaining in the strategic armsreduction talks, or START. &quot;I think you're going to have somereal resistance in the U.S. to any START agreement,&quot; saysformer defense secretary Harold Brown.   The generally hard line Mr. Gorbachev has pursued againstLithuanian independence has tarnished his image in the U.S.,making it harder for Mr. Bush to offer economic help. Mr.Bush &quot;will be split between the wish to support Gorbachev andthe understanding that the situation is changing,&quot; says Mr.Kortunov. Yet since Malta, Mr. Bush has invested so muchpolitical capital in Mr. Gorbachev that he may be able to dolittle more than complain mildly about the Soviet leader'stactics.   Of course, either president could pull a surprise out ofhis hat. Some analysts, for instance, speculate that Mr.Gorbachev may try to sidestep the disagreement over whetherGermany should be part of the Western alliance by proposingthat all Soviet and American troops and nuclear weapons beyanked off German soil. Mr. Bush undoubtedly would say no;such a scheme would undermine his plan to keep Germany in theWestern orbit. Nonetheless, simply making the offer couldbolster Mr. Gorbachev's image in Germany.   Similarly, some American analysts are urging the Bushadministration to take a bold step by offering Mr. Gorbachevemergency economic relief -- with the firm understanding thatsuch help is contingent on rapid moves toward a marketeconomy and true democracy in the Soviet Union, and an end topressure on Lithuania. The administration's policy is thatthe West shouldn't proffer the Soviets significant aid untilthe Kremlin makes more fundamental economic reforms. Butthere are now indications that U.S. officials nonetheless mayhave discussed some possible aid -- in broad and vague terms-- in recent meetings with the Soviets.   Without such surprises, public attention at the summitwill focus on Cold War-era arms-control issues that are ofdeclining importance in rapidly changing East-West relations.In addition to the expected statement that they have nearlyfinished a START agreement, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev willsign agreements to restrict nuclear testing and begindestroying chemical weapons.   In the end, the ability of the U.S. and the Soviet Unionto go further may be determined partly by the personalchemistry that emerges between Messrs. Gorbachev and Bush,who have developed a good but tentative relationship. In manyways, the two men are similar. Consummate products of theirnations' political systems, each spent two decades working upthe political ladder. Each is far more of a hands-on managerthan his predecessor. And each is excitable and competitive,and has a readily apparent sense of humor.   At one point in the Malta summit, for instance, Mr.Gorbachev pulled out a map showing the location of Americannaval forces at sites all around the Soviet Union and said itillustrated why the Soviets sometimes feel surrounded. Mr.Bush wryly responded by asking whether he could show the mapto the Central Intelligence Agency to check the Soviets'accuracy.   Yet there also are key differences in style that couldcrimp this personal diplomacy. Mr. Gorbachev is given topublic flamboyance, while Mr. Bush is not. More notably, theSoviet is a natural risk-taker, while the American prideshimself on his prudence.   Another difference bears directly on this week's meetings.Mr. Bush likes to conduct business with world leaders ininformal recreational settings, where he thinks he gets atruer measure of his counterpart. This session will be nodifferent: He initially wanted to take Mr. Gorbachev to hisMaine vacation home, but wound up settling for a Saturdaywith the Soviet at the Camp David retreat near Washington.   Mr. Gorbachev doesn't seem to have much use for relaxedsettings. One U.S. official who has watched him at severalsuperpower summits says he has yet to see him remove his suitcoat or loosen his tie. &quot;Gorbachev is a lot looser than anySoviet leader we've ever seen before, but that's not sayingmuch,&quot; says Peter Teeley, a longtime Bush adviser. &quot;The guyhas come light years from the Brezhnev mold, but there'sstill a certain stiffness there.&quot;   The private summit talks the two men hold on Thursday,Friday and Saturday could prove to be some of the mostimportant since Yalta. For as long as 14 hours, the twoleaders will discuss the future shape of Europe and theSoviet Union itself. The most urgent and contentious of theseissues is the future of Germany.   East and West Germany are roaring toward politicalunification. The U.S. and West Germany want the united Germanstate to be a full member of the North Atlantic TreatyOrganization, the Western military alliance. At leastpublicly, Mr. Gorbachev remains hard set against that. Aboveall he wants to avoid accusations that he has lost the ColdWar by allowing the World War II prize of Germany to slipaway for nothing.   A related Kremlin worry about Germany also appears to haveslowed negotiations on a sweeping new treaty cuttingconventional troops and arms in Europe. Mr. Gorbachevapparently wants assurances that the new, unified German armywill be too small to threaten the Soviet Union.   Thus, American officials say that Mr. Bush's top priorityat the summit will be persuading Mr. Gorbachev to back off onthese German-related issues. He will argue that the Sovietsshould want a united Germany in NATO because that wouldstabilize Europe, and that cutting the size of the newGermany's armed forces will have to be decided as part of around of future troop cuts throughout Europe.   But even if he does agree to a Western-oriented unitedGermany, Mr. Gorbachev may insist that, in return, he geteconomic help from West Germany, some German demilitarizationand a new pan-European security organization to succeed NATOand the Warsaw Pact. He may even push for a peace treatyformally ending World War II, something the Germans fearcould be used to extract big economic concessions from them.   The Soviets &quot;want to get a price&quot; for letting go of EastGermany, says Dimitri Simes, an emigre Soviet scholar at theCarnegie Endowment for International Peace. &quot;They want to besure it won't appear they are surrendering.&quot;   Thus it isn't surprising that Germany and rebelliousLithuania are so dominant on the summit agenda. &quot;The Germanissue really involves whether the Soviet Union can continueto be a superpower,&quot; says Stephen Sestanovich, a formerNational Security Council staff member. &quot;Lithuania involveswhether the Soviet Union can be a power at all.&quot;   Mr. Gorbachev's worsening domestic problems make the taskof resolving these issues more complicated than it was justsix months ago at the friendly Malta meeting. Sovieteconomists now indicate privately that, rather than growingsluggishly, the Soviet gross national product actually hasbeen shrinking by 2% to 4% for each of the last four years. Anew package of economic reforms proposed this month by theKremlin is widely considered too timid.   What's more, the Soviet Communist Party now is dividedinto at least three factions. A formal split is likely totake place at the Party's 28th Congress, which opens July 2.Even Mr. Gorbachev's personal popularity is suffering. Thismonth he was elected a delegate to the party congress byCommunists in his home district -- but won just 61% of thevote.   While these problems distract Mr. Gorbachev, a clearerconstraint on his bargaining freedom is his strainedrelations with the Soviet military. In a recent article, YuriKatasonov, a retired colonel, summed up many of themilitary's grievances about Mr. Gorbachev's arms-controlpolicies by charging that Mr. Gorbachev &quot;is trying toconclude agreements at any price.&quot;   The Soviet defense establishment already is struggling tocope with the consequences of unilateral troop cuts Mr.Gorbachev announced in 1988. A staggering 170,000 officersand their families now have no permanent place to live,according to the Soviet Defense Ministry. Clearly, themilitary will be even unhappier if Mr. Gorbachev agrees tomore troop cuts in Europe.   &quot;When our units are withdrawn from Eastern Europe, dozensof thousands of families will find themselves in a similarsituation,&quot; grumbled one officer in a recent article in theSoviet press.   ---   Walter S. Mossberg in Washington contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>