<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910311-0018</DOCNO><DOCID>910311-0018.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   U.S. Concern Sues Iraq, Raising   Issues of Deciding Postwar Claims   ----   By Ellen Joan Pollock and Wade Lambert   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   HAL MDEST T NCR GMT LABOR DD</CO><IN>OIL EQUIPMENT, SERVICES; OILFIELD, PLATFORM SUPPLIERS (EQS)PETROLEUM (PET)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)INDUSTRIAL andamp; COMMERCIAL SERVICES, LEASING, CLEANING (ICS)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)SECURITIES (SCR)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   The government of Iraq has been sued by Brown andamp; RootInternational Inc., in what is believed to be one of thefirst lawsuits filed against Iraq since the end of theMideast war.   The straightforward, four-page complaint appears to be aroutine commercial dispute, but it raises questions about howclaims against Iraq stemming from the war will beadjudicated.</LP><TEXT>   The suit was filed in federal court in Houston against theState Company for Oil Projects of Iraq, or SCOP. It allegesthat the government-owned firm owes Brown andamp; RootInternational $17,833,862.17, minus the cost of someequipment that had not yet been supplied to SCOP by Brown andamp;Root.   The claim stems from engineering and procurement workBrown andamp; Root performed rebuilding two oil terminals in Iraqthat had been destroyed during the war between Iran and Iraq,according to the suit and Brown andamp; Root general counsel JamesW. Wilson. The work was done between April and August 1990,but Brown andamp; Root International's invoices have not been paid,the company alleges in the suit.   The company is also seeking interest and attorneys fees.Brown andamp; Root International is a subsidiary of Brown andamp; RootInc., Houston, which in turn is a subsidiary of HalliburtonCo. in Dallas.   Many lawyers who represent clients with potential claimsagainst Iraq are waiting before they take action in court.They believe that Iraq may eventually pay reparations andthat a tribunal will be created to compensate companies fortheir losses in Iraq and Kuwait. Such a tribunal was set upas part of the 1981 settlement of the Iran hostage crisis andsuits were removed from U.S. courts.   &quot;Our advice has been, simply wait -- there's no reason torush into court,&quot; said Joseph P. Griffin, a partner in theWashington office of Morgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius. &quot;Most peoplejust have not filed suits because of the assumption that theIranian claims model will take affect and that lawsuits willbe extinguished.&quot;   But Lawrence W. Newman, the partner in the New York officeof Baker andamp; McKenzie who filed the suit, said he believes thatthis is an &quot;appropriate time&quot; to proceed in court even thoughit may be difficult to serve court documents on the Iraqigovernment.   &quot;It might increase one's bargaining position . . . andcause the {U.S.} government to take more of an interest inprotecting the interests of the claimants,&quot; he said.   The Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Controlis collecting records of claims, but the information onlywill be used for planning purposes. Barbara Clay, a Treasuryspokeswoman, said that technically Brown andamp; Root should haveapplied for a license from OFAC to file the suit. She calledBrown andamp; Root's failure to seek a license, &quot;not terriblysignificant.&quot; She added, however, that under present OFACregulations, the company would need a license to recoverdamages.   ---   PROXY TACTIC used by ATandamp;T in battle with NCR is upheld bycourt.   The U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that underNew York state law, companies from other states can be forcedto turn over shareholder lists to stockholders who are NewYork residents.   American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., based in New York,sought the shareholder list as part of its strategy toacquire NCR Corp., which is incorporated in Maryland.   The appeals court last month ordered NCR to turn over thelist in compliance with a lower-court ruling, but the appealscourt didn't issue its decision on the legality of the tacticuntil last week. ATandamp;T has launched a proxy battle to unseatthe NCR board, hoping to elect new directors who would removeNCR's recently adopted anti-takeover defenses and allowshareholders to vote on ATandamp;T's $6.1 billion tender offer.   The appeals court decision clears the way for othercompanies to use the tactic just as ATandamp;T did -- by enlistingNew York residents who have owned the target company's stockfor at least five months, or who own a 5% stake, to requestthe list on the bidder's behalf.   NCR had argued that ATandamp;T's use of the law was illegalbecause the New York residents were acting as a go-between tomake a request that ATandamp;T itself couldn't make under the law.NCR also argued that it didn't have to comply with the NewYork law because the company is incorporated in Maryland,which doesn't have a similar law.   The court, however, rejected NCR's arguments. &quot;Nothing inthe arrangement between the {NCR shareholders} and ATandamp;Tcreates a risk of using the statute for an improper purposeor in bad faith,&quot; the appeals court panel said.   The judges also found that in some cases, such as NCR's,in which the shareholder list hasn't been compiled, the NewYork law requires the company to put together such a list.   ---   GATX ORDERED to give full retirement benefits to formerunit's workers.   The federal court decision involves 58 former employees atFuller Co. a former unit of Chicago-based GATX Corp. that wasspun off in a management-led buy out in December 1986.   As part of the transaction, GATX and Fuller forced 58employees to either retire early or give up their lifetimehealth insurance benefits, which were sponsored by GATX. As aresult, 33 Fuller employees retired with reduced pensionswhile another 25, who rejected the offer, lost their lifetimemedical insurance benefits.   In a strongly worded opinion, federal Judge Edward N.Cahn, in Allentown, Pa., characterized reduced benefits as a&quot;subterfuge&quot; strategy calculated to lower the transactionprice by reducing Fuller's employee retirement benefits, aviolation of the federal Employee Retirement Income SecurityAct, or ERISA.   &quot;Federal courts will not countenance tactics such as thoseemployed by GATX in conjunction with the Fuller sale,&quot; thejudge wrote. A GATX spokesman said the company believes ittreated the Fuller employees fairly and is reviewing thedecision.   GATX, one of the nation's largest lessors of rail cars andcommercial aircraft, sold Fuller, Bethlehem, Pa., to F.A.Holding Co. for about $50 million. The group is comprised ofFuller management and New York investor Eli S. Jacobs.   Judge Cahn ordered GATX to pay full pension benefits tothe 33 Fuller employees who retired and to offer retirementand lifetime health insurance to the 25 employees who stayedon. The decision could cost GATX between $3.2 million to $3.9million, said Seymour Traub, whose Allentown, Pa., law firmof Traub, Butz andamp; Fogerty brought the suit on behalf of theemployees and former employees.   &quot;This decision makes it very clear,&quot; Mr. Traub said. &quot;Youshould bend over backwards to make sure employees are takencare of.&quot;   ---   SEC ACCUSES former arbitragers of insider trading.   In federal court in Manhattan, the Securities and ExchangeCommission filed a civil suit against Victor Teicher and RossFrankel, who were convicted in April of insider trading in arelated criminal case. The suit, which involves tradingrelated to several corporate takeovers, also names asdefendants two investment firms owned by Mr. Teicher, VictorTeicher andamp; Co. and Carmel Partners L.P.   The SEC suit asks that Mr. Teicher and his firms beordered to turn over a total of $722,455 in alleged illegaltrading profits from the transactions. The SEC is seeking$8,714 from Mr. Frankel, who worked in the arbitragedepartment of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. The defendantscould also face civil penalties of as much as three times thealleged insider-trading profit.   Attorneys for Mr. Teicher and Mr. Frankel couldn't bereached.   Mr. Teicher of Englewood, N.J., and Mr. Frankel of NewYork were implicated in the &quot;Yuppie Five&quot; case in 1986, inwhich five young Wall Street professionals were charged withtrading on inside information about corporate takeover plans.   Mr. Teicher and Mr. Frankel have not yet been sentenced.   ---   TETRATEC'S ANTITRUST suit against Du Pont can go to trial,judge rules.   Federal Judge Ronald L. Buckwalter, Philadelphia, ruledthat Tetratec Corp.'s suit, filed against Du Pont Co. inMarch 1990, was not barred by the statute of limitations. DuPont had asked the judge to dismiss the suit because it hadnot been filed within four years after Du Pont refused tosell resin, used in making GoreTex fabric, to Tetratec in1984.   Tetratec, Feasterville, Pa., claims that Du Pont had asecret agreement to sell resin to W.L. Gore and AssociatesInc. exclusively, which enabled Gore to maintain a nearmonopoly in the Gore-Tex market. Gerald North, Tetratec'sattorney, claims the damages, tripled under federal law, aremore than $100 million.   Du Pont declined to comment.</TEXT></DOC>