<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911114-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>911114-0085.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS:   Red Menace Alive and Well in Java Museums   ----   By Margot Cohen</HL><DATE>11/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Jakarta, Indonesia -- Communism may be hitting the skids,but for Indonesia, this is no time to relax. Seizing theoffensive against the red menace, Jakarta officials recentlyannounced plans for a Museum of the Extreme Left.   &quot;The idea is to remind the young generation and futuregenerations that this ideology is not fit for the Indonesianpeople and historically always made trouble,&quot; says ArmedForces spokesman Brigadier General Nurhadi Purwosaputro. Intracing Indonesian communism since the Dutch colonial period,this armed forces project &quot;will show to the people how crueland fanatical the communists are.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   The new museum, set to open in November 1992, is thelatest addition to the government's long cultural campaign tokeep anti-communism alive. Having risen to power on the backof communist defeat 26 years ago, President Suharto's NewOrder government has used film, television, textbooks andexhibits to bludgeon its former enemies -- with an eye towardpromoting its own brand of unity and stability. As a result,the red specter continues to grip the public psyche, althoughreal live reds are nowhere to be found.   At the same time, the government has encouraged collectiveamnesia over the murders of hundreds of thousands ofsuspected communist sympathizers in 1965-66, following abotched coup attempt reportedly engineered by the top echelonof the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI). The new museum willmake no reference to the massacre, one of the worst in thiscentury. &quot;Space is limited,&quot; says Mr. Purwosaputro.   Graced with majestic white pillars, the two-story museumwill be erected at Lubang Buaya (Crocodile Hole), once aremote patch of rubber trees near an air base in EastJakarta. This is the site of the deep dry well where coupplotters dumped the bodies of six senior generals in theearly morning hours of Oct. 1, 1965. According to theofficial version of events, three generals were killed intheir homes, while the other three were kidnapped, tortured,then murdered.   The government has already built one anti-communist museumhere, devoted exclusively to the 1965 assassinations. Thanksto multiple mandatory pilgrimages by schoolchildren andMuslim groups, Crocodile Hole had 350,000 visitors last year,far more than any other museum in the capital.   Next to the well, now lavishly framed in marble and teak,visitors crowd around black-and-white photographs of thegenerals' bloated, seemingly mutilated bodies. Theunrecognizable features contrast sharply with the dignifiedportraits fixed above. &quot;Sadists,&quot; clucks a thin young man,moving closer. In a scratchy black-and-white documentary filmshown to school groups, violins wail as the corpses arelifted onto stretchers. Then come the funeral scenes, withlong close-ups of weeping widows.   In the Room for Relics and Other Historical Effects, thetouch is no more subtle. &quot;This bloodstain on the sarong ofGeneral Suprapto is the proof of the cruelty of thecommunists,&quot; reads one plaque. In addition to honoring thegenerals as martyrs, the museum also portrays them as plainfolks so visitors will identify with their plight. Displaysinclude one general's fishing pole (just a replica, says thesign).   The room gives particular prominence to the personaleffects of 5-year-old Ade Nasution, the coup attempt'stiniest victim. Her father, General A.H. Nasution, managed tojump over a back wall to safety during the raid on his house,but Ade was mortally wounded. Youngsters hover over her pinknightie, little doll and blue comb.   Where documentation is lacking, dioramas do the trick.Behind a clear glass panel, a miniature general staggersthrough his dining room, blood streaming from bullet holesand smudging the floor. For drama on a larger scale,Crocodile Hole offers the Torturing Veranda, a one-room waxmuseum. Communists wave razors and sickles at two of thegenerals, as blood drips onto their pajamas. When thecustodian remembers to flick the switch, the scene isanimated by voices shouting &quot;Kill] Kill]&quot; and &quot;Feel thisrazor]&quot; punctuated by evil laughter and drumbeats.   It's a dramatic presentation, but not strictly factual.For starters, the generals were never tortured, according toofficial autopsy reports published abroad in 1987. Thedisfigurement shown in the photos resulted from 75 hours oftropical decay. The photos may also have been doctored by theCentral Intelligence Agency, if former agent Ralph McGeheecan be believed.   Second, the museum carefully downplays the military's rolein the coup attempt. While one diorama points out that thePKI succeeded in infiltrating the armed forces, visitors canglide through Crocodile Hole blissfully unaware that soldiersfrom a dissident army division in Central Java actuallycarried out the assasinations, with the air force commanderin on the plot. Even if they were recruited by the PKI, theserebels had their own motives to resent the top army brass,some Western scholars have argued.   The sticky issue of armed forces disunity also confrontsthe creators of the Museum of the Extreme Left. Inillustrating the 1948 Madiun Affair, a bloody PKI power grabin East Java, armed forces historians are sure to display thephotos of hundreds of corpses left in its wake. It seems lesscertain, however, that the exhibit will explain thatpro-communist military officers &quot;were able to stampede mostof the PKI organization on Java into an ill-coordinated andpoorly executed revolt.&quot; Such is the view of CornellUniversity historian George McTurnan Kahin, who received acitation from the New Order this year for his outstandingwork in Indonesian studies.   Unfortunately, details about the new museum's contents andprice tag are not forthcoming. To get a sense of what's instore, Mr. Purwosaputro advises a trip to the Museum of theExtreme Right, an earlier armed forces endeavor that focuseson Muslim separatists who have fought for an Islamic state.While Indonesia boasts more Muslims than any other nation --they make up 90% of the citizens of this country, the world'sfifth most populous -- Islam is only one of five officiallysanctioned religions.   Like its Crocodile Hole counterpart, this museum has amusty Mao-thought feel to it, starting with its formal name,the Museum of Awareness of the Limitations of Power, astranslated from the Old Javanese. Its halls of dioramas arenot quite as arresting as those starring the reds, but someinteresting tidbits emerge. Visitors read, for example, thatthe Darul Islam group &quot;disseminated political propagandathat, in most cases, was not in accordance with Moslemreligious training. People who were categorised as beingheretics were those who drank tea and coffee, especially withsugar.&quot;   This museum also appears to suffer from historical lapses.One diorama asserts that only a &quot;small portion of the Acehpeople&quot; supported a separatist rebellion in 1953, whenhistorical accounts of that period state that the peasantryin this northern province almost universally backed themovement. The subject remains a sensitive one today, as thegovernment attempts to eradicate popular support for a small,violent separatist group fighting for a &quot;free Aceh.&quot;   Some Indonesian scholars feel queasy over the notion ofseparate museums for communists and Muslim separatists. &quot;Interms of the interpretation of process in history, there isno extreme left or extreme right,&quot; says AbdurrachmanSurjomihardjo, former chairman of the Indonesian Associationof Historians. &quot;The concept is static.&quot;   Striding from the pages of history, Gen. Nasution alsotakes a dim view of the didactic approach. Having overseenthe surrender of Muslim separatists and escaped the bulletsof coup plotters, the 73-year-old general believes thatIndonesian youth need a more complete understanding of theirnation's past. &quot;In Indonesia, we are short on facts and longon interpretation,&quot; he sighs. &quot;Let the new generationinterpret it themselves.&quot;   ---   Ms. Cohen is a Jakarta-based journalist.</TEXT></DOC>