<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900830-0071</DOCNO><DOCID>900830-0071.</DOCID><HL>   The U.N., a Wobbly House of Cards   ----   By Alan L. Keyes</HL><DATE>08/30/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><CO>   MDEST FORGN FREST LATAM AFRIC</CO><LP>   In the days since Iraq invaded Kuwait, the United Nationshas acted with greater promptitude and cohesion than at anytime since the Korean War. Within 48 hours the U.N. SecurityCouncil issued a resolution condemning the invasion,demanding that Iraq withdraw, and invoking comprehensiveChapter VII sanctions. Even more striking is the most recentresolution authorizing member states to use minimal force toenforce the sanctions. Even rogue states like Libya, Syriaand Iran have supported the U.N. actions and declared thatthey will respect them. Armed with this universal solidarity,the U.N. secretary general will meet with Iraq's foreignminister today, leading some to hope that the U.N. willprovide an escape route from war.   It is probably fair to say that the U.N. has never beforein its history looked more like the peacekeeping,order-preserving institution it is supposed to be. Manyobservers ascribe this to the apparent end of the Cold War.There has certainly been an unprecedented degree of Sovietcooperation with the Security Council's actions. But thesuperpower conflict hasn't been the only, or, in many cases,the main, obstacle to an effective U.N. response to regionalthreats to peace.</LP><TEXT>   In fact, the Korean War is a good example of a tough U.N.response against the wishes of the Soviet Union. Of course,at the time the U.S. dominated the world scene. This nation'srelative power combined with the strong support of WesternEurope and the Latin American countries to give us an almostautomatic majority in the U.N. bodies. In the Korean casethis led to circumstances in which we could even circumventthe Soviet veto on the Security Council.   As Europe's colonial empires in Africa and Asia collapsed,however, U.S. domination of the U.N. gave way to dominationby a new majority composed mainly of developing countries --the so-called Third World. This majority has since determinedthe issues that dominated the U.N.'s political agenda. Twocomponents of the majority, the Africans and the Arab states,proved most effective at promoting their preoccupations,South Africa and Israel, to the top of the U.N. agenda.Beyond these regionally determined priorities, ananti-colonial and leftist ideological thrust superficiallyunited the Third World majority. This gave the Soviets someadvantages in advancing their anti-Western agenda throughU.N. institutions.   To see how destructively this arrangement has worked, ithelps to look at the numbers. A Heritage Foundation review ofvoting patterns during the U.N.'s 44th General Assembly(September-December 1989) shows that the rest of the worldvoted the same way the U.S. did an average of only 17% of thetime. The average overall coincidence of voting with theSoviet Union for these countries was by contrast 95%. OnMiddle East questions, the rate was about the same. Some 94%of U.N. members supported resolutions 44/40 A and 44/42,which condemned Israel for being &quot;terrorist&quot; and &quot;aggressive&quot;and called for Israeli withdrawal from &quot;occupiedterritories.&quot;   Long before last fall, once it became clear that we couldno longer dominate its decisions, the U.S. ceased to take theU.N.'s politics seriously. It seemed easier for us to use ourgreat power unilaterally, or to take advantage of thesuperiority in bilateral relations that our global economicdominance made possible.   As a result, the U.N. ceased to be a viable instrument forpursuing U.S. policy goals. Yet the Third World majority thatdominated its decisions had no effective power to translatedecision into action outside the U.N. In this sense thegreat-power veto on the Security Council merely reflectsreality. Without involvement and support from the greatpowers, the U.N. can't do much more than talk. The necessarybut not sufficient condition of its effectiveness is thesupport, indeed the leadership, of a nation powerful enoughto add meaningful economic and political muscle to itsactions. The Third World majority can provide the chassis forthe U.N. vehicle. The great powers, and especially the U.S.,must provide the engine.   The U.N.'s remarkably cohesive response to Iraq'saggression reflects a set of circumstances that have at leasttemporarily pushed aside the factors that have rendered theU.N. impotent. In the context of the Soviet Union's apparentcollapse in the Cold War competition, the U.S. has, for themoment, emerged again in a position of undisputed globalpreeminence.   Iraq's invasion of Kuwait posed an immediate threat toSaudi Arabia, whose wealth and quiet political skills havemade it a very influential player among Arab countries. Othertraditional or more moderate Arab regimes (Egypt and Morocco,for example) also feel the shadow of this threat, while theleaders of the radical states (such as Libya and Syria) don'twant to see Saddam Hussein achieve the Nasserite position ofdominance in Arab politics that will result if his bold moveagainst Kuwait succeeds. Given Iraq's regional militarydominance, and the Soviet Union's current weakness, the U.S.represented the only power with the wherewithal to respond toIraq's move in time to forestall an Iraqi takeover of SaudiArabia.   A combination of regional self-interest and U.S. readinesshave created an opportunity to fashion a coalition of supportfor prompt, and even forceful, U.N. action. The Soviets arein no position to oppose this coalition (which has some ofthe same elements as the one that repeatedly secured passageof resolutions in the General Assembly against the Sovietinvasion of Afghanistan). In fact, since a prolonged crisisin the Gulf will increase U.S. eagerness for continued goodrelations, the Soviets have an interest in encouraginginternational action -- with the U.S. in the lead role. Giventhe importance of Middle Eastern oil to their economies, theEuropeans and the Japanese clearly have an important stake inmaking sure that supplies are not disrupted, or permanentlycontrolled, by an Arab power less susceptible to theirinfluence than the Arab monarchies.   It would be a mistake to believe that the U.N.'s abilityto deal with the Gulf situation means that the organizationitself has suddenly overcome its inherent structural andpolitical deficiencies. The organization is not a catalyst oragent of events, it is more like a barometer. Its presentrole reflects a certain state of existing interests and powerrelations in the world. At the moment, those interests andrelations have allowed the U.S. to reassert the strongleadership role that allowed the U.N. to take decisive actionin the early years of its existence. What we are witnessingtherefore tells us more about the current pre-eminence of theU.S. than it does about the U.N.   Even with that insight, we should be wary of concludingthat the U.N. has now become a routinely reliable instrumentfor U.S. policy. The self-interest of certain Arab statescombined with our readiness and Soviet weakness have made thecurrent moment possible. The key factor, in U.N. terms, ismajority support in the Arab bloc. Even in the present crisisit is not hard to envisage a change in that support overtime. If Saddam Hussein can foment anti-American,anti-Western feeling among the Arab masses, this might weakenthe resolve of the vulnerable moderate and traditionalgovernments that are the core of the coalition that supportsour presence and forceful action in the region. Weakness atthe Arab core would give rise to European vacillation anddoubtless affect the Soviets' calculations about the wisdomof being too positive in their cooperation with theinternational effort built around U.S. power.   We should also bear in mind that at some point thissituation may become the precedent for actions less consonantwith U.S. interests than at present. Will we someday findourselves called upon to acquiesce in an effort built aroundSoviet military power (which still exists, by the way,despite current Soviet preoccupations that discourage itsuse), aimed at South Africa or Israel, with an African ormore radical Arab majority at its core? The U.N. remains ahighly politicized arena, in which -- for the moment --global and regional circumstances favor our leadership.Circumstances can change, however. Rather than betting onnaive theories about a fundamental reform of the U.N.'s weakcharacter, we should constantly remember that there can be nosubstitute for our own prudence, diplomacy and decisiveness.   ---   Mr. Keyes, president of Citizens Against Government Waste,served as assistant secretary of state for U.N. Affairs from1985 to 1987.</TEXT></DOC>