<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910124-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>910124-0012.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>01/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   U.S. OFFICIALS SAID they are intensifying the airoffensive against Iraq's army.   Senior American defense officials said allied forces havebegun focusing their air attacks on Baghdad's hunkered-downarmy in Kuwait and southern Iraq. Defense Secretary DickCheney and Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs ofStaff, claimed the allies have gained air superioritythroughout the war zone. For the second day, Iraq fired off adouble-barreled volley of Scud missiles at Saudi Arabia andIsrael. At least four missiles, one in northern Israel andthree over Saudi Arabia, were intercepted by U.S.-madePatriot defense missiles, officials said.</LP><TEXT>   U.S. armored troops skirmished with Iraqis along SaudiArabia's northern border. The Americans captured six Iraqisand suffered two slight casualties, according to the U.S.command.   ---   PANICKED SOVIETS BESIEGED banks following a governmentcurrency decree.   Many demanded an explanation of the confiscatory decree byGorbachev that withdraws 50-ruble and 100-ruble banknotesfrom circulation and permits Soviets to change only a limitedpart of their cash into smaller denominations. Savings-bankaccounts were frozen, with Soviets allowed to take out nomore than 500 rubles a month. Officials hope the steps willcurb inflation and lower black-market prices. In Washington,the head of the World Bank said Soviet membership in theorganization is no longer being considered.   Soviet troops seized a newspaper warehouse in Lithuaniaand the republic's president told Gorbachev that he shouldorder security forces to withdraw from all occupiedbuildings.   ---   A Chinese people's court put on trial Wang Dan, themost-wanted student leader of the 1989 pro-democracy movementthat was crushed by Communist authorities. Wang, 23, is atleast the 25th activist to be tried or sentenced this monthin China. He has been imprisoned for 19 months.   ---   Manhattan's federal appeals court ruled that newspaperscan be held responsible for running ads that violate the U.S.Fair Housing Act. A suit, filed in 1989, had accused the NewYork Times of running real-estate ads that almost exclusivelyfeatured white models and that communicated a &quot;whites only&quot;message.   ---   A federal study indicated that chemical plant workers'prolonged or extensive exposure to dioxin can increase therisk of cancer. However, the study left open the question ofcancer risk for low levels of exposure.   ---   The Utah Senate passed a tough new anti-abortion bill thatRepublican Gov. Bangerter has vowed he will sign despite alegal battle promised by abortion-rights advocates. Thelegislation, approved 23-5, now goes to the House for a vote.   ---   Fathers who smoke have a higher risk of having childrenwith brain cancer and leukemia, suggesting that smoking mighthave damaged the fathers' sperm, researchers said. In aseparate study, doctors found that children whose parentssmoke are three to four times more likely to developinfectious diseases requiring hospitalization.   ---   Bush accorded Mongolia most-favored-nation trade status,praising the democratic and economic changes occurring in theonce-Communist state. He disclosed the step in Washingtonafter meeting with President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, thefirst Mongolian head of state ever to visit the U.S. Mongoliaheld its first free elections in July.   ---   Hundreds of Tamil rebels shot or hacked to death 29 peoplein Sri Lanka, mostly women and children, in a raid on ajungle village, officials said. They quoted survivors assaying female guerrillas led the attack. The ethnic Tamilsare fighting for a separate homeland in the island nation,accusing the majority Sinhalese of discrimination.   ---   Rwandan forces and rebels battled for control of adistrict capital, and France sent troops to evacuateforeigners caught up in the fighting. Diplomats in Rwandasaid that between 400 and 600 insurgents, remnants of a forcethat first attacked the central African country in October,had invaded on Tuesday from neighboring Uganda.   ---   Greece has sent home 3,000 Albanians who crossed theborder illegally in the past few days, the Communist Party'snewspaper said. Greek officials said those returning weredoing so voluntarily, and Albania has pledged not to punishthe refugees. Separately, Albania and China agreed to renewrelations after a 15-year estrangement.   ---   The leader of Barbados easily won a second five-year termin parliamentary balloting. President Erskine Sandiford, aproponent of Caribbean economic integration, has beencritical of the U.S. government for what he regards asrestrictive trade barriers, including sugar import quotas.   ---   Colombia announced it would pardon about 2,000 members ofthree leftist guerrilla groups if they agree to lay downtheir weapons. The offer doesn't pertain to the two largestrebel groups, the ELN and the FARC, which are pressing theirattacks. The ELN was said to be linked to a blast yesterdayat Colombia's main oil pipeline.</TEXT></DOC>