<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910515-0011</DOCNO><DOCID>910515-0011.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>05/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   BUSH NOMINATED Robert Gates to become director of centralintelligence.   Gates, currently deputy national security adviser, is acareer intelligence officer and one of the president'sclosest aides. Administration officials had long consideredhim the logical choice to succeed CIA chief Webster, who saidlast week that he is resigning. The only apparent doubt aboutwhether Bush would choose Gates arose from concern about hisconduct during the Iran-Contra affair, when Gates was deputyto CIA director Casey.</LP><TEXT>   Four years ago, congressional questioning about theIran-Contra scandal compelled Gates to drop his name fromconsideration for the top CIA job.   ---   WINNIE MANDELA RECEIVED a six-year prison sentence inJohannesburg.   Convicted a day earlier on charges of kidnapping andaccessory to assault, the wife of South African black leaderNelson Mandela will remain free on bail during an appealprocess, which could take a year. The sentencing judge toldMrs. Mandela she lacked remorse and compassion. NelsonMandela said that he believes in his wife's innocence andexpects her name to be cleared in court.   South Africa's Archbishop Tutu said he was shocked by theseverity of the sentence but said it was &quot;not fatal&quot; to theanti-apartheid movement.   ---   A crowded tourist train slammed head-on into a local trainnear Kyoto, Japan, killing 42 people and injuring 415 othersin the nation's worst rail accident since 1963. Somepassengers were trapped inside crushed train cars for hours.The cause of the crash wasn't known, but railway officialssuspected a signaling malfunction.   ---   The U.N.'s Perez de Cuellar said his envoys in Baghdadwere negotiating to set up a lightly armed U.N. police forceof 400 to 500 men to protect Kurdish refugees in northernIraq. But he said that U.N. and Iraqi officials hadn't yetreached an agreement on establishing the U.N. force.   ---   Baker apparently failed to get a firm commitment fromJordan to engage in peace talks with Israel. After meeting inAmman with King Hussein, the secretary of state traveledyesterday to Israel, where he met with three Palestinianleaders.   ---   Queen Elizabeth II was welcomed to the White House by Bushas the 65-year-old British monarch began a 12-day trip to theU.S. that also will take her to Florida, Texas and Kentucky.The queen's last visit to Washington occurred in 1976, theyear of the U.S. bicentennial celebration.   ---   The FDA expanded its offensive against misleading foodlabels, demanding that three companies take no-cholesterolclaims off their bottles of high-fat corn oil and canola oil.The agency notified Procter andamp; Gamble, CPC International andGreat Foods of America that their labels are misleading anddeceptive.   ---   A federal judge criticized the U.S. government for failingto disclose all that it knew about alleged Army dumping oftoxic waste at Love Canal and ordered that all related courtdocuments be made public. The dumping transformed an areanear Niagara Falls, N.Y., into a ghost town in the 1970s.   ---   An inquiry was authorized by the Senate Ethics Committee'sleadership into a series of large gifts and personal loansfrom private individuals to Oregon Sen. Hatfield, the rankingRepublican on the Senate Appropriations Committee. Hatfieldhas repeatedly denied that any of the transactions influencedhis judgment as a legislator.   ---   The Urban Institute released a study showing that racialdiscrimination in employment is still widespread in the U.S.After sending pairs of young black and white men to apply for476 entry-level jobs, the Washington think tank found thatthe blacks were three times as likely as whites to facediscrimination.   ---   Nepal's interim premier quit after losing his legislativeseat in Sunday's multiparty election -- the first in threedecades. King Birendra accepted Bhattarai's resignation butasked him to remain as caretaker leader until a newgovernment is formed.   ---   An Alabama man became the first person in the U.S.sentenced to death under a federal capital punishment lawaimed at drug-trafficking violence. A judge in Birminghamordered the execution of David Ronald Chandler, described asthe head of a marijuana ring. The judge didn't say how orwhen the sentence should be carried out.   ---   The Red Cross offered to mediate any Lebanese-Israelihostage swap that might also free Westerners but said theagency couldn't initiate talks. A delegate in Lebanon for theInternational Committee of the Red Cross was reacting to aMuslim cleric's proposal that bodies of Israeli soldiers betraded for Lebanese held by Israel.   ---   A protester's burial was canceled in South Korea afterriot troops used clubs and tear gas to block tens ofthousands of mourners trying to march to Seoul's City Hall.Demonstrators said they would try again to hold funeral ritesfor Kang Kyung Dae, a 20-year-old student who was beaten todeath by police April 26.</TEXT></DOC>