<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910412-0119</DOCNO><DOCID>910412-0119.</DOCID><HL>   Bush vs. Saddam -- The Final Round   ----   By Fred C. Ikle</HL><DATE>04/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)</RE><LP>   The news from Iraq is bad. After the brilliant militaryvictory, a colossal human tragedy is emerging that isbringing the U.S. to the edge of a political defeat. For itis the human dimension, we all know, that shapes the verdictof history. But don't despair; the great victory in the Gulfwar -- now looking so tattered and tarnished -- can yet besaved.   The dynamics of the situation will soon force a change.Within days, the United Nations will be compelled toimplement a massive intervention in Iraq's internal affairs,under the term of its cease-fire. If the U.N. fails, it willbecome irrelevant as the League of Nations did in the 1930s.As day follows night, the U.N. will thus move into everexpanding confrontations and conflicts with Saddam Husseinand his remaining military forces. Either Saddam Hussein willwin by destroying the credibility and influence of the U.N.,or he will finally make his last mistake.</LP><TEXT>   Between the invasion of Kuwait last August and the end ofthe Gulf war, many brave souls inside and outside the U.S.government worried about clever stratagems that SaddamHussein might employ to defeat the U.S. What if he split thecoalition by making enticing offers? What if he draggedIsrael into the war? What if he inflicted heavy casualties?What if he suddenly withdrew from Kuwait to save his hugearmy and then built nuclear weapons -- as Lenin saved hisBolshevik regime by surrendering a third of Russia to theGermans in the Brest-Litovsk treaty? Well, Saddam Hussein maybe twice as brutal as Lenin, but he is only one-tenth assmart.   George Bush, by contrast, developed a coherent strategy toliberate Kuwait; backed up his diplomacy with a war plan thatprovided for sufficient force to achieve a clear militaryobjective; obtained at every step the endorsement not only ofAmerica's allies but -- miraculously -- also of the U.N.Security Council; secured public support at home and theconsent of a divided, reluctant Congress; wisely leftmilitary campaigns and tactics to his commanders; and fendedoff a last minute attempt by Mikhail Gorbachev to turn Iraqinto a Soviet protectorate.   Now, for the coming final round in &quot;Bush vs. Saddam,&quot; Icertainly wouldn't place my bets on the half-witted Butcherof Baghdad.   To be sure, many critics now fear President Bush haswalked away from this final round, leaving Iraq a vastdisaster area, like an abandoned Chernobyl reactor, andcondemning Kurds and Shiites to choose between permanentrefugee camps, prison or death. Even if the president wantedto, he could not walk away from Iraq's internal affairs. Notwithout destroying the U.N., and thus destroying any chanceof success for his Middle East peace diplomacy; not withoutinscribing &quot;his&quot; Gulf war on the same tablet as WoodrowWilson's League of Nations and Lyndon Johnson's war inVietnam.   Saddam Hussein will, of course, try to turn America'svictory into a Pyrrhic one. In an hour-long speech on March16, he praised political pluralism, democracy and Iraq'sfuture contribution to stability in the Middle East. He wasappealing, it seems, to Washington's interest in some balanceamong Iran, Iraq and Syria; to Ankara's concern about turmoilon Turkey's southern border; and perhaps to friendly Germanarms merchants who would again want to do business with him.But then he hurled at his neighbors and at the world at largeacts of mass cruelty that compelled Ankara and London, Tehranand Paris, Bonn and -- yes -- Washington, to recognize thatone's own moral integrity is more important than Iraq'sterritorial integrity.   Even though the Bush administration's response to the newchallenge has been mysteriously slow and inept, SaddamHussein's most recent depredations have killed his lastchance to plead for &quot;magnanimity in victory,&quot; or to posturehimself as the &quot;lesser evil,&quot; who would, at least, give usthe blessings of &quot;stability&quot; in Iraq. He also prevented hisfew remaining supporters in the U.N. from diluting the toughcease-fire terms.   Now the U.N. is committed to implementing the destructionof all of Iraq's chemical and biological weapons,longer-range ballistic missiles, and nuclear materials andcomponents. And once Iraq is permitted to resume oil exports,it must contribute part of its earnings to aU.N.-administered fund for reparations to Kuwait and othervictims of its aggression. It is most implausible that SaddamHussein could survive as Iraq's dictator and comply withthese terms. To become a law-abiding ward of the U.N. is tooalien to his mindset, too contrary to the thuggery that hishenchmen are forced to practice.   When Saddam Hussein is told to hand to the U.N. a list ofall his prohibited weapons as a first step in complying withthe ceasefire, he might well respond by arguing: (1) Iraqnever had any of these weapons, (2) if it had, Americanbombing raids have destroyed every one of them, and (3) ifthere were remaining weapons, all records have been burned byKurdish terrorists. But he will not refrain from using morebrutal ways as well to obstruct the implementation of theU.N. directives. We should expect unexplained disappearancesof U.N. arms control inspectors, crashes (blamed on Kurds) ofU.N. helicopters looking for hidden chemical weapons, and thekilling of thousands of Iraqi soldiers, scientists andtechnicians who might reveal the location of prohibitedweaponry.   Saddam Hussein may not realize it, but as he begins toobstruct, violate and sabotage the U.N. implementation of theceasefire agreement, he must take on not just somebureaucrats at U.N. headquarters and the U.N. flag. He musttake on George Bush and Old Glory. Since Mr. Bush has justsucceeded in turning the U.N. into a useful instrument forenhancing world order, he can't let Saddam Hussein steal hissuccess. Moreover, the president will depend on the U.N. &quot;toput an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict,&quot; a key policy goalhe announced after Desert Storm.   Nearly all suggestions for the Arab-Israeli conflict callfor territorial concessions by Israel in exchange forinternationally guaranteed security arrangements -- the&quot;territory for peace&quot; principle to which the presidentreferred. How could the U.S. ever help to promote such a dealif it permitted Iraq to violate the U.N. cease-fire terms?Since the U.S. achieved total military dominance over theIraqi forces and now plays a leading role in the U.N., theconditions for enforcing U.N. prohibitions on armaments areoptimal. If international security guarantees were to fail inthis instance, the deal that could be offered to Israel wouldno longer be &quot;territory for peace,&quot; but territory for aworthless U.N. document.   Senior administration officials are saying that the DesertStorm victory opened &quot;a window of opportunity&quot; for U.S. peaceefforts in the Arab-Israeli conflict. For this to be true,Saddam Hussein must not be allowed to slam the window shut.   Five weeks ago, in his triumphant speech to Congress,President Bush said that &quot;our commitment to peace in theMiddle East does not end with the liberation of Kuwait.&quot;Indeed, it does not. The U.S. is committed to support theU.N., and the U.N. is now committed to inserting itselfdeeply into the internal affairs of Iraq. The success orfailure of this endeavor will largely determine the prospectsfor peace in the Middle East. It will also determine thefinal winner in the contest between George Bush and SaddamHussein.   ---   Mr. Ikle, now with the Center for Strategic andamp;International Studies in Washington, D.C., was Undersecretaryof Defense in the Reagan Defense Department.</TEXT></DOC>