<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900705-0091</DOCNO><DOCID>900705-0091.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Chemical-Weapons Agreement With Soviets Spurs   Discord as Senators Contend It Should Be a Treaty   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- When is a treaty not a treaty?   That is the sticky political and legal question the Bushadministration is encountering as it prepares to ask Congressto approve the agreements signed by President Bush and Sovietleader Mikhail Gorbachev at last month's summit meeting. Theway the question is answered is far more than a matter oflegal arcana; it could set precedents for a whole series ofhistoric U.S.-Soviet agreements likely to be wrapped up inthe next few years.</LP><TEXT>   Contrary to general perceptions at the summit, theadministration isn't treating the most important deals Mr.Bush and Mr. Gorbachev signed -- a pact to eliminate chemicalweapons and a trade agreement -- as formal treaties, whichwould require ratification by two-thirds of the Senate. Thatprocess often has resulted in amendments and reservationsthat then require further negotiations. Instead, thechemical-weapons and trade accords are to be treated asexecutive agreements, which can be approved by resolutionsbacked by simple majorities of the House and Senate.   And that already is generating spats between Congress andthe White House -- and between the two houses of Congressitself.   Prominent senators from both parties -- including 18 ofthe 19 members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee --have formally protested that the decision not to treat thechemical-arms deal as a treaty robs them of theirconstitutional ratification rights. &quot;We must be unequivocalabout the imperative that significant internationalagreements take treaty form,&quot; declare Foreign RelationsCommittee Chairman Claiborne Pell, a Rhode Island Democrat,and ranking Republican Jesse Helms of North Carolina in ajoint letter to Mr. Bush.   And Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.) warns that failing toallow the Senate to ratify the deal would be &quot;a seriouspolitical mistake.&quot;   There isn't the same kind of dispute over the treatment ofthe trade pact. Under American trade law and tradition, suchbilateral trade deals are treated as executive agreements andsubmitted to both the House and the Senate for simplemajority approval.   But there's a related problem with the trade pact. Bushadministration officials contend, and many in Congressconcur, that for technical reasons the current process forapproving trade deals is unconstitional because theresolutions of approval aren't sent to the president forsignature. So, although the White House says it doesn'tintend to do so, some administration lawyers contendPresident Bush could put the trade deal into effect withoutapproval unless Congress passes pending legislation to fixthe system.   That legislation seems likely to clear Congress soon. Butif it doesn't, the question of what sort of congressionalapproval is legally necessary could still emerge as adebating point when the trade deal is submitted for approval,probably later this year. That would be particularlyimportant if Congress remains angry over Mr. Gorbachev'streatment of Lithuania and continues threatening to block thetrade deal in retaliation.   For now, the more politically charged debate is on thechemical-arms deal, which requires an end to production ofchemical weapons and destruction of a large share of existingstockpiles. The question of whether such a pact is a treatyor not is a murky area of constitutional law, leaving muchopen to presidential discretion.   The White House doesn't consider the pact a full-blowntreaty because it is supposed to be just an &quot;interim&quot; steptoward a broader, multinational accord banning chemicalweapons world-wide, says C. Boyden Gray, the president'scounsel. In addition, administration aides contend, the Househas been particularly active on chemical-weapons issues andshouldn't be cut out of the approval process, as it would bein a Senate treaty ratification.   But many in Congress suspect that other, long-rangepolitical considerations also are behind the administration'scalculation.   Persuading two-thirds of the Senate's 100 members toratify a formal treaty without them first tacking on theirown amendments and reservations has proven to be a tough jobin recent years. So some suspect that the administration'shandling of the chemical-weapons deal, which even Sen. Bidensays probably would get the two-thirds Senate support, may beintended in part to set a pattern of approving some armsaccords through resolutions requiring only a simple majority-- an important point at a time when six arms deals with theSoviets could be completed in coming years.   &quot;It's such an epic struggle to get a treaty through theSenate that if you're going to go ahead on a pragmatic basisyou're going to have to go more to the executive agreement,&quot;says Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), a leading Democrat on theHouse Foreign Affairs Committee.   In fact, there is some historical precedent for treatingarms pacts this way. The SALT I strategic-arms accord alsowasn't ratified as a treaty but rather approved by bothhouses as an executive agreement. Under President Nixon, asnow, the White House argued that the pact was merely an&quot;interim accord&quot; leading to a broader SALT II agreement --which also never was ratified by the Senate because of theinvasion of Afghanistan.   As if to underscore the problem with getting treatiesratified, Mr. Bush has just sent to the Senate forratification two lesspublicized agreements he signed with Mr.Gorbachev at the summit, which detail how to verify limits onunderground nuclear explosions. Those agreements are designedto finally win ratification of two nuclear-testing accordswith the Soviets, which have been lying unratified for 14years.   House members would love to see arms deals treated asexecutive agreements because they are cut out of the actionin a Senate treaty-ratification process. As a result, someintracongressional sniping has broken out between Housemembers and senators over the handling of the chemicalarmspact.   Recently, Secretary of State James Baker appeared beforethe Senate Foreign Relations Committee and was chided fordeclining to submit the chemical-weapons pact as a treaty.Sen. Biden, in particular, argued that the deal issignificant because it would commit the U.S. to banproduction of an entire class of weapons, and thereforeshould be treated as a &quot;serious and significant&quot; treaty.   The next morning, Mr. Baker appeared before the HouseForeign Affairs Committee, and Rep. Dante Fascell (D., Fla.),the panel's chairman, immediately argued against his Senatecolleagues. He implored the administration to continuetreating the deal as an executive agreement and evendeclared: &quot;I congratulate the administration for sending thisup as an executive agreement.&quot;   The House should play a role in approval because onchemical arms &quot;there's been a debate going on in Congress forthe last eight or nine years in which the House has beenintimately involved,&quot; Rep. Fascell says in an interview.Besides, he adds, the decision of whether to call the pact atreaty or an executive agreement &quot;is purely a politicaldecision. Both have equal effect in law.&quot;   And in fact, there aren't any hard and fast rules todistinguish between a treaty and an executive agreement. Suchambiguity about the constitutional rights of Congress is&quot;always the case in foreign afffairs,&quot; says Louis Fisher, aspecialist on executive and legislative powers at the Libraryof Congress. &quot;Whenever it gets gray, that means theinstitutions have to be alert to their own powers, and ifthey think they're being infringed, then to fight back.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>