<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900806-0135</DOCNO><DOCID>900806-0135.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Why So Many U.S. Errors in the Mideast?   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>08/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><CO>   MDEST EUROP</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PETROLEUM (PET)</IN><LP>   When Saddam Hussein seized Kuwait Thursday morning, theworld quickly turned to the U.S. for leadership in dealingwith the crisis. The measure of trust reflected in that makesit all the more poignant that the U.S. has such limited meansfor restoring the status quo ante in Kuwait and punishing theIraqi tyrant for his outrageous act.   To be sure, it was something of a feat for the U.S. to soquickly organize a wide-ranging trade boycott and freeze ofIraq's foreign assets, plus suspensions of arms shipments tothat country. But asset freezes and trade boycotts are adubious way of dealing with tyrants. The one results inincredible legal tangles that hurt both sides. The other ishard to enforce when it involves oil, a much sought-aftercommodity that cannot easily be traced to its origins. Thereare many holes to plug.</LP><TEXT>   If the boycott fails, nothing happens. If it hassignificant success, it might cost the West far more inhigher oil prices than it would cost Saddam Hussein in lostrevenues. His refusal to pay foreign debts would add to thecost. It's the old cutting-off-your-nose-to-spite-your-faceproblem.   President Bush is threatening military action if Husseinpresses his campaign into Saudi Arabia, but the Iraqifreebooter probably has judged his ground carefully. The Westhas little prospect for deploying enough forces to overwhelma 1 million-man Iraqi army. Punishing Iraq with air powerprobably involves risking a U.S. aircraft carrier in thePersian Gulf against a sizable Iraqi air force equipped withExocet missiles. Winning permission from the Saudis or theArab emirates to base strike aircraft on their soil facestheir usual ambivalence over whether the U.S. is a reliableprotector. A blockade would require Persian Gulf militaryaction and the interruption of oil flows through pipelinespassing through Turkey and Saudi Arabia.   Saddam also can be expected to display further cleverness.He now may pull some troops out of Kuwait and claim that hehas met world-wide demands. He learned from the Soviets inAfghanistan and from the Vietnamese in Cambodia thatwithdrawing troops is not the same as surrendering control.He has installed his own puppet government in Kuwait and willrun it from Baghdad.   What friends does the West have in the area? Turkey andIsrael, of course. But they too have recent cause forreservations about the reliability of their western allies.After the Iraqi move last week, the initial Israeli statementwas that it would retaliate if attacked. That hardly neededsaying other than to possibly convey the meaning that Israelintends to sit this one out if it isn't attacked. TheIsraelis also couldn't resist saying, &quot;we told you so,&quot; toall those critics in the West who lately have been carping attheir &quot;intransigence&quot; toward the Arabs. They wondered whetherIraq, by attacking another Arab country, now has demonstratedto everyone's satisfaction that it, not Israel, is thegreatest threat to Mideast peace.   The Turks, for their part, are the stepchildren of NATO,welcome to help defend the West if they can find the weapons,but too &quot;different&quot; to merit membership in the best clubs,such as the European Community. If they are asked to helppull the West's chestnuts out of the fire through suchhostile acts as shutting down Iraq's pipeline across Turkeyor basing a NATO attack force on Turkish soil, they couldjustifiably demand better future treatment.   Democrats in Congress and press critics are flogging theBush administration for its failure to foresee the Iraqistrike. This time, some flogging is deserved. Having beenembarrassed by a tyrant it had assiduously courted with tradesubsidies, the administration attempted an alibi, saying thatSaddam's move was unexpected. In fact, few knockout puncheshave been better telegraphed. London's Economist, amongothers, had called the invasion a near-certainty a weekbefore it happened. Columnist William Safire had beenscreaming at the top of his lungs about the attempt to cozyup to a man with such a long and bloody record of treachery.   There is plenty of blame to go around, however. IfCongress was more prescient than the administration it wasn'tevident while it was whacking away at the defense budget justbefore Saddam made his move. Indeed, it was whacking the verythings, such as the B-2 Stealth bomber, the C-17 airlifterand a forward air base at Crotone, Italy, that would be mostuseful in dealing with a war in the Middle East.   Such confusion is hardly new. U.S. policy in the MiddleEast has been schizoid for years. In part, this is becausethere is no area of the world where U.S. foreign policy hasbeen subject to a greater number of competing domesticpolitical pressures. U.S. politicians have so often givenTurkey the back of their hands, for example, because oflobbying from powerful anti-Turkish Greek and Armenianlobbies in the U.S.   While the U.S. has had a longstanding special relationshipwith Israel and has invested large sums in Israel's security,U.S. politics have mirrored the dove-hawk debate in Israelitself. The fiasco that ultimately resulted from Israel's1982 invasion and then withdrawal from Lebanon, leaving thatcountry a permanent abattoir presided over by Syria, was adirect result of policy divisions in the U.S. and Israel.   Before that came the Carter administration's abandonmentof the Shah of Iran, another U.S. friend in the region, aftera revolutionary campaign against the shah had stirred loudsympathetic echoes from the American left. President Carter,of course, paid for that mistake with the hostage crisis. TheReagan administration's effort -- by means of Israel andunorthodox methods -- to reopen contact with Iran explodedinto the Iran-Contra affair, one of the most vicious fightsin the history of American politics.   Through it all, State Department operatives have persistedin trying to build relationships with the Arab world. Themost notable success of such efforts was the Camp DavidEgyptian-Israeli peace treaty. But the failures have beenequally prominent. Yasser Arafat has continued to fomentterrorism despite U.S. efforts to convert him into astatesman. King Hussein of Jordan and Hosni Mubarak of Egypt,two other putative U.S. friends, set up a cooperation councilwith Saddam not long before he pulled last week's power play.That complicates efforts to organize a moderate Arab frontagainst Iraq.   It can be argued that U.S. failures in the Mideast aremainly a product of the complexities of the problem and thefact that the Soviets have been competitors for influence inthe region. There is truth in that, but one still wonders howSaddam's move could have been &quot;unexpected&quot; and how much itwill cost to remedy the oversight.</TEXT></DOC>