<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910329-0076</DOCNO><DOCID>910329-0076.</DOCID><HL>   Price of Disarray:   Brazil's Efforts to Curb   Inflation Face Hurdle:   A Lot of People Like It   ---   No One Is Ready to Sacrifice,   And Cold-Turkey Cures   Just Rattle the Economy   ---   Mortgage That's Easy to Pay   ----   By Thomas Kamm   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/29/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LATAM LABOR</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   RIO DE JANEIRO -- On March 15, 1990, a new president tookoffice in Brazil and immediately shocked his countrymen witha harsh economic program. President Fernando Collor deMello's target was wild inflation, long an albatrossburdening the country's economy and then soaring at 1,764% ayear.   Mr. Collor's radical, enough-is-enough decree seemedfinally to be medicine as tough as the disease. He frozeabout half the money then circulating in the economy, createda new currency and froze all prices.</LP><TEXT>   Yet less than one year later, what was Mr. Collor doing?On Jan. 31, he was imposing still another anti-inflationprogram for Brazil.   What is it in the economy of this nation -- a nation whoseeconomic health deeply concerns its legions of U.S. creditors-- that makes runaway inflation so intractable? Why didn't ityield to the recession that was set off by the 1990 programand might have been expected to moderate price increases?   The answer seems to lie, at least partly, in a kind ofinflation culture in Brazil. It is a set of expectations thateven some of those who call inflation a menace and a cursefind curiously comforting.   Consider the experience of Gil Pace. An economist andformer government official, he worries that Brazil is&quot;entering chaos as a result of the persistence&quot; of inflation.But as a private citizen, Mr. Pace offers a different view.Inflation allowed him to buy an apartment in Rio's swankyLagoa district &quot;almost for free.&quot;   It worked like this: When Mr. Pace first started makingmortgage payments in 1975, both his salary and the mortgagewere adjusted annually for inflation, then 30% a year. Thestate lender continued adjusting the mortgage once a year,but before long inflation was so bad that his employer beganraising his salary every month. With inflation totaling morethan one million percent between 1985 and 1990, by the timehe paid off the mortgage last year, the lagging adjustment onhis loan had practically wiped out the debt.   By the end, he was paying the equivalent of a mere $6.50 amonth. &quot;It was costing them more than that to send me themortgage bill,&quot; Mr. Pace says. His conclusion: &quot;I'm againstinflation, but here, you have to defend inflation.&quot;   Thus have Brazilians learned to live with, and even profitfrom, inflation rates so high they look like typographicalerrors. Resisting most anti-inflation policies imposed inBrazil is a strong pro-inflation lobby. It includes salariedemployees whose pay is indexed; debtors whose debts areshrunk in value; companies whose cost increases are easilypassed on to their customers; and banks whose profits areballooned by brokering the country's domestic debt.   &quot;If the powerful didn't benefit from inflation, itwouldn't exist,&quot; says Raphael de Almeida Magalhaes, acommentator for O Globo, a Rio newspaper. &quot;The truth is thatBrazilians have come to like inflation. I would even say thatthey can no longer imagine the country without it.&quot;   So, though everyone pays lip service to the inflationfight, few are willing to make the required sacrifices. Thegovernment accuses business people of &quot;abusive&quot; priceincreases. Business people retort that the increases aredefensive moves against the likelihood of price freezes, andthat the government isn't attacking the roots of inflation --the government's own big deficits and lax monetary policy.Meanwhile, unions, seeing ever-rising prices, fight for wageincreases to catch up with inflation. And the poor keepgetting poorer.   Can it go on forever? Helio Jaguaribe, a politicalscientist consulted by President Collor, doesn't think so.&quot;Either Brazil resolves its inflationary problem and gets towork on its structural problems this year, or it's going toface a gigantic crisis,&quot; says Mr. Jaguaribe. &quot;I'm convincedthat the president runs the risk of not going to the end ofhis mandate&quot; in 1995.   Though more a consequence than a cause of the chronicinflation, Brazil's inflation culture is increasingly beingblamed for the failure of successive shock plans. Therealization that inflation here is cultural as well aseconomic could force a big shift in anti-inflation strategy.   More and more prominent Brazilians are urging thegovernment to give up on cold-turkey shocks, which they saysimply destabilize the economy. Instead, they say, Mr. Collorshould try to wean Brazilians off inflation by setting clearrules and sticking to them to re-establish confidence, and bynegotiating a &quot;national understanding&quot; with Congress,employers and unions over a clear set of objectives.   &quot;The government should have only one plan: Stop the plansthat transform Brazilians into guinea pigs subjected to thebrainstorms of a half-dozen economists,&quot; former FinanceMinister Mario Henrique Simonsen wrote recently.   So deep is Brazil's love-hate relationship with inflationthat many businessmen and economists say that doing away withit requires more than just economic and political measures.It requires a change in the nation's psychology to convinceBrazilians that the long-term benefits, for the many, ofliving without inflation exceed the short-term gains, for thefew, of living with it. &quot;The solution for the country isprobably a massive lobotomy,&quot; says Lawrence Pih, chairman ofMoinho Pacifico, a conglomerate based in Sao Paulo.   By one count, Brazil has had, in the past 10 years, eightmonetary-stabilization plans, four different currencies, 11different indexes to measure inflation, five wage-and-pricefreezes, 14 different wage policies, 18 changes inforeign-exchange rules, 54 changes in price-controlguidelines, 21 different foreign-debt negotiation proposalsand 19 decrees on fiscal austerity. Brazil has tried orthodoxand heterodox measures. It has tried curbing credit, curbingdemand, even temporarily confiscating money from companiesand individuals. The upshot: Inflation just keeps worsening.In 1987 it was 365%. In 1988, 933%. In 1989, 1,764%. And lastyear, 1,794%.   Brazil is caught in a vicious circle, a mixture ofinflationary memories and expectations that turn intoself-fulfilling prophecies. Inflation rises to a politicallyunacceptable level, so the government imposes a plan toreduce it. But since previous plans failed, confidence islow, and Brazilians find a way around the plan or speculateagainst it. The plan fails, and prices rise again. Those whodoomed the plan then say that proves they were right not tobelieve in it in the first place.   The renewed inflation relaunches indexation, whichrelaunches inflation. When it becomes too high again, thegovernment imposes a new plan, which inspires even lessconfidence than the previous one. It fails, too.   As Mr. Collor is finding out. A year ago, the brash Mr.Collor came to power confidently promising to &quot;bring downinflation with one shot.&quot; On his first day in office, insteadof firing a shot he dropped a bomb -- a temporary wage andprice freeze, a new currency (the cruzeiro) and an 18-monthfreeze on many individual and corporate financial assets.   For a while, sheer lack of money made it work. Inflationplunged to one-digit levels in May and June. But by July,doubt that the government was keeping its share of thebargain, by cutting its deficits, revived Brazilians' oldhabits. Inflation picked up, rising faster and faster.Industrial production fell about 10% last year.   So two months ago, Mr. Collor dropped another bomb. Asmonthly inflation rose above 20%, he again froze wages andprices, abolished indexation and announced broad financialreforms to encourage long-term investment. But just beforethe freeze, he raised public-utility rates and fuel prices46% to 71% -- lifting companies' costs but limiting theirrevenue.   The result: chaos. Meat, soybean oil and other productssuddenly disappeared from stores because producers refused tosell at the frozen price. Autolatina, a Ford-Volkswagenauto-making venture, announced plans to lay off 5,110 workers-- although it later temporarily suspended the layoffs afterEconomics Minister Zelia Cardoso de Mello accused it ofsabotaging the plan. Some just chose to ignore the freeze.Sao Paulo Mayor Luiza Erundina raised bus fares 18% to makeup for higher fuel costs. Others held their prices but shranktheir products. Amaral Netto, a federal deputy from Rio, saysthe ice cream he buys suddenly dwindled 20%. &quot;In thiscountry, not even ice cream remains frozen,&quot; he sniffs.   The Brazilian economy doesn't function in ways found ineconomic textbooks. &quot;The orthodox theory of monetary andfiscal austerity repressing demand through a drop in realwages is fine in a country with economic logic,&quot; Mr. Pihsays. &quot;This isn't the case in Brazil.&quot;   How do things work here? &quot;When there's a drop in demand,&quot;Mr. Pih says, &quot;instead of lowering prices to sell more,{businesses} adjust supply to a lower level of demand toincur artificial shortages, which allows them to maintain orraise prices.&quot; Companies can do this without losing businessto competitors because, in some important sectors, theeconomy is so concentrated, he says.   Setting prices here isn't very scientific. &quot;Take thisindustrial sewing machine,&quot; says Luiz Alberto Hirsch,operations manager of the local unit of Japan's Brothergroup, pointing to a machine at a textile fair in Sao Paulo.&quot;It costs 232,000 cruzeiros.&quot; How did he set the price? &quot;Imade some crazy calculation,&quot; he says. &quot;I don't want to sellfor cash now. What would I do with the money? I couldn't buya new machine to replace the one I'm selling and replenish myinventory because the exchange rate has changed. I can't findsomething to put my money in that keeps up with inflationbecause the government abolished indexation.   &quot;So, I sell in three payments: one part now, another 30days from now and the final one 60 days from now. So, I tryto figure out what interest rates will be 30 or 45 days fromnow and set a price.   &quot;I reached this price before the freeze was enforced. Howlong can I keep it up? I don't know,&quot; he acknowledges. &quot;It'sa shot in the dark. You can lose everything you earned if youmake a mistake.&quot;   But isn't he fueling inflation by setting a forward pricebased on expectations? &quot;Yes,&quot; he says. &quot;We all are. But thisis the system here. Either you enter it, or you don'tsurvive. Inflation doesn't bother anyone. I'm from ahigh-inflation generation. I wouldn't know how to livewithout it.&quot;   That way of doing business, says Antoninho Marmo Trevisan,a Sao Paulo consultant, is pervasive in Brazil today.&quot;Inflationary culture means you accept all this, that mycustomer doesn't question the fact that I'm increasing myrates because there's inflation; so, it's reasonable to raiseprices, and he's going to raise his prices, too.&quot; Mr.Trevisan adds:   &quot;It's a culture of passing on costs instead of managingthem through productivity. If my costs don't rise as much asprices, I'll still raise my prices by the average inflationrate. And if my costs are higher than inflation, then I'llraise my prices by as much as my costs went up. Since you'realways anticipating price rises and not only reflecting pastinflation, you raise your prices by a little bit more thaninflation. And inflation thus not only stays where it is, itrises.&quot;   This vicious circle can be broken, many say, only bybreaking inflationary expectations. And rather than tryingshock plans that attack only the symptoms of inflation, theysay, the government should attack the roots of inflation thatlead to indexation. &quot;Saying that indexation is the cause ofall evil is the same as saying that it's raining because myumbrella is open,&quot; says Roberto Campos, a federal deputy.   While disagreeing about how to cure Brazil's inflation,economists do agree that it stems from huge public deficitsand debts, both external and domestic. And the only solutionwill be to cut the state payroll, start a long-delayedprivatization program, reduce import barriers and avoidrepeating the recent $3 billion bailout of the state banksused to finance the deficits. In short, to carry out thefree-market program Mr. Collor promised in his inauguralspeech -- and violated the very next day with a heavilyinterventionist program that immediately sapped confidence inhis ability to fight inflation.   &quot;Conditions aren't right for this government to carry outa frontal attack on inflation, but it can concentrate onguerrilla attacks, accelerating the deregulation of theeconomy,&quot; says Edmar Bacha, an economist.   Seeking to regain the initiative, Mr. Collor is startingto abandon his aloof, authoritarian style. He says he is opento negotiations toward a &quot;national understanding.&quot; This, somesay, could prove easier than attacking the inflationaryculture head-on. &quot;Opening the economy is one thing,&quot; Mr. Pihsays. &quot;Opening someone's mind is something else.&quot;   If a gradual, stable opening of the economy startedshowing results, Brazil's mind then might be opened to theidea that inflation is corroding the economy. Living withoutit, however, would be a big challenge. &quot;We're good at livingwith plans that don't work,&quot; says Mr. Trevisan, theconsultant. &quot;Our big problem will be living with a plan thatworks.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>