<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900925-0045</DOCNO><DOCID>900925-0045.</DOCID><HL>   Thankless Task:   Tough Young Clients   Generate Tough Cases   For a Public Defender   ---   Philadelphia's Richard Bank   Tries to Get Them Help   Rather Than Jail Terms   ---   Courts Mete Out `Heavy Hits'   ----   By John Wagner   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   PHILADELPHIA -- Sitting in the cluttered office he shareswith two other public defenders, Richard Bank thumbs throughcurrent case files stacked on his lap: A burglar accused ofshooting a woman point-blank in the chest. A mother who hasconfessed to killing her baby, stuffing it into a trash bagand burying it in a city park. A habitual car thief accusedof shooting a nine-year-old while joy-riding on a stolenmotorcycle.   Many of his clients have committed heinous crimes. Mosthave several prior convictions -- some more than a dozenprevious arrests. One other thing they have in common: Allhave yet to reach age 18.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I only get the worst of the worst,&quot; says Mr. Bank with atouch of pride. A balding, bearded man with a baritone voice,wire-rim glasses and a bow tie, Mr. Bank has volunteered forthis assignment in the juvenile special-defense unit after 17years as a public defender. In exchange for a lightercaseload, he and the other three attorneys in the unit takeon the most violent juveniles.   In these times of family breakdown, child abuse, cocainewars and vicious street crime, defending violent youths hasbecome a poignant and often thankless job. It can drain thepublic defender's spirit. Lately, America's justice-systempendulum has swung sharply away from rehabilitative idealsand toward harsher punishment. As the stakes for the youthshave risen, so has the toll on the defenders themselves.   A look at Mr. Bank's caseload shows how he tries to make adifference. But it also underlines the frustration of workingwith juveniles on whom the rest of society has already givenup.   Mr. Bank, a 48-year-old graduate of Villanova law school,spent most of his career handling some of Philadelphia's mostgrisly adult criminal cases. But in the late 1970s, hesupervised the defender association's juvenile unit. Then, hesays, the juvenile court was truer to its mission.   Since its inception at the beginning of the century,America's juvenile-court system has been guided by the notionthat youthful offenders should be treated and rehabilitated,not punished and stigmatized as criminals. (In most states,juveniles become adults at age 18; in others, the cutoff ageis 16; a few use 19.)   Court vocabulary reflects this belief in rehabilitation:Youths are said to be &quot;adjudicated delinquent&quot; rather thanfound guilty. They are &quot;placed&quot; in rehabilitative programsand &quot;youth development centers&quot; rather than sentenced toprison.   But here and in other large U.S. cities, the idea ofemphasizing the child's needs has been overshadowed by lesslofty but more attainable goals: locking up young offendersand keeping them off the streets as long as possible. &quot;If akid shows a nasty, violent streak, forget the rehabilitation,we're going to go with the punishment,&quot; says PhiladelphiaDistrict Attorney Ronald Castille. &quot;A kid murdering or rapingis not a kid being a kid.&quot;   Although the number of juveniles arrested over the pastfive years here has dropped significantly, the total placedin corrective institutions has skyrocketed, from 695 in 1984to a record 2,227 last year. Most of Pennsylvania's juvenilefacilities are full beyond stated capacity.   Last year, the DA's office also succeeded in certifying arecord number of Philadelphia's juveniles as adults andtransferring their cases to the city's already-swampedcriminal courts. The trend reflects a growing sentiment thatthe few &quot;hard-core&quot; juvenile offenders who could be &quot;saved&quot;don't justify the additional resources being wasted on manymore who seem destined for a life of crime. The cost ofplacing a repeat offender in a secure juvenile institutionexceeds $50,000 a year.   &quot;It's just not worth it to give them another chance,&quot; saysJames McDermott, chief of the DA's juvenile habitual offenderunit here, one of 13 such units across the country originallyfunded by Justice Department grants to prosecute repeatjuvenile offenders more rigorously.   A decade ago, combat between prosecutors and defenders injuvenile court was less intense. If a youth had multiplecharges brought against him for a single crime, the defenderwould often plead his client guilty on all counts, even if hecould win an acquittal on some, Mr. Bank says. The goal wasto get help for the youth, and the slate would be wiped cleanwhen he became an adult. Now, Mr. Bank says, that objectivehas taken a back seat to resisting prosecutorial efforts to&quot;pile on&quot; juvenile adjudications for use in later adultsentencings.   Most juveniles whose cases fall into Mr. Bank's lap arekids who have exhausted the resources of the juvenile justicesystem and are on the brink of prison. He tries to get themone more chance.   Jamall Rickmon, a short, muscular youth, had had plenty ofchances to turn his life around before his latest case wasgiven to Mr. Bank. Since his first arrest at age eight,Jamall had spent most of his life in rehabilitativeinstitutions but still managed to rack up a dozen arrests.After his latest crimes, at age 17, he was found by afamily-court judge to be &quot;not amenable to treatment&quot; by thejuvenile system and was certified as an adult.   Jamall had driven a stolen getaway car in a $36,000jewelry heist. With police tailing him at high speed, he rana red light and broadsided a car carrying two collegestudents. The passenger, a 25-year-old woman, suffered afractured neck, a broken pelvis, broken ribs and a severedear. The 23-year-old driver suffered two broken legs, aruptured neck artery and a severed ear that surgeons laterreattached.   At the advice of Mr. Bank, Jamall pleaded guilty at hisarraignment, waiving his right to a jury trial and placinghimself at the mercy of Judge Legrome Davis. Moments intoJamall's sentencing hearing, Mr. Bank found an opening.   The public defender told the judge that Jamall Rickmon hadhad, in fact, only two juvenile felony adjudications sinceturning 14, not five as the court-prepared pre-sentencingreport said. That difference could affect the length ofJamall's sentence. Mr. Bank contended that the other threeoffenses really belonged to James Rickmon, who, upon arrest,often gave police his older brother's name. If grantedanother day, Mr. Bank said, he could prove that the court haderred.   The next morning Marion Rickmon, Jamall's 71-year-oldgrandmother, arrived in Courtroom 738 early and sat in thesecond row of chairs, her wrinkled hands folded and clingingto crumpled Kleenex, her face locked in a pout.   Mr. Bank wanted to see Jamall get a two- or three-yearsentence at Camp Hill, a county prison with a program inindustrial skills. That way, he said, his client could learna trade and how to read. According to his pre-sentencingreport, Jamall couldn't read &quot;even the smallest words.&quot;   Shortly before Judge Davis took the bench, a court officerhanded Mr. Bank Jamall's juvenile file, a two-inch-thickcollection of dog-eared psychological evaluations,juvenile-institution progress reports and probation-officerrecommendations dating back to his first arrest a decadeearlier. Mr. Bank and his social worker frantically poredthrough it, trying to reconstruct the pasts of his client and15-year-old James.   By the time Jamall's case was called, about 10 minuteslater, Mr. Bank was able to assert confidently that the listof his client's prior felony adjudications should show two,not five. &quot;Fine,&quot; Judge Davis said. The judge then asked thedistrict attorney in the case whether he wanted to dispute&quot;this one narrow issue.&quot; The DA declined.   Then, Jamall took what public defenders call a &quot;heavyhit.&quot; Ignoring the state sentencing guidelines around whichMr. Bank had constructed his arguments, Judge Davis sentencedJamall to 30 years in the state penitentiary. He will beeligible for parole in a decade.   &quot;I'll be dead before you get out,&quot; Mrs. Rickmon whisperedto her grandson.   &quot;There goes Jamall Rickmon,&quot; said an exasperated Mr. Bankas he left the courtroom. Sure, he felt bad for the victimsin the other car, he said, but this sentence wouldn't helpthem. It was typical of the &quot;primal urge of exacting revenge&quot;that dominates the courts today, Mr. Bank contended. Mr. Banksees Jamall Rickmon himself as a victim, a &quot;brain-damaged kidthe system had failed.&quot; His IQ has been tested at 74, and apsychologist said he showed signs of brain damage.   Jamall never had a family life. He didn't know hisfather's name and had never seen him. He and his threesiblings, all by different fathers, were reared by hisgrandmother, who lived on welfare. His mother was neveraround, he told a social worker. &quot;She not have time for me,&quot;he said. &quot;Don't know why.&quot; Mr. Bank, as a father, expresseslittle sympathy for such parents.   Jamall often skipped school, and he flunked severalgrades. In response to a social worker's question this year,he said he thought George Washington was the current U.S.president. He is very impressionable. &quot;Prison will be thecollege of crime for him,&quot; Mr. Bank predicts.   But the defender usually tries to keep a client from beingcertified as an adult so he can get the services provided tojuvenile offenders. Even if the penalty is no stiffer, &quot;as apointy-headed liberal, I know he needs more help than theadult system can give him,&quot; Mr. Bank says.   Much of Mr. Bank's work is driven by values going back tothe beginning of his career, when he was protesting theVietnam war and handling cases for the Central Committee ofConscientious Objectors. Though he concedes the public has aright to be protected from the behavior of some of hisclients, he feels society is reaping what it has sown. Hedecries the deterioration of social programs and says that ifthe government provided a guaranteed income to its poor, manyof his young clients wouldn't resort to selling drugs.   &quot;My clients are dyssocialized,&quot; he says. &quot;They don't knowwhat's expected of them. They've never met anybody who wakesup with an alarm clock every morning.&quot;   Many have fathers in prison and mothers on drugs, or havebeen abused. One client was in a child-pornography film.Another, at age three, was taught by his father to fire amachine gun. And most, though only 16 or 17 years old, havefathered children.   At Jamall's sentencing, his 16-year-old girlfriend andtheir year-old baby are present. During a recess in thecourtroom, Jamall Jr., wearing a diaper, gym shorts and aBart Simpson tank top, runs to the bench where his fathersits. Jamall cradles his son between his knees -- his handsare cuffed behind his back -- leans forward and tries to makeeye contact with him.   Fifteen minutes later, when Jamall is sentenced, hisgirlfriend starts sobbing, then screaming, before she and herbaby are led out of the courtroom.   &quot;I get immune to wailing girlfriends,&quot; Mr. Bank says onthe walk back to his office. &quot;If you don't keep your distancein this job, you just go crazy. You see so much cruelty.&quot; Mr.Banks says he has developed an &quot;aesthetic distance&quot; thatallows him to fight his young clients' legal battles withoutbecoming emotionally involved in their personal struggles.   Still, he often offers fatherly advice. He sent a &quot;hotrodder&quot; magazine to a client named James, a graffiti artistnow in state custody, hoping he would put his artistic skillsto better use: pin-striping cars.   When Mr. Bank first met James, the youth had alreadycompiled more than 20 arrests, mostly for burglaries andescapes from juvenile detention centers. While in one ofthem, he engaged in &quot;brief sexual activities&quot; in return forcigarettes, according to a report from the institution.Considering James's background, Mr. Bank says, his behaviorisn't surprising: His father frequently beat him up, and hismother had a history of having sex with young children andsupplying them with drugs, according to a psychologicalreport on her son. &quot;As a young child, James huddled in thecorner while his mother had group sex,&quot; Mr. Bank says withdisgust.   Back in his office after a &quot;heavy hit&quot; sentencing of aclient certified as an adult, Mr. Bank kicks off his shoesand slouches in his chair, almost forgetting that he also hasa case in family court that morning. His client, Joseph, isbeing considered for discharge after 18 months in aninstitution for sexual offenders.   At age 17, Joseph tried to rape a younger girl on adowntown street in broad daylight. Prosecutors got himcertified as an adult, but were reversed when the results ofa psychological examination revealed Joseph's background.   At age three, Joseph saw his mother commit suicide byjumping from a high-rise building. His father was analcoholic whom Joseph rarely met. After the suicide, theauthorities placed Joseph with his mother's paramour, whoabused him &quot;physically, emotionally and sexually,&quot; accordingto his case file. At seven, Joseph was taken from theparamour and put in a home with his stepmother and her eightother children. He often ran away from there, including onceto New York for nearly three weeks when he was 11.   On arriving at the courtroom, Mr. Bank discovers that thepublic defender assigned to the room has already handled hisclient's hearing. Joseph has been discharged from theinstitution.   &quot;I'm doing great on the cases I'm not here for,&quot; Mr. Banksays wryly. &quot;I'm like the kiss of death.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>