<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910719-0150</DOCNO><DOCID>910719-0150.</DOCID><HL>   Insurance Cobweb Alarms Investigators   ---   Policyholder Rip-Off   Claimed With Teale at Center   ----   By Michael Allen   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)</IN><NS>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)</GV><RE>BELGIUM (BEL)EUROPE (EU)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   ATLANTA -- At first blush, Compagnie de Reassurance desEtats Unis et Continentale S.A. made quite a showing lastyear.   Officially based in Brussels but operating out of aslightly seedy suburban office park here, the insurer manageda tenfold increase in gross premiums to $38.8 million in1990, its annual report says.</LP><TEXT>   The company insured against earthquakes and accidents atsea. It provided automobile coverage for high-risk drivers inCalifornia. And, true to its name, it engaged heavily in thearcane, loosely regulated business of reinsurance -- insuringthe risks of other insurance companies. According to a personfamiliar with its operations, Etats Unis and affiliates,working through brokers, assumed small portions of theproperty and casualty policies of some major U.S. companies,including USX Corp., Kellogg Co. and Wells Fargo andamp; Co., allapparently without their knowledge. It even agreed to helpreinsure four royal palaces in Saudi Arabia.   And many of its operations may have been a royal rip-off.Although Etats Unis is still believed to be paying mostclaims, a five-month investigation by the U.S. SenatePermanent Subcommittee on Investigations has turned upevidence suggesting that the company is on shaky ground, itsbalance sheet stuffed with virtually worthless securities andits long-term ability to meet obligations questionable atbest.   What's more, investigators contend that the company is buta small part of a blindingly complicated web of insurers,service companies, agents and securities brokers that hasmade off with tens of millions of dollars from unsuspectingpolicyholders.   The man allegedly sitting at the web's center is60-year-old Alan Teale, a courtly British expatriate whom onestate insurance official describes as &quot;somebody you'd like tohave for an uncle.&quot; In the past decade, Mr. Teale orcompanies affiliated with him have been prohibited frominsurance operations in at least nine states; on July 10, theCalifornia Insurance Department ordered a halt to EtatsUnis's main activities there. And Mr. Teale is beinginvestigated by the U.S. Labor Department's Office of LaborRacketeering in Pennsylvania and by federal grand juries inAtlanta and Orlando, Fla.   Yet Mr. Teale, who has been subpoenaed to testify beforethe Senate subcommittee today, has never been indicted, and,in a brief interview, he denied any wrongdoing. &quot;I'm notimportant, I'm retired, and I'm really quite ill,&quot; Mr. Tealesaid, coughing. He added that &quot;my function is adviser tovarious regulatory authorities around the world.&quot; And in May,in fact, he did put together a conference in a London hotelfor two dozen local insurance executives. The topic: &quot;FederalIntervention in Insurance and Reinsurance in the UnitedStates.&quot;   That irony isn't lost on investigators who have watchedMr. Teale repeatedly find loopholes in the confusingpatchwork of state insurance codes. His critics call him aprime example of the need for tougher state enforcementpowers, perhaps even federal statutes making insurance frauda federal crime. Sen. Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat whoheads the subcommittee, notes &quot;some very big gaps in thestates' ability to regulate insurance.&quot;   Mr. Teale's introduction to U.S. insurance beganauspiciously. Leaving a senior post at the Lloyd's InsuranceBrokers Association in London in 1981, he became chiefexecutive officer of the Insurance Exchange of the Americasin Miami, a marketplace where private syndicates could assumeportions of insurance risk from around the world.   But Mr. Teale left at the end of a three-year contract,and the exchange wound up with big problems. Although itisn't clear how much of the blame belonged to Mr. Teale, a1989 study commissioned by the Florida Insurance Departmentuncovered an organizational and bookkeeping disaster,compounded by faulty regulatory oversight. The syndicates'records were in such disarray that investigators oftencouldn't tell which risks belonged to whom. Underwritingstandards were so lax in some cases &quot;as to be nonexistent,&quot;the report found. With 12 of 24 syndicates having been putinto receivership, Florida authorities are liquidating theexchange.   Mr. Teale, who couldn't be reached for further comment,has said he wasn't involved in underwriting.   By the time trouble hit in Florida, Mr. Teale was alreadybuilding a new insurance empire in Atlanta around theill-fated Victoria Insurance Co. The Georgia InsuranceDepartment deliberated just four weeks before issuing thelicense, instead of the normal 60 to 180 days, according toTim Ryles, the new insurance commissioner. &quot;It appears noadequate background check was done,&quot; he adds.   The license was a gold mine. Although it restrictedVictoria to a few narrow lines of property and casualtybusiness in Georgia, the company faced no such limitations onits out-of-state business. Under the management of Mr.Teale's Fenmar International Insurance Services, Victoriasoon was sucking in millions of dollars for everything fromasbestos-abatement insurance premiums to disability coveragefor such high-priced athletes as Joe Montana -- fillingvacuums created when traditional insurers abandoned suchbusiness as too risky.   The company's rapid growth was fueled by an obscurefederal law. The 1981 Federal Risk Retention Act was passedto help groups of companies or individuals band together toobtain property and casualty insurance more cheaply. Thegroups, called risk purchasing groups, are permitted to buyinsurance even from carriers that aren't licensed in theirhome states and are generally subject to minimal oversight bylocal insurance departments.   The Teale crew helped form most of the 63 groups thatbought from Victoria, including Chimney Sweeps Federation RPGof Mobile, Ala., and the American Society of AcupuncturistsRPG Inc. of Atlanta.   But in mid-1988, Georgia insurance examiners detected aproblem: Victoria had almost no assets, at least not inGeorgia, in violation of a requirement that Victoria keep atleast $1.2 million of capital and surplus in the state toguarantee payment of claims. But instead of shutting downVictoria immediately, overburdened regulators dithered,comforted by assurances that the company had $20 million inassets on deposit in Paris with one Goldman Dollar SecuritiesInc.   Not until the autumn did the insurance department tire oftrying to bring Victoria into compliance. The company wasforbidden to write new insurance in late September and putinto receivership in November. Andrew Economou, the receiver,told the Senate subcommittee that the state then learned thatGoldman was &quot;a fictitious entity operating out of a `maildrop'&quot; and that no securities existed.   Authorities may never know exactly what happened to the$16 million in premiums generated by Victoria during its18-month life. They now believe that, sometime in late 1987,control of the company changed hands and that the new owner,Arab American Trust Fund, fired Mr. Teale.   Mr. Teale's take from the company is a mystery because, asMr. Economou testified, &quot;the status of the books and recordsof Victoria makes it virtually impossible to ascertainwhether in fact Victoria received all the premiums from Tealeand his management company to which it was entitled.&quot; As oftoday, Victoria has about $20 million in unpaid claimspending, and assets of just $691,000.   With the fall of Victoria, Georgia authorities moved toput into receivership 10 other Teale-affiliated companies.Most of them represented their business as &quot;providingunderwriting management services&quot; or marketing for offshoreinsurers. But a Georgia state judge denied the insurancedepartment's motion, ruling that the service companiesweren't, strictly speaking, insurers.   The court did note, however, &quot;some evidence that defendantAlan Teale is acting as an insurance agent without alicense.&quot; The order restrained him from such activities untilhe obtained one.   Mr. Teale never did get a Georgia license, but thatdoesn't appear to have cramped his style. Georgia regulatorssay he changed the names of most of his companies andchartered them out of state, beyond their reach. He alsoseparated his office from that of his wife, Charlotte Rentz,moving across a highway and assuming the chairmanship ofCorporate andamp; Marketing Insurance Consultants Inc., or Comic.   Back at 4 Executive Park Drive, in the down-at-the-heelsoffice park that has served as the hub of the Teale empire, areinsurance broker called World Re Inc. began operations. Thereinsurers that World Re represents aren't exactly blue chip.According to the Senate investigators' report, World Refronts for companies &quot;with no tangible assets,&quot; using&quot;fraudulent&quot; financial statements.   They include, for example, Helensburgh Ltd. of Dublin,Ireland, and its sister, Euroam-Re Reinsurance Co. of Huizen,the Netherlands. Their primary assets, according to theirfinancial statements, are $50 million of bonds issued by the&quot;Sovereign Cherokee Nation -- Tejas.&quot; The group, whichoperates out of a Dallas-area high rise, has been denounced,in letters to people who have inquired, as fake by federallyrecognized Cherokee tribes, and Senate investigators say thebonds are worthless.   The reinsurance companies purportedly owned by the Tealefamily don't appear to be much more solid. Take, for example,Compagnie de Reassurance des Etats Unis et Continentale,which investigators say is owned by Teale-controlledentities.   Etats Unis claims to have a $13.5 million portfolio ofcommon stocks. But some of the stocks, investigators say, arecarried at apparently inflated values. One example: threemillion shares of Independent Business Alliance on the booksat $7 a share. An evaluation by the Pennsylvania InsuranceDepartment in a related inquiry found that IBA, which says itis &quot;primarily engaged in the process of investigatingbusiness opportunities,&quot; has &quot;no revenue whatsoever&quot; and thatthe book value of its 16 million shares is just 1.3 centseach.   Similarly, 1.7 million shares of U.S. Card Investors,which is in the business of trading baseball cards, arecarried at $1 each, a figure which Pennsylvania authoritiessaid overstated book value by 2,253%.   Another asset consists of a $292,500 mortgage loan to BushMcKenzie Inc., which is identified by Georgia regulators as acompany owned by Ms. Rentz. Fulton County deed records showBush McKenzie paid $297,500 for a home in the exclusiveHorseshoe Bend subdivision in March 1990.   On that shaky foundation, though, Etats Unis and WorldRe's other affiliates have generated considerable cash flow.Reviewing documents subpoenaed from 4 Executive Park Drive,Senate investigators found copies of &quot;thousands&quot; of insurancepolicies totaling &quot;tens of millions of dollars&quot; in coverageissued directly by Etats Unis. The policies cover high-risklines in several states, including limousine services,construction on military bases, restaurant liability andpersonal and business automobile coverage, plus reinsurance.   For example, World Life andamp; Health Insurance Co. of King ofPrussia, Pa., says it forwarded about $12.5 million inpremiums to World Re during the past 18 months to reinsurevarious portions of group life and health business. About$8.5 million was repaid in claims, according to World Life.But earlier this year, Pennsylvania regulators closed thecompany. They alleged, among other things, that a trust fundset up by World Re in World Life's name contained a&quot;portfolio of virtually worthless penny stocks.&quot; World Re hassince refused to pay any more claims, arguing that itsagreement was voided by World Life's insolvency.   As usual, confusion reigns about what happened to all themoney, according to Senate investigators, who believe servicecompanies controlled by Mr. Teale or Ms. Rentz took hugecommissions from the premium flow. But Ms. Rentz's attorneycomments: &quot;My client hasn't misrepresented anything orengaged in any fradulent activity, and she will explain herconduct in the appropriate forum.&quot;   In examining World Re's records, the Senate staff&quot;confronted what we can only conclude is a regulator'snightmare: a massive web of brokers, financial intermediariesand companies, many of whom are located offshore and farbeyond the jurisdiction of state regulators.&quot;   &quot;With at least 13 companies at Executive Park Drive, withat least 19 insurance and reinsurance companies doingbusiness with World Re, with at least 86 bank accounts tocontend with,&quot; the staff report concluded, &quot;we believe thisweb of companies and accounts was intentionally designed tothwart regulators' efforts to track the flow of monies.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>