<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910828-0047</DOCNO><DOCID>910828-0047.</DOCID><HL>   Rush to Freedom:   Question: How Many   Countries Can Fit   Into the New Europe?   ---   Croats, Moldavians, Latvians   Are Among Many Others   Clamoring for Autonomy   ---   What Makes a State a State   ----   By Roger Thurow   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><RE>EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)GERMANY (GE)LUXEMBOURG (LU)SOVIET UNION (UR)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   GENEVA -- Sorbian Lusatia is not an ice cream flavor.   &quot;Heavens no. We are a legitimate nation,&quot; says AlfredSymank, a Sorb (which is not to be confused with a Serb) andchief lobbyist of the Sorbian Nationality for AutonomousLusatia. Working the hallways at a meeting of internationaldiplomats here, Mr. Symank tells anyone he can grab that theSorbs are a Slavic people in eastern Germany, in a land theycall Lusatia, who have been oppressed down through thecenturies by Prussians, Sachsens, Nazis, Communists and, now,by the reunified Germans.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;We want the world to recognize that Germany isn't justmade up of Germans. The Sorbs are there, too]&quot; he insistsexcitedly, his long gray hair flapping as he pitches hisdream of a Lusatian nation. &quot;If Lithuania succeeds, ifSlovenia succeeds, why can't we?&quot;   This isn't a scene from a long-lost Peter Sellers movie,The Sorb That Roared. This is life in Europe beyond the ColdWar, beyond the failed coup in Moscow, beyond the collapse ofcommunism.   From the Soviet Baltics in the north to the Balkans in thesouth, a host of lyrically named European nationalities,finally out from under the thumb of Communist regimes, arepursuing their long repressed yearnings for nationhood. InJune, Slovenia and Croatia moved to secede from Yugoslavia,and in recent days one Soviet republic after another hasboldly declared its independence. Cheering them on aresmaller, lesser-known minorities that one day would like todo the same, or, at the very least, demand autonomy withintheir present countries.   &quot;Many taboos are disappearing,&quot; says Anna-Maria Biro, arepresentative of Romania's Hungarian minority, which covetsa Transylvanian homeland. &quot;You know,&quot; she adds, winking, &quot;theintegrity of old borders is no longer such a sacred thing.&quot;   For all those in western Europe and the U.S. who havegrown comfortable with the geographic order of the Cold War,this is a frightening prospect. Where, they wonder, will itall end? If they recognize Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia'sindependence from the Soviet Union, as they now seem ready todo, how do they deny the same right of sovereignty to thepeople of Slovenia, Croatia, Moldavia, the Ukraine, Georgia,Slovakia, or even Lusatia? And after yesterday's declarationof independence by Soviet Moldavians, who's to stop theMoldavians living in Romania from following suit, and perhapsreclaiming the historic Moldavian territory of Bessarabia?   &quot;The anomaly of our world is that we are running intocontradictory trends,&quot; says Max Kampelman, the head of theU.S. delegation to a recent Geneva meeting on nationalminorities. &quot;Western Europe has had 45 years to learn to livewith each other. But central and eastern Europe have livedwith a lid on. Now that lid is lifted.&quot;   Ironies abound. As western Europe moves closer toeliminating borders in its quest for a truly common market,eastern Europe is on its way to creating more. The Helsinkiagreement of 1975, guaranteeing the integrity of currentborders for the sake of stability, is now blamed forinstability. For four decades, the West demandedself-determination for the various national groups of easternEurope; when those groups determined to seek independence --and split up existing countries -- the West, in the name ofHelsinki, demurred. It was only after Yugoslavia stumbled tothe edge of civil war and a coup failed in Moscow that theWest began seriously considering the need to redraw, onceagain, the borders of Europe.   &quot;We can't arrive at stability by armed instability,&quot; saysRoger Linster, a spokesman for the foreign ministry of theGrand Duchy of Luxembourg.   The ironies continue. Luxembourg, the smallest state inthe European Community -- it would fit into Rhode Island withroom to spare -- has been one of the EC countries working thehardest to keep Yugoslavia together. Snuggled into a crevicebetween Germany, France and Belgium, the Grand Duchy -- withonly 380,000 residents, even its own publicity brochuresuggests &quot;Grand&quot; is a misnomer -- got its independence backin the 19th century, when the European powers of the daycouldn't agree on who should own it.   &quot;We snuck in at a time when it was still possible to sneakin,&quot; says a Luxembourg diplomat.   What, then, makes a country a country? &quot;One thing thatdoesn't matter for sure is size,&quot; says Danilo Turk, aprofessor of international law at the University of Ljubljanawho has exhaustively researched such things. He ticks off thenames of various flyspeck, yet sovereign, islands in theSouth Pacific and the Caribbean, and throws in nearbyLiechtenstein for good measure. &quot;No one seems to be botheredby them,&quot; he says.   Nor does economic viability seem to matter. San Marino hasstamps, Lesotho lives off blankets, Monaco bets on casinos.Yet no one seems bothered by their independence, either.   What exactly does matter in the matter of nationhood isunclear. Legally, says Mr. Turk, there are three maincriteria: territory, population and effective state power toimplement and defend the sovereignty of that place and thosepeople. Not all tiny countries are in the United Nations,though; sometimes they can't afford to set up an office inNew York.   Slovenia, for one, would seem to meet all three of Mr.Turk's criteria. There are about two million Slovenes whohave for centuries lived in a territory between the Alps andthe Adriatic. On June 25, the Slovene Parliament declared itsindependence from Yugoslavia and defended its sovereigntywhen federal troops moved to crush its secession. After acouple of weeks of fighting, Slovenia negotiated a cease-fireand the Yugoslav troops withdrew. Thus, it believes itdemonstrated territorial control.   But still no recognition, though as the fighting inYugoslavia produces ever more casualties, some members of theEC believe they should mull the possibility. &quot;What does theworld want? Is it that more people must die?&quot; asks JosipSkoberne of Slovenia's Chamber of Economy. &quot;How long must wefight -- one month, one year, what, before the Westrecognizes us?&quot;   Mr. Skoberne takes a deep breath and apologizes for hisoutburst. &quot;I don't want to be too emotional,&quot; he says, &quot;butit's a great frustration for us.&quot;   This frustration, at least, knows no borders. &quot;Democracycan't be served by the rigid patterns of the past,&quot; arguesMs. Biro, part of the large Hungarian minority in Romania.Adds Aap Neljas from Estonia: &quot;The politicians are stillthinking about stability in Cold War terms and not in theterms of democratic choice. What defined stability yesterdaymay define instability today.&quot;   Potential instability seems to ooze from the lounge chairsin the lobby of the Geneva conference center, site of themeeting on nationalities. Here is the worst nightmare ofevery European country with at least one minority aspiringfor sovereignty: There are the Serbs in Croatia, theAlbanians in Serbia and the Macedonians in Yugoslavia, Greeceand Bulgaria. There are the Georgians and the CrimeanTartars. There are Gypsies, Sorbs and Transylvanians. TheCzechs are here, and the Slovaks, too. There is theFinnish-speaking minority in Sweden, the Bretons in Franceand the Kurds of Turkey and Iraq. The Corsicans would havecome, except that they were too busy raising an army to fightfor independence from France.   &quot;We don't think Europe will permit one new country afteranother,&quot; Stoyan Boyadjiev, president of the Union ofMacedonian Brotherhoods, says rather pessimistically. Hetucks the bottom of his necktie into his pants and rummagesthrough a briefcase full of documents outlining theMacedonian cause, just in case. &quot;If Europe decides thatSlovenia is independent, we want to make sure the same isalso true for Macedonia.&quot;   Mr. Boyadjiev scans the history of Europe, puffing on hispipe as he recalls the various realignments of borders.Finally, he reaches the argument that most minorities resortto sooner or later: If the Luxembourgers have their owncountry, he asks, why shouldn't the Macedonians?   So, what of Luxembourg, the model for the Lilliputians ofEurope, where &quot;Small is Beautiful&quot; is a national motto?   &quot;An accident of history,&quot; says Jul Christophory, directorof the duchy's national library. &quot;An anachronism,&quot; saysLucien Thiel, general manager of the Luxembourg Bankers'Association. Yet Luxembourg, on 999 picturesque square miles,is a full member of the United Nations, the EC and NATO, andhas wielded its sovereignty cleverly enough to become one ofthe most prosperous specks of Europe.   First, a little history, which shows that the process ofcreating nations has never been a precise science. Luxembourgbecame a duchy in the Holy Roman Empire and was subsequentlyrun and overrun by nobles like John the Blind, Phillip theGood and Charles the Mad. From 1443 to 1815, the duchy passedfrom Burgundy to Spain to France to Austria and back toFrance, where it was tucked away in the ministry of forests.   After Napoleon's defeat, the diplomats at the Congress ofVienna in 1815 gave Luxembourg the confusing status ofindependent &quot;Grand&quot; Duchy, &quot;personal property&quot; of the Dutchking, and member of the German Confederation all at the sametime. The Congress also gave the eastern part of the countryto the Prussians, so the duchy became grander and smallersimultaneously. More turmoil ensued, and the diplomatsregathered in London in 1839. This time they gave the duchyits sovereignty and ceded two-thirds of its territory toBelgium. Despite that loss of much of the country, this isthe year that presentday Luxembourgers mark as theirindependence.   Still, the powers that-were weren't through withLuxembourg. In 1867, Napoleon III offered to buy the duchyfrom the Dutch king, who still held the noble deed. ButBismarck, never one to trust the French, blocked the deal andinstead brought Luxembourg further into the German economicsphere. In 1919, with the German union shattered by World WarI, Luxembourgers voted to attach themselves economically toFrance. But this time France didn't want them. The Belgiansdid, though, and the Belgium-Luxembourg economic union wasborn.   Which, except for the attempt by the Nazis to annex theduchy in World War II, brings us to today. Luxembourg printssome of its own currency, but generally uses Belgian notes.Its foreign trade is an asterisk in the statistics ofBelgium. It hasn't won an Olympic gold medal since 1952. Itdoesn't have enough people for all the work within itsborders, so every day about 35,000 foreigners commute in fromneighboring countries. It is so small that if there was anaccident at the French nuclear reactor just across thesouthern border, the entire country would have to beevacuated.   Still, Luxembourgers, with a per capita gross domesticproduct above $15,000, rank right up there with the Germansand Danes as the wealthiest people in the European Community.Once a poor agricultural country, the duchy gained itsprosperity by trading on its sovereignty. As early as the1920s, Luxembourg rented its sovereign airwave frequencies toprivate entrepreneurs, and today it is one of the leadingcommercial communications centers in Europe. Sovereignty alsoallowed it to nurture its steel industry, which once was oneof the largest on the continent.   Most important, Luxembourg used its sovereign power to settax rates to create a banking haven, which is what broughtthe infamous Bank of Credit and Commerce International toLuxembourg City. According to the duchy's 1989 statisticspamphlet, which features the reigning grand duke and duchesson the cover, Luxembourg has more banking and other financialenterprises (1,604) than harvesters and threshing machines(1,428). By now, with the rapid growth of investment-fundinstitutions in the past year, the financial enterprisesprobably even outnumber manure spreaders (2,559).   Such prosperity has served to soften the inferioritycomplex that can come from being small. &quot;Why do we need ourown money? We get everyone else's,&quot; says a concierge at a tophotel, rubbing his fingers together as he watches the bankerscome and go. &quot;We Luxembourgers don't have a complex aboutbeing small. The big countries have a complex about us beingsmall.&quot;   Every so often, when Luxembourg takes a stand in the EC ona matter of national interest, like tax rates, the biggermembers wistfully muse about shooing away the duchy, like abothersome gnat. &quot;If they contemplated the same thing on ahuman level,&quot; scoffs Mr. Thiel, &quot;they would have to say thatall small people should be abolished.&quot;   Rather, says Mr. Christophory, Luxembourg has proved thatthere is a place in the world, albeit tiny, for smallcountries. &quot;We can teach the bigger ones lessons of modesty,tolerance and cohabitation,&quot; he says.   Tell that to the Slovenes. In the shadow of the Alps, asthey wait for international recognition, they recount themorose anecdote of a Slovene playwright:   On a visit to earth, God comes upon a man crying on theside of a road. God asks him what is wrong, promising to easehis pain.   &quot;Nobody can help me, not even God in heaven,&quot; weeps theman.   &quot;Please,&quot; says God, &quot;I will help.&quot;   &quot;I am a Slovene,&quot; confesses the man.   Upon hearing that, God begins crying bitterly and walksaway.</TEXT></DOC>