<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900606-0093</DOCNO><DOCID>900606-0093.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Fear of Taking the Rap on Taxes Brings Out   Differences Between House, Senate Democrats   ----   By David Rogers   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A18</SO><CO>   TAXES</CO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- When White House Chief of Staff John Sununutook a thinly veiled swipe at Congress on taxes last month,House Democrats reached for the telephone. Senate Democratslooked for the cameras.   A worried House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta(D., Calif.) called Budget Director Richard Darman to protestthat Mr. Sununu had jeopardized fragile deficit-reductiontalks. Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) raised similarconcerns directly with President Bush when the presidentcalled the speaker about a separate matter.</LP><TEXT>   By comparison, Senate Democrats elevated the controversyby going before television cameras. &quot;I don't ever callDarman,&quot; says Rep. Panetta's counterpart, Senate BudgetCommittee Chairman James Sasser (D., Tenn.). Senate MajorityLeader George Mitchell kept himself one step removed byhaving his office verify Mr. Sununu's reported remarksthrough channels. The Maine Democrat then argued for SpeakerFoley to join him in a televised statement that condemned thechief of staff's comments -- painting Democrats as pro-taxes-- as &quot;untrue, unfair, and ill-timed.&quot;   The Democratic response says a lot about the differencesbetween the two bodies of Congress. A nervous Senate appearsdriven foremost by external, election-year pressures on thebudget talks. The House leadership reflects more theinternal, institutional stakes in reaching some accommodationon the deficit.   As budget negotiations resume this week, these lines mayblur, but the contrast between the two chambers underscores adilemma for Democrats as the legislative party. To showstrength and retain power -- most immediately in the Senate-- the party leadership is determined that the White House gofirst in addressing the budget crisis. But by waiting for areluctant president to act, congressional leaders riskabandoning their historic constitutional role as keepers ofthe nation's purse.   Leaders in both houses speak less of the founding fathersthan of the dictates of 20th century budget acts, and it tookan irate representative -- under attack for pork-barreling --to break ranks and mention Article I of the Constitution.&quot;The Constitution clearly places the responsibility for theappropriation of public funds on the Congress of the UnitedStates,&quot; said Rep. Bob Traxler (D., Mich.) of the HouseAppropriations Committee in recent debate. &quot;Not thepresident.&quot;   With a 55-45 majority, Senate Democrats come into thebudget talks as skittish as cats. Their backs arch at themention of taxes. Claws come out at the prospect of losingseats in November. Mr. Sasser is a former state Democraticchairman from Tennessee. Mr. Mitchell is more of a partisanthan his softer Eisenhower Democrat image suggests. His baseof power is built on his success as a campaign chairmanelecting Democrats to the Senate in 1986, and he is bent onprotecting this class -- and his own leadership post -- inthe critical 1992 elections two years away.   After two decades in the Senate, Finance CommitteeChairman Lloyd Bentsen is by nature an inside, incrementallegislator. But after running as the Democraticvice-presidential nominee, he can't escape the more outsiderole of a party leader expected to articulate broader themes.The gray-haired Texan is quickly annoyed at any suggestionthat he might be influenced by the 1988 campaign, but few aremore pointed in demanding that Mr. Bush address the nation onthe deficit problem before the talks can truly succeed.   &quot;That's what he hired out for,&quot; says Sen. Bentsen. &quot;Youdon't just give the good news.&quot;   House Democrats, by comparison, have the more trusting,workaday nature of hounds. The rank-and-file worry about ananti-incumbent mood at home and redistricting in 1992. But noone in the top leadership has ever served in the minority --or expects to soon.   Mr. Panetta is a former Republican who has devoted much ofhis House career to the budget. Mr. Foley resists publicconfrontation and is the last of the appointed party whips torise to the speakership. The gruff Ways and Means CommitteeChairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) speaks fondly of Mr.Bush as a former colleague. As for Mr. Sununu, HouseDemocrats insist, as one committee chairman put it, that thechief of staff is just that -- only &quot;staff.&quot;   When Democrats took over the Senate four years ago, theirvictory was built on wins in the South and Midwest. Thesestates are pivotal in talks today -- Mr. Mitchell'srepresentative, Georgia Sen. Wyche Fowler, is from the classof '86. But the same regional base imposes limits as well. Incrafting his own budget outline for the fiscal year beginningOct. 1, Mr. Sasser had to avoid cuts in agriculture toplacate farm-state allies. And Democrats must cope with thefact that part of their success four years ago was owed totheir ability to mimic the GOP's own populist, antitaxrhetoric.   In the years since, the onus has shifted as a Republicanadministration now looks for revenue to fend off Pentagoncuts and finance the savings-and-loan bailout. But anti-taxpledges could yet haunt freshman senators from Alabama andSouth Dakota. And Sen. Terry Sanford, a progressive formerpresident of Duke University, stumped North Carolina in 1986as an antitax former paratrooper, whose television adsattacked his GOP opponent -- then-incumbent James Broyhill --for supporting federal tax increases.   A former member of the House Ways and Means Committee,Sen. Fowler serves as a bridge between the two chambers, andhis most natural allies are the younger, more aggressivemembers of the Democratic leadership. House Majority LeaderRichard Gephardt, Mr. Foley's proxy in the budget talks, wasa colleague on Ways and Means; the Missourian has ties to theSouth and is identified with the same Midwest populism thathelped Senate Democrats in 1986. Majority Whip William Grayof Philadelphia -- perhaps the most political of Mr. Foley'schoices -- is a northern, urban black, but his rapid riseowes as much to his support in the South, where he has builtalliances with rural, conservative white Democrats as well assuch regional interests as tobacco. &quot;I am not interested inraising taxes on Americans,&quot; says Rep. Gray.   Mindful of deadlines imposed by the Gramm-Rudmandeficit-reduction law, Mr. Darman is anxious to strike somesettlement by mid-July. But in the early skirmishing, noagreement has yet been reached on even a target for thedeficit-reduction package. Options swing wildly from $300billion over five years to a number twice as high, and thefascination with multiyear plans belies immense problems inaccurately calculating the impact of policy decisions. AmongRepublicans, there is increasing tension between Texas Sen.Phil Gramm, who has proposed to freeze nondefensediscretionary spending, and the more moderate ranking memberof the Senate Budget Committee, Sen. Pete Domenici of NewMexico.   Mr. Darman himself speaks in terms of a five-year, $420billion deficit-reduction package. But as thesavings-and-loan crisis has worsened, Democrats have grownbolder in bidding up the stakes as a means to test thepresident's commitment to permanent changes, includingsignificant taxes. As a result, after first asking that atarget amount of deficit reduction be agreed on, Mr. Darmanhas backed away from insisting on this condition.   The House is scheduled to begin drafting fiscal 1991appropriations bills without waiting for a final budget, butthe greater test may come in the Senate as the Democrats seekto pass their own preliminary budget resolution in the comingweeks.   The narrowly divided Senate is more fragmented than theHouse and more subject to the whims of individual members.Any future budget agreement will be put to this same test,and in an election-year atmosphere, the clean-air debate thisspring was a striking illustration of the differences betweenthe two chambers.   Sen. Mitchell was forced to expend immense politicalcapital and in one case publicly sided with the auto industryagainst his own environmental constituency to protect Sen.Carl Levin, up for re-election in Michigan. By comparison,Speaker Foley applied his energy behind the scenes more toavoid votes than win them. When House Energy and CommerceCommittee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.) sought to delaydebate, the speaker insisted it go forward. When Mr.Rostenkowski sought to challenge critical revenue provisions,Mr. Foley blunted his effort. And when environmentalists andlabor couldn't agree on auto-fuel provisions, Mr. Foleyforced the two sides to come together at least long enough toallow his Democrats to escape having to make a choice.</TEXT></DOC>