<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910424-0092</DOCNO><DOCID>910424-0092.</DOCID><HL>   Down on the Farm:   Iowa Towns Shrivel   As the Young People   Head for the Cities   ---   In Tiny Alden, a Son-in-Law   Vows to Find a Better Life,   Leaving the Elders Behind   ---   Census Charts Rural Turmoil   ----   By David Shribman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><GV>COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)</GV><RE>IOWA (IA)</RE><LP>   ALDEN, Iowa -- The big news around here is that Tom andLinda Jass are moving on.   From his seat on the porch, Mr. Jass, a tall, slim figurein worn chinos, can see his corn and soybean fields. Out backis the chicken coop that collapsed last fall. Across the wayis his father-in-law's farm. And everywhere, it seems, arereminders of the frustration that is driving the Jasses away,both from farming and from this tiny town in north-centralIowa.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I'm tired of sitting here and being lonely and feelingthat what I do is of no value,&quot; says the 42-year-old fatherof four, who adds that he has lost &quot;a ton of money&quot; in therichest soil in the world. He doesn't know where he is going,or what he is going to do, he says, &quot;but it's going to beconstructive.&quot;   Alden, a farm town of just 853 residents on the IowaRiver, can hardly afford the loss. The Jasses' decision --bitter and final -- means that a town that has already shrunkby 100 people in the past decade, will soon lose six more --this time the young family living in the 19th-centuryfarmhouse by the side of the road.   It also means that Mrs. Jass's parents, both in their 70s,will be left behind to tend to the sheep and the crops, andperhaps harder, to take care of themselves in a town thathasn't had a grocery store, a doctor or a policeman in ageneration.   &quot;I can't waste the rest of my life just because they wantto stay here,&quot; says Mr. Jass. The Jasses now live in thewhite clapboard home where Mrs. Jass was reared.   While new statistics compiled by the Census Bureau maysketch the outlines of such rural upheavals, the people whostill live here say that what is really gone is the heart ofthe town. The young families have left -- for Des Moines orthe coasts or the big cities of the Great Lakes, while themerchants have fled to larger towns, the nearest being sixmiles away.   &quot;This little town of Alden is going to be home to oldpeople,&quot; says Irvin Abbas, Mr. Jass's father-in-law, as hetakes off his yellow work gloves and rests his foot on a baleof hay. &quot;Pretty soon, I fear we won't see any young people atall. It's coming. Truth is true.&quot;   Those who remain worry that the flight of the youngimperils more than the economic survival of the community.&quot;It's young people who provide the joy of life,&quot; says JerryAldrich, who teaches science at the Alden Community School,which serves pupils from kindergarten through grade 12. &quot;Theyoung people give life to a community, and when you losethem, you lose a sense of being alive.&quot;   Demographers believe that the new census results and otherdata, especially figures detailing youth flight, underlineserious trends that give new worry to the survival of ruralcommunities. In 1980, for example, Iowa's birth rate wasabove that of the nation. Now Iowa is one of only five stateswith a birth rate two points below the national average.   The new data, only now being processed, show that from1985 through 1989, 29 of Iowa's 99 counties had more deathsthan births. During the five years that preceded that period,only four counties reported natural decreases. The median ageof Iowa's population increased from 30 in 1980 to more than33 in 1989. In many communities the nursing home is thebiggest employer.   Alden is not the only town that is shriveling up as youngpeople move out. In every decade since 1920, more people havemoved out of Iowa than have moved in. But this trend reachedrecord proportions in the 1980s. In that decade alone, some280,000 more people left than came here -- more than afourfold increase over the 60,000 who migrated out during the1970s.   &quot;These towns are bleeding people,&quot; says the Rev. JamesMcCalpin, pastor of St. Patrick's Church in Sheldon, Iowa, alivestock and grain farming area near the South Dakota andMinnesota lines.   The situation here is so bad that three years ago Iowabecame only the second state in the nation where the numberof people over 75 was greater than the number under five.(Florida, the country's mecca for retirees, was the first,for very different reasons.)   &quot;We have the lethal combination of more young peopleleaving and fewer people being born,&quot; says Willis Goudy, arural sociologist in the College of Agriculture at Iowa StateUniversity. &quot;When you combine the two, it makes it verydifficult to think positively for the future of a state likethis.&quot;   The 680 small towns with population under 1,000 -- Iowahas more of them than any other state -- have beenparticularly hard hit; they have lost about 35% of theirretail trade in the last decade, for example.   Last fall, the town fathers of Early, whose populationdropped from 824 in 1960 to 649 in 1990, finally took thehandful of old abandoned stores in the center of town,knocked them down and burned them. &quot;There isn't a lot left inthis town anymore,&quot; says Richard Sanders, who owns thehardware store in the northwest Iowa town.   This January, the residents of Donnan, whose population ofseven made it the state's smallest town, voted 6-1 tounincorporate, virtually sentencing the place to oblivion.   In Alden, signs of the youth flight are evident all over.This time of year, with the huge piles of snow gone and thewarm fields ready for planting, a visitor is struck by whatnovelist Edith Wharton once called &quot;the contrast between thevolatility of the climate and the deadness of the community.&quot;   One of the churches can't find young people to sit on theboard. If the Boy Scout leader quits -- he has had the jobfor eight years because no one will relieve him -- the troopdies. The school is having trouble finding volunteers for thecarnival. The 4-H is starved for leaders, as is the LittleLeague. Town officials want to clean up the community parkand work on the road ditches, but such projects suffer fromlack of able-bodied volunteers. And every year Mr. Aldrich,the science teacher, takes his high-school students on a tripto Chicago or St. Louis. He figures they will be able to seewhere they are going to live someday.   A century ago, before automobiles, shopping malls andagribusiness, Alden had to be more or less self-sufficient.It had three firms of stock buyers, two grain buyers, twodrug stores, two hardware outlets, a jewelry shop, twoagricultural implement stores, a photo gallery and twomillinery stores. It was, according to the typewritten townhistory, &quot;a pretty good point for trading or for a permanentresidence.&quot;   But today much of Alden's main block is boarded up. Allthat remains are a couple of taverns, a thrift shop, a barbershop, a beauty shop, a lawyer's office that is only openMonday, Wednesday and Friday, and a welding shop.   And inside the welding shop there rages the argument thatis defining the town right now.   Michael Oliver, the 36-year-old owner of the shop, alsosits on the town council. He wants to stay. His wife, Kerryn,also 36, is the town piano teacher. She yearns to leave.   &quot;It would be great to be able to stay here, but there's noopportunity here for me to do the things I want to do with mylife,&quot; says Mrs. Oliver, who dreams of returning to schooland becoming a minister. &quot;When you watch businesses close,one by one by one, you have to start asking why you'restaying.&quot;   The flight of young and middle-aged people from Iowa'srural towns has spawned a sub-crisis of its own: an agingpopulation of people who not only have no doctors nearby butno young relatives or neighbors to look after their health oreven to do their marketing if they are sick.   &quot;There's a real problem in caring for the aging,&quot; saysRuth Book, studies coordinator for Iowa State's Center forFamily Research, which is examining how families are reactingto change in eight counties of north central Iowa. &quot;Peoplewho grew up with families and neighbors suddenly don't haveeither.&quot;   While the search for opportunity forces families aparteverywhere, the problem in rural America is fueled by thelegacy of the farm crisis of the 1980s. Thousands of farmerslike Mr. Jass still haven't recovered from the credit crunchthat caused a wave of farm foreclosures. Debt-ridden familyfarmers can't compete with the behemoths of agribusiness,sometimes resorting to desperate acts, like burning theirbarns so they won't have to pay taxes on them.   The next generation of family farmers may be less willingthan their parents to try. &quot;The chances that I'll be a farmerin Alden are almost nonexistent,&quot; says Luke Jass, who at 14hopes to be a doctor or scientist. &quot;Farmers are always indebt, they don't have any fun, they work hard and they don'tget anything out of it. I'll do anything but farm.&quot;   There is some glimmer of hope in some of the bigger towns,with populations over 1,000. Britt, Iowa, halfway between DesMoines and Minneapolis, for instance, has held steady atabout 2,100 residents for the past four decades, and in thepast year younger people have purchased the local drug store,the five-and-dime and a men's store.   &quot;Six months ago the average age of business owners wasabout 60,&quot; says William Pritchard, a former Britt mayor whoowns a Ford dealership and has interest in a women's shop intown. &quot;Things are better, but they still could improve and westill could feel better about things.&quot;   Meanwhile, the urban centers of this part of the corn beltare actually growing. Cedar Rapids, for example, hasattracted a healthy and growing biotechnology industry andhas begun to attract new insurance companies. The city hasalso landed a Korean-owned brass, copper and stainless-steelmill. And the Des Moines area is resisting the recession,with some companies experiencing growth.   State governments and big corporations now are trying toplant similar seeds of opportunity in rural pockets of thefarm states, but they still must convince young people.   &quot;We've got to tell kids, long before they leave, that inthe modern world with all these technological developments,they can have an international business based in their oldsmall town,&quot; says Lu Jean Cole, director of communityrelations for Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc., anagricultural seed and plant-breeding research company basedin Des Moines.   So far though, Alden and scores of towns like it haven'tsold themselves even to the captive audiences of their ownresidents.   &quot;I look around and see there aren't many opportunitieshere,&quot; says Mr. Jass. &quot;Sure, someone's going to sellinsurance, someone's going to pump gas. But there isn't muchfor people to do except drive the feed truck and work at theegg place, and no one's going to do that long term.&quot;   His father-in-law, Mr. Abbas, hasn't tried to talk Mr.Jass into staying. But he hasn't been able to reconcilehimself to the departure of Mr. Jass and his wife, either.   &quot;We expected to live here forever, surrounded by family,&quot;says Mr. Abbas, who has farmed here for a half-century. &quot;Weplanned on it. But things change, and I'm seeing that allchange is not for the better. Things aren't going to work outthe way I thought they would.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>