<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900503-0087</DOCNO><DOCID>900503-0087.</DOCID><HL>   Morgan Stanley: Program Powerhouse   ---   Firm Woos Clients   With High Tech   ----   By Craig Torres   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE C1</SO><CO>   MS</CO><IN>STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)</IN><LP>   NEW YORK -- Morgan Stanley Group Inc. has emerged as themost powerful program trading firm on Wall Street, followinga big shakeout in the business after October's &quot;minicrash.&quot;   In the first quarter, the investment-banking firm tradedmore than 100 million shares a month in computer-assistedprogram trading strategies, according to New York StockExchange data, or about as much volume as the entire BigBoard does on some slow days.</LP><TEXT>   Morgan Stanley's recent program trading is far more activethan that of any firm since the Big Board began releasingdata in 1988. It's even more striking because Morgan Stanleyand most other firms say they're no longer doing programtrading for themselves, only for customers.   In March, Morgan Stanley traded as many shares as Bear,Stearns andamp; Co., Philadelphia's Susquehanna Investment Group, aprogram-trading specialist, and PaineWebber Group Inc.combined. Morgan alone did 31.6% of the total program tradingvolume in the first three months of this year. Programtrading accounts for about 10% of daily Big Board volume.   Morgan Stanley's emergence as Wall Street'sprogram-trading powerhouse is partly attributable to itscompetitors' queasiness over the strategy after the publicoutcry against program trading late last year after theOctober market plunge. Program trading involves the rapidbuying and selling of large baskets of stocks, and criticshave especially blamed one form of it, stock-index arbitrage,for making the market more volatile. Morgan Stanley, bykeeping its doors wide open to customers, obviously thinksthe volatility debate is an open question.   Another reason Morgan Stanley advanced to the head of theprogram trading class is the increasing emphasis amonginvestors on computerized trading strategies in stocks,futures and options markets around the world. Also, managersof stock-index funds say Morgan Stanley has wooed clientswith its hot technology and trading dexterity.   &quot;I think they've continued to make a big investment intechnology,&quot; says Jeffrey Geller, managing director at BEAAssociates Inc., a large money management firm that usesprogram trading.   Last year, Morgan Stanley was in head-to-head competitionwith such firms as Salomon Inc., General Electric Co.'sKidder, Peabody andamp; Co., PaineWebber and Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.for top billing as a program trader for both customer andproprietary accounts. But since the October minicrash, all ofthese firms cut back or ceased stock-index arbitrage, themost debated form of program trading, partly out of concernfor the market but also to keep small investors coming totheir retail brokerage offices.   Morgan Stanley has no small investors to worry about andis able to keep its doors open for those institutionalcustomers who want to use stock-index arbitrage strategies.   Morgan Stanley's spokesmen have little to say on why thefirm is doing so much program trading. The firm is, in part,cashing in on the demise in February of Drexel BurnhamLambert Inc., which created a big scare on Wall Street aboutother firms and their stock-clearing operations. A number ofclients, who wanted to clear big trades through a stablefirm, migrated to Morgan Stanley, which boasts that itsclearing and settlement operations are as safe, fast andefficient as any on the Street.   Yet Morgan Stanley's activities have raised eyebrows amongsome investors. The active trading by the firm's customersappears in some cases to ignore the New York Stock Exchange'srequest last November for a voluntary pullback from programtrading in times of volatile markets. A panel appointed bythe exchange currently is studying market volatility andprogram trading as part of the exchange's response to thepublic's outcry; results aren't expected until next month.Morgan Stanley's chairman, S. Parker Gilbert, is a Big Boarddirector and member of the panel.   The Big Board implored member firms to &quot;ask theircustomers to refrain from program trading, unless thosetrades would have a stabilizing influence on the market.&quot; Theexchange's request was tantamount to a cease-and-desistorder, but it has been clearly ignored by the clients ofMorgan Stanley and other firms.   For example, on Jan. 24, the Dow Jones Industrial Averagefell 60.42 points in the first half-hour of trading. Duringthat period Morgan Stanley sold 226,000 shares for a client.Among other sellers, Susquehanna Investment Group sold466,000 shares, PaineWebber 460,000, Merrill Lynch 219,000,and Kidder Peabody 154,000.   &quot;All we can do is make sure customers are aware of the NewYork Stock Exchange's position,&quot; a Morgan Stanleyspokesperson says. &quot;But they have a need to adjust theirexposure to the market, and we can't tell them they can'ttrade. They need access to the market.&quot;   And Morgan Stanley prides itself on providing this access.While other firms have shifted their program-trading focusaway from the U.S. to foreign markets, Morgan Stanley hasabsorbed many clients who trade in the U.S. market.   &quot;They are good at client relationships,&quot; says JeremyLefkowitz, managing director at Chancellor Capital ManagementInc.   Individuals familiar with the firm's activities, speakingon the condition they weren't identified, say MorganStanley's rising market share in program trading may reflectthe firm's large technological investment in its tradingbusinesses. For example, the firm is currently negotiatingwith Sun Microsystems Inc. and other concerns to purchaseseveral high-performance computer workstations. The peoplefamiliar with the firm said the workstations will help linktrading departments to a central computer. In addition, theseworkstations will allow Morgan Stanley traders to use some ofthe hottest automated trading systems on the market today.   Morgan Stanley recently installed a computer in itstrading room that carries an artificial intelligence tradingpackage designed by Dale Prouty, a physicist who has turnedhis talents to the securities business as head of a companycalled Integrated Analytics Corp. Mr. Prouty's brainchild,called &quot;MarketMind,&quot; is a powerful market-surveillance systemthat can give traders up-to-the-second data on relationshipsamong hundreds of stocks, stock baskets, futures and options.   While about half of Morgan Stanley's program trading in atypical month involves stock-index arbitrage-rapid tradesamong stocks, stock-index futures and options -- the otherhalf involves a variety of portfolio trading strategies.George Douglas, formerly head of Drexel's quantitativetrading and research team, says Morgan Stanley is one of themost aggressive firms when it comes to winning portfoliotrading business.   &quot;We've evaluated the capability of leading firms, and interms of aggressiveness and pricing, Morgan Stanley is rightat the top,&quot; says Mr. Douglas, now chairman of a consultingfirm, Dais Group Inc. He adds that many foreign investors areusing U.S. brokers to buy baskets of stocks. Also, MorganStanley is said to be a large broker in already completedarbitrage trades. Stock-index arbitrage is considered by manymoney managers an alternative to short-term investments suchas Treasury bills. Brokers such as Morgan Stanley will sellthese money managers stock-index arbitrage trades thatusually deliver a return on investment a bit higher thanshort-term interest rates. These trades are typically done inLondon to get around technical rules in the U.S. market.</TEXT></DOC>