<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910411-0002</DOCNO><DOCID>910411-0002.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Banks' Burden in Cleanups Is Questioned   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Amy Stevens   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B5</SO><CO>   AFP BAC CCI CMB TAXES</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><NS>LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)TAXES, ISSUES, LEGISLATION, ASSISTANCE, EVASION (TAX)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)MASSACHUSETTS (MA)NEW YORK (NY)</RE><LP>   A study of the financial statements of major banks raisesquestions about whether lenders are bearing as large a burdenas they claim for the cleanup of hazardous waste sites.   The study by the advocacy groups Essential Information andU.S. Public Interest Research Group was timed to coincidewith the opening today of a fact-finding hearing by Sen.Frank Lautenberg (D., N.J.) about lenders' liability underthe federal Superfund law.</LP><TEXT>   Under Superfund, those who own or operate contaminatedsites are responsible for cleaning them up. The law alreadycontains an exemption shielding lenders from liability whenthey have a security interest in a company but don'tparticipate in its management.   Nonetheless, lenders have been lobbying Congress to definethe scope of that exemption further since a federal appealscourt last year found Fleet Factors Corp., a commercialfinancing company, liable for the cleanup of hazardous wastecreated by a business to which it lent money. Fleet Factorsis a subsidiary of Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc. ofProvidence, R.I.   Sen. Jake Garn (R., Utah) and Rep. John LaFalce (D., N.Y.)have introduced a bill that would create additional Superfundexemptions for public and private lenders. And theEnvironmental Protection Agency has proposed a rule givingbankers broader protections from environmental lawsuits.   The consumer-oriented advocacy groups that conducted thebank survey oppose dilution of lenders' liability becausethey say the threat of such liability encourages lenders toinvestigate whether a company has a toxic-waste problembefore agreeing to lend to it. Such scrutiny, in turn, islikely to make companies more vigilant about obeyingenvironmental laws, the advocates say.   The groups' survey looked at 10-K reports submitted to theSecurities and Exchange Commission by the nation's 20 largestbank holding companies. All publicly traded banking companiesare required to disclose legal liabilities in the reports.   According to the survey, no current liabilities related toSuperfund cleanups were disclosed by the banks as of March31, 1991. Six additional banks operating in 10 states withthe largest number of Superfund sites also reported no suchliabilities, the survey found. Among the companies surveyedwere Citicorp, BankAmerica Corp., and Chase Manhattan Corp.   &quot;The banks' own SEC filings show that there is noliability crisis. The banks are either misrepresenting theirposition to the SEC or misrepresenting their position toCongress,&quot; said Andrew Buchsbaum, a program director for PIRGin Michigan. U.S. PIRG is a lobbying arm for more than 25public-interest research groups. Essential Information wasfounded by consumer activist Ralph Nader.   Mr. Buchsbaum said the survey buttresses data submitted toCongress last year by the EPA that found that only 34Superfund cases have involved lenders and that only sixlenders have contributed financially to Superfund cleanups.   But John Byrne, senior counsel to the American BankersAssociation, said the survey doesn't reflect potentialliability problems. He said that uncertainties about the lawhave prompted many lenders to stop lending money to high-riskindustries and to small businesses that use real estate ascollateral.   &quot;Lenders have a serious problem. It's unfair to look atone reporting element and draw such sweeping conclusions,&quot;said Steven A. Tasher, a New York environmental lawyer whorepresents lenders.   Among those scheduled to testify in Congress today are theAmerican Bankers Association, the federal Resolution TrustCorp., the EPA, Sen. Garn and Michigan Attorney General FrankKelley.   ---   SYNDICATED LAWSUIT arrangement upheld by Californiaappeals court.   In a closely watched case involving the financing of alawsuit through the sale of shares in its outcome, athree-judge panel of the California Court of Appeals rejecteda challenge to the arrangement. The court said that thedefendant in the suit had no grounds to challenge thepresence of outside investors in the plaintiffs' case becausethose investors weren't parties to the litigation.   However, the court declined to decide whether suchfinancing pacts are permissible as a general rule. Severalstates have outlawed the practice of selling shares inlitigation because it's thought to discourage settlement.   In California and most other states, the legality oflitigation syndicates is &quot;a brand-new, hot issue&quot; accordingto Morgan Chu, a partner in the law firm of Irell andamp; Manellawho has been involved in related lawsuits.   The ruling was a Pyrrhic victory for a pair of men whoraised about $300,000 by selling shares in their $40 millionsuit against William Millard, the founder of ComputerLandCorp. In a separate, unpublished opinion, the court alsoupheld a judgment in favor of Mr. Millard in the underlyingsuit, so there will be no winnings for the investors todivide.   The court suggested that the challenge to the agreementmight have been upheld if the investors had had a more directstake in the case, beyond just the shares they had purchased.This might have been the case, for example, if the trialjudge had found that they were in fact directing thelitigation from the sidelines.   John MacGregor, a San Rafael, Calif., lawyer for the twomen, said he was disappointed with the decision in the suitbut thought the court reached the correct result in upholdingthe syndication agreements. Lawyers for Mr. Millard couldn'timmediately be reached for comment.   The decision comes a month after a federal judge inCalifornia declared an investment in litigation to be againstpublic policy in another suit.   In that case, the plaintiff later assigned to theinvestors about 85% of his interest in the patent that was atissue in the suit. That made the investors coplaintiffsbecause they then had a direct stake in the case, and thelitigation was allowed to proceed.   ---   ATHLETES' PERSONAL CORPORATIONS are upheld in tax-caseappeal.   A federal appeals court in Minneapolis handed down adecision that protects professional athletes who incorporatedto gain tax benefits on pensions and salaries. Had the rulinggone against the athletes, the tax advantages thatself-incorporated actors and entertainers enjoy also mighthave been open to legal attack.   In a 2-1 decision, a panel of the Eighth U.S. CircuitCourt of Appeals ruled that an incorporated athlete who playsfor a professional sports team is an employee of his ownpersonal service corporation, not of the team. So payments tothe incorporated athletes' pension plan aren't taxable, andneither is the salary paid to the corporation by the sportsteam, the court ruled. Only payments from the corporation tothe athlete are taxable, the court said.   The case pitted seven Minnesota North Stars hockey players-- six of them now retired -- against the Internal RevenueService. The appeals court overturned a ruling by the U.S.Tax Court in 1989.   &quot;If we had lost this case, we would have paid about$350,000 in taxes and interest,&quot; said John W. Hughes,attorney for the plaintiffs. Mr. Hughes said that in the1980s, about 300 professional team athletes had chosen toincorporate as a way to defer compensation and set up pensionplans. Mr. Hughes noted, however, that few athletes haveincorporated in the past few years because the tax advantageshave been reduced and the leagues' own pension plans haveimproved.   Mr. Hughes said the issue transcends the sports world. Ina similar case, the tax court had ruled that actress JoannePflug, who incorporated, could take advantage of taxbenefits. The appellate court said that it saw no distinctionbetween Ms. Pflug and the hockey players, and that bothshould enjoy the same kind of tax breaks.   ---   BOSTON GLOBE agrees to run legal notices requested byobscenity prosecutors.   It was a real-life Catch 22: To pursue a pornography caseunder Massachusetts law, prosecutors needed to publish legalnotices naming offensive publications in Boston newspapers.But Boston's newspapers initially refused to run the notice-- because the names of the publications were too offensive.   A Hampden County, Mass., Superior Court judge responded byordering the Globe to come to a hearing Friday and show causewhy it shouldn't have to run the ad. Yesterday, the Globe, aunit of Affiliated Publications Inc., reversed field and saidit would run the legal notice -- though &quot;with extremereluctance.&quot; A Globe spokesman said the newspaper decided onreflection that it was in the public interest to giveprosecutors access to the press.   The case started in December, when Springfield, Mass.,police seized 355 publications at Video Expo and MagazineCenter and asked a local judge to declare them obscene. Underthe state's law, publishers, booksellers and authors are thensupposed to be notified of such prosecutions in legal noticesin at least one daily Boston newspaper. But both the BostonHerald and the Boston Globe refused to print the notice,judging the titles alone offensive to their readership.   Globe and Herald lawyers maintain that the newspapersaren't required to print anything they don't want to. &quot;Thereis a general rule that the government can't require anewspaper to publish anything,&quot; said Robert Dushman, anattorney for the Herald. &quot;I don't know why there should be adifferent rule for legal ads.&quot;   Regina Quinlan, attorney for Video Expo, said she wasn'tcounting on the lack of a legal ad to save her client. &quot;Myclient exercises his rights secured to him by the FirstAmendment.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>