<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900529-0018</DOCNO><DOCID>900529-0018.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Lender May Be Liable for Client's Cleanup   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Edward Felsenthal   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/29/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   FNG MO CI MD TKC WNEWS LATAM FREST</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)INSURANCE (INS)AEROSPACE (ARO)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A federal appeals court ruled that Fleet Factors Corp., acommercial financing company, may be liable for the cleanupof hazardous waste at a site owned by a company to which itlent money.   The decision, reached late last week in Atlanta, couldhave far-reaching significance for financial institutionsthat lend money to companies that own or operate propertycontaminated with hazardous substances.</LP><TEXT>   The case had been closely watched because it is the firsttime an appeals court has ruled on the scope of an exemptionin the federal Superfund law that shields lenders fromliability when they have a security interest in a company butdon't participate in its management. Under Superfund, thosewho own or operate contaminated sites are responsible forcleaning them up.   The majority of courts have ruled that lenders whoforeclose on contaminated property are no longer covered bythat exemption. But Fleet, a New York-based subsidiary ofFleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc. of Providence, R.I.,didn't foreclose on a facility owned by defunct SwainsboroPrint Works in Swainsboro, Ga. Fleet had loaned money toSwainsboro secured by that company's accounts receivable andinventory.   The government sued Fleet in 1987 to recover the cost ofcleaning up hazardous waste at the site. In 1982, afterSwainsboro Print filed for bankruptcy-court protection, Fleetarranged to auction off the company's inventory and equipmentto recoup its security interest. According to the government,during the winding down process asbestos was released anddrums containing hazardous waste spilled on the property.Fleet has said it is not liable for the cleanup because itdid not own or operate the site and that Fleet's actions werecovered by the exemption.   In its decision, the appeals panel said that lenders whoare able to affect hazardous waste disposal decisions at asite are liable under Superfund. The panel found that thelower court had erred when it ruled that lenders must beinvolved in the day-to-day operations of a facility to incurliability.   The panel said that lenders must insist that debtorscomply with environmental standards as a requirement forcontinued and future financial support.   &quot;Banks will now have to assert a greater degree ofdiligence over their borrowers and their borrowers'activities with hazardous waste than had previously beenthought necessary,&quot; said Richard G. Leland of the New Yorklaw firm of Rosenman andamp; Colin, who argued the lower court caseon behalf of Fleet.   But Richard B. Stewart, assistant attorney general forenvironment and natural resources, said that while thecourt's ruling was broad, &quot;we're dealing with a case wherethere was very active involvement by the creditor in theday-to-day management.&quot;   Richard Miley of Nixon, Yow, Waller andamp; Capers, a lawyer forFleet, said the company hadn't decided whether it willappeal.   ---   PHILIP MORRIS SUES INSURER over Panama factory destroyedin wake of U.S. invasion.   In its suit, Philip Morris International, a unit of PhilipMorris Cos., New York, claimed that Cigna Property andamp; CasualtyInsurance Co. breached an insurance agreement by refusing topay for theft and destruction at the cigarette factory. Thesuit seeks damages of at least $2 million. According to thesuit, the damages and looting occurred Dec. 22, two daysafter the U.S. invaded Panama to oust Gen. Manuel Noriega.   Cigna, a unit of Philadelphia-based Cigna Corp.,countersued, arguing that its coverage excludes damages thatoccur during &quot;hostile or warlike action . . . by military,naval or air forces.&quot; The company said it doesn't have to paybecause damages to the cigarette factory, in an industrialpark in Panama City, happened during hostilities. Both suitswere filed in federal court in Manhattan.   A Cigna spokesman said the company doesn't comment onsuits.   A Philip Morris spokeswoman said the company maintainsthat the damage occurred during &quot;looting by civilians,following the military invasion.&quot;   The spokeswoman said the $2 million in damages includeddestruction of the factory as well as the theft of tobaccoand liquor at the facility.   ---   SATELLITE-TECHNOLOGY MAKERS WIN jury verdict dismissingnegligence suit.   Officials in the aerospace industry had been closelywatching the California case, believed to be the first trialof property damage claims arising from an incident in outerspace. Many were concerned that a damage verdict mightencourage a wave of suits second-guessing the design ofsatellite products that are on the cutting-edge oftechnology, says Victoria Cloninger, an attorney in the LosAngeles office of Lord, Bissell andamp; Brook, counsel for Hitco, adefendant.   &quot;This isn't the average toaster that you buy off theshelf,&quot; Ms. Cloninger says. &quot;Everybody was sitting on pinsand needles.&quot;   The case involves the failure of a telecommunicationssatellite built for the Indonesian government and launchedfrom the U.S. space shuttle in 1984. Shortly after thelaunch, the satellite malfunctioned, falling short of itsproper orbit. In January 1986, a products liability suit wasbrought by three insurance companies to recover $5.6 millionwhich they paid to Perumtel, the Indonesian government'stelecommunications agency.   Accused of negligent product design were McDonnell DouglasCorp., St. Louis, which made the launch vehicle; MortonThiokol Inc., now Thiokol Corp., Ogden, Utah, which built therocket motor; and Hitco, which fabricated the so-called exitcone that is used to maximize the rocket's thrust. Hitco is asubsidiary of B-P Chemicals Advanced Materials, Gardenia,Calif.   After a five-month trial, a state court jury in Fullerton,Calif., held on May 15 that none of the defendants had beennegligent. The jury did uphold a breach of warranty claimagainst Morton Thiokol, but, following the trial judge'sinstructions, awarded damages of only $52,000, includinginterest.   The plaintiffs were Lexington Insurance Co., Boston;Talbot, Bird andamp; Co., New York, and Northbrook Excess InsuranceCo., Chicago.   Phillip Bostwick, a lawyer with the Washington, D.C., lawfirm of Shaw, Pittman, Potts andamp; Trowbridge, counsel for theplaintiffs, said an appeal is being considered.   ---   RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI IS SWITCHING New York law firms.   The former Manhattan U.S. attorney is moving from White andamp;Case to Anderson Kill Olick andamp; Oshinsky, a smaller law firmthat has attracted many former Manhattan prosecutors.   Mr. Giuliani, 45 years old, said the move was &quot;an excitingopportunity to join some of my old friends.&quot; He joined Whiteandamp; Case in February 1989 and failed in his bid to be mayor ofNew York last November. He called Anderson Kill a firm with a&quot;dynamic atmosphere&quot; and more opportunities to practicelitigation.   Mr. Giuliani is known for his prosecution of New York'smob &quot;families&quot; and white-collar criminals.   Dennison Young Jr., Mr. Giuliani's deputy U.S. attorneywho went with him to White andamp; Case, also will move to AndersonKill.   At White andamp; Case, Mr. Giuliani was making more than$600,000 a year and Mr. Young, more than $300,000 a year,said individuals knowledgeable about the situation. AtAnderson Kill, the two will be making less, said theindividuals. Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Young declined to commenton their compensation. White andamp; Case's managing partner couldnot be reached for comment.   In recent months, there has been much speculation that Mr.Giuliani, rumored to be restless, would leave 365-lawyerWhite andamp; Case, which specializes in banking, insurance andinternational law. Mr. Giuliani wouldn't comment on hispolitical aspirations.   Said Mr. Giuliani, &quot;I remain interested in public issues.We'll see what opportunities are out there later.&quot;   ---   NORIEGA'S ATTORNEYS resume their battle to get paid.   Attorneys for the deposed Panamanian leader are scheduledto appear in federal court in Miami today to ask JudgeWilliam M. Hoeveler to clear the way for their fees to bepaid by the U.S. government.   In late April, Mr. Noriega's defense team, led by FrankRubino, asked the court to be allowed to withdraw from thedrug-racketeering case. They complained that the U.S. hadstopped the flow of their fees by freezing Mr. Noriega'sassets.   Last week, federal prosecutors said the government wouldagree to pay the bills under a provision of the CriminalJustice Act. The act sets a limit of $75 an hour for legalfees. But the U.S. attorney's office and Mr. Noriega'sattorneys had hoped that a provision in the act concerning&quot;complex&quot; cases would allow the court to award fullcommercial fees of about $350 an hour. Mr. Noriega agreed tosign an affidavit saying he would reimburse the government ifand when his assets are unfrozen.   Last Thursday, however, Judge Hoeveler indicated that theCriminal Justice Act doesn't allow him to break the$75-an-hour barrier, and the agreement to pay the defenseteam collapsed.   Today, according to David Lewis, one of Mr. Noriega'sattorneys, the defense team will file a motion asking thecourt to declare the act unconstitutional as it applies toMr. Noriega's case because of its size and complexity.Failing that, Judge Hoeveler will hold hearings to determinewhich of Mr. Noriega's assets could be unfrozen to pay hisattorneys.   Mr. Noriega's attorneys have alleged that he was paid atleast $11 million by the U.S. and between $6 million and $7million by foreign governments in his position as head of thePanamanian Defense Force. Those funds, the defense maintains,shouldn't have to be forfeited.   The cost of Mr. Noriega's defense, they add, will total atleast $5 million.   ---   DREXEL MAY HAVE TO PAY LEGAL FEES of securities-frauddefendant, judge says.   Federal Judge Charles Haight said that Drexel BurnhamLambert Inc. may be forced to pay more than $600,000 in legalfees to Morvillo, Abramowitz andamp; Grand, which represented RossFrankel, a former Drexel employee convicted of securitiesfraud, conspiracy, and other charges last month.   Morvillo Abramowitz has been trying to collect fees fromMr. Frankel. The law firm had tried to withhold case filesMr. Frankel needs to appeal his conviction. Judge Haightordered the law firm to release the files to Bernstein andamp;Milner earlier this month.   A spokesman for Drexel said that after Mr. Frankel'sconviction the company stopped paying his legal bills becauseDrexel Burnham Lambert Group, the brokerage's parent, hadfiled for bankruptcy court protection. &quot;The company is underno obligation to fund anybody's fees who's been convicted ofa crime,&quot; the spokesman said.   Mr. Frankel, who directed arbitrage research at Drexel,was implicated in the 1986 &quot;Yuppie Five&quot; case, in which fiveyoung Wall Street professionals were charged with insidertrading.   In an opinion late last week, Judge Haight said thatbecause Drexel paid Mr. Frankel's bills until the time of theChapter 11 filing, it may still be liable for the expenses.Judge Haight has also asked the parties to submit briefs onthe fee issue.   Mr. Frankel had signed an agreement with his formerlawyers that he would pay his legal fees but his new lawyer,Michael Milner, of the New York law firm of Bernstein andamp;Milner, argues the agreement applies only to pretrialrepresentation. According to Mr. Milner, Drexel had said inwriting it would pay Mr. Frankel's fees.   Paul Grand of Morvillo Abramowitz, who represented Mr.Frankel in the trial, wouldn't comment on the fee dispute.   According to the judge's opinion, the only fees paid byDrexel for Mr. Frankel's defense went to Mr. Grand's formerlaw firm, Grand andamp; Ostrow, which merged with Obermaier andamp;Morvillo last year. Obermaier andamp; Morvillo represented Mr.Frankel's co-defendant, Victor Teichner and his securitiesfirm, Victor Teichner andamp; Co.   ---   Wayne E. Green in Houston contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>