<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910125-0008</DOCNO><DOCID>910125-0008.</DOCID><HL>   U.S. Takes Kuwaiti Island;   Saudis Down Two Iraqi Jets   ---   Baghdad Tanker Disabled;   Marines Begin Exercise   On Amphibious Landing   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>01/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST CBS</CO><IN>MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The war with Iraq expanded to the seas, asU.S. forces captured a small Kuwaiti island and a Saudiwarplane shot down two Iraqi jets that may have been huntingallied ships.   Military officials here and in Saudi Arabia also said U.S.planes disabled an Iraqi tanker that U.S. officers said hadbeen serving as a spy ship. The attack caused a small oilslick in the Persian Gulf.</LP><TEXT>   At the same time, U.S. Marines began an amphibious landingtraining exercise involving more troops than any operationsince Marines landed at Inchon during the Korean War, theU.S. military said. A military spokesman said the exercisewas in preparation for an amphibious landing &quot;if needed&quot; inIraq or Kuwait. If the U.S. and its allies launch a bigground operation to evict Iraqi troops from Kuwait, it'swidely expected that one part would be an amphibious landingof U.S. forces into Kuwait.   A senior Bush administration official said he expects adecision to launch any major ground offensive would be madepersonally by President Bush. Defense Secretary Dick Cheneyand Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,are likely to turn to Mr. Bush before ordering such asignificant escalation in the war, the official said, addingthat they probably would seek permission to begin a groundoperation only after the bombing campaign has advancedfurther, so that allied casualties could be limited.   Air Force officials privately have estimated that it willtake at least three weeks of bombing to reduce the capacityof Iraqi military units by 50%. And White House spokesmanMarlin Fitzwater yesterday warned Americans to be preparedfor a war that lasts &quot;months.&quot;   For its part, Iraq began trying to counter the perceptionthat the intense American-led bombing campaign has been anantiseptic operation hitting only military targets whileavoiding civilians. The Iraqi government released televisionfootage that it asserted showed civilian casualties anddamage to residential areas caused by an American bombingraid this week in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul. Thefootage showed bloodied people being pulled from a collapsedbuilding.   Meanwhile, the administration official said the U.S.doesn't have any assurances from Israel that it won'tretaliate against Iraq for missile attacks launched onIsraeli cities. Rather, he said, &quot;it's more of a day to daymatter&quot; under continuous discussion with the Israeligovernment. The U.S., fearing an Israeli attack on Iraq couldshatter the coalition between the U.S. and Arab statesopposed to Iraq, has urged Jerusalem to show restraint.   The military action at sea doesn't appear to reflect anyconcerted Iraqi effort to attack U.S. naval targets. But itdoes suggest that Iraq is becoming more aggressive in tryingto use mines and missiles to cause some damage to the alliedships launching missile and air attacks on Iraqi troops andmilitary installations.   The most intense action occurred around the small Kuwaitiisland of Qaruh in the northern Persian Gulf. Pentagonofficials said a Navy A-6 plane sank a small Iraqiminesweeper off the island. After that, a second Iraqiminesweeper, trying to flee, apparently struck an Iraqi mineand sank, U.S. officials said.   A U.S. helicopter from the guided missile frigate USSCurtis rescued 22 Iraqi sailors from the sea and ferried themto the Curtis, officials said.   But the helicopter, while conducting the rescue operation,encountered small arms fire from Iraqi troops on the smalloffshore island, the officials said, adding that three Iraqiswere killed when the helicopter returned fire.   Without providing any details, officials said theengagement resulted in the capture of an additional 29 Iraqitroops on the island, meaning that a total of 51 Iraqis werecaptured off the minesweeper and the island.   In a separate engagement, a Saudi Arabian F-15 shot downtwo Iraqi F-1 Mirage jets, armed with bombs and French-madeExocet missiles. The Exocet has proven effective in assaultson ships; an Iraqi Exocet killed 37 U.S. sailors and didheavy damage when it struck the USS Stark -- apparently byaccident -- in the Iran-Iraq war.   Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams said the Iraqi planeswere headed out to sea when they were attacked by two SaudiRoyal Air Force F-15s. Though two Saudi planes helped huntdown the Iraqi jets, just one of the Saudi planes fired themissiles that downed both Iraqi jets, Saudi officials said.   It wasn't certain that the two Iraqi planes were headingfor allied ships when they were shot down. But two Britishships were in the region, and they detected the Iraqi planes.   At a Pentagon briefing, Marine Maj. Gen. Martin Brandtner,vice director for operations on the joint staff, said hedidn't regard Iraqi planes armed with French-made Exocetmissiles as a threat to allied warships and commercialshipping in the Persian Gulf. U.S. commanders apparently areconfident that naval air defenses and allied air patrols canstop any of the advanced missiles from reaching allied ships.   There were other signs of increased aggressiveness at seaby Iraq, which has only a small navy of its own. Britishofficials said that one of their helicopters found an Iraqiminesweeper and two associated ships and that it killed andcaptured Iraqi crew members in an operation aimed at seizingthe ships. The final outcome of that engagement wasn't known.   The U.S. also lost another plane, an F-16 jet that was hitby ground fire while flying over Kuwait, U.S. officials said.Its pilot maneuvered the plane over the Persian Gulf beforeejecting, and he was rescued by a U.S. helicopter. Americanofficials said that one problem in prosecuting the air war isthe fact that Iraq has mobile radar working with itssurface-to-air missiles, making those missiles more dangerousto allied planes. In addition, the U.S. hasn't been able toknock out Iraq's command and communication systems entirely,because the Iraqi military has built in &quot;redundant,&quot;overlapping systems.   In Dhahran, meanwhile, Saudi authorities said CBScorrespondent Bob Simon and three network colleagues havebeen missing since Monday. Their all-terrain vehicle wasfound along a road in a remote area of Saudi Arabia, and theauthorities said the four apparently had been headed intooccupied Kuwait.   As more fighting broke out at sea, the administrationsignaled new concern that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein mayseek to expand the violence through terrorism in the U.S.   The Federal Bureau of Investigation for the first timelisted Middle Eastern terrorist groups linked to Iraq that itbelieves have operatives in the U.S. It said they are undersurveillance.   In a speech to the nation's mayors, Bill Baker, thebureau's criminal division chief, said the groups include theAbu Nidal Organization, Hezbollah, the Palestine LiberationFront and the Democratic Front for the Liberation ofPalestine. All have bloody histories and each has vowed tohelp carry out Saddam Hussein's threat to conduct terroristacts against nations in the anti-Iraq coalition.   &quot;All of these organizations have the capability of havingcontact from abroad and could carry out activity in ourcountry,&quot; Mr. Baker said. But he added that the FBI has beenkeeping a close watch on the people it suspects to be theiroperatives.   Previously, government officials have said there are suchoperatives here, but it described them as low-level anddidn't identify their parent groups. Privately, JusticeDepartment officials said just before the war broke out thatthey hadn't detected any significant contacts between theoperatives and outside groups or any surge in other knownterrorists entering the U.S.   Tom DuHadway, who heads the FBI's local Washington office,told the mayors the bureau so far has no threats of terrorismthat are &quot;time-, date-, or target-specific, and if we were toreceive that type of information, we would put out aterrorist alert.&quot; He also said the FBI hasn't detected any&quot;terrorist infrastructure here in Washington.&quot;   Separately, intelligence officials looking into a failedattack in Manila, the Philippines, have concluded that Iraq'ssecurity forces, operating through Baghdad's embassies, arepreparing to mount terrorist attacks abroad. Evidencecompiled in Manila has led to increased security and arrestsin Bangkok, Thailand, where officials suspect Iraq may begathering weapons for assaults throughout Asia.   The State Department said, &quot;We have clear evidence thatIraq is supporting terrorists around the world who areplanning to mount attacks against coalition member countries.The clearest example of this activity is the attemptedbombing of the U.S. cultural center in Manila on Jan. 19. ThePhilippine government has expelled an Iraqi diplomat for hisrole in this bombing. The two Iraqis arrested are the sons ofIraq's ambassador to Somalia.&quot;   ---   Bruce Ingersoll and David Rogers contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>