<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910522-0135</DOCNO><DOCID>910522-0135.</DOCID><HL>   Bangladesh Needs Reform, Not Just Aid   ----   By Joel R. Charny</HL><DATE>05/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)</NS><LP>   The current crisis in Bangladesh provides the perfectopportunity to ask some hard questions:   -- Why does a hurricane striking the Atlantic coast of theU.S. claim 10 victims, while a similar storm in Bangladeshkills 200,000?</LP><TEXT>   -- Why do two-thirds of the people of Bangladesh live inabsolute poverty after two decades of independence, duringwhich time the country has received $25 billion in foreignaid?   -- What policy changes on the part of donor governments,the private aid community, and the government of Bangladeshmust occur before aid truly benefits the poor majority ofBangladesh?   Poverty causes the huge death tolls in the naturaldisasters that strike Bangladesh year after year. Poverty,the result of lack of access to land and the difficulty offinding off-farm employment, drives people in search ofsubsistence to more and more marginal areas, includingcoastal islands vulnerable to cyclones. Land tenure patterns,skewed in favor of local elites who control the bulk ofvillage resources (especially land) force the majority intolow-wage agricultural work. In the past decade thenow-deposed military government attempted to offer idlegovernment land to groups of landless villagers. But throughtheir control of village-level governments, elites steeredthis land to landlord families.   The $25 billion of aid to Bangladesh have been channeledby the military governments of the past two decades largelyto large-scale infrastructure projects, with donor countriesmaking the purchase of material and equipment from theircompanies a condition of aid. The construction of roads,ports and dams has its place. But it must be complemented bythe effective provision of basic services to the poor, aswell as the provision of resources that they themselves cancontrol. Relatively little of the aid has been spent invillages on behalf of and by the poor.   To their credit, major foreign donors are finallybeginning to channel significant resources for developmentthrough local non-government agencies such as the BangladeshRural Advancement Committee, Grameen Bank, Proshika andothers, instead of the government of Bangladesh. Over thepast 20 years these organizations have built a solid baseamong the landless, rural poor by focusing on communityorganizing, literacy, reforestation, skill training andcredit for basic agricultural production and smallenterprise. But these organizations alone cannot addressfully the root causes of poverty in the country.   In February, three months after a peaceful popularuprising that toppled the military government of Gen. H.M.Ershad, Khaleda Zia became prime minister in the first freeelections in the country's 21-year history. With an electedgovernment in place, Bangladesh must reassess the flawedapproach of the past two decades. The country needs acombination of policy initiatives and a re-orientation ofexisting aid programs to shift to a development programcentered on the needs of the poor majority, consisting of thefollowing:   1) Land reform: Bangladesh's elected government can atlast begin to address the land question. The governmentshould implement a program for granting the landless title toidle government lands.   2) Investment in human and social infrastructure: Only acomprehensive program of investment in literacy (especiallyfemale literacy), health delivery, day care and otherservices can address the problem of over-population, commonlycited as the root cause of poverty in Bangladesh. Populationcontrol can be implemented successfully only as a componentof women's programs that also build local women'sorganizations and expand economic opportunity through smallcredit programs.   3) Disaster prevention: Cyclones and monsoon flooding arepart of the reality of Bangladesh. But investment in floodshelters, disaster-proof housing, community reforestation,small-scale earthworks and other projects can mitigate theirdestructive impact. An Oxfam America-funded communityorganization in the cyclone-affected area of southernBangladesh has developed a housing design -- featuringconcrete pillars, raised plinth and tile roof -- that can beconstructed for $200 per unit using volunteer labor. A mere$5 million, a bit less than the U.S. government response tothe cyclone disaster to date, could fund the construction of25,000 houses. A massive housing building program in thecyclone-prone areas would save countless lives in futuredisasters.   The resources exist to implement these programs. But evensimple, small-scale interventions cannot go forward until theBangladeshi government, the donor governments and the privaterelief agencies act on the commitment to a new strategy forBangladesh. Successful implementation will involve decreasingthe power of the military over civilian institutions. It mustalso respect the non-governmental sector as a legitimatepartner. Donor governments that underwrite the Bangladeshibudget must insist on democracy.   The American people, who give so generously when disasterstrikes, must insist that the agencies they fund support theagenda required to prevent massive suffering in the future.Too often, when the huge transport planes have unloaded theircargo, and when the images of helpless people reaching outfor a scrap of food no longer appear on the front page, theAmerican people disengage. Having given generously toimmediate relief assistance, donors express either justifiedsatisfaction with their efforts or frustration at theall-too-familiar accounts of bureaucratic red tape and aid&quot;rotting on the docks.&quot;   Either way, no one -- Bangladesh's government, aidagencies or donors -- gives enough thought to fundinglong-term recovery, preventing such disasters from occurringin the future, or creating real economic and socialdevelopment for the millions of people affected by disaster.Without reform of the international aid system, the needlesscycle of disaster and despair will continue not only inBangladesh, but in other countries of the global South.   ---   Mr. Charny is the overseas director of Oxfam America, aBoston-based relief and development agency.</TEXT></DOC>