<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910121-0089</DOCNO><DOCID>910121-0089.</DOCID><HL>   Why Israel Should Fight   ----   By David Bar-Illan</HL><DATE>01/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   Nowhere is the short-sightedness of the Bushadministration's Middle East policies more apparent than inits adamant opposition to Israel's participation in the waragainst Iraq. Like Saddam Hussein, it seems to believe thatan open Israel-Iraq confrontation will wreck the coalition;that by involving the hated Israelis, Saddam will succeed inseparating the Arab partners from their American and Europeanallies and change the war from an anti-Saddam effort toanother Arab-Israeli conflagration.   But, as of this writing, the facts point in a differentdirection. True, the Arab members of the coalition -- mainlySaudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria -- originally warned theadministration that Israeli involvement in the conflict wouldcause them to &quot;change their course,&quot; as Egyptian PresidentHosni Mubarak once put it. And the administration, deemingArab commitment to the coalition vital to its legitimacy,acquiesced.</LP><TEXT>   It chose not to notice that the Arab allies were notbenefactors but beneficiaries; that granting Americans theprivilege of shedding blood in defense of Arab lands was nofavor; that Saddam's Arab neighbors, more than anyone,considered his elimination an absolute necessity; thatdespite the vast quantities of arms in their arsenals theyfelt helpless before the Iraqi threat and in dire need ofAmerican protection; and that taking their threats to boltthe coalition seriously was tantamount to believing theywould commit suicide.   Aware of these threats and their impact, Saddam and hisPalestine Liberation Organization allies adroitly exploitedthem. Initially, neither Saddam nor anyone else linked theannexation of Kuwait with the Arab-Israeli conflict. But withYasser Arafat's help Saddam soon realized that theunexpectedly vigorous world reaction to his Anschluss couldbe deflected by focusing on Israel. The Temple Mount incidentand other intifada disturbances were intended to divertattention to Israel's &quot;occupation&quot; of Judea, Samaria and Gazarather than to Saddam's rape of Kuwait.   The success of the stratagem was considerable. The Arabcoalition partners and the Europeans could not resist theopportunity to censure Israel at the United Nations. And,having presumably bought the notion that an American vetowould wreck the coalition, the U.S. voted to condemn Israeltoo.   But it soon became apparent that neither the orgy ofIsrael-bashing, nor the huge buildup of American forces inthe Gulf, nor the increasingly ominous U.N. ultimatumschanged the basic fact of Saddam's refusal to budge. The&quot;linkage&quot; ploy was exposed for the ruse it was when Franceoffered Saddam to link a promise to convene an internationalconference on the Arab-Israel issue with Iraq's consent towithdraw from Kuwait. Saddam flatly turned it down.   That once the war began Saddam decided to fire missiles atIsrael was also a function of his belief that the coalitioncould be split. His missiles cannot inflict serious strategicdamage on Israel, and risking the opening of a second frontwith a formidable regional power while Iraq suffers poundingby an overwhelming air armada makes no other sense. In fact,it would have been downright mad had Saddam not assumed,correctly, that the Bush administration would prevent Israelfrom entering the fray.   To the administration's surprise, and perhapsdisappointment, the pretext for the objection has evaporated.The Egyptians, Syrians and Saudis have all directly orobliquely suggested that an Israeli reprisal would beacceptable. Even Jordan's King Hussein, while swearing todefend his skies against Israeli incursions, has notthreatened to view Israeli violation of his air space as acasus belli.   One must wonder, then, why the Bush administration, eageras it must be to minimize American casualties, is so adamantin holding Israel back. It should have been grateful toSaddam for opening a second front. After all, the brunt ofthe fighting and its costs -- both in lives and in treasure-- has fallen on the U.S. (Nor will it be appreciablydifferent when the much costlier ground war begins: The Arabarmies have announced they will participate in defensiveoperations only.)   Israel's assistance could prove invaluable. Even in thisage of electronic war, there is no substitute for thetraining and expertise of Israeli pilots. The Israeli airforce may not have Buck Rogers weapons like the TomahawkCruise missile, but its pilots are not only the mostexperienced in fighting Arab armies; they have made the studyof the region's countries their main preoccupation for years.That in 1981 they could penetrate Iraq -- then at war withIran and on constant alert -- and destroy its nuclear reactorwith utter impunity is but one indication of their prowess.   Why, then, is the administration so eager to placatepartners whose contribution to the war is relativelynegligible and curb the one power in the Middle East thatcould really make a difference? The answer does not lie inthe American fear of rocking the coalition boat, but in theadministration's vision of a comprehensive settlement afterSaddam is defeated. If the U.S. is to accomplish a &quot;new worldorder&quot; in which Israel is to be forced to withdraw from &quot;theterritories,&quot; it would rather not be indebted to Israel. Onthe contrary, it wants to show that Israel need not bestrong, for the U.S. can protect it from its enemies.   This goes against the grain of Israel's articles of faithsince its inception. It has always believed that relying oninternational guarantees, no matter how well intentioned, isuseless. Contemporary weapons and the speed of modern warmake them ludicrous. Golda Meir once responded to a promiseof American guarantees with: &quot;By the time you get here, wewon't be here&quot; -- which proved painfully prophetic in thecase of Kuwait.   Indeed, unlike other countries in the region, Israel hasnever wanted nor needed foreign troops to defend it. But now,for the first time in its history, instead of responding to amajor attack, it is letting American crews man Patriotanti-missile installations in Israel and coalition planesdestroy missile launchers in Iraq. Its dilemma is as real asit is agonizing. It does not wish to quarrel with a coalitionheaded by the U.S. and Britain, whose courage anddetermination in challenging Saddam it deeply admires. Yet itcannot allow itself to be perceived as a protectorate in apart of the world where the notion of a &quot;new world order&quot; ishopelessly incongruous.   Not that basking in the fulsome praise is not tempting forIsrael. Even governments that were censorious if not hostileonly last week are now congratulating the Shamir governmentfor its restraint. But, unlike these countries, Israel has tolive in the Middle East. If its Arab enemies perceive it tobe as it is portrayed in their propaganda -- a creature ofWestern colonialism unable to fend for itself and totallydependent on the U.S. even when the very lives of itscitizens are on the line -- Israel will be deemed invitinglyvulnerable.   Nor can Israel ignore the likelihood that the Bushadministration's entreaty that it not act against Iraq andthe universal approbation it has received for behaving &quot;withadmirable maturity&quot; will soon be forgotten. What will remainis the perception that Americans sacrificed their lives forIsrael. And if there is one thing Israel doesn't want andcannot afford, it is to be billed for American blood.   As long as the war continues, Israel and the U.S. willfind ways to avoid a quarrel. But the clash between theAmerican vision of an Israel living in its 1967 borders as anAmerican protectorate and Israel's self-image as a feisty,secure and powerful state in control of territories itconsiders vital to its survival will surface soon after. Ifnothing else, Saddam has made Israelis who used to advocatewithdrawal from the administered areas of Judea, Samaria andGaza rethink their views. Had they been heeded, the land massstretching from the Iranian border to the suburbs of Tel Avivwould have been Saddam-land. An Israel the size of Kuwaitwithin the 1967 borders could not have deterred Saddam fromoccupying Jordan, and a PLO state in Judea, Samaria and Gazawould have welcomed him with open arms.   (Yasser Arafat, who has consistently backed Saddam sincethe Kuwait invasion, last week ordered his followers to joinIraq's war. Intifada leader Feisal Husseini, whom the Bushadministration considers a moderate and a preferred partnerfor peace talks, has declared his backing for Arafat's order.And Palestinians throughout &quot;the territories&quot; have discernedno inconsistency between their calls to Saddam to &quot;gas TelAviv&quot; and their demand that Israel provide them withprotective gas masks. When the missiles hit Tel Aviv, manycheered.)   Had a Palestinian state become reality, Saddam's missileswould have been launched not from the relatively harmlessdistance of 400 miles, but from the mountains dominatingIsrael's heartland, five miles from Tel Aviv.   Fundamentalism and radicalism will not disappear from theArab world with Saddam's defeat. Neither he nor Assad,Gadhafi and Fahd will be replaced by Arab Walesas and Havels.An American victory will not bring the anti-totalitarian,anti-war revolutions of Eastern Europe to the Middle East.Such revolutions are nowhere on the horizon. Nor willAmerican and European pressure on Israel to compromise itssecurity in exchange for &quot;guarantees&quot; bring democracy to theArab countries. On the contrary, it will reward the very sameforces the U.S. is trying to defeat.   ---   Mr. Bar-Illan is editorials editor of the Jerusalem Post.</TEXT></DOC>