<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910716-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>910716-0080.</DOCID><HL>   Combining Assets:   Merger of 2 Big banks   In New York May Be   The Start of a Wave   ---   Chemical-Manufacturers Plan   Is Sure to Put Pressure   On Rivals to Do Likewise   ---   Size Second Only to Citicorp's   ----   By David B. Hilder and Roger Lowenstein   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/16/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CHL MHC WNEWS</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS, APPOINTMENTS (PER)ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   NEW YORK -- The long-awaited era of bank mega-mergers hasbegun.   It was set off yesterday by Chemical Banking Corp. andManufacturers Hanover Corp., the nation's sixth- andninth-largest banking companies. The two New York companiesagreed to merge in a $2.3 billion stock swap that wouldcreate a giant with assets of $135.46 billion, trailing onlyCiticorp's $216.91 billion in U.S. rankings.</LP><TEXT>   The Chemical-Manufacturers deal steps up the pressure onthe nation's biggest banks -- especially New York andCalifornia money-center giants -- to merge, and it is likelyto be followed over the next few months by announcements ofother combinations, bankers and analysts say. The big banksare suffering from too much capacity and from bad loans inreal estate, corporate leveraged buy-outs and other areas.   &quot;The jury had been out on whether mega-mergers of equalswould actually start to occur; we have one now,&quot; says RobertB. Hedges Jr., a bank consultant at Mac Group, a consultingfirm. &quot;You have banks in other regions around the country whocould look to this and see something for themselves.&quot; DennisShea, an analyst at Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., which advisedManufacturers, sees &quot;a new age dawning in terms ofconsolidation.&quot;   Anticipating a wave of mergers, investors yesterday bid upthe shares of many New York, California and strong regionalbanks. Chemical's stock rose $2.875 to $26.625 a share, andManufacturers' $6.125 to $29.375.   The Chemical-Manufacturers merger proposal is subject toapproval by both banks' shareholders, by the Federal ReserveBoard and by the New York State Banking Department. If it'sapproved, the new banking giant, which would take Chemical'sname, would initially have 660 branches and 45,000 employees,leaping ahead of Citicorp to become New York's biggestconsumer bank. It would rank as the nation's sixth-largestbank issuer of credit cards. And officials say it would leadthe industry in primary banking relationships with U.S.corporations and in bank-loan syndications.   But the impetus behind the nation's biggest-ever bankmerger is a prosaic desire to slash costs, and plans wereimmediately announced to eliminate 6,200 of those 45,000 jobsand close about 70 of the branches. The banks hope for hugesavings, totaling $650 million a year -- equal to 150% of thetwo companies' combined 1990 earnings. In fact, the savingswould almost match Chemical's peak earnings of $753.6million, achieved in 1988.   Federal banking regulators are clearly encouraging thecurrent wave of big bank mergers. In January, E. GeraldCorrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,told a group of bankers at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel herethat he would be &quot;surprised -- perhaps disappointed -- ifwhen we meet here next year one or more mergers among thelargest banks in the U.S. are not already a reality.&quot;   In London, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady said: &quot;It's agood thing. The combined bank would make a much stronger unitby eliminating duplication. This would save them a lot ofmoney.&quot;   Some other big banks have been considering action. In theSoutheast, NCNB Corp., the nation's eighth-largest bank, ispressing merger talks with Candamp;S/Sovran Corp., the12th-largest. If successful, those negotiations would producea bank that would rank No. 3. (after Citicorp and the newChemical). And two big California banks, Security PacificCorp. and Wells Fargo andamp; Co., last year talked about a mergerthat would have been even bigger than theChemical-Manufacturers combination. Those talks broke offafter Security Pacific had a surge in problem loans, but MarkAlpert, a Bear Stearns andamp; Co. analyst, believes that the NewYork banks' move &quot;may jump-start the talks between Wells andSecurity Pacific.&quot;   In New York, the new behemoth would pose a serious threatto both Chase Manhattan Bank and Citicorp.   &quot;I would think this puts real strong pressure on Chase,&quot;says Robert Litan, a senior fellow at Brookings Institution.&quot;I would think they would get worried about slipping furtherdown the totem pole.&quot; As a possible merger partner for Chase,analysts cite Bank of New York, which took over Irving TrustCo. in 1988. Spokesmen for Chase and Bank of New York declineto comment. A person close to Chase says that althoughnothing is now in the works, &quot;internally there have beenstudies. Will this intensify the question? Absolutely.&quot;   The merger outlook for Citicorp, which has dominatedconsumer banking in the region for more than a decade, ismurky. Its size and deep portfolio of problem loans wouldprobably scare off any potential partner. &quot;It's an 800-poundgorilla,&quot; Mr. Litan says.   However, many analysts doubt that mega-mergers will be thepanacea for the banking industry that some expect. &quot;If theydo what they say, it will be wonderful,&quot; says Marc Perkins,chairman of Perkins Smith, a Tampa brokerage firm, &quot;but Ihave my doubts. Money-center banks haven't demonstrated areal capacity to control expenses. And there isn't muchevidence that bank profitability is a matter of size.&quot;   Chemical and, to a lesser degree, Manufacturers enjoymajor strengths in lending to small business and so-calledmiddlemarket corporations, usually defined as those with lessthan $100 million in annual revenue. &quot;Chemical is the cremede la creme of the middle-market business,&quot; says JamesMcDermott, president of bank specialists Keefe, Bruyette andamp;Woods.   Both banks have also been strong in certain types ofspecialized lending, such as financing corporate acquisitionsand providing new and profitable loans to companiesreorganizing under bankruptcy law. And the new Chemical wouldhave 40% of the consumer deposits held by the New York area'sfive biggest banks, vaulting far above Citicorp's previouslydominant 29% share.   But both banks have had their troubles. Chemical acquireda major Texas bank, Texas Commerce Bancshares, just beforethe collapse of oil and Texas real-estate prices in the late1980s. Manufacturers was a big lender to less-developedcountries in the 1970s and took big charges for such loans inthe late 1980s. Both banks have had some problems with loanson commercial real estate and on highly leveragedtransactions, such as buy-outs. And both have been hurt bythe slowdown in New York's economy.   Each bank has had its senior lending and credit officersreview loans made by the other. They say there isn't muchoverlap among big credits.   The stocks of both companies were extremely active in NewYork Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday; Chemical'shad huge volume of nearly 5.2 million shares, andManufacturers' nearly 3.7 million.   The $6.125-a-share surge in Manufacturers' stock reflectedthe exchange ratio in the proposed stock swap. Manufacturersholders would get 1.14 shares of Chemical for each of theirshares. The ratio, negotiated by investment bankers for bothsides, was based on the stocks' recent prices. CurrentManufacturers shareholders would end up owning about 48% ofthe combined company's shares.   To increase its capital, the new Chemical also plans tosell common stock valued at $1.25 billion next year. Bankofficials say investment bankers have assured them that thestock can be sold.   The new Chemical's management would be a blend of thebanks' managements. The chairman and chief executive officerwould be Manufacturers' current chairman, John F.McGillicuddy, 60 years old. Chemical's current chairman,Walter V. Shipley, 55, would become president and chiefoperating officer of the new Chemical and succeed Mr.McGillicuddy as chief executive on Jan. 1, 1994.   The new Chemical would have a large board of directors,with 29 members drawn from the current Chemical andManufacturers boards. To try to speed up the transition,Messrs. McGillicuddy and Shipley appointed a managementcommittee of 11 top executives, in addition to themselves.Joseph G. Sponholz, currently Chemical's chief financialofficer, was named &quot;merger implementation manager.&quot;   The highest-ranking casualty of the merger is Thomas S.Johnson, 50, president of Manufacturers and a formerpresident of Chemical who left there in late 1989. Mr.Johnson, whom many analysts had expected to take an activerole because of his knowledge of both banks, said he willresign effective July 31 because it is clear that he wouldn'tbecome chief executive as soon as he had hoped.   Messrs. Shipley and McGillicuddy sought yesterday toreassure analysts and investors that they are serious aboutcutting costs. Mr. Shipley, in an interview, said he wants toemphasize &quot;the ironclad commitment to the diligentprosecution of this.&quot; He added: &quot;This is a great conceptualidea, but unless the implementation of this is rigorous andtough, it's a lousy idea. We understand that, and we'reabsolutely committed to it.&quot;   Mr. McDermott of Keefe Bruyette said he believes that theestimated cutbacks announced by the two companies are lowerthan what the banks really expect to achieve. &quot;The generalfeeling is that they're throwing out conservative numbers,for political and other reasons. In their more aggressivemodeling, they may have higher cost savings in there.&quot;   Mr. McGillicuddy and Mr. Shipley said they have talkedabout a possible merger for about two years. The talks thatled to yesterday's agreement began on May 17 in a Manhattanhotel room, the two men said, though neither would say whosuggested the meeting. &quot;We came together by divine guidance,&quot;Mr. Shipley joked. Within a week, the question of who wouldlead the bank and the succession plan were resolved.Selecting the other members of the new bank's top managementteam went on up until the last week, they added.   Asked why the time for a merger seemed ripe, Mr.McGillicuddy said, &quot;We both came to the conclusion that wewere in a position where we were dealing from relativestrength.&quot; He added: &quot;The scene was changing rapidly, andneither one of us would be able to participate unless we didsomething rapidly.&quot;   Both chairmen said they did not talk to any other bankabout a potential merger.   Investment bankers for each side were brought into thetalks during the week of June 24, according to peoplefamiliar with the discussions. Morgan Stanley andamp; Co.represented Manufacturers; Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., Chemical.Morgan Stanley's advisory team was led by Richard Fisher, itschairman, and Lewis Bernard, a managing director.   Though Messrs. McGillicuddy and Shipley declined tospecify the opportunities they want to pursue, these arebelieved to include possible acquisitions in New England,particularly Connecticut, whose southern counties are full ofpeople who work in New York and are reached by New Yorkadvertising media.   With many New England banks and thrifts in difficulty andCongress on the verge of dismantling barriers to interstatebank branching, Chemical and Manufacturers wanted to mergeand build capital before their rivals can, people familiarwith the talks say. Mr. McGillicuddy said, however, that thenew Chemical won't take a scattershot approach to interstateexpansion. &quot;We have no plans to be nationwide if that meanswe have a couple of branches in all 50 states,&quot; he said.   Officials of Chemical and Manufacturers say they don'tbelieve the merger raises antitrust problems. To make itunlikely that another bank will try to undo the merger bymaking a higher bid for either bank, Chemical andManufacturers granted each other options for 19.9% of eachcompany's shares, which could be exercised if another partymakes an offer.   Over the next year or two, bankers around the country willbe watching closely to see whether the combination producesthe benefits its creators trumpeted. But even the initialannouncement shows that such mergers are far from painless.   In line with the new Chemical's plan to eliminate 6,200jobs, a hiring freeze was put into place at both companiesyesterday, even though the merger isn't expected to becompleted until around year end. Close to 95% of the job cutswill be in the New York area. To reflect severance costs andthe cost of shutting down operating centers and closingbranches, the new Chemical would take a restructuring chargeof about $550 million.   Among the cost savings will be Chemical's Park Avenueheadquarters building in Manhattan. The building, whichChemical leases, will be vacated in favor of Manufacturers'headquarters across the street.   The model for bank mergers is said by many to be WellsFargo's 1986 acquisition of Crocker National Corp. RichardFredericks, an analyst at Montgomery Securities Inc.,estimates that Wells cut out 30% of Crocker's expenses.However, Bank of New York's purchase of Irving was lesssuccessful, say analysts -- saving, by some estimates, onlyabout 12% of Irving's expenses. Bank of New York says it has&quot;cut out a lot of fat&quot; -- by its estimate, equal to about 20%of Irving's costs.   Investors who bank on future mergers, especially amongmoney-center banks, will be taking a certain risk. Forinstance, Mr. Alpert of Bear Stearns says that among big NewYork banks, J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. and Bankers Trust New YorkCorp. are unlikely to merge with anyone because each isrelatively healthy and neither has a big branch system, theusual object of cost cutting.   However, yesterday's announcement may give added firepowerto National City Corp. in Cleveland, which has beenfrustrated in its efforts to buy crosstown rival AmeritrustCorp. National City, which disclosed its $870 million stockbid in May, says that consolidating the banks' operationswould save $125 million a year. Ameritrust hasn't commentedon the proposal, leading many to believe it would prefer tostay independent.   In California, Wells Fargo initiated serious talks withSecurity Pacific late last year but after resolving keyquestions, including who would run the merged bank, Wellsbalked. People familiar with the talks say Wells ChairmanCarl Reichardt felt uncomfortable with the hodgepodge ofinternational activities conducted by Security's merchantbank. Just after talks ended, Security announced it woulddisband the unit. That move presumably has cleared the wayfor renewed talks, though none have occurred, say peopleclose to both banks.   BankAmerica Corp., based in San Francisco, and FirstInterstate Bancorp, in Los Angeles, are also seen as naturalcandidates for merger. BankAmerica badly wants to expand itsoperations in the West and could realize big savings not onlyin California but also in Washington, Oregon and Arizona.First Interstate has made clear that it wants to remainindependent while it focuses on recovering from a series ofblunders it made in Texas, Arizona, and other Western states.BankAmerica, meanwhile, has been busily acquiring the assetsof failed thrifts throughout the West, and is especially keenon Texas at the moment. Analysts say both will have torethink their positions now.   But West Coast banks face merger hurdles. In an exchangeof shares, it's crucial for each bank to value accurately theother bank's loans. New York banks are believed to havealready largely written down their bad loans, but inCalifornia the process seems to be only starting as thereal-estate market slumps.   &quot;At least Chemical is well into the storm,&quot; says JamesChanos, a New York money manager. &quot;The problem with WellsFargo and Security Pacific is we don't know what they'll looklike after the dust settles. They're just going into thesquall.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>