<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910111-0002</DOCNO><DOCID>910111-0002.</DOCID><HL>   Footing the Bill:   Some in U.S. Ask Why   Germany, Japan Bear   So Little of Gulf Cost   ---   A Sense of an Unfair Burden   Could Strain Relations;   Allies See It Differently   ---   Bonn Sends Ill-Suited Planes   ----   By staff reporters Walter S. Mossberg in Washington,   Urban C. Lehner in Tokyo and Frederick Kempe in Berlin</HL><DATE>01/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   JAPAN EUROP MDEST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   MORNINGSIDE, Md. -- Half a mile from the gates of AndrewsAir Force Base, Japan and Germany are under fire again.   At the red-brick Veterans of Foreign Wars hall here, namedfor three local youths who died in World War II, Bob Snydertakes aim at America's allies. &quot;It's not fair,&quot; the Vietnamveteran says, sipping a beer. &quot;The Japanese and Germans arenot giving their fair share. They need that oil more than wedo.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   As the prospect of Americans dying in a Persian Gulf wargrows more real, resentment toward Tokyo and Bonn is growingtoo. It is in the air among the blue-collar men at the bar atVFW Post 9619. And it is being voiced by an increasing numberof politicians in Congress. Oklahoma Sen. David Boren, forexample, asks, &quot;Is it going to be American taxpayers that aregoing to foot the bill so that when it's all over we end upwith Japan, West Germany -- those with whom we're in realcompetition later on -- having their economies enhanced?&quot;   Whatever the outcome of the Gulf crisis, a new and seriousbreach between the U.S. and Germany and Japan is taking shape-- at least in the more vocal corners of Congress. Therelatively small financial and material contribution the twocountries have made to the allied effort in the Gulf hasaggravated already-existing trade tensions. As the U.S. slipsfurther into a recession, more and more people are simplywondering why the U.S. is bearing so much of the Gulf crisiscosts.   &quot;Because our so-called allies are unwilling to pay theirfair share, the U.S. taxpayers will go deeper into debt, beforced to borrow more from these same allies, and then beallowed to pay them more interest,&quot; complains Rep. Richard J.Durban, Democrat of Illinois.   American dismay with Japan and Germany, in fact, may bethe most important unrecognized foreign policy consequence ofthe Gulf crisis. It promises to be &quot;a major irritant in therelationships&quot; with those countries, says Rep. Lee Hamiltonof Indiana, a leading congressional voice on foreign policy.   Not everyone feels that way, of course. The Bushadministration has steadfastly defended the allies, partly toemphasize the multinational nature of the Gulf effort. &quot;Weare satisfied with the response that we've gotten from allour allies,&quot; says Richard Boucher, a spokesman for Secretaryof State James Baker. Moreover, the president's backers inCongress argue that the Japanese and German governments wouldlike to help more, but are constrained by political groupsinternally who feel that the countries' role in World War IIprevents them from taking military stands abroad.   But privately, some administration officials areirritated, especially at Japan, and behind-the-scenessquabbling is going on in the State and Treasury departments,with each accusing the other of mishandling the German orJapanese contribution.   The increasing prospect of a bloody war, with U.S. troopstaking the brunt, has fanned the flames of the debate overwhat constitutes a fair contribution. &quot;If you have a shootingwar, and they have still done very little, there will be atremendous political backlash,&quot; predicts House Armed ServicesCommittee chairman Les Aspin of Wisconsin. &quot;There's going tobe some reckoning on this.&quot;   The world looks very different from Tokyo and Berlin. Inthe halls of Berlin's Humboldt University, and on Japanesetelevision talk shows, there is bewilderment and anger atAmerican griping. And, among many, there is strong oppositionto U.S. policy in the Gulf.   Take oil. Roughly 65% of the oil Japan uses comes from theGulf (the figure for Germany is about 11%, for the U.S. about12%), and therefore Americans have argued Japan should domore in the effort against Iraq. But some Japanese scoff atthis equation. While officially Japan supports the alliedeffort, many in the country aren't worried about oil and feelJapan is resilient enough to weather higher prices, just asit did during the oil shocks of the 1970s.   Others note that Japan has spent the postwar era learninghow to use diplomacy rather than military force to obtain theresources it needs. During the Iran-Iraq war, few Japanesetankers had any difficulties transporting oil from the Gulf:They simply painted their flag on the hulls of their shipsand, as a valued customer of both sides, were given safepassage. &quot;I don't subscribe to this idea, but it's perhapsunderstandable that Japanese think that the past 45 yearshave given them the wisdom and the know-how to evadeinternational conflict,&quot; says Yukio Okamoto, a seniorJapanese Foreign Ministry official. &quot;Especially amongJapanese industrialists, the `leave-us-alone' mentality isvery strong: `Don't get us involved. We can take care ofourselves.'&quot;   Now walk through Humboldt University, in old East Berlin.The 18th-century hallways are festooned with hand-scrawledsigns in crimson warning against getting involved in a Gulfbloodbath. Among the two dozen students in MargaritaMathiopolous's seminar on American foreign policy, not onesupports deeper German involvement. Neither does theirprofessor. &quot;Everyone on earth should be happy the Germansdon't want to go to war,&quot; she shrugs.   The positions taken by Bonn and Tokyo have a similar ringto them. The two governments argue that their contributionshave been underestimated, that they have put up every dollarthe Bush administration has requested, and that it was theU.S. influence after World War II that has made them shy awayfrom military action. What's more, many in both countriesconsider the U.S. too eager to resort to force and too quickto demand support for its unilateral decisions.   So, with war possibly days away, neither nation has senttroops. As for financial contributions, the figures are onlya fraction of the buildup's cost. Moreover, the pledgesremain only partly fulfilled, months after they were made,and they sometimes involve less than they seemed to at first:Much of Japan's contribution to the Mideast states is inloans, not grants, and much of Germany's donation of &quot;modern&quot;military equipment for U.S. forces turned out to be leftoverSoviet-style gear from East Germany's defunct army.   Assuming there isn't a war, and that troops stay in place,the deployment in the Mideast will have cost the U.S. anestimated $30 billion to $35 billion by Oct. 1 of this year(not including several billions of dollars in Egyptianforeign debt that the U.S. forgave at the outset of thecrisis). That figure is before any reimbursements. Tokyo haspledged slightly more than $4 billion for the effort -- halfto support the U.S. military and half to aid Turkey, Jordanand Egypt, the poor &quot;front-line&quot; Muslim states. As of latelast month, Japan had delivered about $585 million to theU.S. military, including $415 million in cash to cover trooptransportation, $70 million to charter ships and planes, andaround $100 million in equipment for the troops, such as faxmachines and copiers. Another $400 million, mainly inequipment, is being put together or is en route. But thesecond $1 billion for U.S. forces has only just beenappropriated.   All but a fraction of the $2 billion for the poorcountries is in the form of loans -- albeit long-term loansat a rock-bottom one-percent interest rate, in many cases.But many of the loans are tied to specific projects, such asa bridge in Turkey and a factory in Egypt. And U.S. officialscoordinating the effort complain that Tokyo is behindschedule in loaning even the $600 million it had promised byyear-end.   Germany, meanwhile, pledged about $1 billion for the U.S.military and $2 billion for front-line states, mainly Turkey.According to German figures, about $320 million in militarygear had been delivered by late December, roughly half of itEast German material whose market value is almost impossibleto estimate. Another $315 million in cash had been paid tohelp cover transport costs. Yesterday, Germany decided tosend an additional $39 million worth of tank equipment andmore transport help, according to German press accounts.   Of the $2 billion for front-line states that Germanypledged, about half was non-military. German figures showthat, as of late last month, roughly $341 million innon-military aid had been delivered. Also, Turkey hadreceived about half of the $1 billion in military gear it waspromised, according to the German government. Bonn is alsoputting up about $200 million toward the European Community'said for the front-line states, and says the aid will beginflowing soon.   The U.S., by contrast, is believed already to have spentbetween $7 billion and $10 billion on Operation DesertShield, though the administration won't say exactly. A warwill extract its harshest cost in lives, which no foreignmoney can offset. But if the bullets fly, so too will thefinancial costs. Estimates range as high as $2 billion a day.   As for the Arab allies in the thick of the conflict, SaudiArabia has kicked in financial support for the U.S. soldiersprotecting the kingdom, in addition to fielding its owntroops. The Saudis insist that, while they have taken in $14billion in extra oil revenue because of rising oil prices,they have also spent $27 billion on the crisis. Kuwait'sexiled rulers, in turn, pledged $5 billion to the effort,half to the U.S. and half to front-line states, and U.S.officials say they have paid it all. But Kuwait's rulingfamily is under pressure from Congress to pony up more fromits estimated $100 billion fortune invested abroad.   Each day seems to bring Americans new signs of Japan andGermany's caution in helping. Japan could recruit only 24volunteer doctors and nurses to go to the Gulf, instead ofthe promised 100, and then wouldn't permit them near thefront. The last 17 of them were pulled out in December.   Germany said it would send 18 warplanes to Turkey as partof a NATO air unit dispatched to ward off an attack fromneighboring Iraq. But the planes turned out to be low-techtrainers, which Bonn hastened to assure its public lack therange to reach the Iraqi border from their new base inTurkey.   Until recently, Germany was too distracted by overwhelmingevents -- reunification and its first national election sinceWorld War II -- to focus on the threat of war in the Gulf.Now Germans don't like what they see. They feel they arebeing pushed too fast to take on greater internationalresponsibility before the country is psychologically preparedto deal with it.   Part of the problem is that Germany, like Japan, wasweaned away from its militaristic ways by the U.S. But partof it is also that Germans feel they already are helping theWestern alliance in non-military ways. They have paid thelion's share of aid to Eastern Europe and the Soviets, theysay, and therefore are shouldering their share of thealliance's burdens in the Gulf.   &quot;I understand the American resentment, but I would ask ourAmerican partners to understand the German position,&quot; saysMichael Stuermer, an adviser to the government and thedirector of the Institute for Science and Policy near Munich.&quot;We acted as a militaristic race at one time, and that landedus on the dark side of history.&quot;   The public mood against sending German troops to the Gulfis so great that those who had been pushing for a change inthe German constitution to allow German troops to participatewith U.N. forces around the world have decided to halt theirefforts until the dust settles in the Gulf. &quot;Those, likemyself, who want a change in the constitution say that weshouldn't press the issue now, because we don't want tolose,&quot; says Karsten Voigt, the foreign policy spokesman ofthe opposition Social Democratic party. &quot;With warthreatening, no German party wants to discuss the issue.&quot;   The government isn't much more hawkish. Chancellor HelmutKohl and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher arebeginning to align themselves behind the French, who areseeking a peaceful way out of the crisis. Over the Christmasholidays, Mr. Genscher met at his home with Iraq's ambassadorto Bonn, Abdul-Jaber Omar Ghani, a general who played a keyrole in coordinating Iraqi actions in Kuwait in weeks leadingup to the invasion and following it.   German officials are concerned by what they considercontradictions in America's approach to the Gulf. Mr.Stuermer, the government adviser, argues that, among otherfailings, the U.S. hasn't taken the sanctions policyseriously enough. And, he says, German officials fear thatAmerican leaders haven't thought about the aftermath ofvictory. &quot;You can't in the long run win the warpsychologically,&quot; he contends. &quot;You can't win it in thehearts and minds of Arabs.&quot;   In Tokyo, the Japanese government is convinced that ifAmericans only knew how much Japan was already contributing,they wouldn't be so critical. &quot;Japan has contributed agreater amount to the multinational forces than any otherindustrialized country,&quot; says Taizo Watanabe, the ForeignMinistry's spokesman.   Mr. Okamoto, the senior Foreign Ministry official involvedin the disbursement of aid, says Japan's payments have beenslow because the Pentagon preferred to take it in goods, suchas four-wheel-drive vehicles, rather than cash. Just lastmonth, a U.S. major arrived in Tokyo from Saudi Arabia with along shopping list of items, including computers, motorvehicles and construction materials.   Underlying the Japanese response is a deep ambivalenceabout America's behavior in the Gulf. The Japanese simply seethe invasion of Kuwait differently, argues Sheila Smith, aColumbia University doctoral candidate who is studying theU.S.-Japan defense relationship. &quot;In Japan, there isn't thesympathy for the idea that the aggressor needs to bepunished,&quot; she says.   In addition, there is what some call a &quot;free-rider&quot;mentality. Japan's security has been assured by somebody elsefor so long that security is like air; there isn't any sensethat someone has to pay for it. The U.S. would have to be inthe Middle East anyway, some say, so why should Japan pay theU.S. to act in the American interest?   Mr. Okamoto says many members of the Japanese Dietcomplain that the U.S. wants to make the decisions and thenforce its allies to pay for them. &quot;Why are we simply giventhe fait accompli of the decision and a demand to fund thebill?&quot; he says they ask. In particular, Japanese wereoffended by Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, who came toTokyo with a script already written -- contributions of $2billion will be made to the multilateral forces and $2billion to the front-line states -- but with no detailedbreakdown of figures justifying the script.   Mr. Okamoto sees a vicious circle developing, in whichstrained relations beget further strained relations. &quot;Thereis very dangerous waters lying ahead of us, in whichAmericans feel more critical, and more passionately critical,of Japan, sometimes with reason but mostly without reason.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>