<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900719-0146</DOCNO><DOCID>900719-0146.</DOCID><HL>   Drucker on Management:   Junk Central Europe's Factories and Start Over   ----   By Peter F. Drucker</HL><DATE>07/19/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   LABOR EUROP</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)</IN><LP>   Everybody in the fall of 1989 -- a few short months ago --was sure that German unification would take years. Similarly,the current common wisdom is that liquidating the Stalinisteconomies of Central Europe -- East Germany, Czechoslovakiaand Hungary (all areas that before World War II wereeconomically fully developed) -- will take many years.Actually, the changes are coming with lightning speed, andthere is no slowing or stopping them. For the goods turnedout by Central Europe's plants have become unsalable.   By 1995, Volkswagen expects to make 250,000 Rabbits in aplant in Zwickau, East Germany, that last year turned out50,000 of the tiny, expensive and chronically malfunctioningTrabant cars. But what is that plant going to make duringthese next five years? Not a single Trabant can be sold nowthat East Germans can buy, for less money, bigger andinfinitely better Western-made Fords, Volkswagens, Opels orFiats. Central European-made textiles, appliances, toys, handtools, processed foods and shoes have all become similarlyunsalable and are, indeed, no longer on the store shelves inBerlin, Budapest and Prague. And even the lushest governmentsubsidy could not make a Western manufacturer put into itsautomobile bodies the heavy and pockmarked sheet steel thatCentral European rolling mills turn out.</LP><TEXT>   For Central Europe to regain a modicum of prosperity, letalone enjoy social and political stability, its industriesmust become productive and competitive in no time at all.This requires, however, that industrial employment be slashedmore drastically than it has ever been slashed, even in asevere depression. East Germany's total labor force numbersnine million (out of a total population of 16.5 million).West German economists, including those of the trade unions,estimate that between three million and four million workerswill have to be laid off if East German industry is tosurvive in a competitive market. This, although East Germanyhas the most efficient industries of the entire Soviet Bloc.   A rapid economic turnaround has to be Central Europe's toppriority. Without it there will be neither social norpolitical stability. But the region's fragile democracies,with their tremendous social and political tensions, couldnot stand prolonged mass unemployment. They need somethingunprecedented: radical job cuts coupled with employmentmaintenance or, at least, income maintenance. This is theturnaround challenge of Central Europe.   And it is the prosperity and stability not just of CentralEurope that is at stake, but that of Western Europe as well.A successful turnaround of Central Europe offersunprecedented opportunities to Western Europe, and above allto West Germany. It promises a long investment-led boom thatwould make Europe the world's economic leader.   But failure to turn around the economies of CentralEurope, and fast, would surely trigger a mass exodus ofdespairing people from the East -- a larger-scale repetitionof the flight of 3,000 East Germans a day that inundated WestGermany before the Berlin Wall crumbled last autumn. And ifprolonged mass unemployment were the price for theturnaround, it would evoke the same response. &quot;I amoptimistic,&quot; said a West German publisher when he told me ofhis buying a number of East German newspapers. &quot;But it's ahigh-low poker game with the biggest stakes ever.&quot;   To produce 250,000 cars a year in Zwickau, Volkswagenexpects to employ no more people than had been employed inthe same plant to build 50,000 Trabants. In other words, fourout of every five Trabant workers should never have been onthe payroll.   Central Europe's most efficient steel mill, Witkowice inCzechoslovakia, produces about the same tonnage it did in1938, but with a substantially larger work force. In theWest, even an inefficent steel mill turns out 2 1/2 times thetonnage per worker it did 50 years ago, or about three timeswhat Witkowice does.   Even the plants in Central Europe that have kept abreastof technology are overstaffed. The Tungsram works outside ofBudapest, of which General Electric recently acquiredcontrol, make a first-rate light bulb. But they employ almost50% more people, proportionately, than do GE, Siemens andPhilips in their light-bulb plants in the West.   These are not isolated examples. In a Stalinist economy,over-staffing is not mismanagement; it is a virtue and builtinto the system. All incentives reward putting more people onthe payroll: capital available for investment in the plant;raw materials allocated to the plant; managerial pay andmanagerial perks. As a political system too, Stalinism pushesover-staffing. Large plants are expected to create jobs toreward the party faithful.   A Stalinist economy also misemploys. All its emphasis ison the heavy industries of the 1920s: coal mining, steel,commodity chemicals. As a result, employment in CentralEurope is concentrated in the &quot;smokestack&quot; industries inwhich there is over-capacity world-wide. A good many, somevery big employers among them, will shut down. A likelycandidate for the padlock is the large chemical complex inBitterfeld, East Germany, probably Europe's biggest. Becauseits raw material is lignite -- a sulfur-laden, ash-rich, softcoal -- its costs are double those of its petroleum-usingcompetitors across the border in West Germany. And reducinglignite's life-threatening pollution to the minimumacceptable level would drive up costs by an added two-fifthsor so.   Yet, typically there is little alternative employmentavailable in the areas in which these over-manned or obsoleteplants are located. Stalinism deliberately organized itspolitical control around one big plant or industry thatdominates its region. Zwickau, Witkowice and Bitterfeld areall single-employer towns. It is precisely there, however,that jobs will have to be cut the most.   There are substantial employment opportunities in CentralEurope. Many workers will be needed, for instance, to rebuildthe obsolescent, dilapidated factories that are Stalinism'slegacy. To convert Zwickau into an efficient Volkswagen plantshould keep one-third of its present work force busy.Rebuilding Central Europe's industry could provide jobs forsomething like 5% of the total industrial work force, it isestimated. It won't come cheap, though. Volkswagen, forinstance, plans to invest $3 billion in Zwickau -- more thanit should cost to build such a plant from scratch. In EastGermany capital will not be much of a problem, however; WestGermany has deep pockets. In Hungary and Czechoslovakia, too,capital to rebuild the plants seems to be available from theWest.   Another substantial employment opportunity -- perhaps foras much as another 5% of the work force -- lies in rebuildingthe run-down infrastructure of Central Europe. East Germany,for instance, has fewer telephones now than it had beforeWorld War II; its railroads and highways also have fallenwell below prewar standards. The biggest infrastructure needin all of Central Europe is housing; communist regimes alwaystreat it as a stepchild. What is needed is not public housingbut housing that gives privacy, is privately financed andprivately owned. &quot;If only,&quot; a Czech friend said, &quot;we couldfind someone like your Mr. Levitt who built the Levittowns inLong Island and around Philadelphia after World War II.&quot;   But the biggest employment opportunities lie in services.Communist regimes consider them &quot;bourgeois&quot; and are hostileto them. There is, therefore, tremendous demand all overCentral Europe for every kind of service: retail andwholesale distribution; repair and maintenance; banking andinsurance; restaurants, laundries, dry cleaners and so on.Services, as we know, can come into being practicallyovernight and without much investment. All they require is alocal entrepreneur. And since factory workers in CentralEurope have been badly paid, shifting into service work oftenmeans making more money. Europe's best chance for asuccessful turnaround may then lie in rapidly building athriving service sector.   The biggest question regarding Central Europe's turnaroundis a political one. Will governments refrain from doing thewrong things, however popular they might be?   The worst thing Europe's governments could do -- and theone they are, alas, most likely to do -- is subsidizecontinuing industrial over-staffing. Unless Central Europe'smanufacturing plants become competitive very fast, there willbe no turnaround. Cutting piecemeal is the wrong move in aturnaround, and the most expensive move in the end. One mustbe able to tell people, &quot;We're done with cutting. Let's startbuilding.&quot; Otherwise no one does any work.   Any financial assistance given -- and quite a bit will beneeded -- should be aimed at creating new, productive jobs.There might also be a need to provide income maintenance --e.g., following early retirement. But subsidizingunproductive and redundant jobs can only obstruct economicrecovery. It ultimately endangers social stability.   Equally dangerous would be protecting Central Europeanindustries from competition within Europe. There will be highbarriers in Europe against Japan and South Korea. But rapidEuropean economic integration must not be sacrificed to theshort-term problems of Central Europe.   Finally, there is the legacy of 40 years of Stalinism: thehostility in Central Europe to services and especially to theindependent entrepreneur. &quot;We need 500 house painters inPrague alone,&quot; my Czech friend said, &quot;and there'd be morethan enough work for them. But the government monopolieswouldn't sell them ladders or paint brushes or paint. They'dconsider them antisocial and parasites.&quot; In the lastanalysis, Central Europe's turnaround may therefore well beas much a matter of political courage and political will asof investments and of economics.   Market economics and free enterprise, it is now beingsaid, have won over communism. This is not really true.Communism collapsed from within, economically, politicallyand, above all, morally: It defeated itself. Free enterpriseand market economics -- and democracy as well -- will havewon only when they have turned around Central Europe.   ---   Mr. Drucker is a professor of social sciences at theClaremont Graduate School in California.</TEXT></DOC>