<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910411-0143</DOCNO><DOCID>910411-0143.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:   One Man's Evolution   ----   By David Shribman</HL><DATE>04/11/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   Consider the manifest of a modest 19th-century sailingship called the Beagle:   There's Charles Darwin, the son and grandson of physiciansand a man just then gathering together the strands of atheory that would become known to the world as evolution.</LP><TEXT>   There's the commander, Robert FitzRoy, a nephew of theBritish foreign secretary Castlereagh. He possesses amissionary's zeal, a scientist's mien and a mystical beliefin the power of a new instrument called the barometer totransform not only the nautical sciences but man'srelationship with his environment.   And there's Jemmy Button, an Indian from Tierra del Fuegowho had been taken to be civilized in England. There he hadan audience with King William IV and Queen Adelaide andbecame something of an anthropological curiosity before beingreturned to his own land.   &quot;Three Men of the Beagle&quot; (Knopf, 256 pages, $22) is thestory of the ship and its three illustrious passengers, butRichard Lee Marks has really written the extraordinary storyof one of them, Jemmy Button.   Until he met Capt. FitzRoy, Button was one of the canoeIndians of Tierra del Fuego, living peacefully andanonymously at the bottom of the world. There the men andwomen often went naked, gathered wood, grass and sticks tofashion rude forms of shelter, speared fish, gorgedthemselves on the blubber of sea elephants and whales, anddisposed of their old by smothering or strangling them todeath.   Into this world in 1830 slipped the H.M.S. Beagle. FitzRoytook Button to England, where he was schooled under theauspices of the National Society for Providing the Educationof the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church. Fromthe start it is clear that this story was not going to have ahappy ending.   When the crew of the Beagle was ordered three years laterto return to the South Atlantic to continue the mapping ofseveral islands, Brazil and the Patagonian coast, FitzRoybrought along a scientist, Darwin, and Jemmy Button.   Button's mother and oldest brother seemed to reject him.Their reunion provided an awkward moment, as Marks describes:&quot;There wasn't a range of expression in the Yahgan language tobridge all that has passed; the Yahgan language was simplyinadequate to bridge the difference which now existed betweenthese brothers.&quot;   Button stayed in Tierra del Fuego but would continue todrift in and out of the European consciousness, playing acameo role in the great adventure of colonization andexploration. A year later an English expedition returned tofind a skinny, hungry, filthy and half-blind Jemmy Button,caught betwixt two worlds. More than two decades later,English missionaries rediscovered him. He was then about 40and had transformed himself into something of a triballeader. He had taught some of his friends the rudiments ofEnglish. And he agreed, after all this time, to travel to theFalklands to start an education and religious-trainingprogram as part of an effort to bolster the British presencein the region.   But the mature Button proved to be a lazy student; hedidn't care much for farming or the domestic sciences. Asecond batch of Indians seemed to work out so much better.But when it was time for them to return, their bundles weresearched, prompting an uproar. At a service in a new missionhouse, emotions boiled over and a group of English soldierswas beaten, stoned and killed. &quot;It was a bloody spree ofkilling, the massacre of unarmed men who were led by amissionary with a Bible in his hand, the brutal murder of menwho were trying to bring a message of peace and gentleness,&quot;Marks says.   Months later an English crew found a single Europeansurvivor. He was naked, with swollen and cracked lips. Hiseyebrows and beard had been plucked out. He was covered withboils. Soon Button appeared in a canoe. He boarded theEnglish ship -- and was told he couldn't leave.   Jemmy Button, once the toast of London, was accused ofinstigating the massacre. At a Falklands inquiry, he deniedhe had been there or had anything to do with it, and finallyhe got off and returned to his people. He died in theepidemic of 1864 that killed off half his tribe. The last ofthe Yahgans died three decades ago.   Robert FitzRoy didn't fare much better than his protege,and himself became a case study in downward mobility. He waselected to Parliament and then appointed governor of NewZealand and chief meteorologist before -- dissipated anddiscredited -- his world began to fall apart. A portrait ofdespair, he finally slit his wrists.   Darwin survived Jemmy Button by 17 years and RobertFitzRoy by 18, giving him ample time to examine vegetablemolds, insectivorous plants and the effects of cross- andself-fertilization in the vegetable kingdom. Aquarter-century after he last saw Jemmy Button, all of hisobservations of coral polyps, fossil forests and exoticbeasts like the South American rhea came together, bearingfruit in one of the most revolutionary volumes of hiscentury, &quot;Origin of Species.&quot; We are haunted by it still.   But a reader of Mr. Mark's book cannot fail to be hauntedeven more by the image of Jemmy Button. Richard Lee Marks hasdiscovered him yet again.   ---   Mr. Shribman is a staff reporter in the Journal'sWashington bureau.</TEXT></DOC>