<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910821-0072</DOCNO><DOCID>910821-0072.</DOCID><HL>   Flash Point:   Spotlight Is on Yeltsin   As Soviet Coup Effort   Runs Into Roadblocks   ---   Russian President Issues Call   For Defiance, but Military   May Determine Outcome   ---   A Telephone Call From Bush   ----   By Peter Gumbel and Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)ENERGY (ENE)</MS><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)COAL PRODUCERS (COA)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)PETROLEUM (PET)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>COMMODITIES MARKET (CMD)INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)LABOR, PERSONNEL ISSUES, TRENDS, MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES (LAB)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>EUROPEAN COMMUNITY (EC)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   MOSCOW -- Just one day after deposing President MikhailGorbachev, there were growing signs that the Soviet Union'snew hard-line leadership was running into trouble, and maynot be able to consolidate its power without resorting tobloodshed.   The counterattack by Boris Yeltsin against the &quot;statecommittee&quot; that seized power Monday has gained some supportfrom the general public, leaders of other republics and evenparts of the army. Mr. Yeltsin, president of the republic ofRussia, remained holed up in the Russian Parliament buildingin Moscow, where he is coordinating resistance over thephone. Several foreign leaders, including President Bush,spoke with Mr. Yeltsin yesterday. Outside the parliamentbuilding supporters used vehicles and cobblestones ripped upfrom the street to construct barricades to protect Mr.Yeltsin.</LP><TEXT>   Meanwhile, one member of the eight-man committee, PrimeMinister Valentin Pavlov, was said to have fallen ill withhigh blood pressure. The hard-line regime denied reports byRussian officials that another member, Defense MinisterDmitri Yazov, had resigned and been replaced by MikhailMoiseyev, chief of general staff. A politburo official,Mikhail Surkov, also denied a report by Interfax, anot-always-reliable independent Soviet news agency, that KGBchief Vladimir Kryuchkov had stepped down.   Despite the support Mr. Yeltsin is getting, no one iswriting off the coup yet; notably, a general strike Mr.Yeltsin called largely went unheeded. Tuesday night, a curfewwas imposed in Moscow amid a growing show of strength by theregime, though the curfew wasn't being strictly enforced.Indeed, former Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze droveunimpeded through the city at 2 a.m. to lend moral support toprotesters outside the Russian Parliament building.   All day, tension was high as rumors spread of an impendingarmed attack on the building. Last night, gunfire was heardnearby and Soviet radio said at least three people werekilled and several injured when armored vehicles confrontedprotesters and crashed through barricades. Those vehicles,however, quickly backed off. Elsewhere, some of the hundredsof tanks positioned around Moscow moved to block off mainroads to the city's center.   The military activity is still largely limited to Moscow,although there have been reports of troop movements in otherparts of the country, including the Ukraine. In Leningrad,the Soviet Union's second largest city, tens of thousands ofpeople gathered to denounce the coup and the city councildeclared the ousting of Mikhail Gorbachev &quot;null and void.&quot;   Significantly, the new regime has so far failed to gainendorsement from hard-line political groups that had beenexpected to rally behind it. Col. Viktor Alksnis, a leader ofthe parliamentary Soyuz group that was long fiercely criticalof Mr. Gorbachev, says the takeover was &quot;badly planned&quot; andthat the new regime has made &quot;serious mistakes.&quot;   In an interview, Col. Alksnis, popularly known as &quot;theblack colonel&quot; for his extremist views, supported thedeclaration of a state of emergency. But he questioned theconstitutional legality of the coup leaders' actions and saidthe leaders should have avoided a confrontation with Mr.Yeltsin. &quot;There is a real chance that Yeltsin will win,&quot; Col.Alksnis said.   If the coup does fail, it would be a remarkable victoryfor the fledgling Soviet democracy that Mr. Gorbachevintroduced in his six years in office. And it would likelyspeed the transformation of the Soviet Union into adecentralized, democratic federation of sovereign republics.   Mr. Yeltsin, 60 years old, remains the rallying point forresistance to the coup. He immediately condemned the takeoveras against the constitution and has been wooing parts of themilitary over to his side. &quot;Clouds of dictatorship and terrorare gathering over Russia,&quot; he said in a videotaped addressto Soviet soldiers and citizens. He urged the army and KGBofficials not to obey orders from the coup leaders, and ispromising them &quot;moral and legal guarantees&quot; if they switchsides.   The tactic has had some early success. Three armeddivisions positioned around the Russian Parliament lent theirsupport to Mr. Yeltsin Monday night, but two of the divisionspulled back Tuesday after being threatened with punishment bythe Defense Ministry, according to Gen. Konstantin Kobets,head of the Russian republic's defense committee.   In an interview, Gen. Kobets said he and Mr. Yeltsin havebeen holding talks with senior officers from the generalstaff, and he contends that most junior and middle-rankingofficers support the Russian republic's cause. If it were notfor the Defense Ministry's threats, he says, &quot;all of themwould have switched to Russia's side.&quot;   Such talk may be bravado. Col. Alksnis, the Soyuz groupleader, says he doesn't believe the army will split. But heacknowledges that parts of the officer corps do sympathizewith Mr. Yeltsin. A deputy to Gen. Kobets estimates that 52%of servicemen voted for Mr. Yeltsin in the Russianpresidential election held in June, and says support fromofficers was even higher.   The coup leaders may have miscalculated the loyalty of thetroops by sending mainly ethnic Russian forces, some of thembased close to Moscow, into the capital. The tanks and truckshave been surrounded for hours at a time by the public andmembers of the Russian Parliament, who have tried to talk thetroops out of supporting the coup.   One major in a tank division of the elite Tamanskyregiment who stayed on to defend the Russian Parliament sayshe and others did so &quot;because we consider the order of theSoviet government illegal.&quot; Asked whether he was afraid ofreprisals, the major, who refused to give his name, replied:&quot;History will judge us.&quot;   Quite apart from the military, the new regime appears tohave so far failed to exercise full control of the situation,even in Moscow. Parts of the media, including the TASS newsagency, supposedly now under strict state control, havepublished details of Mr. Yeltsin's appeals as well asoverseas reaction to the coup.   In subway stations around the capital, hastily-printedleaflets carrying the latest news have been stuck on thewalls, where they draw crowds of curious commuters.   &quot;I heard that they're going to storm the RussianParliament in an hour,&quot; said one anxious woman at theTaganskaya subway station.   &quot;Don't worry,&quot; replied a man in military uniform standingnext to her. &quot;Reason will prevail.&quot;   For some hard-liners who virulently opposed Mr.Gorbachev's reforms, such laxness by the new leadershipsmacks of incompetence. Boris Gunko, who heads the Moscowbranch of the &quot;Unity&quot; group, which pledges to uphold&quot;Leninism and Communist ideals,&quot; says he thinks the man whoreplaced Mr. Gorbachev, Vice President Gennady Yanayev, is atbest &quot;naive.&quot;   &quot;I just don't understand,&quot; Mr. Gunko said in an interview.&quot;Look at the tanks. Where are the officers? They're notthere.&quot; He complains about the lack of control over the massmedia, and says that he's amazed the key opposition figureshaven't been arrested. &quot;It's just indecisiveness,&quot; he says.   Some light was shed Tuesday on one of the few people tohave been arrested: President Gorbachev.   When the coup began, the new regime said Mr. Gorbachev wassimply in bad health and needed time to recuperate and wouldremain in the south of the country where he had beenvacationing. But Sergei Stankevich, the former deputy mayorof Moscow and now an aide to Mr. Yeltsin, said the Sovietpresident was arrested at his dacha in the Crimea togetherwith his head of security and two long-time advisers, AnatolyChernyaev and Georgy Shakhnazarov. Citing sources in themilitary, Mr. Stankevich told a rally outside the RussianParliament that the military had cut off all of Mr.Gorbachev's escape routes the day of the coup.   President Bush and Boris Yeltsin, whose relationship hasbeen awkward at best, are moving rapidly toward becomingcomrades in a united effort to oust the hard-liners. Afterhis phone call to Mr. Yeltsin, Mr. Bush declared that &quot;wepray for you and we hope that you're successful.&quot; He added:&quot;I assured Mr. Yeltsin of continued U.S. support for his goalof the restoration of Mr. Gorbachev as the constitutionallychosen leader.&quot;   That doesn't mean the president is throwing America's fullweight behind the defiant Russian leader. The U.S. hasn't anyintention, for instance, of making any military moves tosupport Mr. Yeltsin's stand, and Mr. Bush made clearyesterday that he still considers Mr. Gorbachev thelegitimate leader of the Soviet Union.   But turning to the silver-haired Mr. Yeltsin is clearlythe best -- and probably the only -- option Mr. Bush hasavailable to ratchet up the pressure on the hard-liners,aides say. The link to Mr. Yeltsin means that the reactionfrom Washington will have to be that much more severe if thecoup leaders ultimately seize or kill the Russian leader.Such a move would also complicate the internal Sovietsituation. &quot;If they make a martyr out of Yeltsin, I thinkthey've lost,&quot; says Sovietologist Murray Feshbach ofGeorgetown University.   Senior U.S. officials say they are proceeding on theassumption that the Putsch that overthrew Mr. Gorbachev canbe overturned. In addition to the various reports of membersof the new regime stepping down, U.S. officials say thatForeign Minister Alexander Bessmertnykh apparently is stayingout of active participation in the coup. A presidentialspokesman said yesterday that Secretary of State James Bakerhad tried to telephone Mr. Bessmertnykh and was told hewasn't available.   The U.S. also has been using Voice of America to transmitinto the Soviet Union rebroadcasts of Mr. Yeltsin's defiantcall for opposition to the coup, as well as Mr. Bush'ssympathetic remarks. That has given Mr. Yeltsin a crucialopportunity to address the Russian people. But thecharismatic -- and erratic -- Mr. Yeltsin still concerns Bushadministration officials, and Mr. Bush made clear that hedoesn't want any of his actions to be so provocative thatthey spark any military tension with the Soviet Union. TheU.S. doesn't &quot;want to see this turn into an East-Westconfrontation,&quot; the president said. Administration officialspointedly reported, for instance, that Mr. Bush tried toreach Mr. Gorbachev by phone before calling Mr. Yeltsin butwas unable to reach the Soviet president.   Mr. Bush's contact with Mr. Yeltsin &quot;was a way ofexpressing opposition to the coup more than a way of offeringsupport for Yeltsin,&quot; says former Defense Secretary HaroldBrown.   Asked at a White House press conference what kind ofsupport he intends to offer Mr. Yeltsin, the presidentreplied: &quot;Well, we're certainly going to offer encouragementin every way we can. And we're making very clear to the coupplotters and the coup people that there will not be normalrelations with the United States as long as this illegal coupremains in effect.&quot; With that in mind, when Robert Strausswas sworn in as the new U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Unionyesterday and instructed to go to Moscow on a fact-findingtrip, he was also told not to present his credentials to thenew regime.   In part, officials say, Mr. Bush is trying to signal thehard-liners that they won't succeed in winning Americanacquiescence to the coup by simply paying lip service tocontinuing reforms in the Soviet Union. In their initialstatements, the coup leaders appeared to suggest that theywould be willing to continue Mr. Gorbachev's broad foreignpolicies and economic reforms as long as the West left themalone to clamp down internally.   To dispel thoughts that he might go along with such aplan, Mr. Bush and European leaders moved more forcefullyyesterday to put economic ties with the Soviets on ice. TheEuropean Community suspended economic aid, and Mr. Bushreiterated that the U.S. is &quot;leaving everything on hold.&quot;   Mr. Bush is dodging a decision for now, though, on themost politically sensitive area of economic cooperation:grain credits to the Soviets. The president declined to sayyesterday whether he intends to proceed with dispensing $1.5billion in new credits granted the Soviets earlier this year.The president can put off a decision now: The first chunk ofthe credits, worth $600 million, was largely disbursed beforethe coup, officials say. The next part isn't due to begranted until Oct. 1.   Officials note that European leaders have made foodshipments an exception to their economic sanctions, and theysay Mr. Bush may do the same.   The big question now is how much control the leaders ofthe coup can exert over the Soviet military as they seek toconsolidate control. The reported departure of Mr. Yazov, thedefense minister, from the committee now running the Kremlincarries a mixed message, part ominous and part encouraging.U.S. analysts suspect that, if he did indeed step down, hefell out with his fellow coup leaders after sensing thatSoviet army officers wouldn't go along with a violentcrackdown against their fellow citizens.   Some U.S. analysts think his rumored replacement, Mr.Moiseyev, is another career military man reluctant to orderthe army to shoot Russian civilians.   Throughout the day in Moscow, tens of thousands ofMuscovites rallied in front of the Russian Parliament, knownhere as the White House, to listen to rousing speeches fromseveral deputies condemning the coup. Lending his voice tothe chorus of criticism, the head of the Russian OrthodoxChurch, Patriarch Alexei, issued a statement calling for Mr.Gorbachev to be given a public hearing. &quot;Bewilderment creepsin the conscience of millions of our fellow citizens whobegin to question the legality of the newly formed statecommittee,&quot; the Patriarch said.   Elsewhere, the president of the Central Asian republic ofKazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev, termed the new regime'smoves &quot;illegitimate&quot; and called for a special session of thenational congress to be convened within 10 days. &quot;If wecontinue treading the slippery path of lawlessness, thepeople will not forgive it,&quot; Mr. Nazarbayev said in astatement. Similar comments were made by leaders in theUkraine and Moldavia, as well as the Baltic republics, aparticular hot-spot that the hard-liners have tried to coolby seizing radio and television stations.   While protest rallies of varying sizes were held inseveral cities around the nation, Mr. Yeltsin's call for ageneral strike has so far been heeded chiefly by miners inthe militant Kuzbass coal fields, though some factories inByelorussia and elsewhere are also threatening to stop work.Most enterprises and stores were working normally throughoutthe nation. The new regime did get one reprieve when thepowerful oil industry workers, who could quickly shut downthe nation's economy, announced they support Mr. Yeltsin butnot to the point of striking.   Mr. Yeltsin's efforts to rally support are still beinghampered by a lack of communication with the nation. So far,his aides have been broadcasting news to ham radio operatorson a make-shift short wave transmitter installed in the sixthfloor of the Russian Parliament. But the signal can only bepicked up by a few people, and the republic lacks anyfacilities of its own to bring its message to a wider public.Nonetheless, in addition to U.S. broadcasts, word of mouthand leaflets remain a potent force in a nation long used toinformation blackouts.   For example, many responded to a call on typed leafletshanging from the walls of subway stations in Moscow to defendthe Russian Parliament during the night. The notice advisedpeople to bring &quot;warm clothes, a tent and an umbrella&quot; withthem.   Amid the tension and turmoil of the second day of theunrest, as tanks moved around town, there was some optimismin Moscow that Mr. Yeltsin might prevail, unless the regimeresorted to massive use of military force. That's how thedemocracy movement in China ended in 1989: a massacre ofprotesters at Tiananmen Square that allowed conservatives inthe government to retain power. A similar move in the SovietUnion, though, could destroy the already meager credibilityof the new regime, and perhaps even spark a civil war.   &quot;It's the final stage. It's evident the coup attemptfailed,&quot; contends Sergei Pustovoi, a young radio broadcasterinside the Russian Parliament building. &quot;The only question iswhether blood will flow.&quot;   ---   Neela Banerjee in Moscow contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>