<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900508-0005</DOCNO><DOCID>900508-0005.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Court in Maryland Strikes Down   `Exclusions' in Sandamp;L Insurance Case   ----   By Milo Geyelin and Glenn Ruffenach   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/08/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   AMB CCI J.BOT BAC CMB LATAM EUROP</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)INSURANCE (INS)TOBACCO PRODUCTS (TOB)BANKS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   A Maryland state appeals court struck down two keyprovisions that so far have limited the exposure of insurancecompanies for the negligence of officers and directors offailed savings and loan associations.   The decision is the first state appellate ruling in thenation to address whether the provisions -- known as&quot;exclusions&quot; in insurance parlance -- should exempt insurancecompanies from paying claims against directors and officersof failed thrifts. Though the case has no binding effectoutside Maryland, it is expected to be widely cited as morelawsuits are filed nationwide against directors and officersof failed Sandamp;Ls.</LP><TEXT>   Almost all liability policies for directors and officersof thrifts contain the exclusions struck down in Maryland.One, known as the &quot;regulatory exclusion,&quot; bars coverage whenfederal regulators take action. The other known, as the&quot;insured vs. insured exclusion&quot; exempts insurance companiesfrom liability when institutions sue their own officers.   The exclusions have been pivotal in limiting the exposureof insurance companies for the negligent conduct of officersresponsible for the collapse of thrifts nationwide. But bothwere nullified last week by the court of special appeals ofMaryland, in Baltimore. The intermediate state appellatecourt ruled that the exclusions are contrary to Maryland&quot;public policy.&quot;   The state has been bailing out collapsed thrifts since1985, when it created the Maryland Deposit Insurance Fund torepresent creditors and depositors. Allowing the exclusionsto stand, thus barring a payout by insurers, the court ruled,would circumvent the state's greater interest in recovering&quot;every dollar available.&quot;   The court ruled that: &quot;The law in Maryland is well settledthat considerations of public policy are deemed paramount toprivate rights. . . . Thus, where the two conflict, privateinterest must yield to the public good.&quot;   &quot;From a national perspective, the vitiating of these twoexclusions has tremendous ramifications,&quot; said Neil Dilloff,a partner at the Baltimore law firm of Piper andamp; Marbury, whichwon the opinion on behalf of the Maryland fund.   The case was filed against American Casualty Co. ofReading, Pa., an underwriter for CNA Insurance Cos., inChicago. American's attorneys in Washington weren't availablefor comment, but the case is expected to be appealed toMaryland's highest court, said Mr. Dilloff.   Michael Lovendusky, counsel and litigation manager for theAmerican Insurance Association, in Washington, said that ifthe ruling is picked up in other states or by federal courts,it could become impossible for insurance companies to issuedirector and officer liability policies. The two exclusions,said Mr. Lovendusky, have been standard since the 1960s.   ---   RACIAL ISSUE in major smoking-liability case forces achange of venue.   The case of Horton vs. American Tobacco Co. originallywent to trial in January 1988 in Lexington, Miss. The familyof Nathan H. Horton, a housing contractor who died of lungcancer in 1987, charged the company with &quot;marketing adefective and unreasonably dangerous product.&quot;   American Tobacco, a unit of American Brands Inc., deniedany responsibility for Mr. Horton's death. But anti-smokingforces had high hopes for the Horton case. Mississippi statelaw is more favorable to plaintiffs than in most otherstates. Under its so-called comparative-negligence law, thejury could have awarded damages to the Horton family even ifit had found the tobacco company bore only 1% of theresponsibility for Mr. Horton's death.   But the first trial ended in a hung jury amid charges ofjury tampering.   A second trial began last month but was abruptly halted byCircuit Court Judge Eugene Bogen in response to complaintsmade by American Tobacco. In early April, newspapers,broadcasters and local civic and political leaders hadreceived a packet of information from the plaintiffs'attorneys that included statements that tobacco companieswere targeting blacks and other minorities.   Judge Bogen, in approving a motion by American Tobacco fora delay in the case and a change of venue, said thestatements were a &quot;blatant attempt to make an appeal on thebasis of race to the persons in Holmes County, and thusindirectly on the jury pool.&quot;   After declaring a mistrial and placing a gag order onlawyers for both sides, Judge Bogen moved the case to theLafayette County Circuit Court from Holmes County and set aSept. 4 trial date.   ---   BANKS' LAWSUIT against government of Peru gets courthearing.   The group of banks is seeking immediate repayment of $1.2billion in loans made during the past two decades. The banksinclude Citibank, a unit of Citicorp; Bank of Tokyo; Bank ofAmerica, a unit of BankAmerica Corp.; and Chase ManhattanBank, a unit of Chase Manhattan Corp. The banks allege thatPeru has been in default on its foreign debt since 1984.   The suit is believed to be the largest ever filed againsta sovereign government, said Mark A. Cymrot of Cole Corette andamp;Abrutyn, a lawyer for Peru and Peruvian financialinstitutions that are also defendants in the case. Ten othersuits have also been filed against Peru seeking the repaymentof loans.   An attorney for the banks told federal Judge John Keenanof New York that his clients would prefer to renegotiate theloans but were concerned about deadlines that would havebarred legal action.   The banks filed suit March 2 after learning that anagreement reached with Peru's government, which would haveeffectively extended the deadline, might not be enforceableunder Peruvian law, Henry Weisburg of Shearman andamp; Sterling, anattorney for several banks, told the court. A spokeswoman forCitibank, which heads the 10-member Bank Advisory Committeefor Peru, said later that serious negotiations with Peruhaven't taken place for several years.   Peru has had difficult relations with its foreigncreditors since 1985, when it restricted payments on itsforeign debt to 10% of its export revenue. In December, Perupaid the International Monetary Fund $42.3 million in overdueinterest payments. In return, the IMF agreed to send a teamto Peru to develop an economic program with the government.   Mr. Cymrot said the banks's suit ignores the IMF agreementand that enforcement of a favorable judgment could cut offPeru's foreign income and strangle the country economically.&quot;This could undermine democracy in Peru,&quot; he said.   At the hearing, Judge Keenan gave the defendants 60 daysto respond to the banks' allegations.   ---   RETRIAL BEGINS:  The retrial of Raymond Buckey, the formerCalifornia preschool teacher accused of child molestation,began following a month of jury selection. Mr. Buckey, whosefirst criminal trial was the longest and costliest in U.S.history, will be tried on eight counts of child molestationinvolving three girls who were once pupils at the now-defunctVirginia McMartin Preschool in the community of ManhattanBeach. Earlier this year, after 28 months of hearingtestimony and three months of deliberations, a jury acquittedMr. Buckey and his mother, Peggy McMartin Buckey, on 52 of 65counts. The government later decided to retry Mr. Buckeyalone on eight of the 13 counts on which the jury haddeadlocked. The new trial is expected to take at least sixmonths.   ---   PRIVATE LESSONS: Baker andamp; McKenzie, a 1,400 lawyer firmbased in Chicago, was picked as a legal adviser to Hungary inthat nation's efforts to sell its state-owned enterprises.The law firm, which has a two-year-old office in Budapest,will join investment bank Barclays de Zoete Wedd Limited, aunit of Barclays Bank PLC, London, and accounting firm PriceWaterhouse of New York as part of a consortium ofinternational advisers on the public offering. The consortiumwill recommend policies and procedures for the HungarianState Property Agency, which was established this year tooversee the sale of an estimated $32 billion in stateproperty.   ---   Amy Dockser Marcus contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>