<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900712-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>900712-0080.</DOCID><HL>   Beleaguered Bell --   A New Jolt for Nynex:   Bawdy `Conventions'   Of Buyers, Suppliers   ---   At Annual Parties in Florida,   Regulators Hear, Women   Were Hired to `Entertain'   ---   Trying to Keep It All Secret   ----   By Mary Lu Carnevale   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   NYN</CO><IN>TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Nynex Corp., which has had a lot of trouble this year, isbracing for more.   The telephone holding company was shocked by a record $1.4million fine that the Federal Communications Commissionproposed in February after an FCC audit found $118.5 millionin alleged overcharges to its operating subsidiaries. Evengreater was the jolt in late May, when the company wascharged in a criminal indictment with violating the consentdecree that broke up the Bell System in 1984.</LP><TEXT>   Now, another potential scandal is erupting at Nynex, onethat may do far more damage.   As part of closed regulatory proceedings in a state ratecase for the company's New York Telephone unit, evidence hassurfaced about a series of bawdy gatherings at Floridaresorts. Nicknamed the &quot;perverts' conventions&quot; byparticipants, the raucous, weeklong sessions were heldannually from 1984 to 1988. They allegedly involved improper,if not illegal, business contacts between employees ofNynex's purchasing unit, Materiel Enterprises Co., and about30 Nynex suppliers, some of whom picked up much of the tab.   According to rate-case documents, women were hired toprovide entertainment and sex for the attendees. Otherevidence being reviewed by state regulators draws acorrelation between suppliers' attendance at the conventionsand the volume of Nynex business steered to them. Questionsalso have been raised about whether phone customers paidhigher rates because of deals cooked up by convention-goers.   People familiar with the Florida meetings say one Nynexemployee won the &quot;Procurement Award&quot; for three consecutiveyears, apparently for &quot;arranging for women&quot; for theconventions. Others won the &quot;Most Valuable Pervert Award&quot; andthe &quot;Moon Over Miami Award.&quot; A Nynex unit vice president,dismissed for being the ringleader, eventually sued thecompany. He won a $1 million settlement and gave the companya pledge of silence.   Nynex refuses to discuss the Florida meetings, citing itspolicy against disclosing personnel matters. In argumentspresented in the New York rate case, the company contendsthat such disclosures could strain marriages and hurt companymorale. Nynex also insists that the identities of those whoattended and the companies they represented, as well as thealleged prostitution and other convention activities, are&quot;trade secrets&quot; that needn't be disclosed.   &quot;We're not eager to try this thing in the press,&quot; a Nynexspokesman says.   But with all the revelations, a picture emerges of acompany that sometimes acted as if it wasn't subject tocertain regulatory rules or ethical standards. The recordalso shows that Nynex officials hampered regulators byholding back documents in the rate case and suggesting thatonly people with dirty minds would pursue the Florida matter.Moreover, Nynex has paid heavily for top-notch lawyers whohave kept a lid on public disclosures.   The Nynex spokesman contends there was &quot;never anyindication&quot; that customers were harmed or that favoritism wasshown to suppliers. Once the company learned ofpurchasing-unit problems, the spokesman says, Nynex &quot;quicklyand efficiently took appropriate action.&quot; In rate-casedocuments, Nynex representatives say that although suppliersmay have picked up hotel tabs for some Nynex employees, nobusiness was discussed at the conventions. In any event,Nynex didn't knowingly pay any of the expenses.   New York's attorney general is investigating allegationsof unusual transactions between company employees and certainsuppliers, possible insider trading in suppliers' stocks, andsuspected misallocations of lobbying expenses, charitabledonations and legal fees. In addition, the Manhattan districtattorney's office has been investigating alleged bid-rigging,mostly on construction projects, by New York Telephoneemployees.   Under the cumulative weight of such developments, the NewYork State Public Service Commission staff, the state'sConsumer Protection Board and other parties are preparing toseek drastic reductions in the company's proposed $1.4billion rate-increase request over three years.   Another upshot is that Nynex has become the black sheep ofthe Baby Bells. The federal indictment and proposed FCC finehave not only hurt Nynex but also have tarred the six otherBells trying to win credibility in their fight to getCongress to lift all consent-decree restrictions. &quot;We needcredibility to get our job done, and accusations like thishurt all of us, because we are still viewed as the same,&quot;says Sam Ginn, the chief executive of Pacific Telesis Group.   In fact, Sen. Daniel Inouye, a Hawaii Democrat andchairman of the Senate Communications subcommittee, citesNynex's behavior in opposing a bill to allow the seven Bellsto make telephone equipment. The FCC overcharge case, whichregulators contend proves their ability to catch illegalbehavior, albeit five years after the fact, &quot;is more anexample of regulation by good fortune, hardly a policy forthe long run,&quot; he says.   In recent weeks, much of the drama has been unfolding in a21st-floor conference room in an old New York Telephonebuilding overlooking the Brooklyn Bridge. Public ServiceCommission lawyers, members of the state attorney general'sstaff and several men fired by Nynex -- all parties to therate case -- sit at a huge table cluttered with papers andinterrogate New York Telephone officials. The object: totrace the sometimes-obscure ways money flows at the company.   For five days, the lawyers deposed Guy Struve, a partnerat Davis Polk andamp; Wardwell whom Nynex retained in 1988 toinvestigate the Florida meetings and other relatedactivities. After Mr. Struve's investigation, Nynex ended upfiring the alleged ringleader of the conventions, LawrenceFriedman. Mr. Friedman had been Materiel Enterprises' vicepresident for purchasing, reporting directly to thesubsidiary's president.   Mr. Struve declines to comment about his work for Nynex.Repeated attempts to reach Mr. Friedman were unsuccessful.   After his dismissal, Mr. Friedman sued Nynex in statecourt in Manhattan claiming religious discrimination -- he isJewish. Nynex has made at least one payment on the $1 millionsettlement. A provision in the settlement tied futurepayments over a 10-year period to Mr. Friedman's continuingsilence on the matter, but last month a New York Telephonelawyer officially freed Mr. Friedman -- and others who hadsigned similar settlements -- to talk to the PSC, theattorney general's office and the Consumer Protection Board.   One other employee, who assisted Mr. Friedman in planningthe conventions, was dismissed, and five more weredisciplined. People familiar with the company's securityprocedures say the investigations left members of the Floridaconvention group and other current employees spooked enoughto keep quiet.   Mr. Struve's $500,000-plus investigation, supported byKroll Associates, a private investigative agency, produced11,000 pages of documents and conclusions. A centralconclusion: The atmosphere at the conventions was &quot;boys'night out,&quot; with no serious talk of business.   &quot;One of the areas that we tried to question everybodyabout was whether there was any discussion of business of anysort at the conventions,&quot; Mr. Struve testified. &quot;With twoexceptions, which I consider immaterial, the answer uniformlywas that there was absolutely no business discussion at anyof the conventions. Given the nature of the activities of theconventions, that probably will not surprise you.&quot; Many ofthe supplier employees, he added, weren't directly involvedin sales to Nynex.   Just after the Florida investigation began, Mr. Struvetestified that he and a Davis Polk senior partner, RobertFiske, concluded that the conventions episode wasn't a matterfor prosecutors. When state and federal regulators arrived,the company produced confidential files and studies thatindicated no favoritism was shown to suppliers who attended.Regulators didn't investigate further.   The 1988 investigation wasn't Mr. Friedman's firstgo-round with Nynex; he was investigated by New YorkTelephone security people in 1985 also involving the Floridasessions. The company commissioned a follow-up review by theNew York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley andamp; McCloy to seewhether it was missing something. The Nynex spokesman saysthe investigation into unspecified allegations &quot;came up withnothing.&quot; That investigation and an earthy videotape for the1987 convention that contained a brief appearance by anotherMateriel Enterprises vice president poking fun at asubordinate for attending the convention indicate that sometop officials at Materiel Enterprises knew about theconventions.   Some participants in the rate case strongly disagree withthe conclusion that there weren't any ties between sales toNynex and the cavorting with Materiel Enterprises officialsin Florida.   &quot;I don't know how Nynex's investigations could have missedit, unless they really weren't looking,&quot; says Scott Rafferty,a fired Nynex executive who initiated the Justice Departmentinvestigations that led to Nynex's criminal indictment inMay. Mr. Rafferty took Nynex data that tracked the years thateach supplier had a representative at the Florida parties andeach supplier's sales to Nynex. Adjusting for companies thatdidn't sell to Nynex, he ran the data through a computer tofind an average compounded annual growth rate.   Mr. Rafferty found a strong correlation: For suppliers whoattended, sales grew an average of 67% over the years,including later years when their employees may not haveattended. For suppliers not represented at the Floridasessions, sales to Materiel Enterprises crept along withabout 3.5% growth.   Mr. Rafferty was hired to direct the consulting operationsof Nynex's newly acquired Telco Research unit in the springof 1986. He said his salary was $110,000 a year. Then aconfident 30-year-old, he already had a solid resume:Princeton undergrad, Yale law school, Rhodes scholar,experience in telecommunications on Capitol Hill, and a stintat McKinsey andamp; Co., the consulting firm.   But Mr. Rafferty's vision of building a consultingbusiness at Nynex vanished quickly. In the fall of 1986, hesays, he questioned whether Telco's consulting activitiesqualified under a waiver Nynex had received from the courtoverseeing the Bell System consent decree. Shortly afterthat, the consulting operation was disbanded, and he wasfired.   Nynex maintains that the consent decree had nothing to dowith it. The company cites &quot;business reasons&quot; for disbandingthe unit and won't discuss the circumstances of Mr.Rafferty's departure.   Overnight, Mr. Rafferty became Nynex's worst nightmare: asharp, aggressive lawyer with abundant energy, intenseconcern about his consulting clients and his reputation, anda burning desire for vindication. Just after he was fired,Barbara Morris, a Nynex lobbyist, passed along a suggestionto Donald Reed, then head of Nynex's Washington office, froma Nynex lawyer that &quot;this guy should be neutralized fast . .. before he goes over to DOJ {Department of Justice} andsuggests they look into Nynex operations for compliance&quot; withthe consent decree. The Nynex spokesman says Ms. Morris wastrying &quot;to find a way to defuse the tension.&quot;   This spring, Mr. Rafferty and several other former Nynexemployees intervened in the New York rate case, and, in anunusual twist, the parties to the case won the right todepose New York Telephone witnesses.   As a spinoff to that case, Mr. Rafferty recently filed acomplaint at the FCC alleging that Nynex improperly allocatedto New York Telephone and New England Telephone most of the$7 million it paid to outside counsel, mostly Davis Polk, inconnection with a suit that he filed against Nynex and theJustice Department investigations leading up to theindictment.   The legal fees are likely to keep piling up as Nynex getsready for trial in late autumn in federal court in Washingtonon a charge of willfully providing prohibited informationservices. Although the single charge that came out of thetwo-year investigation seems small -- Nynex's Telco Researchunit provided certain computer services to MCI CommunicationsCorp. -- the trial is certain to draw considerable attentionas the first criminal case charging a violation in theconsent decree.   In New York, the attorney general's office is alsoinvestigating whether Nynex accounted improperly forcharitable donations and lobbying expenses. Already, the FCChas excluded some lobbying expenses from interstate rates,and the attorney general's office is investigating a longroster of New York Telephone payments that may have gone tocharities but were listed under general and administrativeexpenses. These include payments to such organizations as the42nd Street Educational Theatre Culture, the Abraham LincolnAssociation and U.S. Olympic Committee.   Regulators generally allow utilities to earn a setpercentage of profits on their rate base. So, if New YorkTelephone's rate base was padded by improper accounting forcharitable donations and the like, or by inflating the costof goods that the phone company buys from another Nynex unit,customers would wind up paying more for phone service thenext time rates are reset.   Whether consumers have paid anything extra, or how much,is uncertain because a rate moratorium has been in effect inNew York for the past few years. New York Telephone contendsthat it has been making less than the 14% of its rate base itis permitted to earn.   In addition to the rate case, investigators at the NewYork state attorney general's office are delving into companydocuments and depositions that could shed light on specialties between Materiel Enterprises personnel and suppliers.   &quot;Obviously, our first priority is the rate case, but thereare footprints all over the place,&quot; says Charles Donaldson, alawyer in the attorney general's office. &quot;It is a question ofwhich trail to follow.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>