<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900906-0149</DOCNO><DOCID>900906-0149.</DOCID><HL>   Technology:   Computers in Disguise Try to Achieve   Wide Acceptance That Still Eludes PCs   ----   By Michael W. Miller   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   J.SUT GACC J.NTD GRL CCI T</CO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)BANKS (BNK)</IN><LP>   Lawrence Weiss, one of Citicorp's top technologyexecutives, works at a desk surrounded by 14 boxes of&quot;Underoos,&quot; kids' underwear cleverly packaged to look likesuperhero costumes. Mr. Weiss created Underoos in an earlierjob and keeps them nearby as a reminder of the marketingprinciple behind them: The best new products are variationson comfortable old products.   Today he is applying that lesson to a lumpy beige gadgetthat resembles an ordinary telephone. Citicorp is gambling itwill catch on as a bank-at-home device better than an earliersystem that let customers dial up their accounts via personalcomputer.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;The trick is to mask the new technology,&quot; Mr. Weiss says.&quot;It's an Underoo.&quot;   This same philosophy is behind a cornucopia of productssneaking computing power into the home in the guise of morefamiliar devices. Other projects in the works use embeddedcomputer technology to let people trade stocks on a NintendoCo. game machine, receive written messages on an AmericanTelephone andamp; Telegraph Co. telephone, search databases ofarticles and listings on a television set and programhousehold appliances with a television's remote control.   Products such as these are crashing onto the turf of thepersonal-computer industry, which has long promised to makethe PC as ubiquitous as a telephone or a TV. Right now, thePC industry is wooing the home market more aggressively thanever, led by lavish new products from International BusinessMachines Corp. and Tandy Corp. These and other companiespaint pictures of every household using a computer to sendmessages, read news, play games, bank and shop. PC makersscoff at the idea that simpler household gadgets could everdo these jobs.   But so far home computers have shaped up as a narrowmarket. Only about a quarter of all American households havePCs. Most use their computers for limited, utilitarian tasks,such as writing or doing leftover office work.   Now, instead of home computers becoming household items,household items are turning into home computers.   &quot;People said there were going to be two or three computersin every home like there are two or three telephones,&quot; saysA.C. Markkula, an Apple Computer Inc. founder and presentvice chairman. &quot;They're right, but the physicalimplementation isn't what they had in mind. Instead of havingthree things that look like PCs, people will have many piecesof equipment that are in essence PC technology but are buriedin refrigerator doors, and lighting systems, and VCRs and TVsand CD players and telephones.&quot;   Mr. Markkula has founded a new Silicon Valley companycalled Echelon Corp., which is working on ways to link allthe hidden microchips in a home or commercial building intoone communications and control network. Echelon won't saymore about its products until it unveils them later thisyear.   Right now the most promising buried PCs are showing upinside telephones. In a Citicorp pilot program, about 400customers already are using the home-banking phone, which hasa little screen, a hidden keyboard and microchips that let ithandle all manner of banking tasks. The bank says it wants toship hundreds of thousands more of the phones over the nextfew years, though it won't dislose a specific timetable.   The unit lets a user transfer funds, buy certificates ofdeposit and send anyone a check. Eventually, the bank plansto let customers check stock quotes and trade securities.   ATandamp;T is working on a rival product dubbed SmartPhone,which it is promoting as the standard telephone of thefuture. SmartPhone, slated for a 1992 introduction, has asmall screen and built-in software for adding customizedprograms. For instance, ATandamp;T says, a customer could set thephone so that pressing one button would place an order forhis usual pizza, or his usual seats at a baseball game.   Personal computers are &quot;wrong for things that occur to ussuddenly and (that) we expect to be able to deal with quicklyand move on,&quot; says Michael Grisham, the ATandamp;T strategicplanning executive who conceived the SmartPhone. But if youtook the SmartPhone apart, he says, &quot;you'd find that what'sinside is pretty much the same as what's in a PC.&quot;   Televisions also are starting to converge with computers.Viewers operate some new digital TVs by clicking a cursorover windows and menus, just as with a PC and a mouse. Nextweek, InSight Telecast Inc., a Palo Alto, Calif., start-uppartly owned by Japan's giant Sumitomo Corp., will introducea system that will let viewers call up a week's TV listingson their screens and push some remote-control buttons to tella videocassette recorder which shows to record. The systemwill be able to follow the instructions even if a show startslate or runs long.   Other companies are turning TV screens into terminals forinformation databases. Owners of Zenith Electronics Corp.digital sets can call up news stories and read them on theirscreens. Great American Communications Corp., a Cincinnatimedia company, distributes the stories through specialsignals that chips inside the TV can read.   In Montreal, 30,000 cable customers have a broader servicethat lets them call up news, recipes, movie schedules,weather and many other services by punching numbers on a TVremote control.   Le Groupe Videotron, the cable company that provides theservice, outfitted its channel boxes with computer chips thathandle the information.   The largest maker of cable boxes, General InstrumentCorp.'s Jerrold division, has even bigger plans to expand aTV system's reach. Earlier this year, it demonstrated a cableremote-control unit that flips over to become a telephone.It's also working on features that will let the same unitcontrol any other electrical appliances in the home. Jerroldexpects to begin selling the units next year.   Another ambitious plunge into the PC's terrain is underway at Nintendo, the video-game maker. Next year it plans tointroduce a service that will send information and games overphone lines to televisions with Nintendo sets. The firstfeatures will include a stock-trading service from FidelityInvestments, the Boston mutual-fund giant. Later, Nintendoenvisions offering electronic mail, shopping and consumerinformation, such as comparative prices for car insurance.   Nintendo runs the considerable risk that people won't feelcomfortable doing their personal finances with the same toythey use for Cybernoid and Super Mario Brothers. On the otherhand, unlike the PC industry, it has a fast-growing customerbase addicted to its products. By year's end, Nintendo says,more than 30% of American families will own its machine.   To consumers who already have to find the neighbor's kidto help them program their VCR, the prospect of phones andTVs sprouting strange new functions and commands could bedistressing. Indeed, the danger in all these projects is thatthey'll make a home's simplest machines as forbidding as apersonal computer.   &quot;Taken to its logical extreme you could generate abacklash from the public,&quot; admits Bruce Huber, marketing vicepresident of Zenith's consumer-products group.   For their part, PC makers say the disguised computers arejust feeble imitations of the real thing. &quot;Once you get thisdata in on your phone, what do you do with it? Do you writeit down?&quot; asks Robert Amezcua, the product manager for IBM'stwo-month-old PS/1 home computer. &quot;If I'm really going to dostock analysis, I want to be able to run my analysis programor my financial spreadsheet.&quot;   Tandy Vice President Howard Elias says the PC industry isjust starting to bring out easy-to-use products that willfinally let it break open the home market. Tandy's month-old1000 RL comes with simple programs for organizing recipes,creating shopping lists, planning meals and posting messagesfor family members.   Some people say the ultimate home-information appliancewill come out of the blue, rather than evolving fromsomething familiar. &quot;The big developments of the 20th centurywere not extrapolated,&quot; says Alan Kay, a pioneer in thepersonal computer's development and currently a seniorresearch fellow at Apple. &quot;Companies rarely come up withreplacement technology for their old technology.&quot;   He rattles off a string of examples: Railroads didn'tinvent the airplane, Western Union didn't invent thetelephone, A.B. Dick didn't invent the photocopier, SmithCorona didn't invent the word processor.   &quot;A lot of the uninteresting stuff flows smoothly from thepast,&quot; Mr. Kay says. &quot;But all the interesting stuff is likethunderstorms.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>