<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900820-0051</DOCNO><DOCID>900820-0051.</DOCID><HL>   Guiding Hand:   In Asia, the Japanese   Hope to `Coordinate'   What Nations Produce   ---   They Use Investment and Aid   To Determine Who Makes   TVs and Who Makes Toys   ---   Nicer Co-Prosperity Sphere?   ----   By Bernard Wysocki Jr.   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   JAPAN FREST</CO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><LP>   TOKYO -- On the 14th floor of a government office buildinghere, young Japanese bureaucrats are quietly drawing upblueprints for the economic future of Asia.   This is the headquarters of Japan's Ministry ofInternational Trade and Industry, or MITI, which helped guidethe postwar Japanese economic miracle. But in this particularoffice, MITI is focusing on Japan's less-developed neighborsto the south, especially Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia andthe Philippines.</LP><TEXT>   Noboru Seki, the section chief, shows a visitor a stack ofrecent studies -- MITI's economic plans for Malaysia. Theyinclude blueprints for new industries ranging from rubbersneakers to color-television picture tubes. The mostelaborate document, written in concert with Malaysianplanners, is 70 pages long and outlines, in astonishingdetail, MITI's plans to make Malaysia one of the world'sforemost producers of word processors, answering machines andfacsimile devices.   &quot;We deeply hope,&quot; says Mr. Seki with a smile, &quot;that thesewill be the most important industries in Malaysia.&quot;   Always eager to study and coordinate, Japan's bureaucratsare working overtime these days on the economictransformation of the Asia-Pacific region -- with thewell-being of Japanese business and industry firmly in mind.Some of these grand plans exist only on paper. Yet, Japanesegovernment aid is flooding into the region. So is Japaneseprivate investment, in the form of factories and jointventures. The Ministry of Finance estimates Japanese directinvestment in Asia will hit about $8 billion this year,quadruple the level of 1986.   More important than the amount of money is the methodicaland sophisticated manner in which it is being spent. Far fromusing a case-by-case approach to foreign aid and investment,Japanese government and corporate strategists speak aboutshaping and even &quot;coordinating&quot; the economic development ofthe region. Implicit in this view is a division of labor. Forexample, as MITI sees it, Indonesia will pay specialattention to textiles, forest products and plastics. Thailandwill focus on furniture, toys and die-cast molds. AndMalaysia will concentrate on sneakers, copiers and televisionpicture tubes.   &quot;Laissez faire can't be recommended,&quot; says Nobuhito Hobo,a mid-level official in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.&quot;Careful utilization of market forces is always ideal.&quot;   Metaphors for Japan's new role in Asia are multiplying.Some people speak of Asia as a &quot;flock of geese.&quot; Others,including consultants to Japan's Economic Planning Agency,talk of an &quot;Asian brain,&quot; the center of which is in Tokyo.   Whatever the imagery, the basic idea is pretty much thesame. Says Masayoshi Furuya, director of Japan ResearchInstitute, a Tokyo think tank: &quot;We have to develop the Asiancountries.&quot;   The development strategy works like this: First, Japaneseloans, mostly of government money, build up roads, bridgesand such. Second, the Japanese government sends technicalexperts. Third, Japanese loans filter down to industry withinthe Asian country, to finance joint ventures and otherbusiness alliances. Fourth, Japan opens its doors to importsfrom these offshore factories.   Experts see in this the emergence of a regional Asianeconomy. And some worry that these strategies may be thefoundation stones for a future protectionist trading bloc.   The surge of Japanese investment has met with mixedreactions in Asia. On the one hand, the Asian nations, hungryfor jobs, can prosper mightily from an infusion of Japanesetechnology and money. &quot;We have 200,000 young people leavingschool each year,&quot; says Sapuan Amir, a director of theMalaysian Industrial Development Authority. &quot;We need tocreate 200,000 jobs a year just to stay even, and we alreadyhave an unemployment rate of 7.9%.&quot;   On the other hand, Japan's emergence as a regionalpowerhouse conjures up painful memories for many Asians,particularly the older ones who remember Japan's wartimepronouncements on a &quot;Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.&quot;As early as the 1930s, military strategists in Tokyo hadtalked of gaining control of Southeast Asia's vast naturalresources. Back then, Japan envisioned the entire Pacificregion woven into a cohesive economy, with Southeast Asiaserving as the source of raw materials and a vast consumermarket.   The Co-Prosperity Sphere formally became part of Japan'swar plans, and Japan would soon invade Vietnam, Indonesia,Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines. Decadeslater, resentment and suspicion of Japan remain close to thesurface in many Asian nations -- including those hungry forinvestment. In the early 1980s, when Japan revised itstextbooks to minimize its coercive wartime rule, other Asiansprotested vehemently. &quot;The period of Japanese presence inEast and Southeast Asia was indisputably one of extremesuffering for people in the region,&quot; wrote one Malaysian tothe Far East Economic Review, a weekly magazine. &quot;The attempt. . . to whitewash this history further adds to theinjustice.&quot;   Lingering fears about overdependence on Japan haveprompted many current Asian leaders to seek American andEuropean investment as a counterweight.   Still, Japanese businesses are finding plenty ofopportunities to expand into Asia. Nikken Sekkei, Japan'slargest architectural-design firm, for example, recently wona fierce competition to design a major office tower in Seoul,South Korea. More Korean business is flowing in and thecompany has opened an office in Singapore to tap marketsthere, says Kimiaki Minai, the company's president.   Mr. Minai downplays fears that Japan is out to dominatethe rest of the region. &quot;First of all, we are Asians,&quot; hesays.   First among the Asians is probably closer to the mark. Asa society that is rank conscious and hierarchical, Japanfinds it easy to think of Asia as an economic hierarchy ofnations. And Japan is, naturally, No. 1.   Or to use the flock-of-geese image, Japan is the leadgoose, followed in close formation by newly industrializednations like Taiwan and South Korea, and then developingcountries such as Thailand and Malaysia. Behind them is giantChina. The fifth rank is an embryonic membership in theflock: India, Vietnam and Bangladesh.   At least some Japanese bureaucrats are eager to limitcompetition between these countries, and private industry isalready making an effort to foster complementary patterns ofdevelopment. A regional auto industry, for example, mightcombine transmissions made in the Philippines with steeringmechanisms built in Malaysia and engines from Thailand. Eachcountry would then do final assembly. Toyota Motor Corp. isalready moving rapidly in this direction.   The new Asia strategy has another notable feature: Ithelps Japan trim its trade surplus with the U.S. Movingproduction offshore means shifting elements of that $49billion annual trade surplus out of Japan, even if many ofthe factories remain Japanese-controlled. So Tokyo winspoints with U.S. politicians worried about the trade deficit.   But this is what John Stern, of the American ElectronicsAssociation in Tokyo, calls an &quot;export shell game.&quot; He notesthat last year Japan's exports of consumer electronics to theU.S. dropped 21% to $4.2 billion. Thailand's exports to theU.S. rocketed 2000% to $162 million -- largely because ofproduction there by Japanese and joint-venture producers.   Some of this Japanese investment goes back a long way, butthe big wave began building in 1987, when then-Prime MinisterYasuhiro Nakasone announced a $20 billion foreign aid programand earmarked $2 billion for the development of privateindustry in Asia. About the same time, the Ministry ofInternational Trade and Industry initiated a New AsianIndustries Development Plan (New AID), which amounted to ablueprint for Japanese industry to set up offshoreproduction.   Japanese officials are touchy about appearing too wellcoordinated in their thinking. They stress that MITI's planisn't official Japanese policy.   &quot;This is the Japanese first line of defense: They say theNew AID plan is MITI's policy, it isn't Japan's policy,&quot; saysDavid Arase, a professor at Pomona College in California.&quot;But there is a large degree of cross-fertilization. There isa lot of de facto coordination.&quot;   Japanese officials concede, for example, that theinfrastructure planning for Thailand is done with theknowledge that Japanese industry is lining up to investthere, and that Thailand's current infrastructure is burstingat the seams. More roads and ports will be needed to handlethe new business.   The MITI plan was designed to be a timely helping hand forJapanese industry, which was buffeted by a sharply rising yenbetween 1985 and 1988, and by soaring land prices and aworsening labor shortage. This last problem has forcedJapanese companies to import immigrant labor -- acontroversial step in xenophobic Japan -- or take the work tocheaper labor markets overseas.   Hitachi, Matsushita, Toyota and others have thus begunincreasing production in Southeast Asia, and their smallersuppliers have followed them overseas. Today, small- andmedium-sized companies in many industries are rushing intoSoutheast Asia in a stampede of investment. Last March, aJapanese survey of 9,000 smaller companies showed that 2,500of them were planning to invest overseas, and almost 60% ofthese were planning to invest in Southeast Asia. Thailand isthe most popular destination, followed by Indonesia andMalaysia.   At the Indonesian Embassy on the outskirts of centralTokyo, Soeprapto Herijando waits with outstretched arms. Herecently set up a special reception room to handle the flowof inquiring Japanese businessmen. &quot;In two months, more than100 visitors,&quot; says Mr. Herijando, proudly showing a visitora large room with an elaborately carved Indonesian sofa andwing chairs. &quot;The telephone calls,&quot; he adds, &quot;number in thethousands.&quot;   But Indonesia more than most has also discovered thatJapanese investment -- as any foreign investment -- can be amixed blessing. Consider the country's Asahan project, a $2.7billion complex that includes dams, power transmission and agiant aluminum smelter. Asahan has created 2,000 jobs,electricity for a town, and aluminum to export to Japan andelsewhere. For Japan, Asahan (41%-owned by the Indonesiangovernment, 59% by Japanese interests) is a monument toJapan-Indonesian cooperation.   Yet the project has been, at times, a financial nightmare.The plant's exports are largely denominated in dollars, butits loans are mostly in Japanese yen. When the yen rosesharply between 1985 and 1988, Indonesia was caught in asqueeze, unable to generate enough export revenue to repayits costly yen-based loans. Japan had to cough up several newloans, totaling more than $1 billion in 1987 alone.   Then in 1988 the Indonesian side of the joint ventureangrily shut off aluminum shipments to Japan for five monthsbecause it wanted more of the smelter's output. Otherdisagreements followed.   &quot;When I visited Asahan, I got big complaints from theJapanese working there,&quot; says Tsuneo Fujita, a high-rankingofficial of the Japanese Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund,an investor in the project. &quot;They kept losing {workers},after making strenuous efforts to train them.&quot;   The recipient countries have their own complaints.Japanese reluctance to install local managers is a frequentsource of conflict. &quot;U.S. companies have readily appointedlocals in top positions in Malaysia; Japan hasn't,&quot; says M.Suppiah, a Malaysian in charge of attracting Americancompanies to his country. Moreover, Japan is often criticizedfor being stingy about transfering technology to fledglingSoutheast Asian industries.   Some Japanese executives admit they fear wholesaletechnology transfer for simple competitive reasons. ToshioOda, managing director of Nissho Iwai, the giant Japanesetrading house, which has 70 joint ventures in Asia, says hiscompany has to be careful. &quot;Otherwise,&quot; he says, &quot;it's just agiveaway of technology. The difficulty is when we can'tcontrol the management,&quot; he says. &quot;Investment means havingsome control when we invest.&quot;   In all likelihood, these problems will work themselves outover time, given the incentives. Japan is keen to gain fromcloser economic cooperation, and so, too, are the nations ofSoutheast Asia. And therein lies a remarkable historicaltwist: What Japan was unable to do with military force 50years ago, it is achieving today through its money, diplomacyand technical skill.</TEXT></DOC>