<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911118-0110</DOCNO><DOCID>911118-0110.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Baker's Uncertain Struggle With the Arms Dragon   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>11/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A17</SO><MS>TECHNOLOGY (TEC)</MS><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION, NATO (NTO)NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><RE>CHINA (CH)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)IRAN (IR)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)SOVIET UNION (UR)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   China promised U.S. Secretary of State James Bakeryesterday that it would be more judicious about exportingmissiles and missile technology -- if the U.S. in turn liftedsanctions against two Chinese firms and removed licensingrestrictions on highspeed computers and satellites. Whetherthat constituted a reliable deal is anyone's guess. Beijing'spast promises to abide by international arms controlconventions have had little worth.   For example, some past Chinese denials of missileshipments to the Middle East have proved false. It is beingaccused of selling Algeria nuclear weapons technology. It issuspected of aiding a North Korean nuclear bomb project. Lastmonth, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Richard Solomon tolda Senate subcommittee that China had sold nuclear weaponstechnology to Iran, despite assurances that it would notexport such know-how.</LP><TEXT>   Whatever the results, or non-results, of Mr. Baker's trip,it emphasized one thing. A surging arms trade in theaftermath of the Gulf War worries the U.S. More to the point,it is worried about the flouting, especially by China, ofeven the limited controls on this trade. The day is rapidlyapproaching when politically irresponsible regimes could havenot only advanced conventional weapons but weapons of massdestruction.   The western democracies themselves are contributing to theconventional weapons build-up, especially vigorous activityin the Mideast. Cutbacks in the military budgets of the NATOnations are having a serious impact on the business of theWest's most sophisticated arms producers. They have beenclamoring for relaxation of restrictions on sales to non-NATOcountries. In response, the U.S. House of Representativeslast month liberalized the Export Administration Act, despitePentagon objections and threats of a White House veto.Elsewhere, Aviation Week quotes British aerospace sourcessaying that the Mideast now is their biggest market.   But the far more serious problem is the prospect forunstable countries, such as Iran, acquiring both nuclearweapons and rockets to hurl them several hundred miles. Mr.Baker made his rush trip to the Far East because he fearsthat China is becoming a rogue source of both technologies.It was fitting that he should announce his intention ofaddressing the China &quot;problem&quot; while he was in Madrid lendingU.S. auspices to a historic Mideast peace conference. It'shard for Messrs. Baker and Bush to make peace in the MiddleEast while the local regimes are arming themselves to theteeth and aspiring to the acquisition of missiles capable ofhurling nuclear warheads.   Claudia Rosett, editorial page editor of The Asian WallStreet Journal, casts further light on the problem withChina. She hears from her Asian sources that the China armstrade has taken a bizarre turn in which various power centersin the Communist Party, such as the army, control differentparts of the business. Inner-party corruption means that thebusiness is personally lucrative to the high-level partycadres who run it. Given this complex power equation, even ifsome central authority makes a promise, there is no guaranteethat the actual arms merchants will abide by it. Good faithis not a hallmark of even the highest officials, either. Soit is no wonder that past promises have been broken.   Then there are the consequences of the Soviet collapse. AnAmerican who attended the big Dubai International Aerospaceand Defense Exhibition in the Persian Gulf sheikdom at thebeginning of this month says business was brisk. Arms vendorsfrom throughout the world were there, courting Arab buyers.U.S. arms salesmen were frustrated by government restraintson what they could offer, no doubt a result in part of U.S.Mideast peace efforts. By contrast, the Russians, in theirnew entrepreneurial mode, were flogging their most advancedmilitary hardware. Desperate for foreign exchange, they wereeven offering the advanced Mig-31 fighter for sale, alongwith the Mig-29 and other advanced warplanes, not to mentionsophisticated equipment for land warfare.   Equally disturbing to one western military official was avisit to the U.S. recently by Alexander Chernyshev, a formerSoviet designer of nuclear warheads. Mr. Chernyshev now is anofficial of a new &quot;private&quot; Russian company called ChetekCorp., which wants to sell the use of underground nuclearblasts for various purposes, such as vaporizing toxic wastes.According to a report by the Journal's John J. Fialka lastmonth, Chetek was formed by a group of scientists formallyemployed by Arzamas-16, the Soviet nuclear weapons program.If Chetek is offering nuclear blasts, what's to stop themfrom offering a high bidder their expertise in making anuclear weapon? asks the western military official.   Iran seems to be especially interested in nuclear andmissile technology. Its appetite for arms apparently was notsatisfied with the more modern air force Saddam Husseinmysteriously bestowed when he dispatched some 130 planes toIran to get them out of harm's way during the Gulf War. Whilethere are rumors that Iran is moving towards a more moderatebrand of politics and would like to rejoin the world familyof responsible nations, there has not been enough evidence ofthat yet to generate much confidence. In the absence of suchan evolution, a nuclear-armed Iran would be a cause forconsiderable nervousness in the region. It is no wonder thatMr. Baker is concerned about nuclear deals between China andIran. India is negotiating the sale of a nuclear &quot;research&quot;reactor to Iran, raising questions about where it stands.   It is possible that an underdeveloped country with anuclear weapon in its possession could be more dangerous thana large developed country, simply because it would have lessat risk in such a face-off. It also might be more likely toproduce a mad leader, as we have witnessed with such ThirdWorld stalwarts as the Ayatollah Khomeini and Idi Amin. So ifMr. Baker thinks he has a problem with the Chinese armsmerchants, it would be difficult to quarrel with hisconclusion.   Moreover, the Chinese arms merchants are not the only oneswho present a problem. The world arms trade has never beenvery susceptible to international controls. The incentivesfor the sellers are high and arms are the first priority ofthe world's petty dictators.   Does this sound like the kind of world in which the NATOnations should be allowing the French to undermine thealliance? Or is it the kind of world in which Americanpoliticians should be arguing that the world's problems aresolved and the U.S. now can bring the boys home? Maybe itdoes to some people. But there might be others who think thatfor all the bright prospects that flow from the collapse ofcommunism in the Soviet Union, the world remains a dangerousplace, where the price of freedom is about as high as it everwas.</TEXT></DOC>