<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900403-0114</DOCNO><DOCID>900403-0114.</DOCID><HL>   Tiff of Titans:   Italian Tycoons Push   European Unity, Then   War Over Home Turf   ---   De Benedetti and Berlusconi   Brawl in Court and Press   For Control of Publisher   ---   Neither's Image Is Benefiting   ----   By Philip Revzin   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   I.OLV I.MND</CO><IN>BIOGRAPHY (BIO)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><LP>   MILAN, Italy -- Carlo De Benedetti and Silvio Berlusconiled Italy's charge into Europe well before 1992 was declaredthe year for economic unity in Western Europe. And they got ahead start on others in Eastern Europe when Communism beganto collapse there.   Mr. De Benedetti, chairman of computer-maker Ing. C.Olivetti andamp; Co. S.p.A., turned around an ailing typewritercompany in West Germany. He has invested in Spain, Portugal,Greece and Hungary. Two years ago he tried to form the firstpan-European holding company through a hostile takeover ofSociete Generale de Belgique, which owns more than 1,200companies.</LP><TEXT>   Mr. Berlusconi was just as active. He added televisionstations in France and Spain to his three private Italiannetworks. He obtained the rights to sell televisionadvertising in the Soviet Union, began making TV movies, andturned up wherever a new commercial TV venture was launched.   But late last year, Italy's European standard bearers gotinto a brawl that is tying them down at home and distractingtheir efforts to expand abroad. The battle, over Italianpublisher Arnoldo Mondadori Editore S.p.A., drags the twoentrepreneurs from boardroom to courtroom to shareholders'meetings in Milan and Rome. Meanwhile, German, French andBritish executives are scurrying from Madrid to Moscowsigning joint venture deals that might well have whetted theappetites of the Italian tycoons.   &quot;A few years ago Italian companies led the wave ofinvestments in Europe,&quot; says Romano Prodi, former chairman ofstate holding company IRI. &quot;But that was short-lived, and nowwe're back to the internal fighting&quot; of the Middle Ages.   &quot;We have no government,&quot; adds Mr. Prodi, &quot;just strongindividualistic entrepreneurs sending their foot soldiersagainst each other and killing each other off in theirstrange wars.&quot;   Indeed, the intrigues and infighting among Italy's tinycorporate elite -- Signori De Benedetti and Berlusconi alongwith Giovanni Agnelli of Fiat S.p.A. and Raul Gardini ofagribusiness giant Ferruzzi Group -- command banner headlinesin the rival newspapers they own, and dominate Milanesecocktail-party gossip. The battles are local, bitter,intense, and perplexing to foreigners, as well as to manyItalians.   Among the most difficult to fathom is the continuingstruggle over Mondadori. Mr. De Benedetti first invested inthe ailing publisher in 1984 and took effective financialcontrol three years later after the death of then-chairmanMario Formenton. Under De Benedetti guidance, Mondadori'sprofits tripled and its market capitalization soared from $80million to about $2 billion.   The Formenton family signed a contract agreeing to turnover their 25% holding to Mr. De Benedetti for 200 billionlire ($167 million), by the end of January 1991. But lastDecember, Mario Formenton's son, Luca, and other relativesdecided instead to sell their shares at a higher, undisclosedprice to Mr. Berlusconi, who had been buying Mondadori shareson the open market. This gave him a majority of the commonshares.   Despite howls and lawsuits from the De Benedetti camp, Mr.Berlusconi was elected chairman of Mondadori at a Januarymeeting of holders of common stock, and took over day-to-dayoperations of the company. But Mr. De Benedetti controls 80%of the Mondadori preferred stock, with the power to decide oncapital increases for the company. And he can use this powerto block Mr. Berlusconi's ambitions or paralyze the company.   Both sides insist there are higher issues than money inthe struggle. De Benedetti aides claim that press freedomsare at stake. Mondadori's crown jewels are the daily LaRepubblica and newsweeklies L'Espresso and Panorama. If Mr.Berlusconi succeeds in taking over these publications, hewill achieve near-monopoly control over Italian media, warnsCorrado Passera, the executive leading Mr. De Benedetti'sfight for Mondadori. The media element &quot;makes this more thanjust a battle between two guys,&quot; insists Mr. Passera. &quot;Thereis . . . an attempt to silence a strong critical voice inItaly.&quot;   Nonsense, say the Berlusconi people: Their boss, the TVmogul, wants above all to ensure that Italy becomes a majormedia player on the continent at a time when the EuropeanCommunity is moving toward a more unified market and wallsare tumbling in Eastern Europe. &quot;You've got to be multimediaand multinational now,&quot; says Berlusconi lieutenant FedeleConfalonieri. Under Mr. Berlusconi's guidance, he contends,Mondadori would spread its interests beyond Italy and competewith other global press magnates, like Rupert Murdoch andRobert Maxwell.   A lot of ego is involved in the Mondadori struggle. Bothentrepreneurs are self-made megamillionaires of the samegeneration who rocketed into prominence about the same time.In a country where so few people control so much of theeconomy, perhaps the only surprise is that they hadn'tclashed publicly before.   Mr. De Benedetti is 55 years old, the son of a Jewishfamily that fled to Switzerland during World War II to escapeFascist persecution. He started in his family's small machineshop and built it into a thriving concern before leaving fora top post at Fiat. His personality and ambitions eventuallyrubbed against Mr. Agnelli's, and he left Fiat in a partingas dramatic in Italian business circles as was Lee Iacocca'sexit from Ford in the U.S. in 1978.   Mr. De Benedetti wound up at Olivetti, then a sicklytypewriter manufacturer, and turned it into a major computercompany. At the same time, he invested his own and otherpeople's money in a wide range of ventures: Buitoni pasta,which he later sold to Nestle S.A.; a slice of French fashionhouse Yves Saint Laurent; and various finance and publishingfirms.   During the 1980s, bull markets helped him turn assets of$2 million in his personal investment companies into aconglomerate, called Cofide, which controls assets now valuedon stock markets at nearly $7 billion. He's one of Italy'srichest men.   But he isn't standing still. The &quot;easy finance&quot; that madehim so wealthy in the last decade is over, Mr. De Benedettisays. In the 1990s, &quot;I'll get back to what I'm capable ofdoing, which is running industry, during a great period ofreindustrialization.&quot;   Entrepreneurs on both sides of the Atlantic are professingrenewed interest in the nurturing of industry, now thatcorporate raiders, leveraged buy-outs and junk bonds are inbad odor. All the more reason for his rivals to insist thatMr. De Benedetti remains a kind of wheeler-dealer.   &quot;De Benedetti is above all a man of finance,&quot; says Mr.Confalonieri, general manager of Mr. Berlusconi's holdingcompany. &quot;Berlusconi is a man of industry, a builder fromzero. That's the difference.&quot;   It's a distinction lost on many Italians. They seenumerous similarities in the men's careers, particularlytheir swift climb to riches.   Mr. Berlusconi, the son of a Milan banker, worked atvarious jobs including stints as a singer at Adriatic Searesorts and as a tour guide around the country before gettinga law degree and setting up a construction company. He madean initial fortune building residential projects, and burston the Italian business scene by forming the first nationaltelevision network in 1978. While technically such networkswere illegal, Mr. Berlusconi slipped through a loophole: Hebought up hundreds of local stations, and sent them cassettesof recorded programs, often by messengers on motorbikes, forsimultaneous broadcasting.   He still isn't allowed to beam live news or sports. Andwhile his programs aren't necessarily uplifting -- gameshows, &quot;Dynasty&quot; and cheap-to-produce talk shows are thetypical fare -- they are hugely successful.   Mr. Berlusconi, 53, now owns two other Italian networks,controls more than a third of the advertising revenue onItalian TV and owns a Milan daily newspaper, Il Giornale. Healso owns all or part of stations in France, Spain, WestGermany and Yugoslavia. Other properties include Italy'sbiggest department store chain, La Standa; a chain of movietheaters; the AC Milan soccer team; and insurance, financialservice and real estate companies. His 100%-owned FininvestS.p.A. has consolidated annual sales of close to $10 billion,and reported a profit of $152 million in 1988.   With a fortune estimated between $1 billion and $2.5billion, Mr. Berlusconi, too, is among Italy's richest men.He looks the part, with his elegant clothes and smoothed-backhair, as he shuttles among sumptuous homes all over Europe.   For now, though, the Mondadori mess has grounded him inItaly.   Last week, his rival Mr. De Benedetti won a round when aMilan court ruled in his favor on a technical matter thatwould unblock voting rights of 16.4% more of Mondadori'sholding company, depriving Mr. Berlusconi of his majoritythere. Today, at a special Mondadori shareholders' meeting,Mr. De Benedetti will try to push through a capital increaseof 320 billion lire ($256 million) that would help thecompany pay its debts of more than 400 billion lire. Such acapital increase would also give him control of the commonshares and put him back in the chairman's seat. Mr.Berlusconi has proposed a smaller capital increase, underwhich he would retain majority control of the common shares.But Mr. De Benedetti, with his authority over holders ofpreferred stock, can, and almost certainly will, block thisproposal.   Meanwhile, the whole matter remains before assorted Milanand Rome courts and tribunals, and may not be resolved formonths. Last week, Mr. Berlusconi hinted he was ready tonegotiate a settlement, but yesterday Mr. De Benedetti saidchances of an early accord are &quot;dead.&quot;   The climate for negotiations hasn't been helped by themedia spotlight. Editors at La Repubblica and Panorama havemercilessly attacked their nominal boss, Mr. Berlusconi, inprint, dragging up his past association with a now-dissolvedMasonic lodge, P-2. Some P-2 members -- though not Mr.Berlusconi -- were accused of various plots against thegovernment in the late 1970s. Mr. Berlusconi hasn't attemptedto replace these editors, perhaps because he fears a publicoutcry.   De Benedetti aides, on the other hand, are incensed bywhat they allege to be attempts by Mr. Berlusconi, using hispolitical connections, to embarrass their boss. Recently, forexample, Mr. De Benedetti was summoned to give testimony in atrial that touched on the decade-old Banco Ambrosianoscandal, which involved the mysterious suicide of bankerRoberto Calvi in London amid allegations of the misuse offunds by the Vatican Bank in the late 1970s.   Mr. De Benedetti had become vice-chairman of BancoAmbrosiano for two months to help try to clean it up, andseveral investigations have found that he acted blamelessly.But the latest Ambrosiano court hearing was held three daysbefore a crucial Mondadori shareholders' meeting -- and DeBenedetti allies don't think the timing was accidental.   Just when the Mondadori affair will end is anybody'sguess. The most probable outcome, both sides hint, is abreakup of the company that would give Mr. De Benedetticontrol of La Repubblica, a string of local newspapers andL'Espresso magazine, while Mr. Berlusconi would get Panoramamagazine and the book publishing business.   &quot;De Benedetti has got to win Mondadori, or at least LaRepubblica, for the sake of the rule of law in Italy,&quot; says abanker involved in the battle who asks for anonymity. &quot;He hada contract {for the shares held by Formenton family}. If heloses what are contracts worth here?&quot;   There are also other reasons Mr. De Benedetti is perceivedto have more of a stake than his rival. He has suffered anumber of setbacks over the past two years. While long knownas a visionary who was ahead of the pack on 1992, on EasternEurope, and on the need for global alliances, others haveseemed to benefit more from his ideas recently than he has.   Mr. De Benedetti's bold bid to create a pan-Europeanholding company by buying Societe General de Belgique wasthwarted by management allied with Cie. Financiere de Suez ofFrance. An accord between his Olivetti and American Telephoneandamp; Telegraph Co., which was to marry computers and telephonetechnology, collapsed when neither partner saw much benefitfrom it. His move into Hungary via a new holding company ispromising, but now Mr. De Benedetti is far from alone:Budapest teems with investment bankers seeking to put cash inHungarian companies as a foothold into Eastern Europe and theSoviet Union.   &quot;His image is tarnished,&quot; says Chris Moore, Italiansecurities analyst for Morgan Stanley International in Milan.Mr. Moore sees growing problems in Mr. De Benedetti'sflagship, Olivetti, where, according to company executives,earnings last year fell by as much as 45%. Olivetti's stockprice is near the low end of its range over the last 12months.   Why then has Mr. De Benedetti let himself get so enmeshedin the Mondadori dispute? &quot;It's very simple,&quot; he says. &quot;Thereis only one way to never get into battles: Don't move. If youdon't act, if you stay where you are, then you just keep whatyou have.&quot;   Mr. Berlusconi, for his part, is hoping that once theMondadori conflict is resolved he can focus again on agrander vision: to reverse the decades-old dominance ofEuropean airwaves by American television shows. &quot;We've got tochallenge the one-way flow of programs from the U.S. toEurope by making more of our own,&quot; he told a businessconference in Venice last year. And with satellitetransmission opening up TV markets across the continent, Mr.Berlusconi's inventory of over 70,000 hours of his ownprograms looks like a potential bonanza.   &quot;I hope to fly high in the new great, free skies of Europeto come,&quot; he said.</TEXT></DOC>