<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911004-0034</DOCNO><DOCID>911004-0034.</DOCID><HL>   Busing Revisited:   Court to Ponder Issue   Of School Integration   As Some Blacks Shift   ---   In Georgia County, Some Put   Getting Their Fair Share   Ahead of Racial Balance   ---   When Can Order Be Lifted?   ----   By Paul M. Barrett   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><NS>EDUCATION ISSUES (EDU)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES AND LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><RE>GEORGIA (GA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   DEKALB COUNTY, Ga. -- Nearly four decades after Brown vs.Board of Education, the Supreme Court is preparing to decidehow much integration is enough.   As the court reconvenes for its new term Monday, race, andthe DeKalb County schools, will be the first order ofbusiness. The case, Freeman vs. Pitts, presents the criticalissue of whether a historically segregated school districtlike DeKalb may be released from federal court supervisioneven though it remains effectively segregated.</LP><TEXT>   The legal stakes are enormous. DeKalb officials contendthat today's segregation reflects residential shifts, notdiscrimination. If the conservative Rehnquist Court concurs,the justices could direct federal judges overseeing hundredsof school districts nationwide to consider getting out of thedesegregation business.   Civil rights lawyers fret that the court's right-leaningmajority may be eager to use the case to make such a broadpronouncement. After all, just this past January, thejustices decided a similar case from Oklahoma City, ruling5-3 that local authorities may escape court supervision ifthey have desegregated &quot;to the extent practicable.&quot; But ChiefJustice Rehnquist's majority opinion was vague; mostobservers believe that, dissatisfied with the earlier effort,the majority wants to take another crack at the issue.   Freeman vs. Pitts is the first time the high court willconsider drawing the Brown era to a close without ThurgoodMarshall on the bench. The first black justice, whoofficially retired Tuesday, made the winning argument as alawyer in the 1954 Brown case. On the court, he has been astrong moral influence in race-relations cases, even as adissenter in recent years. His likely replacement, ClarenceThomas, won't join the court soon enough to vote on Freemanvs. Pitts. But his presence could be important in futurecases; Judge Thomas has attacked the reasoning and some ofthe results of Brown, drawing a distinction betweenintegration and the quality of education.   The most striking thing about a visit to classrooms andneighborhoods in DeKalb County, a sprawling suburban areaeast of Atlanta, is how deeply that distinction splits blackopinion. Freeman vs. Pitts isn't a simple confrontation of awhite school board against black residents. Two of the sevenboard members are black, and both support bringing the casebefore the Supreme Court. And as is so often true with legaldisputes, the voluminous briefs in this case obscure muchreality -- in this instance, the attitudes and aspirations ofmany black people here.   Some, including leaders of the local chapter of theNational Association for the Advancement of Colored People,defend the core principle of the Brown decision, thatracially separate public education is always unequal, andtherefore unconstitutional, because it stigmatizes blacks asinferior.   But a growing number of black parents say they're tired ofbeing told that their children can excel only if they sitnext to whites. These parents, generally younger and morefirmly established in the middle class, abhor busing. Theyare more concerned with getting their fair share of resourcesfor neighborhood schools that whites abandoned when blacksarrived.   Gilbert Turman, the black principal of nearly all-blackSouthwest DeKalb High School, boasts of enticing dozens ofstudents away from the system's modest integration programs.&quot;If people want interracial education, fine,&quot; says Mr.Turman, but &quot;they're not going to get it here.&quot;   &quot;Remember, it was the whites who moved out,&quot; headmonishes. &quot;Black kids shouldn't have to get on buses to payfor it.&quot;   Racial separation among DeKalb's 77,000 public schoolstudents is irrefutable. More than half of the 46,000 blackstudents attend schools that are 90% or more black. Theschool board disclaims responsibility for this segregation,blaming it on demographic changes, not any official bigotry.Lawyers representing black parents and children counter thatbecause of the system's racist history, it must achievegreater racial balance now.   As late as 1969, DeKalb County still separated black andwhite students by law. A court order that year closed theall-black schools, and the system has remained under judicialsupervision ever since.   Beginning in the 1970s, a massive influx of blacks intothe burgeoning subdivisions of south DeKalb changed thecounty's complexion. Many whites fled to the north and toadjacent counties, or they enrolled their children in privateall-white schools. Today, black students account for 60% ofthe enrollment, up from 6% in 1970. In south DeKalb, formerlyall-white schools are now black; schools in the north remainmostly white.   Although it has done little without judicial prodding toencourage integration, the system in 1986 asked to bereleased from court supervision. The case came before afederal appeals court in Atlanta, which in 1989 rebuffed thesystem. The court rejected the argument that demographicchanges insulated the system from blame. In light of DeKalb'shistory and current segregation, the court said, the systemwould have to consider forced busing and &quot;drasticgerrymandering of school zones.&quot;   The DeKalb NAACP chapter promptly circulated a plan underwhich 16 schools in black neighborhoods would be closed andreplaced with &quot;magnet schools&quot; to which students from allover the county would be bused. The plan had been drafted byRoger Mills, a white DeKalb resident who had been married toa black woman and whose children consider themselves black.Mr. Mills had for years spearheaded the litigation againstthe school system.   In response to the appeals court decision and theMills-NAACP plan, many of the county's remaining whiteparents threatened to pull their children out of the DeKalbschools. To the surprise of the NAACP, large numbers of blackparents were no less concerned.   &quot;I was angry and confused,&quot; recalls Rose Stewart, a blackmother. &quot;I couldn't believe that this white man {Mr. Mills}was telling me I should bus my child.&quot;   Ms. Stewart and 17 other black parents banded together tohire their own lawyers and tried, unsuccessfully, to have Mr.Mills ejected from the case. Members of the dissidentplaintiff group, who have filed a separate brief with theSupreme Court, claim they actually represent the majorityblack view. They cite a May 1990 poll commissioned by theDeKalb Chamber of Commerce that reported that 65% of blackparents oppose mandatory busing.   Mr. Mills, a busing advocate, says it's &quot;naive&quot; to thinkthat racially separate education will ever be equal. Hedefends his role in the court battle by pointing out that asthe most active plaintiff, he has kept the pressure on thesystem.   But in the face of widespread black protest, the southeastregional office of the NAACP has overruled the local chapterand disavowed Mr. Mills's mandatory busing plan. In February,the Supreme Court granted the school system's request that itreview the Atlanta appeals court decision.   Black parents in DeKalb almost uniformly distrust theschool system and hope it will remain under courtsupervision. Even Phil McGregor, a black school board memberwho voted with the rest of the board to appeal the Atlantacourt's decision to the Supreme Court, says he did so only tohasten a resolution to the case; he insists he personallybelieves the system should stay under court control. Thelegal fight aside, many blacks rank other goals far aboveintegration.   Evelyn and Larry Bailey worry that their son Saadi'ssouthside elementary school doesn't get its share of money orattention from the system. One of the issues the SupremeCourt will review is an allegation that DeKalb spends moreper pupil in white schools than in black, a charge the systemdenies.   At Saadi Bailey's school, there are plenty of computers.But there is only one teacher who knows how to operate themwell, in contrast to the situation at the predominantly whiteschools, say his parents. As a result, students often end upstaring at blank screens. Meanwhile, black schools appear tohave older and fewer books per pupil than other schools, andblack parents had to raise money privately to ease a shortageof maps and texts.   For these reasons, the Baileys fear, Saadi is fallingbehind in his reading. But they have no intention of applyingfor a transfer to a white school under the voluntary busingprogram. &quot;We'll fight to get the quality of education thatour kids deserve -- in our schools, in our neighborhoods,&quot;says Ms. Bailey.   Another issue the Supreme Court will examine in Freemanvs. Pitts is the racial mix of teachers. In its brief, themain plaintiff class headed by Mr. Mills complains that thesystem has tacitly &quot;identified&quot; schools as being intended forblacks by assigning a disproportionate number of blackteachers to them. Overall, 30% of the system's teachers areblack; at some black-majority schools, 40% of the teachersare black.   In fact, black parents don't seem alarmed about too manyblack teachers in their children's schools; instead, theseparents want more black teachers. &quot;We need more role models,&quot;says Charles Brown, who sends his daughter to a black southDeKalb high school.   Black dissatisfaction with white teachers is pervasive,especially the belief that white teachers set lowerexpectations for blacks. Consider the case of Brian McGregor,the 15-year-old son of Phil McGregor, the school boardmember. After Brian's white algebra teacher last year senthome a first-quarter report card with a 76% average and thecomment &quot;keep up the good work, doing well,&quot; Mr. McGregorwent to see the teacher &quot;to let her know we expect more ofBrian.&quot; A couple of months later, the mid-term report cardarrived: same grade and the comment &quot;Brian is doing the besthe can.&quot;   Mr. McGregor says he returned to the school and &quot;let theteacher know in no uncertain terms&quot; that she was to push hisson harder. Brian finished the year with an 89% average. &quot;Thequestion is, how many other parents would have followed up?&quot;says Mr. McGregor.   Robert Freeman, the system's superintendent, insists suchexperiences are unrepresentative. &quot;There is a good educationavailable to every kid in DeKalb County,&quot; he says. &quot;Teachersteach without regard to color.&quot;   DeKalb's voluntary busing efforts appear promising onpaper and have their backers, yet they are losing adherentsamong middle-class black families.   Two years ago, the system launched a relatively small&quot;magnet&quot; program, under which students, both black and white,volunteer for special classes in schools outside theirneighborhood. A foreign-language magnet at predominantlyblack Towers High, for instance, draws white students and asmattering of Asians and Hispanics. In one Japanese languageclass, an ethnic smorgasbord of 30 students snappily answersquestions fired at them by not one but two native-speakingteachers. The room crackles with enthusiasm.   But Superintendent Freeman says he can't expand the magnetprogram because of a dearth of black applicants willing totransfer. Black parents complain that magnets set up in theirneighborhood schools exacerbate overcrowding and push blackchildren into the mobile trailer-classrooms that surroundmany schools on the south side.   The system's other main integration tool is known as&quot;M-to-M,&quot; for majority-to-minority. It allows a student ofthe racial majority in any school to voluntarily transfer toa school where he or she would be in the minority. Inpractice, the program moves 4,000 black students to whiteschools in the north and a handful of white students to blackschools.   At predominantly white Dunwoody High School, 88 blacksarrive on the M-to-M buses each morning, joining anequivalent number from the neighborhood to form 16% of thetotal student population. Thus there is integration in aformal sense. But close interracial friendships are rare,students say. Black and white students generally don't sittogether in the cafeteria or at pep rallies. &quot;We're friendly,but we don't hang out,&quot; says Eric Goldklang, a white senior.As he speaks, a class enters the library and settles down towork; the four black students, two boys and two girls, sit atone table, and the white students sit at other tables.   A sharp contrast to Dunwoody is Southwest DeKalb HighSchool, which is 99% black. It's more crowded than Dunwoody,and the students on average score lower on standardized testslike the SAT. Gilbert Turman, the black principal, offers noexcuses for the lag in test results but points out that manyof his students come from less-privileged backgrounds. AtSouthwest DeKalb, 27% of the students receivegovernment-subsidized lunches; at Dunwoody, just 7% do.   Mr. Turman acknowledges that some black parents who onlyrecently have ascended to the middle class don't stressacademics as much as they should, or as much as whitefamilies who have been financially comfortable for longer.But he predicts that over time his students will begin toclose the performance gap.   One promising recruit is Daisy Abdur-Rahman, whose parentssent her to private school through eighth grade but,impressed by Mr. Turman, transferred her to Southwest DeKalbthis year. Daisy has established her usual A average,admitting that public school is nothing like she expected:&quot;It's not dirty; there aren't kids always in trouble.&quot; Shewants to be a lawyer one day and doesn't think attending asegregated high school will hurt. &quot;People do best wherethey're comfortable,&quot; she says.   Kevin Rambeau, an 11th-grader who came back to SouthwestDeKalb after quitting the M-to-M program, has a bleaker view.&quot;I didn't want to go to a white school,&quot; he says softly. &quot;Ihave never seen any deep friendships between black and white.People of the same color are going to stick together in theend.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>