<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910123-0151</DOCNO><DOCID>910123-0151.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   They Are What They Eat</HL><DATE>01/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A13</SO><IN>FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)RESTAURANTS, FAST-FOOD, CATERING (RES)</IN><LP>   Alix M. Freedman's series of page-one articles on thecentral role played by the fast-food chains in the diet ofthe inner-city poor was splendid (Dec. 18-20). Actually, thefast-food chains play an important role in the diet ofeveryone. They dominate the landscape. They are even inschools and hospitals. Finding nutritious food is likefinding a needle in a haystack.   The inner-city poor also use food stamps for junk food atthe supermarket (or they trade the stamps for crack). Theyknow not what food to buy, or how to cook it.</LP><TEXT>   Surely, there is a better way to feed the inner-city poor.Kibbutz-style eating places as in Israel might be a way toimprove their health. No fraudulent use of stamps, no junkfood. One and all would benefit.   Ralph Slovenko   Professor of Law and Psychiatry   Wayne State University   Detroit   ---   Your Dec. 20 headline reads, &quot;Poor Selection: AnInner-City Shopper Seeking Healthy Food Finds OfferingsScant.&quot; &quot;Healthy&quot; is one of the most misused words in theEnglish language. It means enjoying good health. Yourheadline proclaims the food to be healthy and not its impacton people. Proper usage would substitute the word&quot;healthful,&quot; meaning that there are benefits of health in thefood.   An ad for milk saying it is healthy is a bigger tribute tothe cow than the person who drinks the milk. I saw an ad thatsaid canned sardines are healthy, which is dubious since theyare all dead.   William Benson   President   Hospital Counselors Inc   Emeryville, Calif.   ---   Proper nutrition is a problem in the inner city as well asthe nation in general. More education and better awarenessare the ultimate means of providing the necessary guidance.   The issue of better dietary habits is of major concern inour community and must be dealt with accordingly. Your seriespresents a biased position that stereotypes inner-cityresidents as being ignorant and gorging themselves onfast-food products constantly. This depiction is unfair,inaccurate and offensive.   Next time, balance your articles with differentperspectives that include alternative life styles and somepositive things that are being done. America will then get amore accurate description of the issue rather than thesensationalized version.   Don Harty   The Charisma Group   A Franchisee of Burger King Corp.   Harlem, Bedford Stuyvesant and East New York   New York   ---   New York City wants to enable fast-food eaters to makeinformed consumer choices about their dollars and theirhealth. Typical fast-food meals are loaded with fat andsodium, but most diners wouldn't know that a fish or chickensandwich could be worse than a burger, or that using onepacket of dressing can turn an otherwise healthful salad intothe artery-clogging equivalent of a Quarter Pounder withcheese and a large order of fries. And poor people aredisproportionately harmed by the poor nutritional quality offast foods, as your article points out.   True, McDonald's headquarters has sent out across-referenced poster that perhaps someone with a master'sdegree in nutrition could decipher. Which is why we'reworking to design a readable, simple poster instead. Andunlike the lack of enforcement in Peoria you assert, we canand will make sure fast-food chains will comply with our newlaw once it's enacted. Who can oppose consumers knowingbeforehand, if they choose to, what they're getting into andwhat's getting into them and their families?   Mark Green   Commissioner   City of New York Consumer Affairs   New York   ---   It is clear to us that more efforts like the SpecialSupplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children, orWIC, need to be employed in the battle against poornutrition. WIC, which provides a combination of nutritiousfood and nutrition education to at-risk pregnant andpostpartum women, infants and children under age five, hasbeen shown in a recent U.S. Agriculture Department study tosave up to $3.13 in neonatal Medicaid costs for every $1spent on prenatal nutrition.   A related effort that deserves mention is a federaldemonstration project in place in 10 states that encourageslow-income consumers to select locally grown produce atinner-city and rural farmers markets. Through the FarmersMarket Coupon Program, low-income WIC participants areprovided coupons that enable them to purchase high-fiberfruits and vegetables, which, according to the NationalAcademy of Sciences, can lower one's risk of coronary heartdisease, colon cancer, diabetes mellitus, diverticulosis,hypertension and gallstone formation.   Unlike other efforts, the Farmers Market Coupon Programdirectly benefits both the farmer and the low-incomeconsumer. Once redeemed for fresh produce by WICparticipants, these coupons are then turned over in the localeconomy by farmers who are learning new ways to expand theirtrade. This partnership is helping to improve the health andnutrition of an at-risk population, while at the same timepioneering changes in our food system by linking small ruralfarmers with needy urban consumers.   Dan Cooper   Robert A. Lewis   James H. Stephenson   Harrisburg, Pa.  (The writers are, respectively, the director ofagricultural diversification in Iowa, the chief agriculturalmarketing representative in New York, and the governor'sadviser on food and nutrition in Pennsylvania.)   ---   Your series on the nutritional habits of the poor showsonce again how expensive it is to be poor. Add ignorance topoverty and the costs double.   The series raises the question, also, of just how much theproviders of public assistance to the poor can do in tellingthem how to spend the money. We accept, for example, thatfood stamps cannot be used to purchase alcohol and tobacco.Why not prohibit the use of food stamps to buy lard, Twinkiesand fat pork, or does the First Amendment forbid this?   Lorenz A. Newton   Salinas, Calif.   ---   If fast-food companies did not locate in the inner city,they would be accused of redlining. When they do, they aredeliberately ruining the health of minorities. The wholereport belittles the ability of minorities to make choices intheir own lives.   Brandon Windham   Hammond, Ind.</TEXT></DOC>