<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910328-0096</DOCNO><DOCID>910328-0096.</DOCID><HL>   No Sale:   RTC's Many Miscues   In Selling Off Property   Rattle Local Markets   ---   Battered in Sandamp;L Mess, People   In Phoenix Say Agency Is   Too Slow and Bureaucratic   ---   But One Developer Got a Deal   ----   By Todd Mason   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)REAL ESTATE INVESTMENTS (REA)INSURANCE (INS)MORTGAGES, MORTGAGE BANKERS, MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES (MOR)</IN><GV>FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   PHOENIX, Ariz. -- The Resolution Trust Corp. has announcedambitious plans to speed the cleanup of the savings and loandebacle, but people here aren't cheering just yet.   They have been waiting two years for the RTC to sell offthe thrift detritus dragging down this city's once-boomingreal estate market. And to them, the job ahead isn't assimple as relaxing a few rules for sales or getting another$78 billion to close still more defunct Sandamp;Ls.</LP><TEXT>   Success to locksmith Roger Wolheim would be getting hisbills paid faster than 90 days; he won't do business with thefederal agency anymore unless it does. Real-estate brokerClay Fouts wants the RTC to slim down the 239-page bidspecifications for its auctions and eliminate such provisionsas requiring auctioneers to hire public-relations firms. AndAlbert J. LaCanne wants an answer, please, on his plans tosave his mobile-home park; his loan is only a speck in theRTC portfolio, but, understandably, it keeps him awakenights.   Much of Phoenix is waiting in fateful resignation for theRTC to act on an estimated $1.7 billion of brokesubdivisions, resort hotels, offices, retirement complexes,golf courses, recreational-vehicle parks and restaurantsscattered across the state. And thus nowhere is the questionmore pressing: Can the RTC, now the nation's largestfinancial institution, clean up its act? Perhaps, but peoplehere feel they've seen little evidence so far that theagency, burdened by red tape and political second-guessing,can make the right decisions.   Its performance stirs concern far beyond Phoenix, ofcourse. As the largest seller of real estate in scores ofoverbuilt cities, the RTC has tremendous influence, in effectsetting property prices and determining whether financing isavailable. Through year end, it had seized $271 billion inassets from 531 thrifts. With its fresh bankroll fromCongress, the agency now plans to close another 215 thriftswithin six months and sell $65 billion from its portfolio ofjunk bonds, distressed loans and foreclosed real estate.   Unless it handles these sales adroitly, the damage to thevalue of those properties will spread and will threatenbillions more in mortgages and properties held by otherthrifts, banks and insurance companies.   And the RTC has been anything but adroit. The principalfear a year ago -- that the agency would dump its vastholdings and destroy weak real-estate markets -- has largelydisappeared, replaced by complaints that it isn't moving fastenough. In a survey by Datasource RE Inc. of 2,000real-estate investors in January, not a single one expressedsatisfaction after dealing with the RTC, and 65% said theywould never deal with it again. In Texas, where one brokerfaxed deed records to an RTC agent to prove that thegovernment owned the property in question, brokers joke thatRTC stands for Red Tape Central.   A look at the agency's record in battered Phoenixillustrates why the streamlined sales practices announcedthis week may not be enough. &quot;I'm not too proud of how we gotstarted in Phoenix,&quot; says L. William Seidman, chairman of theFederal Deposit Insurance Corp. and head of the RTC. Thebanking regulator is mindful of those miscues as he begins todeal with falling property values in New England andCalifornia. &quot;The most important lesson we have learned,&quot; hesays, &quot;is to get into these financial institutions earlier toprevent failures.&quot;   Lapses were inevitable, of course, considering the size ofthe problem and the RTC's rapid start-up 18 months ago. Inhard-hit Texas, Colorado and Arizona, thrifts waited monthsfor overburdened appraisers to complete their work, the firststep in a sale. Much of the RTC's salvage effort stilllanguishes in bankruptcy courts and foreclosure actions.Still other assets remain under the control of Sandamp;Lconservators and receivers pending a sale of the institutionsthemselves. Predictably, the RTC has trouble coordinating allthis.   After operating a year, the Phoenix office is just nowcompleting its computer system, a pilot program for thenational organization, which will track the management andsale of its thousands of properties. Two months ago, saysDewey Porter, the RTC regional director, it developed abill-paying system that should reduce the duns it fields byphone and mail.   But the slow development of computer systems is only oneproblem. Last summer, the RTC selected winning bidders forthe property-management and mortgage-servicing subsidiariesof nine thrifts, including a Phoenix unit of Pima Savings andamp;Loan Association. The first deal was extraordinarilydifficult to close, says Douglas C. Heltney, the buyer andthe chairman of Albuquerque-based Sandia Mortgage Corp.,because the RTC had little experience selling an entirebusiness: employees, furniture, accounts and all.   Then the federal liquidators had second thoughts about theother eight deals: Should the RTC take bids not only for theorganizations but also for their contracts to manage RTCapartments and offices? (Or as the frustrated bidders preferto state the question: Having sold the car, should the RTCnow take bids for the engine?)   Such policy impasses still can paralyze the RTC. With halfof Congress gunning for the RTC, says a frustrated bidder fora property-management subsidiary, &quot;The only way these guyscan be hurt is to make a decision, even if they are rightnine times out of 10.&quot;   The forest of pointing fingers remains a major obstacle.&quot;Because oversight wasn't what it should have been,&quot; saysDaniel Kearney, former chief executive of the RTC, &quot;todayeverybody and his brother is going to be looking over hisshoulder.&quot; Mr. Kearney, now chief financial officer of AetnaLife andamp; Casualty, says he quit when it became clear hewouldn't be allowed to act as a chief executive. Power restsinstead with an oversight board that includes TreasurySecretary Nicholas Brady, Housing and Urban DevelopmentSecretary Jack Kemp and Federal Reserve Board Chairman AlanGreenspan.   The RTC's double mission, to clean up the mess and topunish the guilty, became evident quickly in Phoenix.Arizona's real-estate bubble burst in the mid-1980s. But notuntil 1989, when Congress passed the thrift rescue act, didregulators get the money to deal with ailing institutions.The regulators focused on putting Sandamp;L crooks and theircronies out of business. &quot;It was a mess,&quot; says ElliottPollack, a Phoenix economist and real-estate investor. &quot;TheRTC's attitude was almost punitive, like, `We're going toshow you guys you were at fault.'&quot;   In Phoenix courtrooms, the RTC routinely disavowedcontracts it inherited from the Sandamp;Ls. In August, the agencyreneged on an out-of-court settlement to pay tradesmen $18.5million for work performed at the Phoenician Hotel, which wasbuilt by Charles H. Keating Jr., a hometown entrepreneur andthe indicted former chairman of Lincoln Savings andamp; LoanAssociation. The government won't be able to prove itscontentions that the subcontractors charged too much and didshoddy work, says W.R. Lundahl, a cabinetmaker with claims of$500,000. Says the RTC's Mr. Porter, declining to comment onthe Phoenician litigation, &quot;The whole issue of Lincoln isextremely sensitive.&quot;   The scorched-earth approach cut a wide swath through thecity. Projects and deals virtually stopped as thrifts, underregulator control, cut off loans to developers and funding tojoint ventures. The RTC evicted low-income residents from anapartment complex here a year ago after an RTC receiver inCalifornia called it unsafe. Dismayed by that move, the citystruggled for months to get the agency to board up thebuildings and put up a fence. In frustration, the state andcity formed task forces to plead for moderation.   Regulators also forced banks and thrifts to write downreal-estate loans to the price that the property might fetchif the lender had to sell it within six months. That led tothe insolvency of the remaining three of eight Arizona-basedthrifts and eight small Phoenix banks. Robert Walker, asenior vice president at Valley National Bank here, saysfederal examiners asked him how far he expected real-estatevalues to fall. &quot;How the hell should we know?&quot; he says. &quot;Theyshould tell us. For regulatory purposes, they had all theanswers. For marketing purposes, they didn't respond.&quot;   The dumping worries became moot as commercial real-estateprices, with distress sales apparently looming, went into afree fall. Selling a suburban Mesa office building purchasedby the now-defunct Western Savings andamp; Loan Association in 1987for $55 million, the agency fetched just $20.3 million lastsummer. That wasn't bad, considering all the RTC holdings inArizona that, in effect, have no price at all. &quot;Thegovernment owns land so far out that its only apparent valueis holding the rest of the world together,&quot; says RobertStallings, a Phoenix investor. Until the RTC deals with thisoverhang of property, buyers will worry that the next salewill come in at even lower prices.   That's why the agency this week relaxed some of the rulesdesigned to assure the highest prices possible for its realestate. Now, the RTC can discount prices by 20% immediatelyand by 40% after six months. Before, it couldn't reduce itsasking price until properties had sat on the market sixmonths -- and then by only 15%.   Under the old rules, the RTC spread frustration far andwide. Some appraisals at Merabank FSB expired before thethrift could get them to pass regulatory muster, thwartingwould-be buyers while the RTC receiver backed up six monthsand started over. The RTC took four months to get a luxuryhome in Scottsdale appraised last year, says Mark Moskowitz,a real-estate agent who had a buyer willing to pay $1.2million for it. Some months later, Mr. Moskowitz's buyer gaveup; the RTC eventually sold the home for $900,000.   Such miscues have left the agency with an image problem.That became abundantly clear in Mesa, where Chase ManhattanCorp. had briefly considered locating a credit-cardprocessing center on RTC-owned land. &quot;As soon as Chase foundout the RTC was involved, it backed off,&quot; says Philip K.Gardner, president of the city's development arm. Chase putthe center in nearby Tempe instead. And while the agency sold$650 million in assets last year, it was criticized forselling cheap-to-maintain subdivision lots too quickly, whilemoving too slowly on office buildings with heavy carryingcosts.   Admittedly, the Phoenix office has made progress. Mr.Porter, a well-liked 34-year veteran of Valley National Bank,has defused some of the tension between the city'sreal-estate establishment and the agency since he took overthe office last August. &quot;We've been working hard to educatepeople that you can work with the RTC,&quot; he says affably.   He hired some savvy real-estate veterans and struck someinnovative deals. One developer, Lawrence Kush, was able totie up lots for an option fee and closed on them only afterlining up home buyers; that enabled him to pay the RTC $8,000per lot above the going rate, he estimates. And the RTC's newability to offer liberal financing terms for 85% of the salesprice is as welcome as rain in credit-parched Phoenix. &quot;Ithink I'm about to retire as an RTC critic,&quot; says Arizona'sbanking superintendent, William H. Rivoir III.   It remains to be seen how much all this will help. Mr.Porter is just now hiring the last of his authorized 364employees. The Phoenix office is still under construction;the magazines in its waiting areas date back to February1990, the month the RTC moved in. Mr. Seidman concedes,&quot;We're an organization built for long-term stability,hopefully, but not for quick action.&quot;   Moreover, Mr. Porter's experiences suggest that even ifthe RTC learns to move quickly, it can't move painlessly. InGrove East, a partially built subdivision in Mesa, homeownersasked the RTC to sell lots in their subdivision directly toconsumers to preserve the prices and the architecturalstandards, rather than as a package to a developer. &quot;We knowthere were people willing to pay the prices we paid,&quot; saysThomas A. Longfellow, a resident who paid $50,000 for hislot. But &quot;every time we sent a letter to them,&quot; he says, &quot;wewere given a letter back that said the RTC was going to dowhatever was necessary to get rid of the property.&quot; Mr.Porter promises to arrange a meeting between the homeownersand the subdivision's new developer when he is selected.   Carl Wilson also has paid for the RTC's zeal. The veteranbuilder was developing a subdivision in suburban Chandler onlots he purchased in 1987 for $26,000 when, suddenly, hiscompetitors began paying the RTC $12,000 for similar lots.When his loan came due, he asked the regulators runningMerabank to restructure it to reflect values of $14,000 alot. &quot;They opted not to do that, and now they're selling themat $10,000,&quot; he says.   Mr. Wilson, who signed over his development in lieu offoreclosure, is especially aggrieved that while local RTCofficials promised to hold off on calling his loan while hesought financing elsewhere, they apparently were overruled bytheir superiors in Denver or Washington. &quot;When the RTC saysits aim is to save the taxpayer money, it's a joke,&quot; he says.   Although declining to comment specifically on Mr. Wilson'scase, Mr. Porter, the regional director, says, &quot;We just don'tarbitrarily foreclose. Our stated policy is that foreclosureis the last resort.&quot;   Still, policy and casework -- the language of bureaucratsrather than of real-estate trouble-shooters -- are the cruxof the RTC problem. After the Phoenix operatives decide whichtroubled borrowers to help and which buyers to finance, theystill must write up most of these &quot;cases&quot; and send them tobureaucrats for approval.   In Washington and Denver, reviewers scrutinize thecontracts for political land mines: the price that could beattacked as a giveaway, the borrower who could be painted asa crony, the venture that could fail a second time. &quot;It's notthe kind of organization you would expect could make thosedecisions well,&quot; admits James P. Simmons, chairman of theRTC's Western advisory board.   Mr. Kearney, the former RTC chief executive, notes onebasic reason: &quot;Real estate is the quintessential localbusiness. Which projects do you support in Phoenix? You can'tanswer that in Washington.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>