<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920106-0120</DOCNO><DOCID>920106-0120.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   When Will the Next Hostage-Takings Come?   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>01/06/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><RE>ALGERIA (AE)AFRICA (AF)EUROPE (EU)IRAN (IR)MOROCCO (MCO)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)TUNISIA (TS)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   The Islamic Salvation Front's triumph in Algeria'sparliamentary elections a week ago heads that nation of 26million souls toward becoming the world's second Islamicrepublic, after Iran. What would that mean?   The truth is that nobody knows, and there is scant comfortin that. North Africa's Islamic fundamentalists usuallydisclaim connections with Iran. Indeed, they do seem to bemore inward-looking than were the Ayatollah Khomeini'sfollowers, who were incited to focus as much hatred as theycould muster on the &quot;Great Satan,&quot; the United States. For thetime being, the FIS (French initials) has a sufficient stockof enemies near at hand. The Algerian government and militarycommand did what they could to try to suppress thefundamentalists and there could be real trouble if they nowtry to resist an FIS takeover. Last week's mass rally ofanti-fundamentalists could be a foretaste of civil strife.</LP><TEXT>   Goodness knows, Algerians have plenty of legitimategrievances. They have had no better luck than anyone elsewith &quot;socialism,&quot; that universal euphemism for theall-powerful state. Unemployment reportedly is as high as 50%in some urban pockets of poverty. As with most Islamiccountries, there is a huge cohort of jobless men in theirearly 20s with very little idea of what to do with theirlives. Fundamentalism gives them a mission, to purge thesociety of the evil influences of Western culture, to forcewomen into purdah, to pray to Allah for relief from theirpoverty.   What the Western democracies have to worry about is thedanger that this religious fervor will be directed abroad atthe infidels of the U.S. and, in particular, Europe. Europealready has worked itself into a frenzy trying to decide whatto do about the steady influx of impoverished Muslims fromthe Maghreb states of Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco. Most ofthese immigrants are not good material for fundamentalistproselytizers; they left home to escape the old ways, not totransplant them. But if their relationships with localpopulations in such places as France and Belgium continue tosour, their resentments could create bands of Islamicmilitants in the heart of Europe.   Sadly, there is nothing in the record to suggest thatIslamic fundamentalism offers prospects for relieving thepoverty of the Maghreb. Iran had oil to tide it through theeconomic dislocations caused by its banishment of the foreigndevils. Algeria has no such riches and if fundamentalismspreads to the other states of the Maghreb, they haven'teither. Indeed, Morocco and Tunisia depend heavily ontourism, an industry not especially compatible with Islam'sstrictures against alcohol and bikinis. Even oil hasn'tprevented economic and social decay in Libya. It is more of aGadhafic than Islamic republic, but has nonetheless combinedelements of fundamentalism, Arab nationalism and socialisminto a self-destructive brew.   Whatever the FIS intends, the record of Islamicfundamentalism gives pause. One such group, the Holy WarOrganization, assassinated Egyptian President Anwar alSadatin 1981. Fundamentalism has had a role in other intramuralbattles in Arab lands, including the 1982 massacre ofthousands of Sunni religious militants and innocent civiliansin Hama, Syria, by the forces of President Hafez al-Assad.There was also the bloody battle between Saudi securityforces and Sunni extremists who occupied the Grand Mosque inMecca in November 1979.   Then, of course, we have that mother of all Islamicrepublics, Iran. Iran's fundamentalist regime has plaguedthree American presidents, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan andGeorge Bush, to a degree out of all proportion to theimportance of Iran in the world-wide scheme of things. Ithardly needs to be recounted here how Iran's 444-dayconfinement of 52 Americans hostages at the U.S. Embassy inTehran weighed on President Carter or how his abortivemilitary effort to free them damaged his credibility.   President Reagan, who came into office proclaiming thatfuture hostage-takers would pay dearly and that he would notdo business with such people, fared little better in the longrun. Fanatics in one of the Iran-sponsored groups in Lebanonwere responsible for the explosive-laden suicide truck thatcrashed into the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut Oct. 23,1983, killing 241 Marines. President Reagan says in hismemoirs that this was one of the most painful things thathappened to him during his eight years in the White House.   As if that weren't enough, the Iranians switched fromdirect hostage-taking to using their radical front groups inLebanon, such as the Islamic Jihad, for that purpose. WhenPresident Reagan and his aides tried to deal with this byshading his rule against doing business with terrorists, hefound himself embroiled in the Iran-Contra scandal. Hisabortive overtures to Iran would not have raised such a loudand protracted political drumbeat had the president's aidesnot linked it with aid to anti-Communist guerrillas inNicaragua. But as things turned out, a duplicitous Iran, withthe help of the American left, scored yet another victoryagainst an American president.   President Bush has fared best of all, finally winning therelease last month of the last remaining American hostages inLebanon, Terry Anderson and Alann Steen. But his politicalopponents soon will be asking how much he had to compromisewith the hostage-takers. Writing on the New York Times op-edpage last month, David Halevy, a specialist on Mideastterrorism, said that the &quot;hostage-takers made out like thebandits they are.&quot;   Coincidentally with the hostage release, Mr. Halevy wrote,the U.S. agreed to pay Iran $278 million for militaryequipment impounded in 1979, to lift restrictions on some $7billion in frozen Iranian assets held by banks and to settleclaims on behalf of the passengers on Iran Air Flight 655,accidentally downed by a missile from the U.S.S. Vincennes in1988. With return of its three hostages, Britain agreed to$4.2 billion in trade and arms deals.   Most chilling of all, Mr. Halevy quotes anonymous Mideastsources as saying that Hezbollah, the Lebanon-based covertarm of Iran's secret service, won agreement from its masterson the launching of more terrorism and hostage-taking in1992.   Without necessarily taking Mr. Halevy's assertions at fullface value, they illuminate one chilling fact. There isnothing at all to prevent a new campaign of hostagetaking andterrorism. The sad lesson is, hostage-taking works, withmonetary rewards and an enormous nuisance value in Americanpolitics.   As to random thoughts about Algeria's prospects, here's abit of history: Before the United States of America hadreached its 12th birthday, as the newly elected ThomasJefferson discovered, Congress already had paid $2 million inbribes and ransoms to the Barbary pirates of Tunis, Tripoli,Morocco and, last but not least, Algiers. The problemcontinued to plague America throughout its early history.</TEXT></DOC>