<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910619-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>910619-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Overexposed:   How a French Bank   Went to Hollywood   And Found Trouble   ---   Credit Lyonnais Is Awash   In Sour Loans to Studios;   Shakeup at MGM-Pathe   ---   A Big Thanks at the Oscars   ----   By Kathleen A. Hughes and Charles Fleming   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/19/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CRC F.CLC LVE PCC</CO><MS>CONSUMER CYCLICAL (CYC)FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ENTERTAINMENT AND LEISURE (ENT)OTHER SPECIALTY RETAILERS OF LIMITED PRODUCT LINES (OTS)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)ALL SPECIALTY RETAILERS (RTS)</IN><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEVADA (NV)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   HOLLYWOOD -- For years, the name Credit Lyonnais had a lotof cachet in this town. The French state-owned bank financedmovies for producers like Dino De Laurentiis and ArnoldKopelson. Its name flashed on the screen during credits for&quot;Platoon&quot; and &quot;The Fabulous Baker Boys.&quot; Paparazzi snappedphotos of beaming bank officials at black-tie events.   These days, Credit Lyonnais is still a hot topic here, butthe bankers are no longer beaming.</LP><TEXT>   Their bank, it turns out, is up to its eyeballs introubled Hollywood loans to production companies that eitherhave failed or are on the brink. People close to theinstitution say its exposure here exceeds $2 billion, makingit the film industry's largest lender. Credit Lyonnaisrecently even took effective control of its biggest Hollywoodborrower, ailing MGM-Pathe Communications Co.   The bank, which has assets of 1,463 billion francs, orabout $239 billion, declines to discuss how it wound up sodeep in the film business. The topic has become politicaldynamite in France. Opposition politicians, led by Francoisd'Aubert, a conservative deputy in the National Assembly, aredemanding a parliamentary investigation into the bank'sdoings, particularly its relationship with GiancarloParretti. In a lawsuit filed this week, Credit Lyonnaisclaims Mr. Parretti, who formed MGM-Pathe last November,mismanaged the studio.   Credit Lyonnais's many troubles in Hollywood are provingan embarrassment at a particularly sensitive time for thebank. The institution is trying to become a major player inglobal banking and is also seeking to elbow aside its largestrival, Banque Nationale de Paris. Since he was named chairmanof Credit Lyonnais three years ago, Jean-Yves Haberer, aforceful former head of the French Treasury, has propelledthe 128-year-old bank on a takeover binge, snapping up banksacross Europe.   Mr. Haberer's outspoken style hasn't endeared him to theFrench banking community. In April, he thumbed his nose atother big French banks, saying they suffered from &quot;inertia.&quot;But his competitors could have the last laugh, for CreditLyonnais's aggressive style in Hollywood may now cost it alot of money.   Credit Lyonnais never intended to be banker to the stars.Rather, it stumbled into the business in the early 1980s whenit bought a stake in Slavenburg's Bank NV of Holland, basedin Rotterdam. Frans Afman, then head of international lendingfor Slavenburg's, had been making Hollywood loans for adecade. The bank had financed several of Mr. De Laurentiis'sfilms, including a remake of &quot;King Kong,&quot; one of theproducer's few financial successes.   &quot;Frans was very aggressive with Dino. He was takingzillions of little contracts,&quot; says John Miller, managingdirector of the entertainment division at Chemical Bank inLos Angeles. &quot;Most other banks wouldn't have gotteninvolved.&quot;   Shortly after Credit Lyonnais acquired its stake in theRotterdam bank, it named Georges Vigon chairman of operationsthere, and Mr. Vigon encouraged Mr. Afman to continue hisHollywood lending. But trouble on the home front soonerupted. In 1983, some officials of the Rotterdam bank werearrested in an investigation of a scheme to hide undeclaredassets for depositors, according to Rolf de Groot, a publicprosecutor in Rotterdam at the time. Two directors of thebank were later found guilty.   Mr. Vigon, who wasn't charged in the affair, didn't returnphone calls seeking comment for this article.   Credit Lyonnais wound up taking full control of theRotterdam operation in a bid to clean it up, and changed itsname to Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland N.V. (CLBN). Theoperation eventually began providing larger lines of creditto fledgling independent movie companies including CannonGroup Inc., which made action films. Soon, the bank's hallswere lined with movie posters, the movie division had morethan 20 people on the payroll and Mr. Afman's name wasshowing up in movie credits.   &quot;For a little bank with relatively few assets, they weremaking enormous amounts of money,&quot; says Bruce Lilliston, anentertainment attorney who has worked with Credit Lyonnais.   Jean Deflassieux, chairman of Credit Lyonnais at the time,estimates the bank's early film portfolio was &quot;tens ofmillions of dollars,&quot; which performed well through the early1980s. By 1986, the loans had ballooned to $300 million, butheadquarters felt they were good business, so no major changein course was ordered.   Meanwhile, Mr. Afman and others at the bank weredeveloping more close relationships with Hollywood borrowers.&quot;I am not that interested in balance sheets or financialstatements,&quot; Mr. Afman told Screen International magazine in1986. &quot;I am very very interested in people.&quot;   Mr. Afman showed up frequently on the West Coast. The tallDutchman summered in Malibu and appeared every year at theCannes film festival in France. &quot;Frans was always verypowerful,&quot; says one industry lawyer. &quot;Everyone wanted to know`What is Frans thinking?' He was the guy with all thecapital.&quot;   The bank came to be viewed as an open spigot. John Flock,a former president of Film Accord, an independent productioncompany, says that Credit Lyonnais was even willing tofinance a Film Accord television mini-series before the loandocumentation was completed. &quot;There was no consistent attemptto document all the money that was being funneled. The moneykept flowing,&quot; he says. &quot;It was the relationship betweenMichel Roi {founder of Film Accord} and the bankers thatallowed this to go on.&quot; Mr. Afman wasn't involved with thisaccount.   For his part, Mr. Roi says that &quot;with an American bank,the series never would have been made.&quot;   Many of the films that Credit Lyonnais backed did well. Inone year, movies it helped finance, including &quot;Platoon&quot; and&quot;Crimes of the Heart,&quot; received 27 Academy Award nominations.When he accepted the Oscar for best picture, &quot;Platoon,&quot; Mr.Kopelson thanked Mr. Afman for &quot;having money in thePhilippines when I needed it.&quot; Says Mr. Kopelson now: &quot;Theyare the most sophisticated bankers I have worked with.&quot;   Yet the bank also had its share of film disasters. Ithelped finance Roman Polanski's &quot;Pirates,&quot; a $30 millionflop. The movie featured one of the most expensive props inmotion picture history: a replica of a 17th-century Spanishgalleon that cost more than $4 million. The ship is now atourist attraction in Barcelona.   In late 1987, matters got more complicated. The Securitiesand Exchange Commission filed a civil suit against CannonGroup in federal court in Los Angeles, charging that thecompany had defrauded investors, submitted false documentsand had Mr. Afman, its chief banker, on its payroll. The suitcharged that Cannon had failed to promptly disclose that Mr.Afman was a managing director of an offshore unit of Cannonwith a three-year contract valued at $225,000. The suit alsosaid that Mr. Afman received consulting fees of $100,000.Cannon later settled the suit without admitting theallegations.   Mr. Afman also had positions with and received fees fromtwo other borrowers, Carolco Pictures Inc., best known forits &quot;Rambo&quot; movies, and Scotti Brothers EntertainmentIndustries Inc., now called All American Communications Inc.   Mr. Afman's role at the bank eventually evolved into thatof consultant; he continued to act as a liaison betweenCredit Lyonnais and Hollywood until recently.   Mr. Afman declined overall comment for this article otherthan to discuss the matter of the consulting fees. &quot;The bankknew about the positions and the money was paid to the bank.It didn't jeopardize my relationship with the bank and itwasn't controversial in Holland,&quot; he says. Mr. Afman addsthat his change in title wasn't linked to the controversy.Mr. Afman still receives $225,000 a year from Carolco and itsLive Entertainment affiliate in connection with positions heholds with both concerns. Credit Lyonnais has granted an $85million line of credit to Carolco and, along with otherbanks, a $95 million line of credit to Live Entertainment.   By 1988, a growing number of independent productioncompanies were falling victim to mismanagement, high overheadand movies that flopped. Other banks, with smaller Hollywoodloans, began to pull back. But not Credit Lyonnais. JacquesGriffault, an official with the bank, told the HollywoodReporter in December 1988, &quot;We are committed to this industryand we do stand behind our clients and do not pull the plugwhen they hit hard times.&quot;   Back at headquarters, the bank was sounding equallyupbeat. That year, Mr. Haberer, the new chief, announcedplans to double the bank's net profit by 1992. During histenure, loan volume has jumped 37% to about $113 billion.With a big growth program underway, the movie loans lookedsweet indeed: They were proving more profitable than generalcorporate lending, another bank official told the HollywoodReporter in 1988.   Some in the industry suggest the bank was simply able todelay recognition of its Hollywood losses by loaning more andmore money.   For example, Credit Lyonnais recently filed suit in statecourt in Los Angeles against producer Charles Band and hiscompanies. It claims that the companies owe the bank morethan $26.8 million and charges that Mr. Band gave the bankfalsified cash flow statements and diverted company fundsinto Swiss bank accounts and a castle in Italy.   But the suit also suggests that the bank made new loans toprotect old ones. The suit says Epic Pictures EnterprisesInc. was formed &quot;to obtain&quot; the assets of Mr. Band's Empiregroup of companies and to repay creditors, including CreditLyonnais. The suit does not say who owns Epic and officialsat Epic didn't return calls. But a separate suit filed byEpic against Mr. Band and his companies in Los AngelesSuperior Court indicates that Epic was also a borrower fromCredit Lyonnais, and had a $37.5 million loan outstandingfrom the bank as of March 31, 1991.   Mr. Band says he hasn't been served with the suit andwon't comment on specific allegations. However, he says thebank took control of his Empire group in 1986 and arrangedits sale to Epic. &quot;For the last year and a half they approvedevery payment. They were our in-house babysitter,&quot; he says.   The bank's troubles reached their bleakest in theMGM-Pathe debacle. Ironically, Mr. Parretti and his partner,Florio Fiorini, first surfaced in Hollywood four years ago asa solution to the problems at Cannon Group. Mr. Afmandeclined to work with them but they successfully appealed toother bankers at Credit Lyonnais. Messrs. Parretti andFiorini infused more than $200 million into Cannon through aseries of stock purchases and loans, and helped to pay downthe company's bank debt. &quot;The money came in buckets and allthe banks got paid off,&quot; says Mr. Miller of Chemical Bank,another Cannon lender. &quot;It was a very happy story for thebanks.&quot;   Mr. Parretti went on to make bids for other troubledCredit Lyonnais borrowers, and many people suspected that hewas acting in concert with the bank, trying to wrap all ofits problem loans into one entity that could then be resold.&quot;The relations between Parretti and CLBN are obviouslyambiguous and even unhealthy because CLBN uses him to takeover companies in difficulty that are clients of the bank,&quot;Mr. d'Aubert, the French deputy, claims in his report. Mr.Parretti declined to be interviewed.   The relationship took a turn in 1988, when Mr. Parrettiattempted to acquire Pathe Cinema, a prestigious French moviecompany, with the help of Credit Lyonnais. That effort wasblocked in June 1989 by the French finance minister, whoargued that Mr. Parretti was a &quot;threat to public order.&quot; Atthe time, Mr. Parretti had been charged in an Italian courtwith fraudulent bankruptcy in connection with the collapse ofan Italian newspaper of which he was a part owner. In 1990,Mr. Parretti was convicted and sentenced to three years and10 months in prison. He is appealing.   Despite the flap in France, Mr. Parretti used the Pathename, and soon changed the name of Cannon Group to PatheCommunications.   When Mr. Parretti then acquired MGM/UA Communications Co.for about $1.3 billion, he merged it with Pathe. The extentof Credit Lyonnais's involvement didn't become apparent untilthe studio began suffering cash shortages and a small band ofcreditors filed a petition in federal bankruptcy court thisyear seeking to liquidate the company.   It was the end of any honeymoon between Credit Lyonnaisand Mr. Parretti. Top Credit Lyonnais officials convergedhere in Hollywood and started paying off debts, reaching asettlement with the creditors. Mr. Parretti stepped down ascochairman of the holding company under pressure from thebank.   Then, this week, the bank's Rotterdam unit and MGM-Pathesued Mr. Parretti and others alleging he is interfering withthe studio's new management and has thrown the studio into&quot;disarray.&quot; The suit, filed in Delaware state court, chargesthat Mr. Parretti misled the bank when he asked for help infinancing his acquisition of MGM/UA. The suit says herequested short-term financing until certain investors whohad made &quot;firm commitments&quot; could come through with equityinvestments. The bank complied but the other investors &quot;nevermaterialized,&quot; according to the suit.   The suit also indicates Credit Lyonnais continued tobankroll Mr. Parretti, providing a total of more than $1billion in short-term loans and advances, among other things.Associates of the bank say Credit Lyonnais's total exposureto Mr. Parretti and his companies approaches $1.5 billion.Mr. Haberer, however, told the French weekly L'Expansionearlier this month that the bank is &quot;guaranteed by the valueof MGM, which has enormous assets.&quot;   Mr. Parretti, meanwhile, issued a statement yesterdaycontesting his removal from the board of MGM-Pathe and saidhe is taking legal action. However, at a hearing yesterday, aDelaware state court judge granted Credit Lyonnais atemporary restraining order, effectively blocking Mr.Parretti from interfering with the new management of thestudio.   It still isn't completely clear how Credit Lyonnais dugitself such a deep hole. &quot;It was the Las Vegas syndrome ofpeople who lose more and more money at the tables,&quot; suggestsPaul Kijzer, a financing consultant who has worked on filmprojects with the bank. &quot;I think it just grew out of hand.&quot;   Whatever the case, Credit Lyonnais is doing its best atdamage-control. Hollywood executives say the bank has beentelling many of its borrowers that it wants to reduce itsloans here by a third or more. Credit Lyonnais has evenappealed to other bankers in Hollywood to pick up part of itsloan portfolio. But so far, there are few takers.   ---   Bob Hagerty in Brussels contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>