<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900523-0164</DOCNO><DOCID>900523-0164.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Orphan Drug Act Needs Discipline</HL><DATE>05/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A23</SO><CO>   AMGN</CO><IN>DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   As the principal sponsor of the Orphan Drug Act of 1983, Iwas surprised to read your claims that recent legislation Iintroduced would &quot;repeal the law's only reason for being, toencourage development of drugs for rare diseases&quot; (&quot;WaxmanThreatens Orphans,&quot; Review andamp; Outlook, May 8). Since 1983, thelaw has worked very well in encouraging investment in drugsfor rare diseases -- those affecting fewer than 200,000people. Today, 45 orphan drugs have been approved by the Foodand Drug Administration, and human trials are under way on anadditional 133.   The theory of the act is that certain diseases havepopulations so small the usual market incentives are notenough to stimulate investment. The act provides grants, taxcredits and seven years of market exclusivity to any companywilling to make the investment.</LP><TEXT>   In most cases, companies investing in orphan drugs havemade at most a modest profit. In those instances, the act hasworked as intended. But at hearings held by our subcommittee,witnesses identified two serious problems.   First, under the act, the determination as to whether adisease is rare is made close to the time that research isbegun, rather than when the drug is placed on the market. Inthe case of AIDS, which has a rapidly growing population,drug companies have known for years that the population islikely to exceed the 200,000 level in the near future. No onecan claim AIDS is an orphan disease for which we need to giveincentives to invest in this research. Therefore, we shouldallow the FDA to look to the future in deciding whether the200,000 threshold has been surpassed, for AIDS or any similardisease. An amendment to do this should bring down the priceof certain AIDS drugs.   The second problem is trickier. In three instances, theprofit potential was so clear from the beginning that two ormore companies were eager to invest. In one case, sales willreach $200 million in 1991, virtually all underwritten by thefederal government, and the other two products havecomparably large markets. These figures translate to veryhigh prices to patients.   If our only goal were research, then we would not beconcerned about the fact that the Orphan Drug Act creates aseven-year monopoly for these blockbuster products. But wealso must be concerned about drug prices. The societal valueof innovative drugs is diminished drastically when they costmore than most people can pay. Patent laws are in place toprotect drug innovators; a law for rare diseases should notbe distorted to give companies a windfall at the expense ofpatients.   The act should continue to apply with full force to theorphan drugs that have only one sponsor. It would continue tostimulate research on drugs for rare diseases. But where adrug's profit potential is so great that it has many parentscompeting to invest in its future, it is no orphan and shouldnot have protection against price competition.   Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D., Calif.)   Washington   ---   In a strained effort to deify profit you performed a gravedisservice to millions of sufferers from rare diseases. Youstated that the organization I represent, the NationalOrganization for Rare Disorders, is &quot;delighted with the lawas it is.&quot; This implies we oppose the Waxman amendment, butthis is incorrect. Our directors and voluntary health agencymembers voted unanimously to support the amendment.   You ignored the fact that while certain drug firms havemade a rich profit as a result of the law, some of thatprofit has been at the expense of victims of certain rarediseases who are forced to pay up to $30,000 a year for thedrugs.   The intent of the law is to give incentives to companiesto develop &quot;drugs of little commercial value&quot; for smallpopulations of sufferers who might otherwise be ignored. Inthe main, it has worked very well. But in some cases, four ormore companies simultaneously developed the same drug (hardlyindicating a lack of commercial motivation), and the first topush its application across the FDA finish line has beengranted a monopoly while patients have had to paymonopolistic prices.   The Waxman amendment would close such unintended loopholeswhile preserving all major incentives and thus would make avery good law even better.   Abbey S. Meyers   Executive Director   National Organization for Rare Disorders   New Fairfield, Conn.   ---   You imply that research incentives are threatened by Rep.Waxman's proposal to permit shared exclusivity where morethan one company has simultaneously developed an orphanproduct. It is our belief at Memorial Sloan-Kettering thatthe incentive to undertake research projects is much morethreatened by the prospect of being absolutely foreclosedfrom the market simply because another company obtains firstapproval from the FDA, possibly for reasons unrelated to thequality of either the product or the supporting data.   In the case of aerosol pentamidine, MemorialSloan-Kettering researchers were the first to explore its useas a prophylaxis for AIDS-related pneumonia and were ahead ofthe competition at virtually every juncture. However, theFDA, employing a standard far less stringent than that whichwas required relative to Memorial's application, approved thecompetitor's application first. As a result, under thecurrent terms of the Orphan Drug Act, the competitor has beenallowed seven years' exclusivity through 1996.   The net effect of the FDA's approving orphan-drug statusto the competitor is that AIDS patients who are at high riskfor pneumonia and the American public will now bear anunnecessary increased cost for the drug and its deliverysystem.   In these times of constricting research resources, manyinstitutions like Memorial Sloan-Kettering will certainlygive serious consideration to limiting institutionalresources for the support of research programs where thelikelihood of transfer of research results to patentapplication is likely to be limited because of uncertaintiesof the application of the law.   The Orphan Drug Act can be improved greatly by correctingits few shortcomings. The Waxman amendment goes a greatdistance in addressing these.   James S. Quirk   Senior Vice President   Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center   New York   ---   You were right on target. We are dismayed that Congresswould consider breaking its covenant with pharmaceuticalpioneers such as AMGEN, which did the crucial research tocreate orphan drugs that now provide hope to thousandssuffering from rare diseases.   As you pointed out, debate now centers on the fact thatAMGEN and other companies are supposedly reaping undeserved&quot;profits&quot; under the marketing-exclusivity provisions of theOrphan Drug Act. Let me clarify AMGEN's situation.   AMGEN spent eight years and more than $100 million todevelop the genetically engineered drug Epogen (Epoetin alfa)to treat anemia in kidney-dialysis patients. Epogen is theonly drug currently available to treat this type of anemiaand is also AMGEN'S only product on the market. Yet for thefirst time this quarter, AMGEN will recover the remainder ofits prior losses and realize a profit, despite the enormousinvestment of private capital and scientific effort wedevoted to developing Epogen. The expectation of orphan-drugexclusivity was critical to our ability to attract the kindof investment needed to pursue this breakthrough therapy, andour investors should be allowed to receive a reasonablereturn.   Finally, to argue that the Orphan Drug Act automaticallycreates monopolies is not accurate. The exclusivity provisiongranted any one company applies only to its use to treat aspecific condition and not to the drug itself. For example,while AMGEN has an exclusive FDA orphan-drug license for theuse of Epogen for treating chronic renal failure anemia, ourcompetitors could obtain FDA licenses for the use of Epogenon patients with cancer, AIDS or rheumatoid arthritis.   The existing orphan-drug law encourages pioneers such asAMGEN to develop drugs for rare diseases and discouragescopycat development of the same drug for the same rarediseases. Rep. Waxman's bill would reverse these incentives,encouraging copycat companies and discouraging pioneers.Which is in the best interest of patients?   Gordon M. Binder   Chief Executive Officer   AMGEN   Thousand Oaks, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>