<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900809-0022</DOCNO><DOCID>900809-0022.</DOCID><HL>   Desert Drama:   U.S., Iraq Square Off   As GIs Move Into Gulf,   Kuwait Is `Annexed'   ---   Bush Demands a Rollback,   Warns Saddam Hussein   Not to Use Chemical Arms   ---   Assessing Baghdad's Army   ----   By John J. Fialka and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/09/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- Barely two months ago, some of the U.S.Army's top brass assembled at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., to hearthe result of a secret war game. The powerful army of&quot;Shattland&quot; had plunged into the rich oil fields of&quot;Audialand.&quot;   Based on the maps used in the game, Shattland was Iraq.Audialand was Saudi Arabia. And the outcome was nightmarish:The U.S. could not overpower the enemy without wiping outproduction facilities at the world's biggest oil fields,sending the world economy into a tailspin for many monthsthereafter.</LP><TEXT>   Now, the U.S. faces the danger of fantasy becomingreality, and the next 48 hours pose the most vulnerableperiod. With the U.S. just beginning to convey a massivemilitary force to the Persian Gulf region, Iraqi ruler SaddamHussein has a window of opportunity of about that much timeto freely deploy his formidable army, possibly unleash hisvast chemical-weapons stockpile and test whether the West'sships really intend to blockade his oil shipments.   &quot;If Saddam is going to move militarily, he's going to doit very soon,&quot; says William Cohen of Maine, the rankingRepublican on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.&quot;He won't want to wait until we have everybody in placethere.&quot;   One flashpoint may come as soon as today, when anIraqi-owned supertanker attempts to take on Iraqi oil fromthe Saudi oil terminal at Yanbu in the Red Sea. According toindustry and other sources, the Iraqis may be using the shipto force a confrontation with a powerful U.S. naval forcesituated near the port. The U.S. hasn't formally declared ablockade, but U.S. forces are unlikely to simply let theIraqi ship pass.   Both Iraq and the U.S. yesterday appeared to move closerto confrontation in their public statements. Iraq declaredthat it had formally annexed Kuwait, dropping all pretensethat it intended to pull out of the nation it invaded lastThursday. Referring to the buildup of Western forces in theregion, Iraq said, &quot;We will fight your criminal force. . . .The blood of our martyrs will burn you.&quot;   President Bush, saying that &quot;a line has been drawn in thesand,&quot; vowed in a televised address that he wouldn't toleratethe Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. The president stressed thatU.S. troops are intended to defend the Saudi kingdom, not todrive Iraq out of Kuwait.   The president said he hopes to free Kuwait througheconomic pressure on Saddam Hussein, which continued to mountas the world's oil-consuming nations -- and, just asimportantly, many of its leading oil producers -- joinedtogether in a campaign to cut off Iraqi oil without causingglobal economic dislocation.   The Arab world continued trying to sort out its responseto the action in the Middle East. Egyptian President HosniMubarak called for an emergency meeting in Cairo today atwhich Arab leaders will agonize over whether to supportputting a multinational army in the path of Saddam Hussein.King Hussein of Jordan, who had been supportive of Iraq, saidhe would refuse to recognize the official annexation thatSaddam Hussein announced yesterday in Bagdhad.   The most pressing question on the minds of many now is:Just how tough is Iraq? Its army, battle-trained and wieldingthe most modern Soviet-made tanks and air-defense weapons,has already impressed U.S. experts with the skill andefficiency of its 2 a.m. blitzkrieg attack on Kuwait lastThursday.   Its airpower is no match for the U.S. But on the ground,where any confrontation would be likely to matter most in theopening scenes, the Iraqi army is far from the rag-tagassemblage it was 10 years ago when it first attacked Iran.   The prospect of facing hundreds of thousands of soldiersin the desert is daunting enough for the U.S., but Iraq'schemical arsenal adds an additional dimension to the threat.The Iraqis have moved surface-to-surface Scud missiles intoKuwait -- missiles that can carry chemical warheads.President Bush yesterday singled out chemical weapons. Theiruse, he said, &quot;would be intolerable.&quot; He added: &quot;It would bedealt with very, very severely.&quot;   The potential U.S. response to a chemical weapons attack,according to U.S. officials, could include raids from B-52'snow positioned on Diego Garcia, a base in the Indian Ocean.Their most likely aim would be to pulverize Iraq's mostsensitive weapons facilities, including those that producechemical weapons and those that are experimenting withmissiles and nuclear and biological weapons. Another possiblebombing target, of course, might be Saddam Hussein himself.   It remained unclear precisely what force the U.S. isdispatching to meet the 100,000 or more heavily-armored Iraqitroops massed on Kuwait's border. President Bush, Secretaryof Defense Richard Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, thechairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, refused to disclosethe size of the force they have committed. &quot;We will deployadequate forces for the mission,&quot; said Gen. Powell.   Privately, U.S. officials say the estimates for theeventual U.S. commitment of troops, which began landing atSaudi bases yesterday afternoon, go as high as 40,000, andwould include a carefully-tailored mix of light and armoredunits that may have to remain there for weeks or months. Theduration of the U.S. commitment will, the officials added,depend on Iraq's response.   As time passes without an Iraqi military move, the U.S.position grows stronger, military experts say. &quot;Every hourthat goes by without an attack now is good,&quot; said Paul K.Davis, director of strategy assessment at the Rand Corp. inSanta Monica, Calif. &quot;It indicates that he {Saddam Hussein}is probably facing up to the fact that things have not gonehis way in the world.&quot;   Mr. Davis, who previously worked on Middle East deploymentscenarios in the Pentagon, expects that it will take &quot;days,not hours&quot; for the U.S. soldiers and airmen arriving toacclimate themselves to the hot desert arena where they mayhave to fight.   The use of chemical weapons by Iraq would make the battleconditions all the more intolerable -- necessitating gasmasks and rubberized suits in an area where temperaturesregularly exceed 100 degrees. &quot;The really appalling thing forAmerican forces on the ground is the fact of being forcedinto anti-chemical warfare gear which will be quiteintolerable in the desert,&quot; said Elizabeth Sigmund, a Britishchemical-weapon expert. &quot;Let's hope they don't have to.&quot;   By her measure, Iraq has stockpiled thousands of tons ofmustard gas, a World War I chemical that burns the skin. Itmay also have hundreds of tons of Sarin, a nerve gasdeveloped from insecticides by the Germans in World War II.One drop on the skin can cause convulsions and sudden death.   Among Mr. Bush's advisors, though, Gen. Powell expressedthe most confidence about the outcome. He pointed out thatthe 3,000 paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne Division thatwere now encamped in the desert, primarily to guard U.S.fighter aircraft, have been trained to fight in heavy,charcoal-impregnated chemical weapons gear in the deserts ofCalifornia.   Even the mere threat of chemical weapons may have apowerful psychological effect on troops and civilians --especially technicians in the Saudi oil fields, who areparticularly important now that the Saudis are being countedon to increase oil output significantly.   But no one can predict the mind of Saddam Hussein. Insteadof ordering his tanks, troops and chemical warheads intoSaudi Arabia, he has the opportunity to create an incidenttoday, using the supertanker that arrived at the Saudi portof Yanbu yesterday.   The port sits at the end of one of the major pipelinesfrom Iraq's oil fields. If, as some industry and otherofficials believe, the captain demands that the Saudis honortheir contractual commitment to fill the tanker, the U.S.will have to decide whether to stop the giant ship, using theawesome combat power of the nearby carrier Eisenhower and itstwelve escort ships.   While pondering his water options, Saddam Hussein mustweigh his major vulnerability to attacks from the air. Morethan 100 U.S. aircraft, largely F-15s coming from Langley AirForce Base in Virginia, have already arrived to augment thetwo carriers and their 80 warplanes each.   Geoffrey Kemp, a former National Security Council MiddleEast specialist now at the Carnegie Endowment forInternational Peace, says that despite its hard-fought yearsup against Iran, the Iraqi army has never before beenconfronted with that kind of air power. Indeed, most ofIran's jet fighters were either destroyed in the early daysof the war or were grounded for lack of spare parts.   &quot;I think we're overestimating the ease with which he canroll into Saudi Arabia,&quot; Mr. Kemp said.   Although the sudden U.S. moves to Saudi Arabia may seemad-hoc, they draw on the experience of many war games, suchas the one staged in Leavenworth last June by the ArmyMateriel Command. The Army's Saudi games began more than tenyears ago, when U.S. and Saudi officials began to worry thatSoviet armored forces could quickly sweep down through Iranor Iraq and take the oil fields. U.S. policy assumed thenthat the Saudis would not give U.S. forces basing rights, atleast not in the initial stages of a conflict.   The real-life scenario began Saturday when, according toMr. Cheney, the White House began planning to send him toSaudi Arabia. The following afternoon, he and Robert Gates,the president's deputy advisor for national security; PaulWolfowitz, Mr. Cheney's top policy aide; and Gen. H. NormanSchwarzkopf, soon to become overall commander of the growingnucleus of U.S. forces, were aloft.   In Jeddah, after two hours of discussion, King Fahd, theSaudi ruler, gave his approval to the military options theU.S. officials presented. As Mr. Cheney put it, the Arableaders agreed that Saddam Hussein's menacing behavior&quot;represented a qualitative shift in the rules of behavior&quot; inthe Middle East.   After the Sunday meeting, Mr. Cheney immediately calledPresident Bush and the president authorized him to give theorders to the Joint Chiefs to set their plans in motion,assigning specific U.S. units. The orders were issued Mondayevening, and the first U.S. unit to move -- believed to bethe command staff of Gen. Schwarzkopf's Central Command atTampa, Fla. -- took off at 7:30 a.m. EDT Tuesday.   By midnight, paratroopers of the Ready Brigade of the 82ndAirborne Division, the nation's most often-alerted unit, werelining up at Pope Air Force Base in Fayetteville, N.C., totake their places on the hard, nylon-webbing seats in thetransports that would carry them and their hastily-assembledgear on the long trip across the Atlantic.   Meanwhile, flight after flight of F-15's was taking offfrom Langley Air Force Base heading east, seeking the line ofairborne tankers that were hovering, mid-ocean, to refuelthem. What military planners call the &quot;aluminum bridge&quot;across the Atlantic was now in operation.   Hundreds of Air Force reservists -- men and women withpracticed skills in the art of airlifts -- were moving acrossthe U.S. to help prepare other units. Army reservistsprepared mechanized infantry units, which will likely useeight fast &quot;roll on roll off&quot; ships to carry them across theAtlantic and through the Suez Canal.   In the Indian Ocean, the Navy was moving specialpre-positioned ships toward the Gulf from their base at DiegoGarcia. They are designed to supply Marine forces, which canbe flown rapidly from U.S. bases to &quot;marry up&quot; with theirequipment at points where the ships arrive. Indeed, accordingto the Associated Press, hundreds of marines had alreadyappeared last night near Khafji, an oil-terminal city nearthe Saudi border with Kuwait where the Japanese-owned ArabianOil Co. operates. That may indicate that the job ofprotecting the oil fields belongs to the Marines.   Gen. Powell dismissed concerns that the early arrivalsmight face the greatest danger, saying that fighters andattack aircraft from the carrier Independence, believed to bein the Gulf of Oman, were close enough to the Saudi shore toprovide air cover to the arriving troops. The Eisenhower,from its position in the Red Sea, can also hit Iraq. Soon athird carrier task force, led by the Saratoga, will arrive inthe Eastern Mediterreanean, putting it within lethal range.That group includes the battleship Wisconsin, carrying cruisemissiles that can be aimed precisely toward Iraqi targets.   Each carrier hauls a kind of mini-Air Force, includingradar search planes and planes specially equipped to jamenemy communications and radars, along with a powerfulassemblage of bombers and fighters. The planes use special&quot;buddy stores,&quot; or refueling kits that would allow them toreach their targets in the area -- generally more than 600miles, or a little more than an hour's flying time, away --and return safely.   Summing up his views of the potential enemy, Gen. Powellsaid, &quot;We view them as a capable military force. But they'renot invincible and they're not ten feet tall.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>