<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910326-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>910326-0059.</DOCID><HL>   Help the Iraqi Resistance   ----   By Laurie Mylroie</HL><DATE>03/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   Every major city in the Shiite south of Iraq has risen inrevolt since the end of the Gulf War -- Karbala, Najaf,Hilla, Diwaniyah, Nasiriyah on the Eurphrates; Kut, Alial-Gharbi, Ali al-Sharqi, Amara on the Tigris, and Basra. Thethree-week-old revolt has turned into a see-saw battle, withthe same ground frequently changing hands. Government troopsare using heavy equipment against the rebel population. &quot;Somany had been killed that their bodies were stacked up likefirewood,&quot; refugees from Basra have testified.   Reports that government troops are using napalm againstcivilians have been confirmed by the director general of theWorld Health Organization. The bodies of rebels are hung fromthe barrels of Republican Guard tanks, while famine andepidemic threaten the country.</LP><TEXT>   This slaughter is proceeding under the eyes of half amillion American troops. The U.S. Air Force commandsunchallenged superiority of the skies. Any policy premised onSaddam Hussein's suppressing the rebels implicates the U.S.passively in Saddam's massacres.   Washington long ago limited its ability to deal with anydevelopment in Iraq except a coup against Saddam Hussein fromwithin the ruling elite. Administration officials are barredfrom contact with all elements of the diverse group calledthe Iraqi opposition, including Kurds, Shiites, liberaldemocrats -- everyone. This ban exists because Washingtonexpected the institutions of the regime to hold and wasapprehensive about involving itself in Iraq's internalpolitics when it believed the Baathists to be the surewinners in any case. So, in the middle of the biggest revoltin Iraq's modern history, American policymakers are not eventalking to the Baathist regime's opponents, although allother major members of the coalition speak to them.   The Kurds are the fourth-largest ethnic group in theMiddle East and constitute 20% of Iraq's population. They nowcontrol most of the north, including the oil fields. That ismore territory than they ever held in their long revoltagainst Baghdad, a revolt that goes back to the 1920s, whenthe victorious allies in World War I reneged on promises ofautonomy for the Kurds.   The Shiites are 55% of Iraq's population. Together withthe Kurds, they constitute 75% of the country's population.The Shiite revolt began spontaneously, driven by hatred ofSaddam Hussein and the Baathist regime. Emboldened by theproximity of the American army and grateful to the U.S. forhaving dealt such a blow to the regime, they initiallyexpressed appreciation for their presumed liberators. One mannamed his newborn son &quot;Mr. Bush.&quot; A woman, with very limitedEnglish, explained to a Western reporter &quot;Saddam, no. Bush,yes.&quot;   But Washington showed little interest in the Iraqipopulation. As Saddam Hussein's forces began to suppress therevolt, Washington had relatively little to say. The U.S. waseven slow to arrange humanitarian relief to refugees in itszone of control. Two thousand Iraqis live in the territoryunder American occupation. Article 55 of the Fourth GenevaConvention obliges an occupying power to provide food andmedical care to civilians living under its control. TheAmerican colonel who said, &quot;We are not in the business ofmassive humanitarian assistance,&quot; was mistaken.   Last week Saddam Hussein's troops seized Shiite Islam'ssenior religious figure, the 94-year old Ayatollah Abul QasemKhoi and dragged him off to Baghdad, where he was paraded onIraqi television. It was a profound insult to religioussensibilities. Although he was returned to Najaf, the man isnow hostage to the regime, denied permission to leave thecountry, his life at risk.   Ten days before his detention, the New York office ofAyatollah Khoi addressed a plea for help to the U.S. &quot;Mr.President, the people of Iraq were urged to rise up againsttheir leader. They have done so. . . . . A tragedy is in themaking. Would you as the leader of the allied forces let ithappen?&quot;   Ayatollah Khoi is no fundamentalist. He was a foe ofKhomeini's and represents the quietest strain in Shiitethought, which considers all politics corrupt, and thereforeto be shunned. (That is why Ayatollah Khoi would never appearvoluntarily in Saddam's palace.) However, his office did notreceive even the courtesy of a reply from the U.S.government.   The U.S. could have won significant good will. It couldhave, for example, responded to the ayatollah's request bythreatening to retaliate against Saddam's forces for anyfurther damage to the Shiite holy shrines, which had alreadycome under government fire. The U.S. would then have been inthe position of defending Shiite Islam's holy sites at therequest of Shiism's pre-eminent religious authority, not abad position for a country so often accused of defiling theIslamic holy places. Even now, Washington could demand thatAyatollah Khoi be allowed to travel.   In contrast to American aloofness, Tehran was quick toexpress sympathy and political support for Iraq's Shiites andto provide humanitarian aid to the refugees that crossed intoIranian territory. Yet Iran's support for Iraq's Shiites waslimited at first -- Tehran heeded American warnings againstinvolvement and it did not want to jeopardize newlyre-established diplomatic relations with Riyadh and Cairo.   But as the atrocities mount, it grows difficult for Tehranto stay out. Iranians are in an uproar over the abuse ofAyatollah Khoi. A prominent Iranian cleric normally distantfrom the Tehran regime, Ayatollah Muhammad Reza MusaviGulpaykani, has condemned the attacks on the Shiite shrines,and has issued a call to all Muslims to defend them.   The revolt in the south continues. The best Saddam canhope for is to reassert military control over the cities andtowns. Even then, a guerrilla war is likely to continue. IfKuwait remains politically unstable, torn between thegovernment and an opposition moved by Iraq's cruel occupationto demand full political rights, the turmoil in southern Iraqmay compound civil unrest in Kuwait.   When Saddam takes his troops from the south to fight therebellion in the north, the southern revolt may flare up withrenewed ferocity. As time passes and Tehran remains the onlyoutside power to show sympathy and provide support, the IraqiShiites are likely to become fixedly pro-Iranian. The U.S.may find it hard to keep Tehran out of the fray. All Tehranhas to do is allow free passage across the border to Iraqiexiles in Iran. If Iraq's Shiites were to succeed under thesecircumstances, the Shiite entity in southern Iraq would bedominated by Iran.   That is the nightmare scenario for the U.S., Europe, theGulf Arabs and the Soviet Union. But if the nightmare turnsreal, it is partly because the outside powers are banking ona dubious policy -- that Saddam will repress the rebels andthat his army will then turn on him.   It is time to end the slaughter in Iraq. The UnitedNations Security Council should condemn the massacre. Evenmore, it should declare explicitly that the removal of SaddamHussein's regime is a goal of the allied coalition. Whatright does Saddam have to rule his country? He has committedaggression against five states -- Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,Bahrain (the Scuds missed) and Israel -- and he isdemonstrably despised by his own people.   The war crimes resolution Margaret Thatcher sought tobring before the U.N. Security Council last fall could bereintroduced. There was sufficient reason for the resolutionthen, and there is more now.   Since the U.N. does not aim to replace one Saddam withanother, it could enunciate neutral principles for any newauthority in Iraq -- such as constitutional government and aU.N. role in monitoring human rights violations andelections. If the rebel forces accept those principles, thenthe allied coalition could provide them air support, andbring the slaughter to a quick end. This would be theprincipled course, as well as the most practical guaranteeagainst festering instability in Iraq.   ---   Miss Mylroie is a fellow at the Washington Institute forNear East Policy.</TEXT></DOC>