<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910523-0053</DOCNO><DOCID>910523-0053.</DOCID><HL>   Bank Measure   On Branches   Clears Panel   ---   But Amendment Is Adopted   Requiring Banks to Meet   Investment Standards   ----   By Kenneth H. Bacon   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A2</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS (SAL)</IN><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- A Bush administration proposal to allowbanks to branch nationwide cleared a House bankingsubcommittee, marking a big step toward removing a54-year-old barrier to cross-country banking networks.   However, the Financial Institutions Subcommittee alsoadopted an amendment that would prevent banks from branchingacross state lines or affiliating with securities orinsurance firms unless they meet certain community-investmentstandards. The amendment, from Rep. Joseph Kennedy (D.,Mass.), passed by a one-vote margin over opposition from theTreasury Department.</LP><TEXT>   The move to allow nationwide branching in three years is akey element in the administration's plan to modernize thebanking system. The change would lead to consolidation of thenation's 12,300 banks -- a prospect that delights proponentsand worries opponents.   Although opponents to nationwide branching are certain tokeep fighting the administration bill as it proceeds throughthe legislative process, many analysts believe thatsignificant liberalization of the 1927 McFadden Act, whichprohibits branching across state lines, is a likely outcomeof the current effort to rewrite the nation's banking laws.   Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady has promoted nationwidebranching as a way to boost the efficiency and profitabilityof the banking system. A study by the management consultingfirm McKinsey andamp; Co. estimates that the change could savebanks $10 billion a year in lower operating, regulatory andadministrative costs. In 1990, a poor year for banks,commercial bank profits totaled $16.6 billion, according tothe Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.   But the measure's opponents -- a group that includescommunity bankers, consumer groups, farm and rural interests,and state and local officials -- fear that the change willlead to a consolidation of financial power and an erosion ofstate control over banks that has characterized Americanfinance since colonial times.   These groups lost an effort to short-circuit the Treasuryproposal. The subcommittee voted 24-12 to defeat a proposalby Rep. Bruce Vento (D., Minn.) to make interstate branchingsubject to state action. Rep. Vento said his amendment would&quot;prevent the rapid merger of institution after institution&quot;and preserve significant state authority over bank expansion.But opponents said the Vento amendment would gut theadministration bill. &quot;This is a killer amendment,&quot; said Rep.Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.). &quot;If this amendment passes, thereis no interstate branching.&quot;   The combination of interstate branching and bankaffiliation with securities firms, which the panel clearedTuesday, would change the financial structure of America byallowing the creation of nationwide financial-services firmsthat can offer a wide range of services around the country.   The Treasury plan also would repeal restrictions in the1956 Douglas Amendment that prevent bank holding companiesfrom acquiring banks outside their home states withoutapproval from the state of the acquired bank. Most states doallow interstate acquisitions to some degree. But operatingseparate bank subsidiaries in various states, each of whichhas its own laws, isn't as efficient as operating a unifiedbranch system, most big banks say.   BankAmerica Corp., which has eight banks with 1,200branches in Western states, estimates that it could save $50million a year by melding its branches into a unified system.Bank analysts assume that large banks, such as BankAmerica,Citibank, NCNB Corp. and Banc One Corp. will acquire otherbanks to establish nationwide systems.   Some committee members fear that big banks will usenationwide networks to siphon deposits out of rural areas inorder to finance lending elsewhere. The Kennedy amendment isdesigned to prevent this by requiring banks to show that theyhave satisfactory records under the Community ReinvestmentAct before they can acquire banks across state lines orcombine with securities firms. The act requires regulators togauge whether banks are meeting local credit needs forhousing, small business, farms and economic development.   Rep. Doug Barnard (D., Ga.) called the Kennedy proposal&quot;an overkill amendment that would distort bankconsolidations.&quot; He and others complained that it might allowcommunity groups to hold up bank consolidations whilenegotiating for more local lending. But the amendmentsqueaked through with an 18-17 vote. Bankers and the Treasuryhope to water down the amendment as the bill works its waythrough Congress. They're likely to get a more sympatheticresponse in the Senate than in the House.   In other actions, the panel, after a lengthy debate,decided to postpone consideration of the administration'sproposal to restructure the bank regulatory structure.Instead, it appointed a task force under the chairmanship ofRep. Barnard to make a recommendation on regulatoryreorganization. Although there was virtually no support forthe administration's plan, the panel couldn't agree on analternative.   The administration proposed to place all regulatoryauthority over federally chartered banks, thrifts and theirholding companies in a new Treasury agency. The FederalReserve Board would end up regulating some 8,000state-chartered banks, and the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorp. would be stripped of most of its current regulatoryauthority. Both the Fed and the FDIC oppose theadministration proposal, which appears destined to gonowhere.   The Fed currently regulates slightly more than 1,000 statebanks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. Most ofthese are small, although a few, such as Morgan GuarantyTrust Co. and Bankers Trust Co., are among the largest in thecountry. However, the Fed also regulates bank holdingcompanies, which gives it broad authority over the nation'slargest banking organizations. Under the Treasury plan, theFed would lose most of this power.   In a letter to panel members, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspansaid the Treasury proposal would &quot;weaken our monetary policycapacity by severing our supervisory ties to many of thenation's largest banking organizations.&quot; Fed officials havesaid they could accept a streamlining proposal that givesthem control over the nation's 50 largest bankingorganizations.   In addition, the subcommittee adopted an amendment by itschairman, Rep. Frank Annunzio (D., Ill.), to strike from theadministration proposal a provision that would limit thepremiums banks pay for federal deposit insurance to 30 centsfor each $100 of domestic deposits. There is currently noceiling on the deposit insurance premium, which will rise to23 cents from 19.5 cents on July 1. Banks want a limit, butMr. Annunzio argued that a ceiling could make it difficultfor the Bank Insurance Fund, which is shrinking as banksfail, to meet its needs without taxpayer support.</TEXT></DOC>