<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900808-0078</DOCNO><DOCID>900808-0078.</DOCID><HL>   Boosting Soviet Democracy From the Bottom Up   ----   Ilya Saslavski</HL><DATE>08/08/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   As the entire world knows, the Soviet Union now hasperestroika, democracy, and, of course, the world's mostpopular political leader, who started it all -- MikhailGorbachev. About the reforms he launched five years ago,there can be no disagreement. It is an indisputable fact thatbefore we lived in one kind of society, and now we are tryingto create another. Only one question remains: Are we creatinga democracy, or is it something else?   The whole world believes it is a democracy. And indeed, wehave chosen a Parliament, and all sorts of people are arguingthere, expressing a wide variety of opinions, voting onvarious proposals, passing resolutions by a majority ofvotes.</LP><TEXT>   But we should ask ourselves a question. How was thismajority formed? It is well known that during the 1989elections to the Congress of People's Deputies, the winningcandidates in some districts ran unopposed. It is also wellknown that one-third of the deputies were chosen by theexecutive bodies of public organizations. Finally, in 1989there were special pre-election meetings where a few hundredpeople, chosen in a rather arbitrary way and certainly notrepresenting the opinions of all the voters in the district,decided which candidates should stay on the list and whichshould be stricken from it.   In many districts where there were two or more candidates,they all represented one platform, that of the CommunistParty. In other words, the only choice available was betweenpersonalities, not ideas. Even in districts where there was acompetition of ideas, the candidates who followed the CentralCommittee line enjoyed enormous advantages. Such &quot;correct&quot;candidates were supplied with brigades of campaigners andcopying machines, and were given access to the press.   For all these reasons, the debates between the minorityand the majority at the sessions of the Congress of People'sDeputies and the Supreme Soviet are not in the same categoryas the traditional debates in Western parliamentary systemsbetween a democratically elected majority and ademocratically elected minority. It would be more accurate,in the Soviet case, to speak of debates between anundemocratically elected majority and a democraticallyelected minority.   The gap between the people and its allegedly democraticParliament leads to difficult social conflicts, growingtensions and, as we say these days, to the rocking of analready unstable boat. Popular discontent with the contentand pace of decisions by the country's legislative body isexpressed through rallies, demonstrations, and strikes -- notto mention hunger strikes, unauthorized takeovers ofgovernment officials' summer homes, and other excesses.   All these actions, of course, are criticized by theauthorities. The strikes, we are told, undermine the economy,while rallies distract people from their jobs. Both claimsare partially true, though rallies and strikes are often theonly way the people have to force their &quot;chosen&quot;representatives to speed up economic and political reforms.And the delay of such reforms does much more harm to theeconomy than any strikes ever could.   As a result of the dissatisfaction of the majority of thepopulation with the current situation, a broad-baseddemocratic movement has emerged. In practice, the democraticmovement consists of a multitude of more or less organizedstructural components, such as popular fronts, voter'sassociations, and various cultural and educational societies.These organizations have begun forming umbrella groups calledcivic action committees.   The development of structures of a broad-based democraticmovement and the involvement of these structures in theelectoral process make it quite probable that mid-level andlower-level elected bodies will more or less accuratelyreflect the interests of the people -- that is, will be trulydemocratic. The 1990 elections have offered goodopportunities. The elections in the Baltic republics wereharbingers of democracy. There, the republics' popular frontswon by landslides. The results of the municipal elections inMoscow as a whole have also been positive, with democraticforces winning an absolute majority. There, Gavriil Popov waselected chairman of the Moscow City Council, and I was chosenchairman of the Oktyabrsky District Council. Thus, in partsof the country there is a realistic prospect of bringinggovernment under democratic control.   The existence of jurisdictions where democrats controllocal government can boost the democratic process throughoutthe Soviet Union. They can be an inspiration to otherregions; moreover, democratic local councils can activelysupport popular movements and assist the work of civic actioncommittees in neighboring nondemocratic regions.   The increase in the number of pro-democracy jurisdictionsinevitably will step up the pressure on the upper echelons ofpower. This pressure must be brought to bear not only throughstrikes, rallies and demonstrations, but also through theactions of local councils in various regions. By adoptingresolutions and pressing the central legislature, localbodies can further the cause of democratic reform. In thisway, I hope my country can navigate through narrow anddangerous straits to early elections for a genuinelydemocratic national Parliament.   ---   Mr. Saslavski represents a Moscow district in the Congressof People's Deputies. A longer version of this appears in theJournal of Democracy's summer issue.</TEXT></DOC>