<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900801-0102</DOCNO><DOCID>900801-0102.</DOCID><HL>   Financial Loss:   Big Banks Are Plagued   By a Gradual Erosion   Of Key Profit Centers   ---   Their Corporate, Auto Loans   Dwindle, and Credit Cards   Get Tougher Competition   ---   Wave of Mergers May Loom   ----   By Douglas R. Sease and Robert Guenther   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   CMB BT CCI BK ONE MNC MIDL NCB JPM H.HKS</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL SERVICES, FANNIE MAE, FREDDIE MAC (FIS)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><GV>TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   NEW YORK -- Bank bashing is big these days.   Flying squads of regulators are forcing banks to own up tobillions in questionable loans. Rating agencies aredowngrading banks' credit ratings. Investors are dumping bankstocks, driving prices to unprecedented lows against theoverall market.</LP><TEXT>   An overreaction? Hardly.   While the real-estate boom that fueled bank profits in the1980s has gone bust, the banking industry's woes run fardeeper than one of its periodic property slumps. What worriesanalysts, investors and bankers themselves is theever-bleaker long-term outlook at many banks.   &quot;The real-estate problems could last 18 months or maybetwo years,&quot; says Thomas Hanley, a bank analyst at SalomonBrothers Inc. &quot;But after that, where does the profitabilityof the industry come from? It's not a pretty picture.&quot;   The basic problem: One by one, the traditional wellspringsof bank profits are drying up. Lending to America's blue-chipcorporations, once the big banks' lucrative &quot;raison d'etre&quot;,has dwindled. The merger-and-acquisition mania, with its fatfees for lenders, has faded, leaving banks stuck with toomany loans to dangerously leveraged companies. Even boomingbusinesses such as credit cards are under siege from powerfulnew competitors. And billions of dollars in bad debts todeveloping countries still haunt many big banks.   The banking climate is &quot;as difficult as any in the historyof the global financial-services industry,&quot; says Thomas G.Labrecque, the president of Chase Manhattan Corp., parent ofthe nation's second-largest bank. Mr. Labrecque is a man whoknows. Chase celebrated his pending promotion to thechairmanship last month with a shakeup that could cost asmany as 3,000 of the bank's 41,600 employees their jobs.   But not only bank employees are at risk. The nation'sbanking system is built on confidence, and if, as seemslikely, banks' problems linger for years, that confidencewill be sorely tested. A weakened banking industry, in turn,could hurt the global competitiveness of many smaller U.S.companies, which would find borrowing more difficult.   Despite all the bad news, however, the banking industryisn't on the verge of a collapse like that of the savings andloan industry, which has left taxpayers saddled with amultibillion-dollar bailout bill. Many analysts predict thata big bank or two may fail this year or next and that thealready-skimpy profits of most big banks are likely to getskimpier. But compared with Sandamp;Ls, banks have a much largercapital cushion to absorb economic shocks, they are betterregulated and managed, and they aren't rife with the outrightfraud that undermined some Sandamp;Ls.   Although the groaning over the big banks' plight focuseson bad loans, the real problem isn't necessarily the loansmade in the past. Rather, it's the good loans that banksaren't making now. Plain-vanilla corporate lending used to bethe big banks' main business, but years ago majorcorporations began seeking cheaper financing in the debt andsecurities markets.   Now, according to Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., a top-ratedindustrial company can raise funds by selling commercialpaper, short-term IOUs, at only 7.85% to 7.95%, slightly lessthan the 7.9% to 8% that a top-rated bank would pay. Acorporation just a step down in the ratings would pay 8% to8.1%, while a similarly rated bank's cost would be 8.2% to8.3%. Add in the bank's operating costs and a profit, and itclearly will have a hard time lending to such an industrialcompany.   Faced with tough competition, big banks have had to cuttheir lending rates, and that, in turn, cuts into profits. Inthe 1980s, banks earned an anemic 7% to 12% return-on-equityon loans to large corporations, says James McCormick,president of First Manhattan Consulting Group. And despitethe efforts to trim rates, corporate lending has declinedsteadily as a percentage of total bank loans, and banks havetried to push such fee-generating services as helpingcorporations manage their cash and issuing letters of credit.But in those fields, too, they face intense competition andrazor-thin profit margins.   Only now is the damage from the erosion of banks'corporate-lending business becoming apparent, however. For awhile, the extent of the problem was obscured by the richfees and high margins that banks earned by financing the1980s merger boom. These highly leveraged transactions helpedswell banks' average returns to a more respectable 14% to18%. The low-margin corporate lending &quot;was just beingsubsidized,&quot; Mr. McCormick says.   But as a result of muscling into investment banking, thebig banks are now stuck with some of the same problems facingtheir cousins on Wall Street -- highly paid deal makers withan acute shortage of deals to make. &quot;Banks went out and puttogether these talented teams of brain surgeons, but now theyhave few patients,&quot; Mr. McCormick says.   At Bankers Trust, one of the biggest banks to adopt amerchant-banking strategy, Ralph McDonald, head of corporatefinance, acknowledges that the slack pace of new deals ishurting the bank. But he expects a quick recovery. Hebelieves that Bankers Trust can increase its Europeanbusiness by brokering some of the cross-border mergers andacquisitions that are likely as the Common Market drops tradebarriers in 1992 and Eastern Europe struggles to shape up. Inaddition, Bankers Trust, like most investment firms,anticipates hefty fees from helping U.S. companiesrestructure to lighten the enormous debt burdens stemmingfrom the merger and buy-out binge.   &quot;There's going to be a demand for brain surgeons to repairother peoples' botched operations,&quot; Mr. McDonald says.   A resurgence in deal making is especially critical toBankers Trust and J.P. Morgan andamp; Co., two big banks that lackconsumer-banking operations. For many other banks, however,consumer banking has largely offset the decline in corporatelending. But consumer banking is a highly competitive game.   In recent years, for example, banks' long-profitableauto-loan business has been losing ground to the auto makers'captive finance units, such as Ford Motor Credit Corp. andGeneral Motors Acceptance Corp. Just as in the corporate-loanfield, many banks have been hurt in auto lending because theynow have lower credit ratings than the auto makers' units andthus can't raise money as cheaply.   Auto lending has become so difficult that Marine MidlandBanks Inc., the nation's fourth-largest auto lender after thethree big captive auto-finance companies, is throwing in thetowel. Marine Midland is negotiating the sale of itsauto-finance subsidiary, which holds about $6 billion of autoloans, to Ford Motor Co.   Credit cards are the current, often-lucrative fad amongbig banks. Citicorp, the nation's largest credit-card issuer,earned $600 million in 1989 from credit cards. But asuccessful card operation requires huge investments intechnology and huge outlays for marketing; for this reason,many smaller banks have sold their credit-card portfolios tobigger banks.   Over the past five years or so, the credit-card business&quot;has become a game of economies of scale,&quot; says Robert H.Burke, general manager of Bank of New York's credit-cardoperation. &quot;In effect, you're running a factory, and the morevolume you can push through your fixed costs, the better theprofits are.&quot; Augmented by the recent purchase of a650,000-account credit-card portfolio from Houston-basedFirst City Bank, the Bank of New York's card operation hasgrown since the beginning of 1989 to $3.8 billion inoutstanding charges from $2.6 billion.   Moreover, big new credit-card players, such as AmericanTelephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co., aretaking on the banks. In just four months, ATandamp;T has signed upmore than a million Visa and MasterCard accounts with itsoffer of no-fee cards and discount long-distance phone calls.Bankers profess no great concern about ATandamp;T's entry into thefield, but some banks are challenging it in court. And withina few weeks, Citicorp countered by offering cheap credit-cardcalls through MCI Communications Corp.   Through all this, the increase in problem loans continuesto plague banks. Witness how some premier banks scrambled tobail out Donald Trump after he failed to meet debt payments;the banks had already lent the real-estate developer hundredsof millions of dollars without requiring any collateral.Real-estate problems continue to mount in New England and NewYork, and now the highflying California real-estate market islosing altitude.   &quot;It's very difficult at this stage of the cycle tounderstand what the losses will be to the banks,&quot; says JudahS. Kraushaar, a bank analyst at Merrill Lynch. He notes thatin the 1970s real-estate crunch, some banks lost 30% of theprincipal of their real-estate loans -- and that was withoutan overhang of foreclosed Sandamp;L properties.   Also dragging down bank profits are the Third World loans.Eight years after the loans began going sour, U.S. banks arestill stuck with more than $40 billion of them. CiticorpChairman John Reed argues that although his bank still holdssome $8 billion of Third World loans -- the biggest one-banktotal -- the problem is, for all practical purposes, behindit.   Regulators and investors disagree. Federal regulatorsrecently demanded that banks write off 20% of the money stillowed them by Brazil. That won't hurt some big banks, such asJ.P. Morgan, that have hefty reserve coverage for the loans,but it will cut deeply into banks with less coverage --Citicorp among them.   Still lurking in the wings are an estimated $55 billion ofloans stemming from the wave of mergers, acquisitions andbuy-outs. Many of these once-glamorous leveraged deals havebeen turned by the sluggish economy into desperately shakyoperations struggling to meet debt payments.   With all the banking problems, it isn't surprising thatthe Sandamp;L crisis is never far from bank regulators' minds.Signs of trouble late last year in the once-thriving NewEngland real-estate market set the Comptroller of theCurrency, the principal regulator of nationally charteredbanks, off on a binge of so-called targeted real-estateexaminations aimed at forcing banks to identify shakyreal-estate loans. As the property slump spread beyond NewEngland, the vigor of the examinations increased.   Other agencies are getting tougher, too. With Sandamp;L fraud sorampant, the Securities and Exchange Commission recentlyrequired Ohio's Banc One Corp., a highly respected regionalbank, to put this disclaimer on the front of its prospectusfor a 10-million-share sale: &quot;The shares of common stockoffered hereby are not savings accounts, deposits or otherobligations of the bank or savings association and are notinsured by the FDIC, Bank Insurance Fund or any othergovernment agency.&quot;   The SEC says such warnings to investors will now bestandard for all bank securities issues; so will tougherreviews of offering documents. A Banc One spokesman comments,&quot;This was a very, very thorough review. They had a preparedset of questions that we had to reply to, even though manydidn't pertain to us.&quot;   As banks' financial performance has eroded, credit-ratingagencies have been merciless in downgrading bank debt. Of thenation's 50 largest banks, only one, Bank of America, hasbeen upgraded in the past six months; many more have beendowngraded. Such giants as Citicorp, Chase Manhattan andChemical Banking have lower ratings than many of theirpotential corporate customers.   Both MNC Financial Corp., the parent of the biggest bankin the Baltimore-Washington area, and Midlantic Corp., basedin Edison, N.J., have endured the ignominy of having theirdebt classified as &quot;junk.&quot; Trading in Midlantic debt &quot;isvirtually by appointment,&quot; says Ann L. Robinson, a bondanalyst at Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Securities Corp. Andbecause of investor anxiety, NCNB Corp., another largeregional bank, had to halt a $150 million private offering ofpreferred stock. That forced NCNB to drop plans to bid forMiami-based CenTrust Savings Bank.   Bankers, in turn, complain that regulators are too harshand ratings agencies too finicky. Such clampdowns force banksto increase their loan-loss reserves, write off more loansand increase their capital levels -- to the detriment ofalready-sick profit margins.   Although none of the big banks have been forced by themounting problems to alter long-range strategies, thosestrategies are being subordinated as bank managers scrambleto meet the crisis of the moment. Personnel layoffs andretreats from some lines of business have become common.Several thousand bank employees have already lost their jobs,mostly in New England and New York, and thousands more willbe let go as banks such as Chase and Manufacturers Hanoverimplement announced cost-cutting plans.   But however unpleasant cutbacks are, many bank executivesfind even more dismaying having to think about what mostexperts, and bankers themselves, agree is the real long-termsolution to the industry's ills: consolidation.   With more than 12,600 banks, the U.S. simply has far morethan it needs. Overcapacity wasn't a problem when bankinglaws gave banks virtual oligopolies in their communities. Butthe liberalization of interstate banking laws and the successof nonbank competitors such as money-market funds, securitiesfirms and finance arms of industrial companies have givensavers and borrowers new choices.   Now, bankers have to consider the once unthinkable:mergers with cross-town rivals. For instance, a merger ofChase, Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover might reduceoverhead by as much as $700 million a year. But it's a rarebank chairman who would be willing to hand over the reins toa former rival.   Nevertheless, many analysts expect that once currentreal-estate problems have bottomed out, market forces willeventually push many banks into consolidation. U.S.Comptroller of the Currency Robert Clarke predicts that thenumber of U.S. banks will drop to fewer than 11,000 in thenext year and a half.   That probably would still be too many. Although no onesuggests that the U.S. banking system should dwindle to justsix big banks, as Canada's has, thousands more institutionsprobably must vanish for banking to prosper again.</TEXT></DOC>