<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900927-0107</DOCNO><DOCID>900927-0107.</DOCID><HL>   What's It Worth?   Tackling Accounting,   SEC Pushes Changes   With Broad Impact   ---   It Wants Financial Assets   Listed at Current Value;   Banks Are First Target   ---   Danger of Disguising Trouble   ----   By Kevin G. Salwen and Robin Goldwyn Blumenthal   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ACCOUNTING (ACC)BANKS (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES (SCR)INSURANCE (INS)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)</IN><GV>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)</GV><LP>   The Securities and Exchange Commission is shaking up theworld of accounting.   The overhaul, so far, is a sedate one in a notoriouslysedate field. But it could radically change companies'financial reports, and so the way companies are evaluated byinvestors. Even small variations in accounting can translateinto big changes in stock prices, and some of thecontemplated rule changes aren't small.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;This isn't evolutionary, it's revolutionary,&quot; commentsChristopher J. Steffen, chief financial officer at HoneywellInc.   Right now, the SEC is focusing solely on debt securitiesand certain types of loans held by banks and other financialinstitutions. Next to be affected will probably be othercompanies with significant financial assets. Finally, much ofcorporate America, ranging from General Motors to a SiliconValley start-up, may feel pressure to revise the way itaccounts for assets.   Although no one is suggesting that the SEC will revampfinancial statements altogether, it wants to force companiesto go a long way toward putting up-to-date values on assetscurrently on their books at historical cost -- the originalpurchase price. It has launched a campaign in Congress andwith the accounting profession to get fast action.   &quot;If accounting standards aren't adequate to give anaccurate picture of a firm's condition, they're not doing thejob they need to do,&quot; says SEC Chairman Richard C. Breeden.   The agency's focus on accounting is another indication ofits renewed scrutiny of corporate America, and its shift awayfrom targeting Wall Street stock-trading abuses. The SECrecently adopted rules making it easier for companies to selldebt directly to large institutions and is awaitingcongressional approval to toughen enforcement againstwrongdoing by corporate officials.   Sweeping changes in corporate accounting won't comeeasily. Many companies oppose, and are lobbying against, anychange that could raise costs, skew numbers or reducereported profits. Banks especially are leery of any changethat could make their balance sheets look worse. And SECofficials themselves are wary of doing anything that mightmake U.S. companies less competitive with foreign rivals, ortrigger, through accounting advantages, foreign takeovers ofU.S. companies.   The SEC's chiefs aren't unanimous about how far they wantto go. &quot;I'd be happy just to have small changes,&quot; saysCommissioner Philip Lochner Jr., who heads the agency'saccounting project. But Mr. Breeden, who increasinglydominates the commission, seems determined to go forward withsignificant changes.   Although most of this work of revision has been going onbehind closed doors, Mr. Breeden recently went public withhis first target. Testifying before the Senate BankingCommittee, he said he wants to force banks and otherfinancial companies to alter the way they account for bondsand other securities held for investment.   Under federal law, the SEC has the mandate to determineaccounting principles for publicly traded companies. But ithas generally ceded that authority to private-sectoraccounting bodies such as the Financial Accounting StandardsBoard.   Should the SEC decide to change the rules, it has a lot ofweapons at its disposal besides just pressuring accountingbodies. For example, it has the power simply to changeaccounting rules by voting a rule proposal at an openmeeting. After a period for public comment, the commissioncould pass a final rule. Alternatively, the agency can issueinterpretative releases, telling public companies and theaccounting industry how it reads a specific rule and thatthey should abide by that reading.   Under today's standards, financial companies -- banks,thrifts and insurance concerns -- holding stacks ofinvestment securities can make their own judgments on whetherto use historical accounting or current, &quot;market&quot; standards.&quot;Financial-institution balance sheets should have the words`once upon a time' on top of them,&quot; Mr. Breeden saysscornfully. &quot;They are a statement of history.&quot; Under the SECplan, recently rejected by an industry accounting panel, onlycurrent values of a financial company's securities would belisted on the balance sheet and reflected in quarterlyprofit-and-loss statements.   Some financial concerns already are sharpening theirpencils to current accounting and stepping away fromhistorical levels. Rouse Co., a real-estate developer basedin Columbia, Md., which began the switch in 1976, shows thedifferences on the balance sheet in its annual report. Atyear-end 1989, for example, the company's assets, largelyland and buildings, totaled $4.13 billion, nearly $2 billionmore than the assets would reflect on a cost basis. (Thecompany does the same on the liabilities side of the ledger.)   &quot;Initially, it came about as a result of the SECrequesting that companies do replacement cost accounting,&quot;says David Tripp, Rouse's director of investor relations.Rather than trying to estimate what it would cost to build anew project, Rouse values its assets on what it would cost toreplace the income stream from them.   Not surprisingly, Mr. Tripp notes, the company's stock hastended to trade much closer to the value achieved by thecurrent-cost model. At the end of 1989, based on historicalcost, Rouse had shareholder equity of $52.9 million, orroughly $1.11 a share, Mr. Tripp says. But under thecurrent-value model, shareholder equity was $1.73 billion, orabout $34.80 a share. Only recently, with the real-estateslump, has the stock been trading at a deep discount tocurrent value, Mr. Tripp says.   But James W. Otto, chief financial officer of AmeritrustCorp., a Cleveland-based banking company, says marking assetsto current value &quot;would be a very significant and costlyeffort that wouldn't be useful. . . . It's an estimation ofthe liquidation value of a company that is totally irrelevantto a going concern.&quot;   Moreover, Mr. Otto adds, &quot;A majority of the assets andliabilities don't have a ready market.&quot; Therefore, he argues,&quot;some very subjective assumptions&quot; would be needed to arriveat current values for those assets and liabilities.   At the root of SEC's new zeal are lessons drawn from thethrift crisis. Mr. Breeden cites 1978 numbers that show thethrift industry with a positive net worth. But a harder look-- using current instead of historical accounting -- showsthat the industry was already ailing, with a negative networth of as much as $118 billion.   The SEC worries that the banking industry could slip intoa similar situation, with trouble disguised by accountinganomalies. Many accounting-industry officials agree. &quot;We needto get accounting changes that reflect what has happened,&quot;says Arthur R. Wyatt, a principal of Arthur Andersen and thehead of the International Accounting Standards Committee.&quot;It's real, and it should be reported.&quot;   The banking industry itself thinks that the SEC's push isoff-base. &quot;You wouldn't want anything that would causeportfolio managers to make business decisions based onaccounting rather than economic impacts,&quot; contends RogerTrupin, a Citicorp representative to the big-businessaccounting task force. And Dennis R. Beresford, FASBchairman, adds that banks ask why they should have to marktheir assets at current prices without manufacturers havingto do that with inventories.   In the past few weeks, the SEC's mission has taken on anew urgency. Accounting rule makers who pride themselves onthe stately pace of the standard-setting process are shockedby what they see as a government-inspired stampede. SECstaffers are calling up the standard setters, who areaccustomed to taking months and years to deliberate on asingle issue, and demanding results now. And in a strikingdeparture, the SEC is not only dictating the timetable butalso letting rule makers know what answers it wants.   Although the commission traditionally has relied heavilyon the private sector to write accounting standards, the FASBoften has been chided by business for taking too long to makerules and for making them too complicated. Indeed, the FASBis still working on a project, begun in 1986, on how tohandle financial instruments.   &quot;I don't think {Mr. Breeden} has to jam through&quot; morecurrent accounting standards, says Pat McConnell, a Bear,Stearns andamp; Co. managing director who heads an analysts'accounting panel. &quot;The FASB is scared to death.&quot;   Observers cite the way the SEC handled anaccounting-standards group's vote on the bank-debt question.Just minutes before the Accounting Standards ExecutiveCommittee was to debate the proposal, it was given a copy ofMr. Breeden's previously delivered Senate testimony by an SECstaffer -- a none-too-subtle reminder of the agency's stance.Then, the day of the vote, the committee got a letter fromEdmund Coulson, the SEC's chief accountant, decryingnewspaper reports that the panel planned to soften proposedtough new standards in the face of industry pressure.   Still, the committee voted to introduce standards lessrestrictive than the SEC wanted. Stepping up the pressure,Mr. Breeden and Mr. Coulson have set up a meeting with thepanel's chairman, the FASB and others next Tuesday. Althoughthe SEC isn't assured of victory, tougher standards for banksseem in the cards.   That has the rest of corporate America wondering whetherit's next. One prominent corporate treasurer, ChryslerCorp.'s Frederick Zuckerman, thinks that major companieswouldn't have much problem switching accounting of liquidassets to a current, market measure. &quot;We all know what ourassets are worth,&quot; he says. But, he adds, trying to determinethe value of, say, inventory &quot;is a bag of snakes.&quot;   John Robbins, a managing partner at accounting firmKenneth Leventhal andamp; Co., says, &quot;You can do it on debt, youcan do it on something that trades. But what's the value of awidget plant?&quot;   A major advantage of historical-cost accounting, heargues, is that value is determined by competing interests --a buyer and a seller agreeing on a price. Relying on acompany's current valuation requires appraisals. &quot;There'sonly one danger with doing an appraisal: Believing it,&quot; hesays. The wild real-estate appraisals emerging from thedevastated thrift industry have increased that anxiety.   But that hasn't stopped some companies from relying moreheavily on internal systems of current accounting. &quot;We maynot be accurate in our current cost estimates,&quot; says David G.Harmer, FMC Corp.'s comptroller, &quot;but we're a hell of a lotcloser than erroneous historical-cost basis. We know {those}are understated.&quot;   The Chicago-based industrial conglomerate could end upworking as a model for future accounting rules. It unveiled acost-based accounting system in the early 1980s, when itsmanagers wanted a better gauge of how their variousbusinesses -- defense equipment, food machinery, agriculturalchemicals, petroleum equipment -- were performing. FMC'smanagers struggled to decide where to invest resources.   As division managers worried about being held to unfairlyhigh standards, FMC set about valuing all the assets in itsunits, using appraisals where necessary. Corporate computerpeople rejiggered FMC's internal accounting so that the valueof plant and equipment could be updated by inflation indexes.(It permits financial officials to strip out current costs toget historical numbers for SEC-required data.)   &quot;It helps you focus on what your real performance is,&quot; Mr.Harmer says.   There's a bonus, too. Division managers are more likely toupdate obsolete equipment with more efficient technology ifthey know that the old equipment's value will be subtractedfrom the totals under current accounting methods. Historicalmeasures would value the old equipment at zero, encouragingexecutives to keep it.   Mr. Harmer cites a metal-fabrication press, which bendsand shapes metal. To determine the replacement cost of apress bought in 1982 for $522,000, the company would add 19%-- the change in the wholesale price index over the sevenyears -- to arrive at a replacement cost of $621,000. Sincethe company assumes that the press has a 12-year life, itthen would deduct depreciation from both numbers, putting thereplacement value at $257,000. That's still 19% higher thanwhat accounting rules force the company to show on its books.   &quot;That's our starting point,&quot; Mr. Harmer says. &quot;If managersthink the value is way off, they can challenge it.&quot;   Real-estate values are determined by appraisals every twoto three years.   Although FMC's numbers are more accurate, they also showwhy many companies oppose the plan: FMC estimates that 1989operating profit (before interest expense and taxes),reported at $347 million, would have been 10% to 15% lowerusing current-cost accounting.   For other companies, the effects would vary. Manycapital-intensive, smokestack industries, such as autos,steel or machine tools, would post sharply lower results, Mr.Harmer suggests. But the impact would be substantially lessfor high-tech companies and service concerns without a lot ofold plant and equipment.   Mr. Harmer acknowledges that the current-cost accountingis no panacea. Intangibles such as good will and trainingpose insurmountable problems; the company uses standardhistorical accounting for them.   The SEC's Mr. Lochner sees that as just one stumblingblock. &quot;What is the current value of Coca-Cola's trademarks?Your guess is as good as theirs,&quot; he says. &quot;But we all knowit's worth more than the $1 or so it's carried for on Coke'sbooks.&quot; (Actually, it's on the books at zero.)   The SEC has been down this road before. John C. Burton, aColumbia professor and former SEC chief accountant, recallsthat in 1974, when bank portfolios &quot;were very much underwater,&quot; the Accounting Standards Executive Committee wasready to shift those holdings to current prices. Mr. Burtonsays he lined up the five commissioners to vote for the plan.   Arthur Burns, then the Federal Reserve chairman, calledMr. Burton to a special meeting to discuss the plan -- onChristmas Eve. The Fed chief praised Mr. Burton, his formerstudent, as an accounting theorist. Then he informed Mr.Burton that he &quot;should advise the commissioners that theywere taking a grave risk with the economic future of the U.S.in the interest of a somewhat dubious accounting principle.&quot;   The next day, the commissioners withdrew their support forthe plan.</TEXT></DOC>