<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911122-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>911122-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Environment:   Toxic Red Tides Seem to Be on the Rise,   Increasing the Risks of Eating Shellfish   ----   By David Stipp   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/22/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><NS>ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)</NS><RE>AUSTRALIA (ASA)CALIFORNIA (CA)FAR EAST (FE)JAPAN (JA)NORTH AMERICA (NME)OREGON (ORG)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)WASHINGTON (WA)</RE><LP>   Alfonso Falon owes his life to bad cooking.   When the Galicia I, a New Bedford, Mass., fishing boat,landed some mussels last year, Mr. Falon and other crewmembers decided to eat them for supper. By the time theshellfish began boiling, though, the crew was busy catchingcod. Ninety minutes later, the mussels were as tough asrubber bands, but Mr. Falon was ravenous and ate more than adozen.</LP><TEXT>   The mussels were caught near Georges Bank, a rich fishingarea 150 miles off Massachusetts. Unknown to the Galicia'screw, state health officials had issued a warning two weeksearlier that a deadly nerve toxin had been found in thearea's shellfish.   Mr. Falon's first symptom of the paralytic shellfishpoisoning, or PSP, was numbness in his lips. Soon other crewmembers were similarly affected. Mr. Falon eventually lostall feeling below the neck, went into convulsions and passedout. Captain David Cabral, who had eaten a cheeseburger forsupper, gunned the boat toward shore for help.   Analysis showed that eating just a few of the raw musselscould have been lethal. But lengthy cooking had leached outmost of the poison, and Mr. Falon recovered.   The Galicia's crew would seem to have had little reason toworry about the mussels. Red tides, the &quot;blooms&quot; of algaethat cause such toxic episodes, were thought to occur onlynear the shore. But to many red tide experts, PSP's spread toGeorges Bank wasn't too surprising.   A world-wide &quot;epidemic&quot; of harmful algal blooms hasdeveloped during the past few years, says Theodore Smayda, aUniversity of Rhode Island oceanography professor. Blooms arecropping up in new places, and formerly nontoxic algae areturning toxic. The pattern suggests red tides are becoming a&quot;major planetary trend,&quot; like acid rain and ozone-layerthinning. Common underlying causes may be at work -- coastalpollution and possibly global warming -- he adds.   The latest U.S. outbreak is on the West Coast, where a redtide toxin called domoic acid has appeared for the first time-- first in anchovies off California and last week in razorclams off Oregon and Washington. It has apparently killedonly sea birds so far. But the outbreak &quot;is very significantand disheartening,&quot; says Sandra Shumway, a red tide expertwith the Maine Department of Marine Resources. In 1987,mussels laced with domoic acid poisoned 153 people onCanada's Prince Edward Island, leaving 10 with brain damageand killing three.   Despite such episodes, many scientists dispute that redtides have reached epidemic proportions. Better monitoring oftoxic blooms with satellites and other high technology mayaccount for much of the apparent rise in frequency, they say.Moreover, fallout from red tides may be growing more as aresult of an increase in coastal shellfish farming thanbecause of the spread of toxic algae, says Donald M.Anderson, researcher at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institutionin Massachusetts.   But researchers generally agree that red tides are on therise, at least to some extent. Some shellfish operators nowcarry mice on their boats. If the rodents keel over whenthey're injected with extracts of freshly caught mollusks,red tide toxins are probably present and the boats move on,says Patricia Tester, a red tide expert with the NationalMarine Fisheries Service in Beaufort, N.C.   Red tides are bursts of growth by different species ofalgae, or microscopic floating plants at the base of theocean food chain. They usually aren't toxic and often aren'tred -- they can be brown, yellow or colorless. The poisons intoxic red tides are transmitted to people through&quot;filter-feeding&quot; shellfish -- such as mussels, clams andoysters -- which strain nutrients from sea water andconcentrate toxins in their internal organs.   Saxitoxin, which sickened the Galicia's crew, is one ofthe most deadly poisons known. It's found in algae off thenorth Atlantic and Pacific coasts. In the Southern U.S., acommon red tide poison is brevetoxin, found in algae thatgrow in the Gulf of Mexico. Less toxic than saxitoxin, ittypically causes a nonfatal flu-like illness. But somecoastal residents are so sensitive to it that they get&quot;choky&quot; from the tiny amounts misted off waves, says RichardPierce, research director at Mote Marine Laboratory inSarasota, Fla.   Red tides have been known for centuries. But during thepast two decades, blooms have occurred with portentousregularity. In 1972, a massive red tide bloom first broughtparalytic shellfish poisoning to New England's southerncoast; PSP blooms have occurred there annually since. In1983, the Philippines' first known PSP bloom killed 21 peoplewho ate affected shellfish. In 1987, PSP brought disaster toGuatemala, killing 26. Less deadly blooms have also occurredfrequently during the past few years, including dense &quot;brown&quot;tides that have devastated Long Island's scallops.   Scientists are only beginning to puzzle out root causes.Japanese ships have apparently transported harmful algae toAustralia in ballast water, says Matt Murphy, a red tideexpert on Ireland's Sherkin Island. The water is pumped outas ships get close to port to take on cargo.   Most red tide stories are more complicated, though. In1987, for example, hundreds of dead and dying bottle-noseddolphins mysteriously washed up on the shores between NewJersey and Florida. Many had pox-like blisters, suggesting abacterial or viral culprit. Tissue analyses also showed highlevels of toxic man-made chemicals in some. But researcherswere baffled -- the widespread dying didn't fit knownpatterns of disease or chemical dumping. Meanwhile, anestimated half of the East Coast dolphins were wiped out byearly 1988.   In late 1987, 14 humpback whales beached and died on CapeCod, providing a critical clue. An analysis showed mackerelin their stomachs contained saxitoxin -- the first time redtide had been linked to the mass death of marine mammals,says Joseph Geraci, a veterinarian at the University ofGuelph in Ontario, Canada. Based on that finding, researcherseventually traced the dolphin deaths to an unprecedentedAtlantic coast outbreak of brevetoxin.   The red tide poisons had apparently weakened the animals,making them easy prey for diseases and chemicals theynormally could cope with. A contributing factor, says Dr.Geraci, could be a switch in the animals' diets to includemore fish tainted with red tide toxins. The mammals' favoredfood is growing scarce under heavy fishing-industry pressure.And numbers of some legally protected mammals, such ashumpback whales, may have risen in certain places to the&quot;carrying capacity&quot; of the habitat, perhaps causing them toexpand their dietary horizons, Dr. Geraci says.   But the most common causal thread running through the redtide story is pollution. In &quot;a good half-dozen places&quot; aroundthe world, long-term increases in the abundance of harmfulalgae have been correlated with rising levels of nutrientsfrom sewers, fertilizer runoff and other sources, says theUniversity of Rhode Island's Dr. Smayda. Woods Hole's Dr.Anderson says anti-pollution measures such as greater use of&quot;phosphate-free&quot; detergents may also contribute to red tidesby changing chemical ratios in coastal waters in ways thatfavor toxic algae.   If pollution is promoting red tides, the blooms are likelyto get much worse in coming years. The population along theU.S. coasts is expected to grow to 127 million by 2010 from80 million in 1960, greatly increasing the amount of sewageand other pollutants spewed into the sea. The percentage ofU.S. shellfish beds in which harvests are banned or limitedbecause of high levels of fecal coliform bacteria is alreadyrising fast -- to 37% in 1990 from 31% in 1985, according toa recent report by the National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration. There's &quot;an almost inexorable trend thatthreatens to destroy the harvest of wild or naturalshellfish&quot; in U.S. waters, the report concludes.</TEXT></DOC>