<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910404-0151</DOCNO><DOCID>910404-0151.</DOCID><HL>   Election 1992:   America Needs Two Political Parties Again   ----   By Edward J. Rollins</HL><DATE>04/04/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   There is a new spirit across America, built on the prideAmericans feel about the victory in the Gulf war. That spiritmay be damped by the return to business as usual, as theDemocratic-led Congress continues its battle with aRepublican president of unprecedented popularity.   My great fear as an American is if we revert back tobusiness as usual -- divided government, bickering and dailyavoidance of tough political decisions -- the voters will beturned off once again and think their vote doesn't matterbecause there isn't a dime's worth of difference between thetwo parties.</LP><TEXT>   This is hardly an academic question. A national pollconducted after the 1990 elections showed that 55% of votersbelieved it didn't matter whether a Democrat or a Republicanrepresented them in Congress. In other words, the voters havelost faith in the fundamental element of democracy --politically competitive parties offering distinctphilosophies of government.   My great fear as a partisan Republican is that my partywon't take advantage of the tremendous opportunity placed atits feet by the strong leadership of our president during theGulf war. Re-electing President Bush in 1992 without moreRepublicans in the House and Senate will doom this country toanother decade of divided direction andlowest-common-denominator solutions. The old campaign methodswon't work. Even though the Republicans won the threepresidential elections of the '80s by electoral landslides,the decade by many measures was a failure and a missedopportunity.   In 1981, the GOP had 192 of the 435 seats in the House. Itcontrolled the Senate. Surveys showed that equal numbers ofvoters identified themselves as Republicans and Democrats,unleashing speculation about a political realignment. Onedecade and a billion dollars later, the GOP is down to 167seats in the House. Once again it is a minority in theSenate, down to 44 from its 1981 height of 53 seats.   In the same decade, although Democrats have regained theSenate and expanded their domination over Congress, they canhardly take pride in their party's health. Voters haverelegated them to the sidelines of American politics --Congress -- where they can pitch bottles and debris onto theturf in hopes of tripping up the presidential quarterback butotherwise accomplish little. They have also lost nearly 20points in party identification.   Republicans, anchored by the presidency, have a philosophyof decentralization in government but centralize all theirpolitical operations in Washington and depend heavily onnational consultants whose horizons are limited by theWashington Beltway. They fail to field strong candidates orbuild strong parties at the state and local level and theyfail to convince voters it affects a president's success ifthey split their tickets and vote Democrats into Congress.Democrats, whose strength lies in congressional districts,want to centralize government but have decentralized theircampaign efforts to ensure they win in local politics.   Before we demand democratization in Kuwait City andBaghdad, let's do something about it right here at home:   -- Revive partisanship. Healthy democracy requires clearchoices between alternatives. Bipartisanship, which hassomehow achieved a status of near-sanctity in our politicallexicon, should be preserved for historically uniquecircumstances, such as war. Otherwise, it's better to havetwo parties at each other's throats as a formula forgenerating alternative solutions to pressing problems. Thatway voters will have a choice and might even get excitedabout voting.   -- Bring back platforms. Next year both parties will draftand adopt platforms, statements that should define them-theirpriorities, values and vision for the future. In 1988Republicans and Democrats stumbled through this process.   The Democrats didn't even write a national politicalplatform that year. They offered only a watered-down&quot;statement of principles&quot; because they feared fights overplatform language would drive away voters.   In 1980, the Republican platform emphasized individualfreedom and opportunity. In 1988, the emphasis shifted toeconomic growth. (Even Democrats want economic growth.)Ronald Reagan's platform didn't defend tax cuts with thecontingency of economic growth. Mr. Reagan defended thembecause he felt taxes had become confiscatory, and it was anindividual's right to keep what he earned, not government'sright to determine how much of his earnings to take. In 1988,the GOP platform passed over individual rights andopportunities in favor of macroeconomic objectives.Republicans lost the poetry that moved voters' hearts.   The future success of the GOP will depend in large part onour ability as a party to avoid the shortsighted attempts atco-opting parts of the Democratic coalition in America.   As a party, the GOP's fastest-growing ranks are under 35.The new, younger GOP will be confronted with a perplexingpolitical dichotomy. How will we balance the demands andcosts of caring for an aging population with a younger workforce already saddled with a heavy tax burden? We must makepolicies that do not lead to further divisiveness betweencompeting generations and we must find ways to keep bothyoung and old under the same tent.   In 1992, the president and his party should lay out afive-year plan of where he will take the country and how hewill solve our nation's many ills. The Democrats should takea stand on principle by writing a platform instead of adiversionary statement. They also should not duck the 1992election by putting up a weak candidate because they thinkthey can't win. If they wish to survive as a real nationalparty they need to nominate one of their best and go out andarticulate their views on where they would take America.   House and Senate candidates from both parties ought to runon their party's platform, and not duck behind the perks ofincumbency. If Democrats are going to vote against thepresident 80% to 90% of the time, they should tell voterswhy.   -- Reform election laws. Meaningful campaign reform needsto be the opposite of the dismal bills now masquerading asreforms in Congress. It's no accident that candidates forfederal office have come to rely on Washington-basedpolitical action committees and media-intensive campaigns. Wedon't need reforms that make elections easier for incumbentsor the national parties in Washington.   We do need to empower state and local parties. Federalelection law makes no provision for local party committeesthat are not organized under federal laws, and virtually noneare. Most town and county GOP committees -- the ones mostlikely to have a core of volunteer support -- are organizedunder state law. As a result, party committees that areclosest to the people are severely restricted, and in somecases forbidden, from participating in campaigns of House andSenate candidates.   GOP congressional candidates in Orange County, Calif.,perhaps the most Republican county in America, cannot usespace at the local party headquarters, or be included in anymailings or volunteer phone calls, if the bills are paid bythe local party. The same restrictions are imposed on CookCounty Illinois Democrats, the local political party that issynonymous with organizational politics.   -- Reach for the fringes. David Duke is a symbol of whyboth parties need to avoid voter alienation unless they wantthe trend toward outsider candidacies to end up creating athird party. We need debates about quotas, affirmativeaction, civil rights and race relations front and center inAmerican politics, which means in the two main parties. Ifthe two main parties refuse to speak to the politicalrealities confronting modern America, you can be certainfringe parties and fringe candidates who are less responsiblewill step into the breach.   -- Meet the future faster. Aside from campaign laws, thereare other reasons fewer Americans bother to vote or care whorepresents them in Congress. That is because what happensunder the Capitol dome is all too often irrelevant.   Take the reshaping of the family. By the century's end,fewer than one in four families will fit the archetype of twoparents living together with at least one child at home.Working mothers with children under six now account for morethan 70% of all such mothers. Issues like day care aren'tacademic to them -- they're a quality-of-life issue. Thisdemographic reality has been with us for almost half adecade. But Congress has yet to enact a child-care bill thattouches the middle class. Irrelevancy in government is a sureguarantee the voters will respond in kind.   Relevance, reform, the revival of partisanship -- thesearen't difficult prescriptions for American politics. Theymay seem obvious. But they fly in the face of Washington'ssurvival code.   That code counsels the officeholder not to take risks, tostay away from legislation that might engender enemies, toavoid competitive elections if a district can begerrymandered instead. The code counsels the incumbent tostack the campaign deck to avoid real competition in anelection, and to value self-preservation most.   We need to reinvigorate people-to-people democracy inAmerica. We need to reform our campaign laws so that thegrassroots of American politics regain their rightful placeat the center of political power. Sharpening the differencesbetween the parties is part of the process.   I hope both parties will take advantage of the newAmerican spirit to reintroduce voters to the wonders ofdemocracy and to try to convince, educate and motivate votersto choose between the party agendas. But first both partieshave to decide on their agendas. For my party, the GOP, itwill take more than a strong president and a victory in a war10,000 miles away.   ---   Mr. Rollins just stepped down as co-chairman of theNational Republican Congressional Committee. He is now acommunications consultant in Washington.</TEXT></DOC>