<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911223-0154</DOCNO><DOCID>911223-0154.</DOCID><HL>   How the Fed Subverts Its Rate Cuts   ----   By Paul L. Kasriel</HL><DATE>12/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FORECASTS andamp; ANALYSIS OF U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS (EMJ)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)U.S. ECONOMIC INDICATORS FORECASTS AND ANALYSIS (EMJ)</NS><GV>FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORP. (FDC)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   An economy that seemed to be rebounding this summer hasagain succumbed to weakness, motivating the Federal Reserve'sdramatic half a percentage point cut in the federal fundsrate on Friday. Many analysts attribute the renewed economicdifficulties to the slow growth of the broader monetaryaggregates (M2 and M3) in the second and third quarters ofthis year. They recorded their slowest rate of growth in atleast 30 years.   At first glance, this slow money growth makes no sense:How could money be growing slowly at the time when the Fedwas lowering the federal funds rate, the interest rate thatbanks charge each other for overnight loans? That rate hasbeen cut 15 times since the recession began in July 1990 andnow stands at 4%.</LP><TEXT>   The key to solving this puzzle has to do with the enormousvolume of funds spent by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.and the Resolution Trust Corp. in closing failed banks andsavings and loans. These expenditures, in combination withthe Fed's practice of targeting the federal funds rate on aday-to-day basis, moving the target level only gradually inresponse to evidence of actual economic activity, explain therecent economic weakness.   But the process of closing banks need not necessarilybring slow growth in money. There is a way for the Fed toreverse this process.   The reduction in deposits that results when the FDIC orRTC closes a bank is not immediately apparent. The depositsthat vanish are not those of the depositors in the failedbank; they are federally insured. It is, rather, the depositsof depositors in healthy banks that shrink, as the depositorswithdraw money from their accounts to buy the Treasurysecurities or to pay the taxes needed to fund the FDIC andRTC. The total amount of deposits in the banking system isreduced by the amount of money raised and spent by thedeposit insurance agencies.   This reduction in deposits, however, creates an imbalancein the banking system: Although bank deposits have fallen,reserves -- the funds held by banks at the Federal Reserve tosupport their deposits -- have not. The resulting imbalancecan be described as one of too few deposits or too manyreserves. How the Fed resolves this imbalance is crucial inwhat happens to money and future economic activity.   And the Fed is resolving it incorrectly. This mistake isthe inevitable consequence of the Fed's current way ofmanaging monetary policy. The Fed manages monetary policy bycontrolling one particular interest rate, the federal fundsrate. But this way of managing money creates severecontractionary pressures in a time of massive bank closings.Here's why:   i) Bank closings reduce the amount of deposits in thesystem but not the amount of reserves, leading to an excessof reserves.   ii) The excess of reserves depresses the federal fundsrate at which reserves are lent.   iii) The Fed thus validates contractions in the moneysupply by removing reserves in order to keep the federalfunds rate up to the level it has selected.   But there is another way. Instead of trying to prop up thefederal funds rate, the Fed could allow the federal fundsrate to fall until banks were induced to purchase enoughassets to increase deposits back to level that existed beforethe bank closings. This would eliminate the imbalance betweenthe levels of reserves and deposits. In other words, the Fedwould target the level of bank reserves, rather than thefederal funds rate.   If depositors in failed banks were not reimbursed,everyone would understand that this would have acontractionary effect on money and the economy. The reasonthat the present mass bank failures are not being perceivedthat way is because the deposits that are dwindling are notthose of depositors in failed banks, but those of depositorsin solvent banks, who are withdrawing money voluntarily tobuy Treasury securities to finance the FDIC and the RTC. Butdeposit reductions do not have to be involuntary to becontractionary.   When the public buys securities from the Fed, it does sovoluntarily -- but reserves and deposits are reduced, and theeffect on the economy is contractionary. The net effect onreserves and deposits of the closing of banks when the Fed istargeting the federal funds rate is identical to a Fed saleof securities -- it also is voluntary, and it also iscontractionary.   The federal government has spent nearly $300 billion inclosing depository institutions since the end of 1988.Expenditures were relatively low until the latter half of1989, after which they rose erratically. These risingexpenditures occurred while the Fed was dropping the fundsrate to 4% from 9.75% since the spring of 1989. The impact ofthe large volume of deposit insurance agency expenditures mayexplain Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan's statement that theeconomy is flying into a 50 m.p.h. headwind. Although the Fedhas been pushing down the monetary policy throttle, theforward thrust has been overwhelmed by the activities of theFDIC and RTC.   This explanation helps explain a number of anomalies.   First, every recession in the postwar period, save forthis one, was immediately preceded by a rising funds rate.The current recession began in 1990, more than a year afterthe funds rate had peaked, and soon after there had been asustained and substantial rise in expenditures for bankclosures.   Second, the spurt in money growth early this year, whichpreceded the economic growth of the second and thirdquarters, coincided with a decline in the volume ofclosure-related expenditures as the RTC ran low on funds.   Third, the sharp decline in money growth in the second andthird quarters, which presaged the current economic weakness,coincided with an increase in closure expenditures to recordlevels.   Fourth, the fourth quarter pick-up in M2 and M3 coincideswith yet another period in which deposit insurance agencieshave run low on funds.   In sum, the volume of expenditures associated with bankclosures appears to inversely affect money growthimmediately, and economic growth with a lag.   The banking bailout is not yet complete, of course, andthe additional spending is likely to be as great, and aserratic, as the money already spent. Congress authorized anadditional $95 billion for the bailout in last month'sbanking bill. This means that more banks will be closingsoon, exerting renewed contractionary influence on monetarypolicy.   Even in the best of times, the Fed's policy of ignoringmoney growth targets and moving the federal funds rate onlygradually in response to actual economic strength or weaknessis debatable. Given the present volume and volatility ofexpenditures for bank closures, it is dangerous. Unless thefederal funds rate is permitted to move vigorously, as it wason Friday, the economy will continue to be at the mercy ofthe ebbs and flows of powerful contractionary forces.   ---   Mr. Kasriel is vice president of the Northern TrustCompany in Chicago. Robert Laurent, senior economist at theChicago Federal Reserve, co-authored the paper on which thisarticle is based.</TEXT></DOC>