<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900803-0059</DOCNO><DOCID>900803-0059.</DOCID><HL>   Slap Saddam Hussein Down Now   ----   By Barry Rubin</HL><DATE>08/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST</CO><IN>MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the post-Cold War era's firstglobal crisis, is a turning point in Middle East history anda true challenge to the Bush administration.   While the U.S. government cannot be blamed for Iraq'saggression, America's too-soft, too-slow response to IraqiPresident Saddam Hussein's earlier threats must have made thedictator think he could push further. Making this mistake thefirst time was costly enough. A passive U.S. policy now willencourage Iraq to occupy Kuwait permanently or even --someday soon -- attack Saudi Arabia or Israel. Such a nextstep could make direct U.S. involvement inescapable.</LP><TEXT>   One may cite here no less an expert than Iraq's deputyforeign minister, Nizar Hamdoon: &quot;Aggressors thrive onappeasement. The world learned that at tremendous cost fromthe Munich agreement of 1938. . . . How could the Germangenerals oppose Hitler once he had proven himself successful?Indeed, aggressors are usually clever at putting theirdemands in a way that seems reasonable.&quot; The deputy foreignminister was of course speaking in a different context. Butthe message is clear.   Fortunately, the U.S. has many options for dealing withthe crisis: threats, U.S.-regional cooperation, newalliances, U.S.-Soviet collaboration and sanctions. But itssecret weapon is the fact that Mideast states, includingIraq, tend to overrate American power. With the U.S. as theworld's only superpower, Saddam Hussein (like other Arableaders) expects Washington to do what he would in thatposition: be aggressive and imperialistic. He should havereason to fear American strength. It would be most dangerousif, like the Iranians during the 1979-1981 hostage crisis, hewere to conclude that the U.S. is a paper tiger. Thus, thefirst thing needed is tough talk.   Next, the U.S. must reassess its regional alliances.Egypt, Iraq's only probable rival for Arab leadership, mustknow that it can rely on U.S. support in building ananti-Saddam coalition. The recent tensions markingU.S.-Israel relations must be discarded in the face of thiscrisis. Last week the Bush administration was in theridiculous position of threatening to withhold $400 millionin housing credits to Israel while refusing to cut off $400million in agricultural credits to Iraq. Any slackness inU.S.-Israeli bilateral relations may give Iraq the impressionthat it can get away with attacking Israel.   The Kuwait crisis also affects the Arab-Israeli peaceprocess. Israel will be less inclined than ever to yieldterritory in such an unstable situation. The PalestineLiberation Organization has moved away from Egypt and towardIraq, and Yasser Arafat's migration from an alignment withAmerica's best Arab friend to its worst Arab enemy ought todiscourage the U.S. from reopening the U.S.-PLO dialogue.   One of the main questions is how the Gulf Arabs,particularly Saudi Arabia, will react. Iraq has broken allthe rules of Middle East politics. Will the Gulf Arabscontinue their pattern of appeasing Saddam Hussein in publicand requesting U.S. protection in private, or will they askopenly for U.S. assistance -- as they did during theIran-Iraq war? If the latter is the case, the U.S. will haveto decide how far it will go in sending them aid and militaryforces.   Another critical issue will be the U.S. attitude towardIraq's enemy neighbors, Iran and Syria. Both countries havebeen radical and anti-American, supporting terrorism andopposing U.S. policy. Faced with Iraq's aggression and theirown weaknesses (Syria has been crippled by losing its Sovietally), they may well want to improve relations withWashington. Damascus has already begun to move in thisdirection. There are many barriers, however, to ending theseenmities. Most of all, the Bush administration must rememberthat the U.S. would be doing Syria and Iran a favor byimproving relations -- not the other way around. Syria andIran must change their behavior and help release Americanhostages if they want U.S. help.   Iraq's action also creates a prime opportunity forU.S.-Soviet collaboration. Indeed, Secretary of State JamesBaker plans to fly to Moscow to issue a joint statementFriday with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze aboutthe invasion. The Soviet Union (along with France) has beenIraq's prime weapons supplier and (next to Saudi Arabia andKuwait) is among its largest creditors. Bilateral teamworkcan organize the international community for sanctions anddiplomatic pressure against Iraq.   Sanctions, it is often said, never work. Yet their primeimportance here is not merely to inflict economic andmilitary costs on Baghdad but to send a signal to SaddamHussein. The freezing of Iraqi and Kuwaiti assets in the U.S.is a welcome first step. The absence of sanctions -- ashappened after Iraq's use of chemical weapons against Kurdishcivilians -- will prove aggression successful. Is the worldso craven that it will continue buying Kuwaiti oil pumped byIraqi occupiers?   Given the large strategic oil reserves possessed by theU.S. and other countries, the world can sustain an extendedembargo against Iraqi and Iraqi-exported Kuwaiti oil. It willrequire cooperation from the two countries traversed byIraq's pipelines -- Saudi Arabia and Turkey -- for thisembargo to work, and they may refuse. The Saudis fear Iraqireprisal; the Turks are major trading partners of Iraq. Butthe effort is worth making. Even if only partially effective,this campaign would give Iraq another incentive to withdraw.   Saddam Hussein likes the additional money from Kuwaiti oilexports, but the invasion was not prompted by economic needsalone. Iraq wants billions for reconstruction, yet it couldhave obtained a big cash infusion merely by threateningKuwait. The principal factor here is Saddam Hussein'sdetermination to prove that Iraq is the most powerful statein the Persian Gulf and the Arab world. For eight years Iraqfought Iran, suffering hundreds of thousands of casualties todetermine who would dominate the oil-rich Persian Gulf. Iraqwon. It is now claiming the prize.   Kuwait and Saudi Arabia gave Iraq an estimated $50 billionto fight the war with Iran. But that was last year, andSaddam Hussein is not known for being grateful. Similarly,the U.S. helped him against Iran. But the day before theinvasion of Kuwait, Iraq demanded that U.S. naval forces bewithdrawn from the Persian Gulf.   The methodology fits Saddam Hussein's self-image. He isthe type of ruler who deliberately spreads stories about histoughness in order to frighten neighboring states. Forexample, he likes people to think he personally executed foeswith his bare hands. He has invited foreign military attachesto the border so they could observe the buildup of his army.   The invasion of Kuwait is only the latest in a series ofsteps the Iraqi leader has taken to make Iraq the mostpowerful Arab nation in the Mideast. First, he ran a crashprogram to obtain nuclear and chemical weapons. Second, hethreatened to destroy &quot;half of Israel&quot; if it attacked anyArab state. Next, he nominated himself leader of ananti-American alliance. Publicly, other Arab leaders cheered;privately, they trembled.   Now, however, Saddam Hussein has smashed the taboos ofpan-Arabism that governed the Arab world for four decades. Heis acting openly as an Iraqi nationalist, and he isindifferent to whether he has any allies. This may prove acostly mistake.   After cooperating with Iraq to defend Gulf Arab statesfrom Iranian aggression in the 1980s, the U.S. must now helpto defend Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and others in the 1990s fromIraq. Otherwise the Iraqi leader may be able to dictate oilproduction volumes and therefore prices, start wars and driveU.S. interests out of the Gulf.   The good news is that the world has been given anotherchance. It is a new 1945, the end of a long global conflictwhen victors and losers are ready to work together in peace.This time, however, there is no Cold War to drag on thesuffering. If the U.S. takes leadership and organizesinternational cooperation against Saddam Hussein, the new eracan be among the best in history. If the U.S. fails in thistask, historians will record Iraq's invasion of Kuwait as thefirst in a series of international depredations and crisesthat shook the 1990s.   ---   Mr. Rubin, of the Washington Institute for Near EastPolicy, wrote the forthcoming &quot;Islamic Fundamentalists inEgyptian Politics&quot; (St. Martin's) and &quot;Revolution UntilVictory: The Politics and History of the PLO&quot; (Summit/Simon andamp;Schuster).</TEXT></DOC>