<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910318-0143</DOCNO><DOCID>910318-0143.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   Gulf Lessons -- for Good Guys, and Bad   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>03/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><CO>   MDEST FREST EUROP</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><LP>   Every battle has lessons to teach, but sometimes losersand bystanders are the ones who learn best. The Frenchdemonstrated the potential of air power in World War I withtheir state-of-the-art little Spads. But it was the losingGermans who would use air power to best advantage 22 yearslater. They assaulted the French army with a devastatingone-two punch of tanks and Stuka dive bombers. The French airforce had nothing in 1940 that could match Germany's fast,modern Messerschmitts.   The Israeli air force employed guided bombs and rockets inthe 1967 Six-Day War to destroy Egyptian armor in the Sinai.But in the Yom Kippur rematch in 1973, it was the Egyptianswho first used guided weapons to best advantage, employingSoviet-made surface-to-air missiles to hold off the Israeliair attack while Egyptian tanks attempted a quick knockoutthat almost succeeded.</LP><TEXT>   President Eisenhower knew the importance of overwhelmingforce when he dispatched troops to stabilize Lebanon in 1957.But Ronald Reagan forgot that lesson when he sent only 1,000soldiers to Lebanon in 1982, with disastrous results. GeorgeBush didn't forget in dealing with Saddam.   What are the lessons of Desert Storm? There are many. Oneis that losing 200,000 soldiers in a war, as Iraq did in itsfight with Iran, doesn't necessarily discourage a dictatorfrom having another go. In countries with a high populationgrowth, a large new youth cohort comes along every year forthe dictator to employ as cannon fodder. In Desert Storm,Saddam has sacrificed many thousands more but has not losthis taste for blood, as evidenced by his current slaughter ofShiites.   The U.S. &quot;rapid deployment&quot; concept did not fare well inthe Gulf. Congress prefers to base U.S. forces at home, wherethey contribute to local economies. Hence the concept ofhighly mobile U.S.-based units that can be rushed to troublespots in a few days. But it took seven months for the U.S. todispatch enough heavy equipment to the Gulf sufficient tofight a decisive ground war against Iraq. Had Saddam beenclever enough or lucky enough to launch an effective airstrike against Saudi Arabia's limited port facilities, thedeployment could have taken much longer.   Yet, there is little evidence of second thoughts overwhether the U.S. can defend its interests in Europe and theFar East from U.S. bases. A very large drawdown of U.S.forces in Europe seems certain. It will leave the SovietUnion with an enormous superiority in men and equipment onthat continent. A cutback also is under way in the Far East.Of course, heavy equipment can be pre-positioned in strategicareas, such as Europe or the Gulf, and the crews quicklydispatched to the theater by plane in case of trouble. AsU.S. forces withdraw from Europe and from the Gulf, theylikely will leave much heavy equipment in place. But whathappens to tanks and artillery left in storage -- prey tocorrosion and obsolescence and tempting to politicalactivists with a mind to subvert regimes friendly to the U.S.-- needs careful attention. The answer might be embarrassingsomeday.   A positive lesson from the Gulf is that multinationalforces can be coordinated effectively on a large scalethrough a single system of command and control. Gen. NormanSchwarzkopf employed U.S. and British air and naval power,with an assist from the French and Italians, along with U.S.,British, French, Egyptian, Saudi, Kuwaiti and Syrian landforces, assigning each of the units at his disposal specificmissions. There was amazingly little confusion. Thetechniques were learned mainly through many years of NATOexercises, where forces of 15 NATO nations function under asingle command.   Some military men say that preserving the principle of asingle command for allied forces is one of the majorarguments for preserving the NATO alliance and removingrestrictions on the use of NATO forces outside the boundariesset by the North Atlantic Treaty. But as the lessons of theGulf slip from view, there again will be arguments fromAmerican neo-isolationists that NATO has outlived itsusefulness.   Precision weapons and electronic defensive countermeasureswere a big story of this war. The capacity to destroy anothercountry's military assets without heavy losses of your own --and without extensive casualties among noncombatants -- giveswarfare a new dimension. Peacekeeping on a global scale by analliance equipped with the most modern weapons is at leastwithin the realm of reason.   Some cautionary notes are needed. Using smart weaponsagainst massed armor in a desert or against exposedpoison-gas factories is one thing; using them againstguerrilla forces in a jungle or in mountains is somethingelse. Iraq was perfect for a high-tech war. Indochina wasnot. But despite the high costs of such weapons, which meansthey require high-value targets, they clearly are worth themoney for the kinds of actions most likely to be vital toWestern interests -- against large, well-equipped aggressiveforces.   Perhaps the biggest lesson of Desert Storm, however, wasthat any country, no matter how inept at battle management ordefense, can shoot a ballistic missile. Many small and nastycountries will have them available by the year 2000. A singleIraqi Scud cost the U.S. the most deaths it suffered from anysingle attack in the war, albeit through a quirk of fate.   In future, missiles in the hands of smaller countries willbecome more accurate. It seems inevitable as well that moreand more will be equipped with nuclear warheads despiteefforts to prevent &quot;nuclear proliferation.&quot; Even if that werenot true, there's enough to worry about from the vast numberof nuclear missiles in the hands of a Soviet Union nowexperiencing political and economic disorder.   The Patriot missile proved that missile defenses arefeasible. But it will not be good enough for the future. Forprotection against nuclear missiles, it will be important tokill the missile on launch, before it is descending onfriendly territory. An exploded incoming nuclear warheadwould multiply many times the damage caused when Scuds wereshot down over Israel. In short, there is little choice butto take missile defense into space, engaging in the very StarWars that sophisticates pooh-pooh.   The central question about all these lessons is who willlearn them best. History's record is not encouraging on thatscore. It suggests that it is the potential aggressor whomost carefully studies the lessons of each war. The Stukadive bombers that came screaming down on British and Frenchforces in 1940 were products of what the Germans learned fromtheir defeat in World War I. Will potential aggressors becowed by Desert Storm? A lot will depend on how well theallies apply in future the lessons they themselves taught in1991.</TEXT></DOC>