<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0090</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0090.</DOCID><HL>   Confidence Game:   Big Swindle Throws   Vietnam's Experiment   In Banking Into Chaos   ---   Perfume Business Appears   To Be a Pyramid Scheme,   And the Investors Panic   ---   Tale of the Phantom Factory   ----   By Barry Wain   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><IN>BANKS (BNK)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><LP>   HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam -- Nguyen Van Muoi Hai wasn'tone to hide his success.   As his perfume and toiletries business grew, he boughtluxurious limousines and equipped himself with cordlessphones, fax machines and a dazzling array of electronicgadgetry. He took to traveling in a convoy of cars, escortedby helmeted bodyguards on motorbikes, their sirens screaming.When the motorcade reached its destination, the outriderswould dismount and form two lines for him to pass through. Anaide would open the door and bow: &quot;Welcome, general director.You have arrived.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   That sort of fanfare, worthy of a head of state, wouldhave drawn attention anywhere. In impoverished Vietnam, itcaused a sensation.   The youthful Mr. Muoi Hai, usually accompanied by hisglamorous wife, acquired celebrity status as hisrags-to-riches fame spread. He appeared frequently innewspaper advertisements and television commercials promotinghis Thanh Huong Perfume Factory and its range of fragrancesand shampoos. He offered investors in the company's creditcooperative higher and higher returns, and people respondedby lining up by the thousands to put their savings in ThanhHuong.   It all must have seemed too good to be true -- and it was.   The authorities recently arrested 32-year-old Mr. Muoi Haiand his associates, and closed the business. Initialinquiries show that they were running a classic pyramidscheme, paying early investors with money poured in by laterones. Little of the money actually went into the business;instead, it was diverted to buying cars and houses. In fact,investigators say, there wasn't even a factory: Mr. Muoi Haiwas merely adding water to cheap imported perfume andrelabeling it for the local market.   The reaction to Mr. Muoi Hai's arrest was immediate andtumultuous. Hundreds of people -- in the biggestdemonstrations since the Communists took over South Vietnamin 1975 -- gathered daily for a week to demand that cityauthorities here help them get their money back. That set offruns on other credit cooperatives, as the secondary banks inthe country are called. The spreading panic quickly paralyzedVietnam's credit system. As it stands, most creditcooperatives and some private companies are now unable torepay depositors. Investors have learned that many of thebusinesses -- far from being a sure bet -- have lost theirmoney on highly speculative ventures.   The government is getting the lion's share of the blamefor the crisis. Critics say it acted without thinking when itimplemented certain reforms in 1987 to help shift from acentrally planned to a market economy. There simply wasn'tenough regulation to prevent schemers from exploiting thesituation, they say.   But if good intentions on the part of reformers begatbanking chaos, it also loosened the bonds on the country'scensored press. And it was ultimately the press that was Mr.Muoi Hai's undoing.   As officials tell it, the trouble started when reformersset out to create a banking system for Vietnam. They gave theState Bank of Vietnam, the central bank, the task ofregulating money and credit. Newly created institutions,called specialized banks, were entrusted with the frontlinework of providing cash and credit to depositors andbusinesses.   According to Nguyen Xuan Oanh, a government economicadviser, the specialized banks, which are owned by the state,failed to perform their function. They attracted only afraction of the money held by the public and didn't readilyextend loans to new entrepreneurs.   As a result, &quot;credit cooperatives jumped in to fill thevoid,&quot; says Mr. Oanh, a former central bank governor of SouthVietnam. &quot;No legislation, no rules, no nothing.&quot;   By early last year, the privately run credit cooperativeswere popping up everywhere -- &quot;like mushrooms after therain,&quot; in the words of a local journalist. By the end of theyear, when the government ordered that no more be permittedto open, there were about 20 credit cooperatives in Hanoi and170 in Ho Chi Minh City, as well as dozens of others innearby provinces.   Some sought to act as financial intermediaries -- takingin deposits and lending out money -- and others were formedby private companies seeking capital for their own expansion.While the specialized banks initially paid 8% a month, theunrestrained credit cooperatives offered 10%. Soon,cooperatives were engaged in cutthroat competition with eachother for deposits, pushing interest rates ever higher.   Nobody wooed potential depositors as ardently as Mr. MuoiHai, a one-time used-clothes hawker with limited formaleducation who set up Thanh Huong to take advantage of newgovernment policies encouraging private enterprise.   Thanh Huong named its perfumes after famous overseasproducts, such as &quot;Charlie&quot; and &quot;Caresse.&quot; Similarly, it'spackaging and promotions borrowed freely from foreignadvertisements. But Mr. Muoi Hai, who couldn't be reached forcomment for this article, didn't attempt to sell his productsas much as his company. Over and over, he assured investorsthat Thanh Huong was enjoying tremendous success and anyonecould get a piece of the action.   Vietnamese say people sold family jewelry and lined up forhours to put their money in Thanh Huong's credit cooperative,especially when the return reached a staggering 15% a month.So heavy and sustained was the rush that a black marketdeveloped in the numbered slips indicating order of servicethat were handed out to those waiting to invest.   With money pouring in, Thanh Huong continued to expand,opening highly visible retail outlets in hotels and at Ho ChiMinh City's Tan Son Nhut airport. But not everyone wasimpressed. Tuoi tre, a Ho Chi Minh City newspaper, inparticular was suspicious.   Editors noticed that one of Thanh Huong's four deputydirectors was a man who had quit as head of a largestate-owned detergent concern after being exposed for takingbribes. Another deputy director was a former policelieutenant colonel who had left the force after he wasconvicted of torturing a man to death. In addition, thecompany's products didn't seem popular, and Mr. Muoi Hairefused to open his operations to inspection on the groundsthat he didn't want competitors to know his secrets.   When Tuoi tre published an article in 1988 expressingdoubts about Thanh Huong, Mr. Muoi Hai responded with ahand-delivered letter that the paper interpreted as a deaththreat. Mr. Muoi Hai later invited the paper's deputyeditor-in-chief, Tran Ngoc Chau, to his office. &quot;He claimedto have many products and customers,&quot; says Mr. Chau. &quot;I toldhim I didn't believe him and that I wanted to see hisfactory. All I got was words.&quot;   Thanh Huong wasn't the only business attracting suspicion.The press was also investigating Xacogiva, a company foundedby Pham Cong Tuoc, a former construction worker now about 55years old.   Xacogiva endeared itself to the government by building afew units of low-cost housing that Ho Chi Minh Cityauthorities allocated to the homeless. Nguyen Van Linh,general secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party, visitedthe housing site with Mr. Tuoc, giving him a widelypublicized seal of approval.   Xacogiva's appeal for deposits for its credit cooperativewas based on ambitious plans that &quot;touched a chord inpeople's hearts,&quot; as a newspaper put it. Company executivestalked of solving the city's garbage problem, of buildingroads, bridges and schools -- things the government couldn'tafford.   The centerpiece was to be a 16-kilometer stretch of roadlinking a major highway with Duyen Hai, a hardscrabble &quot;neweconomic district&quot; on the southern coast. Xacogiva said itwould build the road in three years and recover its outlaythrough a highway toll. Officials approved the project,imagining Duyen Hai, in time, becoming a new port for Ho ChiMinh City.   However, as local newspapers reported, Xacogiva -- likeThanh Huong -- seemed to be spending most of its funds onfancy cars and a three-story &quot;castle&quot; for Mr. Tuoc. And Mr.Tuoc, like Mr. Muoi Hai, took to traveling with his advisers,assistants and agents in a convoy of cars flying the companyflag.   The newspapers, all of which are state-owned, continued toexpose widespread irregularities and &quot;cheating&quot; by both ThanhHuong and Xacogiva, but the authorities seemed reluctant tomove against them. As recently as Feb. 25, Saigon Giai Phong,a daily, said of Mr. Tuoc in a front-page headline, &quot;The LawWas Clearly Violated. Why Is the Criminal Still at Large?&quot;   The answer, as Saigon Giai Phong itself suggested, wasthat both Xacogiva and Thanh Huong were paying off officialsto keep the law at bay.   Finally, Mr. Tuoc's nerve snapped. In early March, he andhis followers fled to neighboring Cambodia, taking with thema huge stash of money. His wife and family and some Xacogivaexecutives, however, were caught. Police then arrested ThanhHuong's Mr. Muoi Hai, along with his wife, brother and closeassociates.   Officials say that Thanh Huong's books show that 140,000people deposited 114.24 billion Vietnamese dong, or $26.9million, in the company. Assets, mainly cars, houses, cashand gold, total less than a quarter of that.   Newspapers in the city have now gone after the officialswho allegedly shielded Mr. Muoi Hai for so long. They havenamed four or five officials and listed the expensive giftsthey got. The papers say it was also common practice forThanh Huong to bribe officials by giving them &quot;empty&quot; creditbooks so they could collect monthly interest of up to 20% onlarge, nonexistent deposits.   When depositors learned of the collapse of Xacogiva andThanh Huong, alarm swept the community. Hundreds ofdepositors gathered outside the offices of the Ho Chi MinhCity People's Committee demanding that the authorities dosomething about their lost money. Police clashed violentlywith Mr. Muoi Hai's bodyguards, who demanded the release oftheir boss and tried to force their way into municipaloffices. City authorities appealed on radio and TV for calmand announced a schedule to partly repay Thanh Huong'sdepositors.   Still, depositors have rushed to get their money back fromother credit cooperatives and private companies, forcingdozens to close their doors. Some of the biggest are facingbankruptcy.   One recent morning, for example, a crowd of worriedinvestors gathered in the dusty street outside the headoffice of Anh Dao, a private concern that employs 800 workersto make rattan, jute and bamboo products. The cityauthorities had posted a notice saying they are trying toraise money to pay back investors, &quot;so please don't worry.&quot;   No matter how hard he tries, Do Hung Phi, 35, a farmerfrom Long An province, does worry. He poured 10 years ofsavings into Anh Dao. For six months, the company paid him10% a month, but the interest payments stopped in April. &quot;Ithought I could get money to take care of my elderlyparents,&quot; says Mr. Phi. He says he returns by motorbike everyfew days in search of news.   Inside, Huynh La, 45, the blind owner of Anh Dao, admitsthat the company is in deep trouble. &quot;We're bearing theconsequences&quot; of the panic spawned by the collapse of ThanhHuong and Xacogiva, he says. &quot;We haven't violated the law,and we haven't cheated people.&quot;   Mr. La says Anh Dao, which continues to operate, hasstarted repaying depositors, and it is seeking a loan fromthe State Bank to complete the repayment.   In Hanoi, State Bank officials say they are preparingcapital-adequacy and other regulations that will ensurecredit cooperatives are closely monitored in the future. Theofficials say they intend to review the activities of creditcooperatives and close weaker ones, though they concede thatnobody even knows how many exist throughout the country.   Mr. Oanh, the economic adviser, who estimates that creditcooperatives have attracted total deposits of 400 billiondong or more, criticizes the State Bank for its lack ofaction.   &quot;The State Bank is supposed to be the bank of last resort,but it isn't acting like one,&quot; he says. &quot;They aren't movingto allow competent credit cooperatives to keep functioning.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>