<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910328-0078</DOCNO><DOCID>910328-0078.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Sellers Held Strictly Liable for Cleanups   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/28/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   U.PSO AET CI ITT MRGC</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)AUTO PARTS AND EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TIRES (AUP)SECURITIES (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT (RGU)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)INSURANCE (INS)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)FULL LINE INSURANCE (INF)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC)</GV><LP>   The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that a company thatpollutes a property can be held strictly liable for cleanupand other costs, giving purchasers of contaminated sites apotent new weapon in the conflict over waste cleanup.   State and federal environmental laws already allow buyersof contaminated property to seek reimbursement for cleanupcosts from a seller. But the decision has importantramifications because it means that property owners can nowrecover a broad range of damages in addition to their cleanupcosts, including the costs of moving to a new site or hiringoutside environmental consultants, said Stuart M. Lederman, aMorristown, N.J., lawyer for the plaintiff.</LP><TEXT>   Under the doctrine of strict liability, a defendantengaged in an activity considered to be abnormally dangerousmay be held liable for damages, regardless of whether thedefendant was negligent.   In the past, the strict-liability doctrine has allowedpeople living near a contaminated site to seek compensationfor damage to their property. The decision yesterday marksthe first time that any state's supreme court has ruled thatthe doctrine is not limited to neighboring landowners and canbe used by purchasers against sellers of contaminatedproperty.   The case was brought by T andamp; E Industries Inc., amanufacturer of electronic components, which purchased aformer radium processing facility in Orange, N.J. The companyclosed the plant when environmental officials discovered thesite was contaminated.   In 1981, T andamp; E sued Safety Light Corp. of Bloomsburg, Pa.,and other related companies, seeking to hold them strictlyliable for the cleanup because their predecessor caused thecontamination. A jury ruled for T andamp; E, but the verdict wasoverturned by the judge.   In the decision, the state supreme court ruled thatlandowners who engage in abnormally dangerous activities maybe held liable for an unsuspecting purchaser's cleanup costsand other losses. The court found that Safety Light'spredecessor knew about the harmful effects of radium at thetime it sold the property.   &quot;This decision is going to make sellers sweat. There are alot of sellers out there who may have a lot of exposure,&quot;said Albert G. Besser, a Roseland, N.J., lawyer representingSafety Light.   ---   JURY AWARDS $10 MILLION in dispute involving theft ofproduct's appearance.   Rally Manufacturing Inc., a Miami-based manufacturer ofautomotive accessories, won the suit in federal court inMiami against Mr. Gasket Co., a Brooklyn, Ohio, auto partsmanufacturer.   The amount is believed to be the highest ever awarded inFlorida and among the highest in the country for a caseinvolving the theft of a product's appearance. The awardincludes $4 million in punitive damages.   According to Steven Peretz, a partner at the Miami lawfirm Kluger, Peretz, Kaplan andamp; Berlin, Rally introduced ahighly stylized line of automobile accessories in 1985 knownas the &quot;Designer Series.&quot; It included such items as ashtrays,dashboard-mounted compasses, map lights and map cases. Whenpremiered at the Automotive Parts and Accessories Associationtrade show in Chicago, it created a minor sensation, he said.   The suit alleged that in 1987, Mr. Gasket stole the designof the products and their packaging for its competing productgroup, Hollywood/Cal Custom.   In cases involving the alleged theft of a product'sappearance -- known as a trade dress violation -- lawyersusually prefer non-jury trials because the allegationsinvolve complicated design details that are difficult toconvey. Typically, damages are limited to profits lost as aresult of trademark infringement, plus the revenue earned bythe offender.   But in this case, lawyers for Rally opted for a jury trialbecause Mr. Gasket's knockoffs were so clearly taken fromRally's series, said Mr. Peretz. The jury award requires Mr.Gasket to pay Rally $298,000 it earned from the line between1987 and 1989, another $5.7 million for lost past and futureprofits projected by Rally through 1993 and $4 million inpunitive damages.   A spokesman for Mr. Gasket said the company plans toappeal the verdict and the size of the judgment.   ---   EX-DREXEL TRADER who testified against Milken settles SECsuit.   Peter R. Gardiner, who worked for Michael Milken in DrexelBurnham Lambert Inc.'s junk-bond department, settled a civilsuit filed by the Securities and Exchange Commission infederal court in Manhattan. The suit and settlement werefiled simultaneously.   The SEC accused Mr. Gardiner of manipulating the prices ofsecurities, illegal stock &quot;parking,&quot; margin violations andrecord-keeping violations. The alleged securities-lawviolations involved trading in 1986 in Sterling Software Inc.and BRIntec Corp., two companies for which Drexel served asunderwriter.   The complaint alleges that Mr. Gardiner broke the laws atthe behest of his supervisors, who weren't identified in thesuit. Last year, Mr. Gardiner is understood to have toldgovernment investigators that Peter Ackerman, a former topDrexel executive, directed some of the trading involvingBRIntec.   In settling the suit, Mr. Gardiner neither admitted nordenied the SEC allegations. He agreed to be barred from thesecurities industry for at least three years, but he wasn'trequired to pay any money to the SEC as part of thesettlement.   Mr. Gardiner's attorney, Henry Asbill, said the settlementstems from an agreement reached last fall, before Mr.Gardiner testified at Mr. Milken's pre-sentencing hearing.Mr. Gardiner also was given immunity by federal prosecutors.   At the pre-sentencing hearing, Mr. Gardiner testified thathe followed orders from Mr. Milken that he believed weremeant to manipulate the price of Wickes Cos. stock.   ---   PENGUIN CRITICIZED for manipulating the courts in case ofIran-Contra book.   The U.S. appeals court in Manhattan attacked Penguin USA,a unit of Britain's Pearson PLC, for rushing to publish the&quot;inside&quot; account of the Iran-Contra investigation. The courtcriticized Penguin for publishing the book, &quot;OpeningArguments: A Young Lawyer's First Case, U.S. v. OliverNorth,&quot; while an appeal of a lowercourt ruling was pending.   In a pre-emptive move last year, Penguin sued the Officeof Independent Counsel, which prosecuted the Iran-Contracase, and asked a U.S. district judge to rule that the book'spublication wouldn't subject Penguin or the author, JeffreyToobin, to any civil or criminal prosecutions by thegovernment. The government had claimed before the suit wasfiled that Mr. Toobin, one of the prosecutors working on thecase, violated confidentiality agreements by writing thebook.   Last month, a U.S. district judge granted Penguin'srequest and rejected the government's claims that the book'spublication might jeopardize aspects of the Iran-Contrainvestigation. Although the district judge's ruling clearedthe way for the book to be published, the government appealedthe decision. Before the appeals court could hear the case,Penguin published the book.   In a decision written by Judge Irving R. Kaufman, theappeals panel vacated the lower court ruling and ordered thecase dismissed. As a result, the lower court decision is nolonger binding, making it possible for the government to tryto take action against Mr. Toobin.   The appellate panel said, &quot;Were we to maintain thedistrict court judgment, we would be sanctioning conductwhich manipulates procedure so as to make lower courtjudgments both binding and unreviewable.&quot;   Attorneys for Penguin couldn't be reached for comment.   &quot;We are of course gratified with the outcome of theappeal,&quot; said Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel, in astatement. &quot;By vacating the district court's holding, thecourt of appeals has left the Department of Justice unimpededto follow whatever course of action it believes appropriateunder federal law and regulations.&quot;   ---   INSURANCE ANTITRUST CASE is settled in Texas.   Seven insurers and the Insurance Services Office Inc.agreed to pay the state $4.1 million as part of thesettlement of a three-year-old suit alleging that thecompanies had conspired to control the insurance market. Fourother insurers previously settled with the state.   The companies admitted no wrongdoing in agreeing to thesettlement, which was approved yesterday by a state districtjudge in Austin. About $1.1 million will be used to reimbursethe state attorney general for legal costs, and the remainderwill be used to establish a nonprofit corporation to trainstate employees on insurance regulation and oversight.   Under the settlement, the staff of Insurance ServicesOffice, an industry rating organization, will be solelyresponsible for suggesting policy-contract language forcommercial liability insurance forms. The Texas AttorneyGeneral had charged that insurers had dictated the insurancepolicies, thereby constricting competition.   The companies covered by the settlement are Aetna Life andamp;Casualty Co.'s Aetna Casualty andamp; Surety Co. unit; Cigna Corp.;ITT Corp.'s Hartford Fire Insurance Co. unit; Liberty MutualInsurance Co.; the Reinsurance Association of America; RobinA.G. Jackson; and Merrett Non-Marine Syndicate No. 799, aLloyd's of London syndicate.   Travelers Corp.'s Travelers Insurance Co. unit and St.Paul Cos.' St. Paul Fire andamp; Marine Insurance Co. unitpreviously agreed to pay a total of $1 million. Fund AmericanCos.' Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. unit and USFandamp;G Corp.previously agreed to pay a total of $1.5 million to settletheir portions of the suit.   ---   THE FTC ENDORSED law-firm diversification into non-legalbusinesses. The Federal Trade Commission also warned theAmerican Bar Association against limiting the trend toostringently. In comments invited by the ABA, the FTC praisedlaw firms' development of ancillary businesses, includinginvestment banking, real estate and economic consulting. Suchdiversification can offer consumers &quot;one-stop shopping&quot; forlegal and other services, the FTC said. Acknowledging theABA's concern that diversification poses potential problemssuch as conflict of interest and loss of clientconfidentiality, the FTC recommended adoption of &quot;narrowlytailored rules&quot; that would regulate ancillary businesseswithout diminishing benefits to consumers.   ---   PROTESTING HARVARD law professor will teach at New YorkUniversity.   Derrick Bell, a tenured black professor at Harvard LawSchool, has vowed to stay on leave without pay until theschool has a tenured black female professor. He has accepteda visiting professorship at New York University Law School.Mr. Bell said he will teach constitutional and civil rightslaw starting in September.   Mr. Bell said he accepted the offer because he missed theclassroom. He said he spent most of the fall and springsemester on the lecture circuit and teaching an informalseminar at Harvard.   Visiting professor status is often a prelude to tenuredstatus, but Mr. Bell said, &quot;The presumption is that I'llreturn to Harvard.&quot;   Last year, Mr. Bell joined a coalition of Harvard Lawstudents demanding that the school hire more minority facultymembers. Harvard has five black professors, three of themtenured, out of a faculty of more than 65. NYU Law has twoblack women on the faculty.</TEXT></DOC>