<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910410-0116</DOCNO><DOCID>910410-0116.</DOCID><HL>   Led Astray by the Saudis in Iraq   ----   By Laurie Mylroie</HL><DATE>04/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A22</SO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)</GV><RE>IRAQ (IZ)SAUDI ARABIA (SA)</RE><LP>   As refugees from Saddam Hussein's terror flee north andsouth, the debate about U.S. policy toward Iraq proceeds withlittle understanding of that policy. Many think theadministration had no policy for Iraq, but that is incorrect.   The U.S. was responsible for military operations againstIraq, while the question of Iraq's political future was leftlargely to the Saudis. The idea, shared by Washington andRiyadh, was to encourage a coup. The Iraqi military, stung byits humiliating defeat at the hands of allied forces, was tooverthrow Saddam Hussein. This, however, would not simply beleft to chance. The Iraqi army would be actively encouragedby a popular revolt.</LP><TEXT>   The model was Romania, where the population rose againstNicolae Ceausescu and the army joined the people, while theinstitutions of the Ceausescu state continued to function.Similarly, the Iraqi army would take over and rule with whatremained of Iraq's political institutions.   This was to be accomplished principally through theoffices of Salah Omar Ali al-Takriti. Mr. al-Takriti, now inSaudi Arabia, was a Baathist and an associate of Saddam'swhen the party seized power in 1968. A member of the party'sregional leadership, Mr. al-Takriti was closely involved inthe 1969 public hanging of 14 Iraqis in Baghdad, 11 of themJews, on trumped up charges of spying for Israel. He exhortedthe crowds that assembled in Liberation Square on thatoccasion and was appointed minister of culture andinformation the next year. In the early 1980s he served asIraq's ambassador to the United Nations.   In August 1982, after Iraqi forces were pushed on thedefensive in the war with Iran and Iraq looked to lose, Mr.al-Takriti resigned his position and went into exile. Hebegan to promote himself as an alternative to Saddam,claiming his qualifications were that he was Sunni, Arab andfrom the same town as Saddam. In the current crisis Mr.al-Takriti has found his chance.   This figure, without much of an authentic political base,convinced the Saudis he could arrange a coup through contactsin the Iraqi military. The Saudis promoted him and Saad Jabr,a London-based Shiite, also without a substantial politicalbase. Early last month a senior Saudi intelligence officer,Gen. Mohammed al-Utaibi, told members of the Damascus-basedIraqi opposition that they must take Messrs. al-Takriti andJabr as equal partners or they would get no support fromSaudi Arabia and the U.S.   The U.S. appears to have been aware of Saudi plans andacquiesced to them. Mr. al-Takriti briefed American officialsin Riyadh about Iraq's internal situation. The U.S.ambassador even requested a meeting with him.   Certainly aspects of the plan for Iraq were put intooperation. A January intelligence finding let the CentralIntelligence Agency assist Saddam's Iraqi opponents. Supportincluded a CIA-backed radio station in Saudi Arabia, whichMr. al-Takriti helped run, and which repeatedly called on theIraqi population to revolt. On Feb. 15, shortly before thestart of the ground war, President Bush called &quot;for the Iraqimilitary and the Iraqi people to take matters into their ownhands to force Saddam Hussein . . . to step aside&quot; -- theCeausescu scenario. He added: &quot;We have no argument with thepeople of Iraq. Our differences are with Iraq's brutaldictator.&quot;   Some two weeks later, almost as soon as hostilitiesceased, the Shiite population in the South revolted. Theadministration warned Saddam against using chemical weapons.It also said that using fixed-wing aircraft and helicopterswould be a violation of the provisional cease-fire. Whateverprotection such prohibitions provided American forces, theyalso made it easier for the angry and disgruntled remnants ofSaddam's forces to march on Baghdad.   The Shiites were soon joined by the Kurdish population inthe North. Massoud Barzani, head of the Kurdish DemocraticParty, with large numbers of trained fighters under hiscommand, first hesitated. He did not want a repetition ofAugust 1988, when Iraq used chemical weapons against theKurds. Untold numbers died then and 100,000 refugees fled toTurkey, where most of them remain. With the U.S. statementsforbidding much Iraqi military activity, Mr. Barzani threwhis forces into the fray, quickly capturing all Kurdistan, asSaddam's troops in the North melted away. The perception thatMr. Barzani held a strong hand was an important factor inundermining the will of Saddam's troops to fight.   But Salah al-Takriti's coup failed to materialize. WithIraq's Shiites in revolt and no military action againstSaddam in sight, the Saudis panicked. Some Iraqi exiles, longbased in Iran, had joined the fighting in a limited way. TheSaudis warned Washington that the uprising in the South wasin danger of being taken over by Islamic fundamentalists,according to an Iraqi opposition figure then in Riyadh.Washington then switched course. On March 26, theadministration announced publicly that the U.S. would notprevent Iraq from using helicopters. Predictably, Saddam tookthat as an invitation to mow down his civilian population.The helicopters dropped napalm and phosphorous bombs.   Although not announced publicly, the U.S. also stoppedinterfering with flights of fixed-wing aircraft. Since adecision had been made to let Saddam suppress the rebellion,the quicker the better was a likely rationale. The tales ofhorror coming from southern Iraq were difficult for Americanopinion to bear. The U.S. Air Force controlled Iraq's skiesand had just succeeded in impressing its power on the sameforces now butchering civilians. Inaction would become harderand harder to justify. Besides, the Pentagon brass wanted tobring the boys home by the Fourth of July.   Having decided it did not want Iraq's revolts to succeed,the administration stood fast as the slaughter continued;Saddam's suppression was deemed &quot;an internal Iraqi affair.&quot;In last Friday's U.N. Security Council session on the Kurds,the U.S. still wanted to &quot;deplore&quot; Saddam's repression,rather than use the stronger &quot;condemn,&quot; pressed successfullyby France.   The administration hasn't made an adequate case for theshift in U.S. policy. Iraq's territorial integrity was notthreatened by the revolts. The Shiites consider themselvesIraqis. The Kurds are demanding autonomy for themselveswithin Iraq and democracy for the country.   Nor does neighbor Turkey view Kurdish demands withapprehension. The alternative is continuing guerrilla war inIraq, with destabilizing consequences for Turkey's Kurds.Thus, in February, President Turgut Ozal called for ademocratic, federated Iraq. (None of the most senioradministration officials pronounced the &quot;D&quot; word when it cameto Iraq, because the U.S. was deferring to Riyadh.) PresidentOzal called for the U.S. to shoot down Saddam's helicopters,and now, with Turkey's stability and his political careerthreatened by the Kurdish influx, he calls for U.N. action.Mr. Ozal is inhibited from speaking louder because ofapprehensions about alienating the Bush administration, whichhas tied its policy to the Saudis'.   Iraq's Shiite revolt raised little threat of an IslamicRepublic, despite Saudi claims to the contrary. The commanderof the Iraqi exiles in Iran, who crossed into Iraq with thestart of the rebellion, reported that Iran would let only alimited number of men across the frontier. As a senioradministration official explained March 26: &quot;The Shi'a inIraq are Arabs. The Shi'a in Iran are Persians. . . . TheShi'a are not going to establish control over all of Iraq inthe way that the Shi'a established control over Iran. . . .Some of the worst-case scenarios that are being painted bysome of the commentators outside . . . we just don't share.&quot;   Saudi Arabia is an extremely conservative society, theonly major state in the Middle East without any moderninstitution for political representation. The Saudis' strictSunni Wahabi establishment discriminates against its ownShiite population, while the ruling family is notoriouslyinsecure. If the Saudi apprehension was aboutIranian-controlled fundamentalism, then it was almostcertainly exaggerated. If it was about power for Shiites,then it was not a concern America shared.   There is a long history of U.S. administrations basingMiddle East policy on Riyadh, only to be disappointed. In1957, King Saud was enlisted to endorse the EisenhowerDoctrine, and reversed himself in a matter of months. On thelast such occasion, the U.S. worked with Saudi Arabia inLebanon after the Israeli invasion, only to find the Saudisunable to secure Syria's acquiescence in U.S. policy, as theReagan administration had expected.   Saudi Arabia is now seen as the heart of the projected newU.S. military presence in the Gulf. But Riyadh is not doingthe U.S. a favor by letting America defend it. It needs theU.S. Meanwhile, America has paid a heavy price for Saudiblunders in Iraq. An urgent re-evaluation of U.S. policy isneeded to define American interests. They go far beyondmaking the Middle East safe for the al-Saud.   ---   Ms. Mylroie is a visiting fellow at the WashingtonInstitute for Near East Policy from Harvard University'sCenter for Middle Eastern Studies.</TEXT></DOC>