<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900614-0149</DOCNO><DOCID>900614-0149.</DOCID><HL>   After the Euphoria:   Specter of Capitalism   Haunts East Germans   Used to Certainties   ---   Prospects of Layoffs, Inequities   And Meager Means Causes   Anxiety and Bitterness   ---   A New Attentiveness to Work   ----   By Frederick Kempe   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   EUROP</CO><LP>   EAST BERLIN -- The bittersweet scent of cocoa beans hasalmost vanished from the work stations inside the grimyredbrick buildings of East Berlin's only chocolate factory.   Elfe VEB, owner of the factory, has all but stopped makingchocolate and wafers since April. &quot;Our production is almostnil, and the workers are deeply depressed,&quot; says ClaudiaSebastian, the plant's sales and marketing director. &quot;Peoplehere just aren't buying our chocolates. The quality is bad,and the packaging unattractive. We never had the capital toinvest before, and now we don't have the financing tocompete.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Reunification may be a German dream come true, but it isgiving Mrs. Sebastian nightmares. Elfe, nationalized in 1949,can't find foreign partners for new investment partly becauseits former owners, a family now living in West Berlin, aretrying to regain control of the company. If Elfe goesbankrupt, Mrs. Sebastian fears that her economics degree willbe worthless on the job market. She got the degree five yearsago through an economics correspondence course that groundedher in such subjects as Scientific Marxism and PlanFulfillment.   &quot;I came home from the factory and then worked every night-- sometimes all night during test weeks -- for five years,&quot;says the 34-year-old Mrs. Sebastian, one of the rare women inmale-dominated East Germany to reach a senior managementposition at so young an age. &quot;But if this company closes, Iwill be regarded by the unemployment office as an unqualifiedworker with a high-school diploma -- nothing more.&quot;   The popular uprising that began East Germany's revolutionhas given way to such individual panic. The politics ofGerman unification, now consuming the four powers in theirtalks with the two Germanys, interests few people hereanymore. The specter of capitalism does. From elderlypensioners to youngsters fresh on the job market, they noware instead obsessed with more personal and pressing mattersof adjusting to a society for which few have been prepared.Psychiatrists report new tensions in marriages and moredivorces, crime has quintupled in East Berlin, and previouslyunknown gang violence by neo-fascist groups is a frequentoccurrence.   In May, a conservative victory in the country's first freeelections since the 1930s confirmed the desire of EastGermans for drastic and capitalist change. But the electoraleuphoria has been chilled by government estimates thatanywhere from 15% to 50% of all East German workers may beunemployed during the transition to capitalism.   Next month's monetary union will make every East Germanjobholder a hard-currency earner -- but there are estimatesthat at least seven in 10 East German companies will fold.Executives of the country's largest car-maker, Ifa-Kombinat,believe 100,000 of the 150,000 jobs in the auto industry areendangered. The beer and soft-drink industries estimate that80% of their jobs could be lost in an invasion by Becks, Cokeand Pepsi. Even those employees who seem likely to keep theirjobs fear that their hard-currency earnings will be too lowto buy much.   &quot;The question isn't anymore how much unemployment therewill be,&quot; says a senior Western diplomat here. &quot;It will begreat. The question is the level of tolerance. How much willEast Germans endure before the situation grows sociallyexplosive?&quot;   &quot;We were childish at first in our views about capitalism,&quot;Mrs. Sebastian at the chocolate factory says. &quot;We thoughtthose who worked hard in capitalism would earn well and thosewho worked little would earn little. But there's much more toit than that. It was a very childish way of thinking.&quot;   At the Elfe factory, Mrs. Sebastian watches workers tryingto adjust one of their inflexible machines to produce theirfirst, small Western order. It's a mere packaging order --the chocolates and even the wrapping have been producedelsewhere. The West German manufacturer doesn't mention theEast German plant on the label for fear of putting offcustomers.   Two hours south of East Berlin in Dresden, electricalengineer Herbert Lappe suggests that East Germans are onlynow discovering that they are paying the price for theircountry's defeat in two wars -- World War II and the ColdWar. &quot;To the victors go the spoils,&quot; he frowns, mourning thatWest German companies are the winners and &quot;most of us&quot; arethe losers.   Mr. Lappe has watched the value of his assets disappear.   Last year, he bought a Commodore personal computer on thegray market for 23,000 marks, around $13,800 at currentexchange rates, about five times its worth. He knew thatkeeping up with Western technology was vital to his future,and he expected to resell the computer at the same price afew years later on a market starved for such products. Butits worth fell as quickly as the Berlin Wall, and now he canget only 1,500 marks, or about $900, for the outmodedmachine.   His Wartburg car, which he bought for 15,000 marks, oncecould be sold five years old for about the same price. He'llnow be lucky to get 3,000 marks for it.   The mathematics of unification is a painful science forMr. Lappe. He now pays eight pfennigs, or about five cents,per kilowatt hour for electricity, compared to the 31pfennigs, or about 19 cents, that it costs consumers in WestGermany. He rents his elegant apartment furnished with familyantiques for only 75 marks, or $45, a month. The owners, wholive on the ground floor, were forced by the state to rentthe flat at a price below their own costs of maintenance. Butfree to charge a market rent, they will have a small goldmine, and Mr. Lappe fears they'll either throw him out ortriple his rent.   &quot;And all of this happens under circumstances when youdon't know if your company will survive,&quot; he says. Still, heis happy that he stands to keep his job at ERW-ElektronikDresden. About 1,800 fellow workers will be let go in theuncertain fight for survival.   &quot;Some sort of normality will return after a few years, butthe problem is the transitional period,&quot; Mr. Lappe says. &quot;Wehave lost our old system of values, however flawed it mighthave been, but we don't have a new system of values. Everyoneis only thinking of himself at the moment. We have lost thedream of building any new society, and now we only want tosurvive.&quot;   Across town at a state dental clinic, Christa Keller isone of those, like auto mechanics, carpenters and nurses,whom popular wisdom considers lucky. As a trained dentalassistant, she has a talent that any society needs. She couldbe expected to earn far more when the market sets her wages.But her boss, a 55-year-old dentist, isn't sure he'll be ableto afford to keep her on. She isn't even sure that he can geta loan to finance his practice when it becomes private.   &quot;He simply isn't creditworthy,&quot; she says. &quot;Why shouldbanks, which have so many demands to extend financing, giveany money to a dentist who may have only five more years ofwork in him -- 10 at the most? And why should a young dentisthire a 50-year-old dental assistant like me?&quot;   Instead of complaining, Mrs. Keller is planning. She makesdelicious sandwiches and salads, and she intends to start acatering service for business firms. And she is curious aboutthe possibility of opening American-style fast-foodrestaurants in Dresden.   She also sees that the threat of capitalism &quot;is makingEast Germans healthier.&quot; Doctors at the clinic aren't as busyanymore. Workers once took many days off for sicknesses bothreal and imagined. Now they are more likely to remain on thejob, trying to show their bosses that they should be the lastto be let go.   At the dental office, patients once sought apppointmentsthat were timed to free them from the bulk of the workday,but now most will come only at the end of the afternoon.&quot;Uncertainty has its good side, I suppose,&quot; says the dentalassistant. &quot;Everyone wants to make a good impression. Peopleare dressing better, working harder and thinking more. Lifehas become more hectic.&quot;   But insecurity, capitalism's ugly brother, has intrudedinto the senior citizens' complex on Dresden'sComeniusstrasse 68 and, like an unwelcome guest, refuses toleave.   The twin towers there, reaching a gray 16 floors into agray sky, were intended to be an old folks' Utopia. Inhabitedmainly by former Communist Party and government officials,the towers have a subsidized restaurant, a medical clinic, alaundry and a social hall, where the elderly could happilymix and exchange gossip. For their service to socialism manyof them have received the highest possible pension. Formedals and other state honors, they have received a monthlybonus. Now they expect their incomes to shrink, and some arebitter.   &quot;Of course we won't be paid by the new government for thethousands of hours we spent building this country fromnothing,&quot; says a retired truck driver who was the partysecretary at his transportaton company. &quot;We were Communistbecause we weren't Fascist. It is an injustice that I mustnow suffer for having been courageous enough to work for theGerman future.&quot; Up until now, he says, his pension has beendouble that of the doctor living across the hall.   Yet Comeniusstrasse 68 was a failed Utopia, and otherresidents are pleased by change. They had been suspicious ofeach other, wondering which of them were governmentinformants. Now they chat amicably as they descend in theelevators for the midday mail, a common daily pilgrimmage.The local party organization has replaced the building'sparty secretary, who always was thought to be asking too manyquestions. And the residents' association in January pushedthrough a vote to buy a satellite dish for Westerntelevision, an effort that had failed dismally while theparty faithful still controlled the complex.   Rapid turnover, a natural phenomenon in an old folks'community, is now producing a more representative mix ofresidents. While 75-year-old Helmut Fischer furiously pushesthe buttons of his remote control, curiously watching therock video channel, he smiles. &quot;The party once had 90% of theapartments,&quot; he says, &quot;but now it is 70% and falling.&quot;   Yet change at the top tier of government has been far toorapid to be matched elsewhere in society. In East Berlin, aneconomist is complaining as he watches East German televisionreports from a European Community meeting in Ireland. &quot;Yousee that face,&quot; he says, pointing to the East Germancorrespondent on the screen. &quot;He is a `Genosse'&quot; -- a partycomrade. &quot;He studied in Moscow and was a party member, andnow he talks proudly of how we will be members of theEuropean Community.&quot;   The economist asks not to be quoted by name because, hesays, his company is still run by those who were appointed bythe country's former leadership. &quot;I was hoping that in theexcitement of the moment, the younger managers would rise upand have them removed, but instead they have quietly stayedin the wings and merely waited for change instead of tryingto cause it,&quot; he says. Yet he concedes that he is one of the&quot;cowards.&quot;   East Germans are also disappointed that Western companieshaven't been much interested in forming joint ventures andbuilding new plants, thus providing investment to compete.Instead, many appear more interested in simply selling theirown goods here. Instead of creating thousands of jobs, mostonly want to hire some sales representatives.   Ironically, the former party faithful have fared best.They know the East German bureaucracy, and they madeinternational contacts in trips abroad. A new elite isn'tcreated overnight.   &quot;I see them driving around in their new Mercedeses and itmakes me sick,&quot; says Mrs. Sebastian, who has already laid off80 of her 450 chocolate-factory employees. &quot;The same peoplewho misguided our economy are now those representing Westerncompanies and getting rich. Couldn't Western companies lookmore carefully for their partners? Where is the justice forwhich we had all hoped?&quot;</TEXT></DOC>