<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900524-0102</DOCNO><DOCID>900524-0102.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Another India-Pakistan War Is Building   ---   Nuclear Threat Looms Over   Kashmir Confrontation   ----   By Anthony Spaeth   Staff Reporter of the Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   MUZAFFARABAD, Pakistan -- This may be one of the world'ssleepiest capitals. It is the principal city ofPakistan-controlled Azad, or Free, Kashmir. The picturesqueKashmir of tourist brochures is the one India controls acrossthe heavily guarded border.   But Muzaffarabad is having a small boom because of thetension between India and Pakistan. Tourists, scared by theviolence in India's Kashmir, are coming here. And foreignreporters, thrown out of India's Kashmir in January, areflocking to Pakistan's portion to meet Kashmiri militants andrefugees from the south.</LP><TEXT>   Kashmir is a kind of looking-glass place: two areasbearing similar names but controlled by two countries thatview things conversely and whose armies glare at each otherwith identical postures of outrage. It is one of the world'smost dangerous flash points.   India's Prime Minister Vishwanath Pratap Singh has toldhis people to be &quot;psychologically prepared&quot; for war.Pakistan's Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto has threatened a warof 1,000 years.   It is a potential nightmare for the whole globe. A war onthe subcontinent could go nuclear: India exploded its firstnuclear device in 1974; Pakistan is believed to have nuclearweapons, too. Even conventional conflict could be brutal asthe animosity between the two countries has been stoked toboiling point by historical passions and thorny currentproblems.   &quot;There has been a steady escalation in tension andpreparation on both sides,&quot; says a diplomat in New Delhi. &quot;Wehave a great worry that they're going to get into a war thatneither side wants.&quot; The U.S. and the Soviet Union have madeit clear that the support they provided in the past -- theU.S. on Pakistan's side, the Soviet Union on India's -- won'tbe forthcoming this time.   &quot;Kashmir is a motherhood issue,&quot; says a diplomat inPakistan. &quot;War could happen tomorrow. It could happen nextmonth. It could never happen.&quot; Says Zain Noorani, formerPakistan foreign minister: &quot;When you raise the war tempo to acertain extent, anything can happen.&quot;   India and Pakistan have fought two wars over Kashmir, in1947 and 1965. The territory remains split along thecease-fire line of 1965 (with alterations made after theIndia-Pakistan war of 1971). A former princely state, Kashmirwas given a choice in 1947 to choose union with India, anavowedly secular democracy, or Pakistan, which was founded inthe name of Islam. The maharajah of Kashmir, a Hindu leaderof a Moslem-majority population, equivocated untilPakistan-backed troops invaded. He acceded to India.   India considers this the supreme justification of thesecular state. So, along with its post-1947 terror of further&quot;mini-partitions,&quot; India is determined to maintain Kashmir.   To Pakistan, Kashmir's accession to India was a betrayalof Moslems by the Hindu maharajah and a violation of theterms of partition that created an independent India andPakistan out of British India. Pakistan's long-term pledge:liberation of the six million Kashmiris in India's Kashmir.   India's tack was to incorporate Jammu and Kashmir stateinto its democratic political system, with specialconstitutional provisions of autonomy. Jammu is aHindu-majority territory adjacent to Kashmir. But politicsproved the undoing of India's Kashmir policy.   In 1984, then-Prime Minister Indira Gandhi forced analliance between Kashmir's main political force, the NationalConference, and her Congress (I) Party. Kashmiris consideredit a sellout by the National Conference. Corruption spread, astate-assembly election in 1987 was rigged, and almostovernight, Kashmir's biggest political force collapsed. Thepower vacuum was quickly filled by militants pressing forindependence.   Last May, the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, or JKLF,the largest of as many as 26 groups, shut down the state in astrike. Demonstrations and kidnappings by militants led to anarmy crackdown in December that continues today. A hard-linegovernor was brought in from New Delhi, and he dismissed theelected state government in February. Foreign correspondentswere thrown out. Round-the-clock curfews made Kashmirisprisoners in their homes for weeks.   Indian journalists and foreign reporters who have madesurreptitious visits say India's Kashmir is under militarysiege. Tourism, the largest industry, is dead. Violent armyraids against militants are frequent. The number ofcasualties is hard to determine. The anti-Indian Kashmirimilitants claim that several thousand of their number havebeen killed and more than 8,000 arrested. Anti-Indiasentiment is raging.   &quot;Morally, India has lost Kashmir,&quot; says Shafiz Misgar, the28-year-old leader of the JKLF's political wing. Mr. Misgaris now in Free Kashmir, which he calls the &quot;base camp&quot; forthe freedom movement. He talks of friends beaten andterrorized, of Kashmiri martyrs shot down by the Indian army.He and his friends say there will be no peace in Kashmiruntil they are allowed to vote for independence.   &quot;This isn't a territorial dispute,&quot; insists Raja MuzaffarKhan, JKLF spokesman in Free Kashmir. &quot;The tension in thisregion cannot be defused until we are given the right ofself-determination.&quot;   India vehemently disagrees, and the world has accepted itsstand that Kashmir is an Indian problem, or at most abilateral one. India applies the label Islamic fundamentalistto the Kashmiri militants in the hope of alienating Westerncountries from the militants' cause.   India also contends that Pakistan started the crisis bytraining and arming Kashmiri militants on Pakistan soil.Although these accusations come from Prime Minister Singhhimself, India has yet to prove them. In a recent interview,Foreign Minister I.K. Gujral conceded that his government hasno hard evidence.   In Free Kashmir, the rebels complain they get nothing butmoral support from Pakistan. But the rebels concede thatKashmiris were brought to Afghanistan in the mid-1980s fortraining with the anti-Soviet mujahedeen, presumably by thePakistani military.   On the big issues -- fundamentalism, independence,alignment with Pakistan -- Kashmiris on both sides seemconfused. At the very least, burgeoning hatred for India hasmade many Kashmiris pro-Pakistan and has boosted Islamicjingoism.   When the JKLF spokesman leaves the room after stating thatthe fight is for Kashmiris' right to self-determination, hisfollowers let slip some significant remarks. &quot;We hate theIndian secularism,&quot; says one. Another calls for a&quot;theo-democratic state.&quot; A slogan on the wall of aMuzaffarabad house reads: &quot;Pray five times daily because thisis the only way through which we can get success.&quot;   The Indian government's emphasis on Pakistan's allegedtraining of militants and the rise of Islamic fundamentalismin Kashmir has helped boost pro-war sentiments in India --feelings never far below the surface in a country that hasdefeated Pakistan in three wars in 43 years.   In Pakistan, 40% of the people in a February poll saidthey believed there was a strong chance of war, the highestlevel in a tumultuous decade.   Many military analysts believe that India would defeatPakistan in a conventional war of about two weeks. The Indianmilitary is convinced of its superiority, and there is arising feeling that another war could help finish offPakistan's military for good. But in Pakistan, localpoliticians and journalists say, the military believes it hasgained strength from new equipment and that revenge forprevious defeats is long overdue.</TEXT></DOC>