<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900420-0152</DOCNO><DOCID>900420-0152.</DOCID><HL>   The Best Earth Day Present: Freedom   ----   By Laurence Solomon</HL><DATE>04/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FORGN</CO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   Since the first Earth Day in 1970, there has been a lot ofgood news on the environment. The deserts of the Sahel maynot be spreading after all. And Lake Erie is no longer dead;its waters now team with tens of millions of walleye. But thebest environmental news of all is the opening of the BerlinWall and the democratization of Latin America.   A very large proportion of the globe's environmentalproblems are caused by policies that cannot stand thescrutiny of either the marketplace or the voting booth.Sweeping world trends -- political, economic, andtechnological -- are fundamentally changing the globe'senvironmental ground rules for the better.</LP><TEXT>   Take Eastern Europe, the dirtiest, most degraded region onEarth. Eighty percent of East Germany's rivers arecontaminated, and some of its citizens breathe air polluted50 times above safe limits; two-thirds of Poland's trees aredamaged, two-thirds of its rivers too dirty even forindustry; 80% of Bulgaria's farmland is threatened byerosion, 25% of its animal and plant species are threatened.Throughout the Eastern Bloc life expectancy has beendropping, with millions suffering from environmentallyinduced disease. Some Eastern Europeans can expect to live adecade less than Western Europeans.   Now all this is being swept away by democracy and economicrationality. One of the first steps taken by the transitionalgovernment in post-communist Czechoslovakia -- where postersdenouncing nuclear power vied for power with those denouncingcommunist rule -- was the cancellation of a reactor underconstruction. In East Germany the notoriously unsafe nuclearreactor at Griefswald on the Baltic coast has been shut downand, with West German help, East Germans are investing $250million in advanced coal-burning technologies and inincinerators for the disposal of chemical wastes. Poland iscleaning up the Vistula River by building 188 large waterpurification plants to treat municipal sewage and industrialwastes and 200 smaller plants for highly toxic chemicalwastes.   In Latin America, too, the winds of change have toppledone junta after another, replacing them with popularlyelected leaders who offer hope of meaningful reform --environmental as well as economic. The slashing of theBrazilian rainforests -- 50,000 square kilometers were beingcleared in 1989 -- was the consequence of economic approachesremarkably similar to those of Eastern Europe. Centralplanning authorities were recklessly promoting industrialexpansion, regardless of profitability, while propertyrights, always a bulwark against unfettered central planning,were undermined.   The first elected president to rule Brazil in 25 years,Fernando Collor de Mello, has promised to drop many of thepolicies that have simultaneously polluted his country andmired it in debt. He is proposing a moratorium on newincentives, subsidies and credits to businesses that cause anegative environmental impact in any region, and taxes onpolluters and users of natural resources. Electricity rateshave been raised nearer to market levels and agriculturalsprawl -- blamed for forest clearings -- is being curbed bythe elimination of the tax breaks that helped to cause it inthe first place. As important, Mr. Collor is attempting tosettle property disputes with Brazil's native people; at therequest of Yanomami Indians, he is using force to evict fromthe Indians' rainforest land some 45,000 prospectors.   Entrenched interests in both Eastern Europe and LatinAmerica -- powerful bureaucracies in the former, military andland-owning aristocracy in the latter -- are likely to delayand perhaps halt the tempo of reform. But technologicalchange is on the side of ecological progress.   Ten years ago, a Third World community faced with theflooding of its farmland by a state hydroelectric project orthe removal of its forests for subsidized pulp production wasall but helpless. Generally it was given no say in thedecision, let alone compensation for the loss of itsproperty, and Westerners would learn of the project too lateto intervene, even though the project was typically built byWestern engineers using Western tax dollars.   Today, that community is as likely as not to have a faxmachine or to be able to reach local environmentalists who --via fax, phone or electronic mail -- can reach a globalnetwork of environmental, human rights and native rightsactivists. Within days, the project's developers can beidentified, environmentalists in the country involved can beenlisted and an international campaign mounted. Though mostprojects nevertheless proceed to completion, through thisprocess literally dozens of ill-conceived projects are beingstopped, and hundreds more slowed or improved. As the ease ofcommunication rises and as information flows improve throughincreased trade and travel, the rejection rate for badprojects can only increase.   The good news isn't universal: In regions such as Africa,where political and economic reforms have been slow tomaterialize, and where communication technologies tend to bestrictly controlled (Kenyans, for example, need governmentpermission to use a computer modem), environmentalists mustoften work in secret, and suffer debilitating intimidationmuch as their counterparts in Latin America did undermilitary rule.   But in Chile and Argentina once-muzzled environmentalcritics of government policy now find themselves in positionsof power. In Brazil, Jose Lutzemberger, one of the world'smost outspoken defenders of the rainforest and the founder ofthe first environmental group to challenge the generals,Agapan, now finds himself secretary of the environment. Withinformation he gets from daily satellite surveys, he claimsthat &quot;no destruction of the environment can happen in thiscounty, even pollution . . . that can be hidden.&quot; He ishopeful that this access to information will further &quot;acapitalist perestroika,&quot; that revamps the tax system,eliminating destructive subsidies, removing power from biglandowners and protecting the rights of the inhabitants ofthe last wilderness.   Nor is capitalist perestroika confined to the Third World.The drying up of state subsidies to the petroleum industryhas rid North America of most new tar sands, oil shale,frontier and other environmentally harmful and economicallywasteful energy megaprojects. In Britain, privatizationpulled the plug on nuclear power expansion by forcinginvestors to see nuclear power and all its latent liabilitiesfrom an owner's point of view.   The U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement is likely to hastenthe adoption of higher U.S. environmental standards inCanada, just as the European Community has leaned on memberstates to raise their water standards up to the levels of thecleaner members. Strong freedom-of-information laws -- theone reform environmentalists around the world agree on --hinder cover-ups, and provide the public with knowledge andresolve.   World-wide, power has shifted away from the remote elitesof the national and international bureaucracies, whoseunderstanding of local economies and environments isnecessarily limited. The Sahel exemplifies that limitedunderstanding: At an international conference in 1977, theNairobi-based United Nations Environment Program pronounced-- on the scantiest of information -- that the Saharan desertwas advancing an average of six kilometers a year, andpointed fingers at peasant practices that supposedly degradedthe land. As satellite studies and ground surveys from theWorld Conservation Union now show, the emergency that the UNand other outsiders saw was a mirage.   The costly emergency measures they championed -- chiefly agreen Maginot Line to defend against desert creep -- wereunwarranted and sometimes counterproductive. Despite droughtsand rapid population growth, the land of the Sahel has becomeincreasingly bountiful over the years. The people are copingadmirably, despite perverse government policies that, forinstance, discouraged tree planting by expropriating locallands.   Not surprisingly, the methods that have helped thepeasants of the Sahel and their environment survive thesepast few thousand years continue to have merit. If peoplethroughout the globe are to do better for themselves andtheir environment, as is usually their desire, the answerwill be in more, not less freedom for their communities.   ---   Mr. Solomon is executive director of Environment Probe, inToronto.</TEXT></DOC>