<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900530-0004</DOCNO><DOCID>900530-0004.</DOCID><HL>   Seeds of Change:   Farmers, Eying Costs   And the Environment,   Limit Use of Chemicals   ---   But Evolving Attitudes Mean   Hard Times for a Dealer   In Fertilizer and Pesticides   ---   New Era for an Iowa Elevator   ----   By Scott Kilman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/30/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   CASEY, Iowa -- Back in the early 1960s, the worn soil inGuthrie County barely produced enough corn to feed the localcattle herds. But then Burdette H. Ruppert began promoting anelixir called anhydrous ammonia, a nitrogen fertilizer thatcould double a field's yield. Local farmers who bought theelevator manager's new product were soon shipping corn to biggrain export houses along the Mississippi.   In Casey, it was the start of agriculture's chemical age.Mr. Ruppert's business surged with the harvests. And when thehuge crops drew rootworms, he sold the farmers insecticides,too. He crisscrossed the county in a Cadillac, vacationed inHawaii, and earned profits so fat that when the local bankfaced a squeeze, he could help bail it out.</LP><TEXT>   But this spring, Mr. Ruppert is selling out. The reason:He figures the farm chemicals industry he has been part offor two decades is headed for rough times. &quot;Burdette just sawthe handwriting on the wall,&quot; says a local crop consultant,Douglas Peterson.   As environmentalism steadily gains ground across Americathis spring, one of the movement's unbending targets has beenchemical farming -- witness recent stormy debates overresidues in foods and over groundwater purity. By and large,U.S. farmers have deflected these protests, citing U.S.agriculture's vast productivity and arguing that economicssimply leaves them little choice. But this year, as springplanting nears completion in the Midwest, a gradual shift isbecoming apparent. Thousands of farmers are doing all theycan to reduce the use of chemicals.   Fertilizer use per acre of corn planted dropped 8% lastyear, and insiders estimate it is down again this year, byanywhere from 2% to as much as 10%. Prices are down, a blowto chemical companies used to selling about $8 billion offertilizer in the U.S. each year. The $5 billion-a-yearpesticide business is harder to measure, because its productsare changing, but usage is basically flat. Best estimates arethat overall volume will grow at maybe 1% to 2% a yearthrough the 1990s -- half the rate in the 1980s.   There are many reasons for the shift. Most notably,farmers themselves worry about overuse of man-madesubstances. Their views started to shift in recent yearsafter surveys began showing widespread contamination ofwater. In Iowa, pollsters discovered that nearly three ofevery four Iowa farmers now believe that agriculture dependstoo much on weedkillers, insecticides and commercialfertilizers. Nationwide, nearly half of all farmers say theyare increasingly concerned about their own safety.   Farmers also are using new tillage practices that reducethe amounts they need to buy. Application methods have thesame effect, by putting the chemicals only on the row and notbetween rows.   And as soil tests get more precise, farmers are learningthat they may have been using more chemicals than they neededall along. Thirty miles down the road from Casey, farmer RonDunphy last year used a new soil test developed at Iowa StateUniversity that persuaded him to slash his fertilizer use inhalf. Yet he still grew 183 bushels of corn an acre --winning a local corn-yield contest. University of Nebraskaresearchers have just concluded that U.S. farmers could cuttheir fertilizer and pesticide use by 10% over four yearswith little impact on harvests.   Fertilizer dealers have long tested farmers' soil to seewhat it needed. But, says farmer Scott Benton withskepticism, &quot;it seems like whichever fertilizer dealer didthe test always said there wasn't any nitrogen in the soil&quot;in order to sell fertilizer. Nitrogen is the nutrientsupplied primarily by anhydrous ammonia, although it can alsobe put back in the soil with manure or by rotating a corncrop with a &quot;nitrogen-fixing&quot; crop like soybeans or alfalfa.   Awareness of the water-purity issue is clearly on the risein Iowa. Last week, high levels of nitrates in water forcedofficials in Iowa City to warn parents for the second timethis planting season not to use local water in baby formula.Nitrates can weaken an infant's ability to carry oxygen inits blood, causing something called blue baby syndrome.   Farmers are concerned not only about the water but aboutinhaling the chemicals as they apply them. Of 800 U.S.farmers polled in August by Jefferson Davis Associates, aCedar Rapids firm, about half said they worry that their useof crop chemicals is dangerous to themselves. At the sametime, they're concerned about how it all plays amongcity-dwellers. Some 83% said they fear that townspeople blamethem for polluting the environment.   All this is quite a change for dealers like Mr. Ruppert,and not a particularly welcome one. A stout gray-haired manwith a florid face and a booming voice, he sits in his officeat Casey Mill andamp; Elevator Inc., at a desk adorned by athree-inch stack of for-sale notices by other chemicaldealers. &quot;This is a lot tougher business than it used to be,&quot;he says. &quot;The housewife in Manhattan thinks I'm a dopepeddler.&quot;   According to an Iowa trade group, the number offarm-chemical dealers in the state is expected to drop by 25%in the next two years. Like Mr. Ruppert, many will sell to abig farm cooperative better positioned to finance thechemical business in an era of meager growth. He frowns atthe sound of workmen mounting a time clock on the wall forthe new owner, Crestland, a fast-expanding $50 millioncooperative.   It will take work to put the Crestland look on this dusty,slightly worn business. The elevator, which looms over thetiny town, sports a purple-and-white sign for the town'sLutheran Church. Inside the white clapboard office, the salescounter is papered with notices for pancake fund-raisers andfarm auctions. Rat poison, rubber gloves and pesticide jugsline one wall. Slumped on wooden chairs, four farmers aredissecting high-school basketball prospects.   There was a time when Mr. Ruppert, 56, seemed like amiracle worker around here. He grew up on a farm outside ofCasey, did a stint in the Army and became a tire salesman.Then in 1963, his father-in-law made him manager of thefinancially troubled grain elevator in town. Soon, he helpedoutfit it with a 12,000-gallon tank to hold anhydrousammonia.   Initially, many farmers were afraid of putting somethinginto the ground that could knock them dead if they inhaledit. Mr. Ruppert urged the few who agreed to try it not totreat the five rows next to the road. That way anyone drivingby could see the treated plants towering over thetraditionally grown corn.   It worked. Anhydrous ammonia not only made corn morerobust, it enabled farmers to grow it year after year in thesame field. Corn, the fuel of the meat industry, was thebest-paying crop to grow, but it sucked so much nitrogen outof the soil that farmers previously could grow it on a givenfield only every other year. Anhydrous ammonia replenishedthe nitrogen. In eight years, Guthrie County's cornproduction jumped from 6.7 million bushels to 10 million.   In 1967, however, corn stalks in the area begancollapsing. Growing corn year after year in the same soil hadprovided a steady diet for root worms. But this only meantmore business for Mr. Ruppert: He shipped in 10,000 pounds ofpesticides.   Mr. Ruppert became one of the leading citizens of Casey,population 473. He had its biggest payroll, nine. He was aLutheran church elder, fire chief, Lions Club president andschool official.   In 1987, the harvest was so big he had to store corn onthe ground. His elevator reaped a windfall storing it for thegovernment. But the huge stockpiles (which were due tosubsidy programs and foreign-trade trends as well as to thehigher yields) were driving down crop prices.   That's when the tables began to turn. In one respect, hischemicals were too effective. They were increasing the amountof money that the government needed to pay to compensatefarmers for low prices. The government tried to reduce thesurpluses by paying farmers to idle millions of acres ofland. In a hilly county like Guthrie, where the soil ishighly erodible, 25% of the farmland was idled. That meantfewer sales for Mr. Ruppert.   Environmental concerns also began to mount. Whilesurveying landfills for evidence of groundwatercontamination, scientists found traces of pesticides. Dairyfarmers in northeast Iowa discovered nitrate (a form ofnitrogen) in their water troughs. In 1987, Iowa slapped a taxon fertilizer, with proceeds used to find ways to minimizechemical usage. The state required farmers to pass a testshowing they could apply the chemicals safely, and it forceddealers to spend tens of thousands of dollars making sureproducts were stored safely.   Things got tighter when more-precise soil testing began tohold fertilizer usage down. &quot;I must have been wasting a lot,&quot;says Mr. Dunphy, of Creston, the farmer who cut his use inhalf and still won the crop-yield contest.   Practices like those adopted by Mr. Benton cut furtherinto usage. He sprays chemicals in a band on top of his cornand soybean rows, instead of everywhere, thus cutting his useof herbicides by 64% and his fertilizer use by 20%.   Mr. Benton, 31, gives another reason for cutting back: &quot;Iwant to farm here for 30 years. I can't afford to poison thewell.&quot;   The government also is beginning to require farmers onhilly land to adopt conservation techniques if they wish tocontinue receiving price-support payments. Instead of turningover the soil completely, some farmers are building up theirseed beds into ridges. The ridges are permanent -- and onlythey will need to be treated with fertilizer. Debris left inbetween the ridges prevents weeds from getting sunlight,reducing the need for herbicides. Researchers now suspectthat the old practice of turning over the soil probablyhelped more to plant weeds than to prevent them from growing.   Farm chemicals unquestionably will continue to serve as amajor tool for farmers. There is little incentive for farmersto cut deep enough into their use to reduce harvestssubstantially. In addition, the Agriculture Department'sbest-paying price-support programs are for chemical-dependentcrops such as corn, wheat and cotton.   At the same time, the era of heady growth is clearly over.Fertilizer prices are down 10% to 15%. Manufacturers projectnationwide fertilizer consumption to rise about 3% from ayear ago, but this is on an estimated 4% to 5% greateracreage of corn, the crop on which nearly half of fertilizeris used.   An anhydrous ammonia plant hasn't been built in the U.S.in a decade. W.R. Grace andamp; Co. has shed its fertilizeroperations, and a Mississippi phosphate plant closed inDecember. By some estimates, one-third of North Americanpesticide manufacturers evaporated in the 1980s. &quot;It's ano-growth business,&quot; says Paul T. Leming, an analyst atMorgan Stanley.   Last year, Mr. Ruppert wrote a letter to himself analyzinghis business prospects. The big crop production days of thecounty are over and fertilizer prices are slipping, he noted.Then he typed: &quot;Look for more co-op mergers and furtherweakening of profits in the future.&quot;   He also noted that the fertilizer tax Iowa started costhim $1,226. Insurance costs had grown to $56,197 in 1988 from$15,983 in 1978, in part because of rising worries byinsurers about the liability of dealers. Requiredimprovements to his dealership would cost at least another$50,000. Meanwhile, the paperwork was building: The list oflicenses and permits he needed had grown to 25.   &quot;Too much risk-margins too low,&quot; he wrote. It was time tosell out.</TEXT></DOC>