<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910318-0007</DOCNO><DOCID>910318-0007.</DOCID><HL>   GOP Can Capture the Civil-Rights Issue   ----   By Clint Bolick</HL><DATE>03/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   Usually when legislation just barely fails to make it intolaw, its proponents in the next session will pick up wherethey left off, attempting to gain the few extra votesnecessary for approval.   Not so with the 1991 version of last year's civil-rightsbill. Though the legislation is the same, the politics havechanged dramatically since President Bush's veto was upheldin the closing days of the last Congress. So much so, infact, that Republicans may wind up turning to their gain anissue the Democrats have dominated for a quarter century.</LP><TEXT>   On the surface, the dynamics appear much the same. TedKennedy (D., Mass.) is still the major force behind the billin the Senate; in the House, Rep. Jack Brooks (D., Texas) isthe primary sponsor, replacing Rep. Augustus Hawkins, whoretired. The effort to override Mr. Bush's veto ofKennedy-Hawkins failed by only one vote in the Senate and waswithin striking distance in the House, meaning thatKennedy-Brooks needs, in theory, to gain only a few votes.   But the actions of the major players betray a verydifferent reality. Where a year ago Democrats monolithicallysupported the bill, this year Mr. Kennedy has had troublefinding people to sign on and will almost certainly lose someof the handful of Republicans (especially Sen. John Danforthof Missouri, who co-sponsored the bill last year). As aresult, the bill is still not introduced in the Senate, threemonths into the new year.   Meanwhile, lobbyists led by Ralph Neas of the LeadershipConference on Civil Rights are now trying to portray the billas a women's bill, even though most of its provisions relatemore closely to racial discrimination. At the same time, thecivil-rights lobby is negotiating with representatives of theBusiness Roundtable to find a compromise -- but that group'sbiggest objection is to the very provisions that are ofgreatest importance to the women's lobby. Compromise thusappears unlikely.   Activities on the other side of the aisle are markedlydifferent as well. Last year, not a single Republican wantedto take the lead in opposing Kennedy-Hawkins. This year, GOPlegislators are falling over themselves to sponsor their owncivil-rights bills or to take on the issue in a visiblemanner.   Likewise, in 1990 the administration was sharply dividedbetween those who opposed and supported Kennedy-Hawkins. Itspent the better part of half a year in intense negotiationstrying to find a way to appease Mr. Neas and company, in theend embracing legislative language that would have given thecivil-rights lobby almost everything it wanted.   This year, conversely, Mr. Bush appears to have drawn aline in the sand around his own more moderate proposal, whichhe's clothing in a broader &quot;civil rights and individualopportunities&quot; package designed to refocus the debate. What'smore, after a year of infighting, no prominent naysayers haveemerged in the White House to oppose this new approach.   What happened to send Democrats into a tailspin and toembolden the GOP? Both sides apparently have discovered thatcivil rights has become, for the moment at least, a no-loseissue for Republicans.   Why this is so has a great deal to do with the specificsof the Kennedy bill, one of the most complex civil-rightsbills ever. Though it contains a number of fairlynoncontroversial components that could have been enacted lastyear had Mr. Kennedy been willing to compromise, its coreprovisions deal with the standards applicable tostatistics-based discrimination claims.   Under the bill, lawsuits challenging employment criteria(tests, education requirements, etc.) and based solely ondifferences in numerical outcomes among races, religions andgenders will be successful unless employers can prove thatthe challenged practices are significantly related to the jobin question. In reality, this standard is nearly impossibleto satisfy, and only at tremendous expense through litigation-- which employers can avoid if they adopt informal quotasystems.   The quota issue was the breakthrough for the Bushadministration, for it completely reversed the usual dynamicsof civil-rights bills, in which proponents are highlymotivated but opposition is diffused. This time, the quotaissue galvanized opponents: non-minorities who feelvictimized by reverse discrimination.   But perhaps even more important, the bill failed toresonate among mainstream blacks. Unlike past civil-rightsbills that promised tangible gains, such as housing or votingrights, this one was mired in complex abstractions, such asburdens of proof and statistical disparities.   The lack of grass-roots support for the civil-rights billdogged its supporters from the beginning. When the NAACP'sexecutive director called for a mass protest against theSupreme Court's 1989 civil-rights rulings, so few peopleshowed up that he was forced to recast the event as a &quot;silentvigil.&quot; This reflects a broader trend in which the NAACP haslost more than 100,000 members in the past decade,particularly among younger blacks who increasingly view theorganization as irrelevant to their needs.   These new dynamics showed up in the election results lastNovember. The quota issue figured prominently in helpingJesse Helms (R., N.C.) keep his Senate seat and helping PeteWilson exchange his for the California governorship. NowDemocrats, especially the several Southern senators whoseseats are up in 1992, are looking nervously over their rightshoulders, while Republicans like Sen. Phil Gramm (R., Texas)move to exploit the quota issue for all it's worth.   New support for the GOP strategy arrived from anunexpected source: Ralph Neas himself, whose group sponsoreda major poll and series of focus groups on what mainstreamAmericans think about the civil-rights movement today. Theresults were so devastating that Mr. Neas tried to suppressthe findings, to no avail.   The results are unsurprising, except to people inside theBeltway: Most Americans support equal opportunity and effortsto expand opportunities to the disadvantaged, but they nolonger view the civil-rights movement as advancing thosegoals. Instead, they view it as merely anotherspecial-interest group, pursuing its own interests at theexpense of others.   Even more ominously for supporters of the 1991 bill:Mainstream voters believe that reverse discrimination ispervasive in American life. And they're not happy about it.   But the GOP isn't making quotas the only facet of itscivil-rights strategy. Instead, it's embracing the concept of&quot;empowerment&quot; -- eliminating arbitrary barriers that preventlow-income people from controlling their own destinies -- asthe next logical step for civil rights.   As a result, the administration is packaging itscivil-rights bill with empowerment initiatives, such asfunding to encourage inner-city school districts to allowparents to choose the best schools for their children, publicor private; enterprise zones to ease tax and regulatoryburdens on inner-city enterprise; tenant ownership of publichousing; and anti-crime measures.   The ideas aren't new (though the administration onlyrecently endorsed private-school choice), but the linkage ofempowerment with civil rights is. Whether the administrationwill work aggressively to establish that linkage is yetunclear: Except for a single speech by Mr. Bush that waseclipsed by war coverage, the administration has yet topresent the package as a coherent strategy.   A civil-rights and empowerment strategy could bepolitically potent, however. It offers the prospect ofbipartisan compromise: The nation's first private-schoolchoice law, allowing 1,000 low-income Milwaukee youngsters toopt out of inadequate public schools, was championed by theduo of liberal black state legislator Polly Williams andconservative Gov. Tommy Thompson.   It also offers the GOP a chance to make inroads amongblack voters without jeopardizing its base among whites. AskGov. Thompson, who last year won re-election as the firstRepublican gubernatorial candidate to carry Milwaukee Countysince 1946.   Indeed, if the GOP embraces empowerment in a big way, itcould completely reverse the ordinary political equation. Foronce it will be Republicans who can go into the inner cityoffering tangibles -- school choice, home-ownership, jobs --while the Democrats argue about abstract intangibles. IfRepublicans can parlay empowerment issues into a 5% to 10%overall increase in black support, it could deliver them theSenate in 1992.   What can moderate Democrats do to retain their base? Theycan take columnist William Raspberry's advice to quietlyforget about the Kennedy bill, which is racially divisive andnot very helpful to the real needs of the most disadvantagedblack Americans, and instead move on to more importantissues.   Or they can hope that the Bush administration drops theball and capitulates on the civil-rights bill. If he fails toassert boldly a clear alternative, Mr. Bush will find, as didRichard Nixon and Gerald Ford before him, that given a choicebetween the Democrats and a Republican trying to out-Democratthem, black voters will choose the real thing every time.   But for once, the ball is in the Republicans' court oncivil-rights issues. The Democrats may have the bill mostpeople are talking about -- but it's also one that many woulddearly love to abandon. The Republicans have the ideas andthe momentum to shift the terms of the debate -- both totheir advantage, and to the advantage of Americans generally.   The question is whether they have the courage of theirconvictions. If so, maybe Saddam Hussein taught George Bush alesson after all.   (See related story: &quot;Can We Talk?&quot; -- WSJ March 18, 1991)   ---   Mr. Bolick is director of the Landmark Center for CivilRights in Washington and author of &quot;Unfinished Business: ACivil Rights Strategy for America's Third Century&quot; (PacificResearch Institute).</TEXT></DOC>