<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900412-0128</DOCNO><DOCID>900412-0128.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   New York and Others Seek to Force U.S.   To Adjust Census in Counting Minorities   ----   By Wade Lambert and Milo Geyelin   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/12/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B8</SO><CO>   WNEWS</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)SPECIALTY RETAILERS (OTS)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, TOYS, MOVIES, PHOTOGRAPHY, SPORTS (REC)</IN><GV>COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)</GV><LP>   New York City, joined by Los Angeles and Chicago, tookcourt action against the U.S. Commerce Department, which theyaccused of reneging on an agreement to correct the CensusBureau's undercounting of minorities.   The bureau's undercounting, which is about five timesgreater for minorities than for others, is a problem for manycities and states because the census is used in calculatingfederal aid and allotting congressional seats. New York Cityclaims undercounting in the 1980 census cost it $675 millionin federal aid over the past decade and the loss of at leastone congressional seat.</LP><TEXT>   The cities and other parties concerned about theundercounting sued the Commerce Department in 1988. LastJuly, in what was widely seen as a victory for the cities,the department agreed to develop guidelines for adjusting theundercounting.   But in a motion filed in federal court in Brooklyn, NewYork City and other critics of the Census Bureau said thedepartment guidelines put politics ahead of accuracy.   The guidelines were to be used to evaluate whether thecensus would be more accurate if it were statisticallyadjusted to make up for the undercounting. But attorneys forNew York said the guidelines amounted to a list of reasonsagainst adjusting the census count.   &quot;Just as you can't get blood from a stone, it appearsimpossible to get a fair and full count from the Departmentof Commerce,&quot; New York Mayor David Dinkins said in astatement.   Peter Zimroth, a former New York corporation counsel andone of the attorneys handling the case, said, &quot;The CommerceDepartment has refused to promulgate standards fordetermining which set of data, the adjusted or the unadjustedcensus count, will be more accurate.&quot;   New York's motion was joined by Dade County, Florida; thestate of California; New York state; the U.S. Conference ofMayors; the National Association for the Advancement ofColored People; and the League of United Latin AmericanCitizens, among others.   Commerce Department officials said they are prepared todefend the guidelines in court. Michael Darby, undersecretaryfor economic affairs, said, &quot;The guidelines are designed toensure that we have the most accurate census possible and toprevent manipulation of the census figures for politicalpurposes.&quot; The Census Bureau is part of the CommerceDepartment.   Mr. Zimroth, however, said the guidelines put a higherpremium on maintaining &quot;an orderly transfer of politicalpower,&quot; including the shifts of congressional districts,rather than on getting an accurate count. He said that underthe guidelines, the Commerce secretary would have thediscretion to reject use of the adjusted census count even ifit were found to be more accurate.   The motion asks federal Judge Joseph McLaughlin to declarethe guidelines null and void and to declare that astatistically adjusted census would be constitutional.   ---   FORFEITURE IS UPHELD for non-obscene materials in anobscenity case.   A federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., said a lowercourt could order the seizure of hundreds of legitimatemagazines and videotapes from a Virginia couple convicted ofracketeering for distributing obscene material.   The decision, the first in the country to uphold the useof the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, orRICO, in an obscenity case, presents novel questions of FirstAmendment rights. Attorneys for the couple, Dennis E. andBarbara A. Pryba, of northern Virginia, said the ruling wouldallow inventories from a chain of bookstores to be seizedunder RICO if two or more items sold in any one store weredeemed obscene.   The unanimous appellate ruling, written by Judge Robert F.Chapman, equated distribution of obscene materials to drugdealing under the federal racketeering statute, which wasamended in 1984 to help prosecutors combat obscenity. Theseizure of non-obscene materials protected by the FirstAmendment was permissible, Judge Chapman wrote, because thegovernment established a connection between couple's&quot;ill-gotten gains&quot; and the protected materials.   &quot;Obscenity is not protected by the First Amendment and aconvicted racketeer may not launder his dirty money byinvesting it in materials that involve protected speech,&quot;Judge Chapman wrote.   Mr. and Mrs. Pryba were convicted in 1987 of selling sixobscene magazines and four obscene videotapes. Each sale wasprosecuted as an individual act in furtherance of thecriminal enterprise. Only two such acts need be proved toobtain a RICO conviction.   The Prybas' chain of 12 video stores, with total sales of$2 million in 1986, were shut down as a result, even thoughthey dealt mostly in general-release videotapes. The totalvalue of the obscene material at issue in the trial was$105.30.   The Prybas' attorney, Paul J. Cambria, an expert inobscenity issues who has represented Hustler magazinepublisher Larry Flynt, promised an appeal to the SupremeCourt.   ---   TEXAS SUPREME COURT makes it harder to keep court recordssecret.   A new rule tentatively adopted by the court requires thata public hearing be held on any proposal to keep settlementsand other case documents confidential.   Whether court records should be sealed is a controversialissue in civil damage litigation, especially inproduct-liability cases. Corporate defendants contend thatopening settlement agreements and other information to thepublic may unfairly expose trade secrets and would impairtheir ability to ward off frivolous suits. Plaintiffs'lawyers, on the other hand, contend that keeping recordssecret prevents consumers from learning about hazardousproducts and forces duplicative investigations inproduct-liability suits.   Under the new Texas rule, anyone proposing to seal courtrecords must show that a need exists to protect a&quot;substantial&quot; interest and that the interest outweighs thevalue of the information to public safety and health. Thistougher standard covers all papers filed with a court, but itdoesn't apply to documents attorneys turn up in thefact-finding process prior to trial. The rule also sets somelimits on when settlements must be made public.   Texas Supreme Court Judge Nathan Hecht said that heexpects the court to adopt the new rule Monday and that itprobably would take effect Sept. 1. The rule is one ofnumerous civil procedure changes the court has beenconsidering. It previously approved a change that would allowcameras into civil courtrooms under certain circumstances.   Dane Harris, president of the Texas Association ofBusiness, said the rule would cause &quot;needless exposure&quot; ofsensitive and sometimes competitive company information. &quot;Wejust feel it's bad public policy,&quot; he said.   ---   LEGISLATORS CRITICIZE Justice Department anti-drug grants.   A House Government Operations subcommittee has turned upnew problems with the department's state and local grantprogram. The panel's investigation has found that about halfthe money advertised as intended to spur innovation amongstate and local agencies goes to such federal bureaucraciesas the Drug Enforcement Administration. Congress hasappropriated as much as $90 million for the grant program forthe year that began Oct. 1.   The subcommittee also has questioned the JusticeDepartment's priorities in making grants. For example, thegovernment has allocated $2.7 million to assist apublic-service advertising campaign based on the cartooncrime-fighting dog, &quot;McGruff,&quot; according to a House staffmember. In contrast, the department allocated $100,000 for anew grant category designed to encourage investigation of therelationship between drug abuse and child prostitution,teen-age runaways and child pornography.   &quot;In an age where violent crime has risen for five straightyears we are fighting a war on drugs with cartoon crime dogs.I think it is time to ask some questions,&quot; the subcommittee'schairman, Rep. Bob Wise (D., W.Va.), said.   A Justice Department spokeswoman said all of the anti-druggrant money ultimately benefits states and municipalities,even if it is routed through federal agencies. &quot;None of ourdiscretionary money is for the purpose of federal agencies toenhance their capabilities,&quot; said the spokeswoman. As for the&quot;McGruff&quot; grant, she said that Congress had specificallyearmarked at least $2.7 million for the National CrimePrevention Council, the private organization that sponsorsthe McGruff ads, among other educational messages.   The subcommittee is scheduled to hold hearings next weekon the preliminary results of its investigation.   ---   TWO PLEAD GUILTY in scheme involving $4 billion in riggedsecurities transactions.   Jeffrey Feldman, 42, of Skillman, N.J., and Paul Foont,51, of New York, pleaded guilty to conspiring to defraud theU.S. through prearranged transactions in U.S. Treasury billsand other government securities. Prosecutors said thosetransactions generated fictitious tax losses of $140 million,which were passed on to investors in the defendants' businessso that the investors could deduct those amounts on their taxreturns.   The investments were made in a series of limitedpartnerships known as the Cralin partnerships, the U.S.attorney's office in Manhattan said. The pleas were enteredlast week in federal court.   ---   OFFICERS OF SOUTHERN AIR TRANSPORT, which has been linkedto the Central Intelligence Agency and the Iran-Contraaffair, lost a wrongful-death lawsuit brought by the familyof a co-pilot. A Dade County, Fla., jury found two currentofficers and one former officer of the Miami-based companyguilty of gross negligence in the death of Phillip DeCenzo.The jury awarded his family $10 million, ruling that theofficers failed to alert the co-pilot about an unapprovedcontrol device on a plane, which crashed while taking offfrom a Texas Air Force base in 1986. Charles W. Rice, anattorney for the defendants, said he will try to get theverdict set aside.   ---   FLORIDA CONGRESSMAN Dante B. Fascell joins Miami-basedJorden andamp; Schulte in an &quot;of counsel,&quot; non-partnershipcapacity. He was formerly associated with Blackwell andamp; Walker,another Miami law firm. Several other former Blackwell andamp;Walker attorneys, Edwin F. Russo, S. Alan Stanley and DouglasStein, became partners at Jorden andamp; Schulte, which said theadditions will help build its international, corporate andlitigation practices.</TEXT></DOC>