<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900820-0048</DOCNO><DOCID>900820-0048.</DOCID><HL>   U.S., Iraq Edge   Toward Armed   Conflict in Gulf   ---   Baghdad Demands Pullout   As Navy Ships Fire Shots   Across Bows of Tankers   ----   By Robert S. Greenberger and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A3</SO><CO>   MDEST MD EUROP</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)AIRLINES (AIR)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   The U.S. and Iraq edged closer to armed confrontation, asU.S. naval vessels shadowed two Iraqi tankers believed to becarrying outbound cargoes of oil, and Iraq vowed to holdWestern hostages until President Bush withdraws troops fromSaudi Arabia and ends economic sanctions.   Over the weekend, the U.S. Navy fired warning shots acrossthe bows of the two tankers in the Persian Gulf and Gulf ofOman. Neither tanker was stopped. But the incident --involving the first shots fired by the U.S. in the Gulfcrisis -- underscored the growing volatility in the conflictbetween the U.S. and Iraq.</LP><TEXT>   The Pentagon wouldn't say where the ships were headed, butan administration official said he believed one tanker washeaded to Yemen. If the vessels continue their course, theshipments would pose the toughest test of the effort to blockoutbound cargoes from Iraq.   President Bush interrupted his vacation in Kennebunkport,Maine, yesterday and headed back to Washington to discuss theGulf crisis with senior aides at the White House. One itemexpected to be on the agenda, according to officials, was howmany military reservists to call up to supplement the Bushadministration's massive buildup in the region. The presidenthasn't yet signed an order calling up reserves.   The U.S. determination to prevent the tankers fromunloading their cargo, thereby breaking the embargo, couldlead the U.S. to the brink of war. &quot;I think we're about 70%on our way to war&quot; within the next several weeks, warned PaulJureidini, vice president of Abbott Associates, aWashington-based Mideast consulting firm. Others say that theodds may be slimmer, but the possibility of forcibly stoppingthe tankers has increased the likelihood of a confrontation.   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who is visiting U.S. troopsand ships in the Gulf region, said that &quot;our vessels continueto maintain their surveillance&quot; of the Iraqi ships. And heemphasized that U.S. forces are authorized to stop cargo toor from Iraq &quot;by voluntary means and naval means ifnecessary.&quot;   At the same time that the U.S. is building up its militarypresence, there are renewed efforts to try to resolve thecrisis without a military confrontation, according to peoplein the Middle East close to the situation. One Mideast expertwith close connections in the region said that Jordan's KingHussein is continuing talks with Iraqi President SaddamHussein to find ways to entice Iraq into withdrawing fromKuwait.   According to the Mideast expert, these discussions includeproposals that the Gulf countries write off Iraq's debts tothem, which total as much as $70 billion. Other ideas beingdiscussed include finding a way for Kuwait to &quot;lease&quot; to Iraqtwo islands, Warbah and Bubiyan, that would give Baghdadexpanded access to the Persian Gulf, and searching forformulas to share the oil fields beneath the Kuwait-Iraqiborder.   Meanwhile, however, Iraq is reacting to the mounting U.S.naval presence by warning that the 3,000 Americans and otherwesterners being forcibly detained would be used as shieldsto discourage American bombers from attacking Iraqi militaryinstallations. Baghdad also has said that the foreignerswould suffer from any shortages of food or medicine resultingfrom the international embargo of Iraq.   Despite these repeated threats, U.S. officials generallycontinued to shy away from the term &quot;hostage,&quot; mindful of howhostage crises hobbled the Carter and Reagan administrations.Speaking yesterday on NBC News's &quot;Meet the Press,&quot; RobertKimmitt, undersecretary of state for political affairs, saidthat the word &quot;has certain emotional elements to it, bothhere and in the region.&quot; He reiterated that the U.S. goal is&quot;to get these people out and to take whatever steps we thinkwill contribute to that.&quot;   Mr. Kimmitt added that the U.S. had no evidence that anyAmericans had been moved to military or research sites thatcould be targets of an American attack.   For now, Iraq's Hussein is using the detained Americans totry to manipulate U.S. public opinion. Yesterday Iraq offeredto let all foreigners go if President Bush provides writtenguarantees that U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia are withdrawn andif the embargo imposed on Iraq is lifted. The message,broadcast on Iraqi television yesterday, was described as anopen letter to the families of those being detained.   Saddam Hussein also said that Iraq is immediately freeingall detainees from Austria, Switzerland, Sweden, Finland andPortugal, the Associated Press reported. People from thosecountries account for fewer than 600 of the 21,000 Westernerstrapped in Iraq and Kuwait, the AP said.   The Iraqi president's tactic of attempting to go over theheads of U.S. officials is similar to the one he used duringthe last two weeks, when he called on Arabs to join Iraq in aholy war against the West. Saddam Hussein is appealing --with some success -- to the impoverished and resentful Arabmasses in such states as Jordan and Egypt who despise theoil-rich Kuwaitis and believe that their leaders are U.S.lackeys. Now, the Iraqi president is hoping to generatepressure in the U.S. to test Mr. Bush's staying power.   White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said SaddamHussein's offer &quot;doesn't have much relationship at all to ourobjectives. It contains no new relevant proposals, noreference to the U.N. and Arab League calls for them {Iraqis}to leave Kuwait.&quot;   President Bush got a boost yesterday from two influentialDemocrats in Congress, who said the U.S. needs to balance itshumanitarian concern for hostages against other Americaninterests in the region, such as the free flow of oil in thegulf and stopping aggression to ensure regional stability.   &quot;You cannot let one interest predominate over these otherinterests,&quot; said Rep. Lee Hamilton, (D., Ind.), chairman ofthe House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on the Mideast. AndRep. Les Aspin (D., Wis.), chairman of the House ArmedServices Committee, said that if U.S. citizens are harmed,&quot;we at least know the address of the person responsible, soif we need to send a message we know where to send it.&quot;   Defense Secretary Cheney, whose tour of the Middle East ispart of a full-court diplomatic press to isolate SaddamHussein from neighboring Arab countries, is offering toprovide military assistance to Bahrain and other Persian Gulfkingdoms.   Commanders of U.S. warships in the region -- carryingwartime loads of air-to-air missiles, extra ammunition andeven specially armed units trained to board suspiciousvessels -- described cat-and-mouse games in the high seas tointerdict cargoes to or from Iraq.   The heightened level of tension was evident throughout theU.S. ships deployed here in the tropical haze about 50 milesoff the northwest corner of Saudi Arabia. Military officialsrecounted at least 15 incidents in the past few days whencivilian vessels suspected of doing business with Iraq werequizzed from a distance by radio or were intercepted by aU.S. warship before heeding orders to change course.   One indication of the administration's seriousness inpursuing the sanctions is the fact that Navy ships have beensupplied with laminated plastic cards to give to civiliancrew members if ships are boarded. The cards, among otherthings, urge civilians to &quot;remain calm&quot; but &quot;drop to the deckwith your hands out-stretched&quot; if fighting erupts.   Mr. Cheney is scheduled to consult with officials in Oman,Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates. The U.S. already basesfighter planes in some of those small Persian Gulf kingdoms,and officials said Mr. Cheney wants to discuss more extensivemilitary cooperation. The secretary told reporters: &quot;They mayhave a need for some short-term items&quot; or long-term militaryaid. &quot;I would think everything is possible.&quot;   As the situation continues to heat up, Pentagon officialsare finding new ways to move the massive force and integrateit with the Saudi military. Pentagon spokesman Pete Williamsannounced that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia formally signed anagreement, as expected, spelling out that American forceswill stay there only as long as the Saudis request.   Friday, the Pentagon announced that it had orderedcommercial airlines to provide as many as 38 planes formilitary purposes. This is the first time the Civil ReserveAir Fleet has been activated since Congress created it in1952, and the law gives the president and the secretary ofdefense authority to order more commercial cargo andpassenger aircraft to help Operation Desert Shield.   Meanwhile, sources in the aviation industry indicated thatthe U.S. may soon supply Saudi Arabia with the most advancedversion of the F-15 fighter jet, built by McDonnell DouglasCorp., St. Louis. The Los Angeles Times reported Saturdaythat Mr. Cheney flew to Saudi Arabia last week to negotiatean agreement for selling the F-15E Eagle.   But Mr. Cheney told reporters that the Saudis haven'tspecifically requested additional weapons and that thePentagon isn't close to locking up a major deal with any Arabcountry.   ---   Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>