<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900418-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>900418-0012.</DOCID><HL>   Executive Pay (A Special Report): Essay   ---   A Modest Proposal:   Do Executive-Pay Scales Seem All Screwed Up?   Here Are a Few Ways to Fix Them   ----   By William E. Blundell</HL><DATE>04/18/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE R31</SO><LP>   AFTER READING about all the money other people are haulinghome in the Brink's truck, you may be suffering the firsttiny spasms of democratic rage. This is forgivable. It's agalling thing to know that Lee Iacocca makes more during atrip to the executive washroom than you do all day.   So a lot of us are asking the obvious questions: Whatmakes these topsiders think they deserve so much? And whatabout me? Am I chopped liver?</LP><TEXT>   Alas, yes -- at least in the so-called free market, whichalmost all of us devoutly believe in until we are caught upin its actual operation.   This much-worshiped mechanism gives a utility infielderwith a .212 average, a bad back and a good agent $1 millionguaranteed over two years, while a high-school math teacherhas to plan three months ahead to finance a valve job on his1977 Datsun. It makes double-digit millionaires of peoplewith interesting hair who, after a labor of some years, havemastered a few chords on the electric guitar. And it has madeyour boss worth his weight in diamonds, even though everyonesuffering through his reign at Amalgamated Everything can seethat he is sending the outfit right down the old sanitaryfacility.   Is this right? Is this fair? God, no.   The free-market value of top managers has been grosslyinflated by prattle about the rarity of their talents.Academics, who have succeeded in making management studies asincomprehensible as molecular physics, are wonderful at this.PR types -- guess who pays their salaries -- aid and abet. Sodoes an uncritical press, whose members pride themselves onaggressiveness but spend a lot of time slobbering at theshoelaces of people who wear better clothes (almosteverybody) and make much, much more money than they do. Theresult: a picture of business as some kind of complicatedprimitive religion, its shamans the CEOs. Their secret runesand rituals, things few can master, bring the rain and makethe cows heavy with calves.   Smoke and wind. Executive ability is far, far more commonthan the talent needed to spear a ground ball hit to thehole. Anyone who has a fair amount of common sense, energyand humanity can do a creditable or even exemplary job ofrunning a business. Parenthood is a lot harder. Look around:There is no apparent shortage of decently run widgetfactories, while that continuous low murmur you hear is thesound of millions of people telling psychologists about theircrummy childhoods.   But logic availeth not. As a nation, we remain convincedthat executive talent is as rare as Kirtland's warbler, andtherefore worth a ton of money; the past Decade of Greed,with its adoration of business and big money, has hammeredthis erroneous idea so deeply into the public mind thatdynamite couldn't dislodge it.   This makes it difficult to sell pay-reform ideas likeinverted regressive compensation, which a few of us recentlymade up over a couple of brews. Its rationale: Why give themoon to 60-year-olds who have already educated the kids, paidoff the mortgage and have a basement full of Montrachet?   Instead, we raise the starting pay of hot-eyed youngM.B.A. recruits to perhaps a half-million -- let's begenerous -- thus giving more money to those who need it. Thenwe cut their pay as they slither up the greasy pole year byyear. At the end their compensation is mostly power, whichthey can use with minds unclouded by personal distractionsthat plague CEOs now, like worrying about what to do with allthe doubloons piling up in the four-car garage. Given currentCEO pay, this idea probably wouldn't cost much and wouldpromote efficiency. Employers would be motivated to give aquick hook to youthful mediocrities instead of letting themclog up the hallways for the next 30 years, and the more ableyoungsters would be induced to give their all.   A sensible notion but, as noted, politically andculturally a hard sell. We simply have been too conditionedto the idea that any big-company chieftain worthy of histitle must be paid the equivalent of the Bolivian GNP. Sohave the chieftains. On, then, to a more palatablealternative, the Bandamp;J Reverse Twist. At Ben andamp; Jerry's HomemadeInc., a Vermont ice-cream producer, the highest-paid employeecannot make more than five times the salary of thelowest-paid. In practice, this has limited the pay of BenCohen, chairman and co-founder, to an amount so niggardlythat many less-altruistic CEOs at big outfits wouldn't botherto pick it up off the sidewalk.   But what if we flipped the formula, stipulating that thelowest-paid employee of a company -- Walt Disney Co., say --couldn't make less than one-fifth of whatever CEO MichaelEisner makes? His ox wouldn't be gored, while every gofer andcleaning lady at Disney Studios would be immediately raisedto a hair under $2 million a year. You can't beat that foracross-the-board palatability.   But a few annoying bugs remain on the economic side. Aftera lengthy study that drained the blood out of several smallfoundations subsidizing it, researchers at the HarvardBusiness School have determined that financing this formulawould require a boost in Disneyland admission prices to$11,748 a ticket. Focus-group interviews, said theresearchers, indicate that quite a few people might not wantto pay that much to get in. The idea clearly needs a littlework. But perhaps we don't need to bother. Saving the bestfor last, we now propose a reform measure that not only meetsbut also exceeds every criterion.   It is this: Pay the CEO the moon and stars if you like --but if he doesn't do well in the ensuing year, make him giveit all back. Every penny actual and deferred, every stockoption, everything granted that year.   Is this economically feasible? Currently, the maindifference between a good performance one year and stinkingout the joint the next is that in the first case the bossgets obscene rewards and in the second only enormous ones. Byreducing the latter to zip, a lot of companies would save afortune. As for the CEO, he has amassed more than enough fatto live on for a year.   Is this politically and culturally feasible? Fiendishlyso. Working the Cabernet-and-squab circuit, CEOs themselvesare forever thumping the tubs for the risk-and-reward aspectof free-market capitalism. All our plan would do is at lastbalance their own great rewards with a truly matching risk,which they can hardly object to without looking likehypocrites.   Case closed. Now -- which CEO wants to go first? Don't allraise your hands at once.   ---   Mr. Blundell is deputy editor of The Wall Street JournalReports.</TEXT></DOC>