<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900706-0012</DOCNO><DOCID>900706-0012.</DOCID><HL>   What's News --   World-Wide</HL><DATE>07/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   NATO AGREED to revise its defense policy in view ofchanges in the East bloc.   On the first day of a two-day London summit, the Westernallies generally accepted a proposal by Bush to declare thatNATO will use nuclear weapons only as a &quot;last resort,&quot; U.S.officials said. The allies also agreed to an Americanproposal for inviting Soviet leader Gorbachev to address analliance meeting. The invitation would be a way of showingthat the group wants to enter an era of cooperation with itsadversaries in Eastern Europe. The U.S. and Bonn apparentlyreached a compromise on a pledge for cutting back the army ofa newly united Germany.</LP><TEXT>   NATO wants to reassure the Soviets that there is nothingto fear from allowing a unified Germany to become a fullmember of the revamped organization.   ---   Albania's foreign ministry pledged to grant passports tothe hundreds of Albanians who have sought refuge in foreignembassies in the capital in an effort to flee their Communisthomeland. The ministry appeared to deny a report thatAlbanians would no longer be able to apply for visas. Thenumber of asylum-seekers rose to 600.   ---   Gorbachev appeared to have staked an unassailable claim toremain head of the Soviet Communist Party as criticsattending a party congress showed no indications of fieldingany alternative candidates. The Soviet leader is facingre-election when the meeting comes to a conclusion next week.   ---   Czechoslovakia's Parliament re-elected Havel as president.The election of the former dissident playwright to a two-yearterm culminated a seven-month transition to democratic rule.Havel had served as interim president after last year'speaceful revolution toppling the Communists. The Parliamentwas voted into office last month.   ---   Israel's defense minister said he would cut troops in theoccupied territories if violence eased in the 30-month-oldPalestinian uprising. Arens, who was named to his post lastmonth, made the comment during a tour of the Israeli-occupiedGaza Strip.   ---   Poland's agriculture minister resigned in anticipation ofa major cabinet shake-up by leader Mazowiecki, who is underpressure to dismiss holdover Communists from key posts. Agovernment spokeswoman indicated the prime minister wouldannounce policy changes today, but she declined to say howmany ministers would be ousted.   ---   India's governor in Kashmir gave security forces sweepingpowers in their battle to quell a separatist revolt in thestrife-torn region, where at least 700 people have beenkilled in six months. Leaders of the protests in Kashmir,India's only Moslem-majority state, have been demandingindependence or annexation by neighboring Pakistan.   ---   The U.S. and Britain plan to argue at next week's economicsummit in Houston that a controversial plan for $15 billionin international aid to the Soviet Union is premature.Surprisingly, leading Soviet economists and officials agree.They say the help would be welcome, but that the countryisn't ready to absorb it.   ---   Kenyan police detained three more prominent individualslinked to recent calls for a legalized opposition in theone-party state. The detentions of a former vice president'sson and two lawyers brought to 10 the number of people seizedin a two-day sweep.   ---   Defense attorneys filed an appeal in a Massachusetts courton behalf of David and Ginger Twitchell, a Christian Sciencecouple found guilty Wednesday of manslaughter for withholdingmedical treatment from their son, who died in 1986 of a bowelinfection. The couple, who said they relied on spiritualhealing, face up to 20 years in prison.   ---   Colombian security forces seized about 800 pounds of purecocaine at an airport in northwestern Colombia as a wave ofdrug-related terrorism intensified in major cities, officialssaid. The cocaine was found aboard an airplane that was aboutto take off for the U.S., according to an army statement.   ---   About 5,300 rebels fought Liberian troops in Monrovia'ssuburbs, according to an insurgent source, while soldiersransacked stores and restaurants in the capital. Moregovernment advisers left the country as Doe clung desperatelyto power. The president has shown no sign of departing andhas rejected a U.S. offer to help him flee.   ---   Serbian authorities dissolved the local legislature andgovernment in Kosovo, the troubled southern provinceadministered by Yugoslavia's largest republic. Serbianofficials also acted to gain control of Kosovo's media. Themoves came in the wake of Monday's independence declarationby ethnic Albanian deputies in the local assembly.   ---   Sri Lankan troops shot and killed 27 Tamil rebels in a newwave of violence in the northern and eastern parts of theIndian Ocean island, and the government said it planned tohold new elections in Tamil-dominated areas. At least 14soldiers were also killed in rebel attacks. The guerrillaslaunched their latest offensive June 11.   ---   Died: Mitch Snyder, 46, a leading advocate for thehomeless, in Washington, D.C., an apparent suicide byhanging.</TEXT></DOC>