<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900824-0130</DOCNO><DOCID>900824-0130.</DOCID><HL>   The Americas:   Uncovering the Awful Truth of Nicaragua's Killing Fields   ----   By Nina H. Shea</HL><DATE>08/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><CO>   LATAM</CO><LP>   In early 1987 in a remote UN refugee camp in rural CostaRica, Jose Aguirre Sanchez, a 57-year-old bean farmer fromsouthern Nicaragua, told me about Sandinista mass murders inhis home village 18 months before that drove him into exile:   &quot;The Sandinista army started killing civilians. My closefriend was killed in it. He read a Catholic Bible and likedto tell people about it. He was kind of a preacher. One daythe Sandinistas surrounded his house while he was eatingdinner. The Sandinistas threw a grenade at the house andstarted shooting at it. They shot my friend in the arm andall the children in the house ran out. The Sandinistas saidthey would take my friend to the hospital to get treatmentfor the gunshot wound and led him away. Instead they killedhim. His mutilated body was found later. His name was RufinoLaguna. We didn't tell the authorities because we wereafraid. The Sandinista soldiers started killing other peoplein the town.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   On that visit to two refugee camps for Nicaraguans inCosta Rica, historian Ronald Radosh and I interviewed 50refugees who told of similar experiences of fleeing lethalSandinista army attacks on remote villages where the Contrashad passed through but were not present during the assaults.They said scores of women, children and other civilians weremurdered in cold blood. We concluded that the Sandinistas hada counterinsurgency policy of &quot;draining the sea,&quot; that is,killing or driving out the &quot;sea&quot; of rural peasants who couldlend support to the guerrillas.   Other evidence of political massacres by the Sandinistasemerged as well. Shortly after our report was publicized,Gary Moore, an investigator with the Washington-basedNational Forum Foundation, went on muleback to remote areasinside Nicaragua. There, he taped villagers attesting topolitical murders by Sandinista security officials (an effortthat landed him in prison and resulted in the confiscation ofsome of his documentation).   What was the reaction of the international human rightscommunity to these and other shocking reports? Most ignoredthe few who spoke up, following the lead of Americas Watch,the most prominent human rights group concentrating on LatinAmerica. Americas Watch retraced our steps in the refugeecamps, but cast doubts on the refugee reports by criticizingus for not collecting corroborating evidence of massacresinside Nicaragua -- in war zones closed to foreigninvestigators but where, they claimed, they had free access.   Americas Watch went even further stating, in a reportissued the same month as my organization's refugee report:&quot;The government of Nicaragua does not engage in a pattern ofviolations of the laws of war. Nor does it engage insystematic violations of the right to life or to physicalintegrity of detainees. . . . Nor does it engage in adeliberate pattern of forced disappearances of persons.&quot;   In 1989, when Americas Watch acknowledged that Nicaraguanarmed forces &quot;engaged in a pattern of killings&quot; in northernNicaragua, it stated that it believed the killings were &quot;anew phenomenon.&quot; In other words, any prior killings bySandinistas were acts of individuals and did not reflectofficial policy.   But now evidence of the awful truth has becomeirrefutable, thanks in large part to the courageous work ofMarta Patricia Baltodano, a Nicaraguan human rights lawyerand director of the Nicaraguan Association Pro HumanRights-established by the U.S. State Department toinvestigate and prosecute Contra human rights violations.Since the Sandinistas' electoral defeat, she has been able touncover eight secret mass graves in remote northern Nicaraguathat corroborate the earliest reports of systematic killingsof civilians by Sandinista soldiers and militants.   Working with four lawyers, a forensic doctor and localwitnesses no longer afraid to testify, Ms. Baltodano hasalready established that three of the graves contain theremains of civilians murdered by Sandinista military andState Security personnel (Nicaragua's secret police, who weretrained and assisted until February by their East Germancounterparts, the dread Stasi). The five others still areunder investigation. In the excavation of each gravesite, thenew, freely elected mayors have been eager to help. Ms.Baltodano told me that local &quot;campesinos&quot;, who have been tooafraid to speak openly about the murders before, have nowenthusiastically volunteered to shovel out the sites and airthe truth.   In the most recent discovery, on Aug. 15 in Murra, a townclose to the Honduran border, Ms. Baltodano's group, with alarge local crowd looking on, found 17 skeletons. Fourteen ofthe bodies have been identified as evangelicals who wererounded up by a Sandinista battalion, forced to dig their owngrave and then shot or stabbed to death on April 10, 1982 --when the Contra war was still in its infancy. Family membersidentified the victims through gold fillings in their teeth,remnants of clothes, and in one case an agrarian reform IDnumber linking him to a local farming cooperative.   In June, the Nicaraguan Association found another shallowgrave in Mokoron, 220 yards from a Sandinista militarybattalion near Wiwili in northern Jinotega. This site yieldedparts of 11 skeletons. One by one the relatives of eight ofthe victims have come forward to identify them. They werecaught by the State Security while trying to escape beingdragooned into the Sandinista army in October 1983. Theremains of two adults and a seven-year-old child have notbeen identified. Cords used to bind the victims were found,and the forensic examiner concluded the victims' throats hadbeen cut.   There is every indication that Ms. Baltodano's findingsare only the tip of the iceberg. Every week campesinoscautiously come to her with new leads. Her office, alreadyoverwhelmed, has not yet investigated in Nueva Guinea, PuntaGorda and the villages of southern Zelaya, where the refugeesI interviewed came from. Nor has she checked the area alongthe Atlantic coast, where many Nicaraguan Indians, targetedby Sandinista authorities as civilian dissidents,disappeared.   That the Sandinistas were able to get away with thesummary execution of noncombatants is in no small part due tothe failure of some of the main human rights groups that dealwith Latin America. The Sandinistas even cited Americas Watchreports to deflect too-close scrutiny on rights-abusecharges. At the same time, reports (such as ours) thatdocumented Sandinista abuses were attacked and dismissed ashaving been trumped up by or linked to the CIA.   The Organization of American States' Human RightsCommission recently met with Ms. Baltodano to discuss herfindings. But so far none of the private human rights groupsthat concentrate on Latin America have shown much interest inher work. As they did in Chile and Argentina, these groupsshould be insisting on a full accounting. Even though anamnesty law in Nicaragua may bar the prosecution of warcriminals and rights violators, a full investigation shouldbe supported out of humanitarian concern for the victims'families and in the interest of justice.   ---   Ms. Shea is president of the Puebla Institute, a layCatholic human rights group based in Washington, D.C.</TEXT></DOC>