<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920304-0130</DOCNO><DOCID>920304-0130.</DOCID><HL>   French Lessons:   The Agnellis of Italy   Learn How Not to Do   A Takeover in Paris   ---   A Nasty Fight Over Perrier   Results From Friendly Bid   For Its Parent Company   ---   The Swiss Knight Strategy   ----   By Peter Gumbel and E.S. Browning   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/04/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   F.BSN F.CFS F.EXR F.PRR F.STL Z.NES</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)CONSUMER NON-CYCLICAL (NCY)</MS><IN>BEVERAGES (BVG)FOOD PRODUCTS (FOD)SECURITIES (SCR)SOFT DRINKS, MAKERS OF NON-ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (SFT)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><NS>ACQUISITIONS andamp; MERGERS, TAKEOVERS, BOARD BATTLES (TNM)</NS><RE>EUROPE (EU)FRANCE (FR)ITALY (ITA)SWITZERLAND (SZ)WESTERN EUROPE (WEU)</RE><LP>   PARIS -- By all accounts, Giovanni Agnelli loves France.The jet-setting 71-year-old Italian tycoon, whose holdingsinclude Europe's second largest auto maker, Fiat S.p.A.,speaks fluent French and visits Paris as often as he frolicson the French Riviera.   When it comes to business, too, France has lately been hiscountry of choice. Seeking to expand out of Italy, theTurin-based Agnelli family has been investing heavily inFrance, forging close links with leading companies andcourting the powerful banks. Mr. Agnelli, says an associate,&quot;likes to think he is almost French.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Imagine, therefore, Mr. Agnelli's dismay to find himselfembroiled in a bitter takeover contest in France that heneither wanted nor expected, lined up against the veryfriends he has been courting all these years. That isprecisely the situation the Agnelli group now faces as itbattles for control of Source Perrier S.A., the famousmineral-water company, and its parent, Exor S.A., in one ofthe few big takeover fights anywhere in recent months.   What started out as an amiable effort by the Agnellis toincrease their already substantial stake in Exor has suddenlyturned into a nasty takeover brawl reminiscent of the roaring1980s. The Agnellis are pitted against an alliance betweentwo of Europe's biggest food groups, Nestle S.A. ofSwitzerland and France's BSN S.A. Adding poignancy to theaffair is the fact that the Agnellis, through a complexnetwork of cross-shareholdings, are linked both to BSN and toits powerful investment bank, Lazard Freres andamp; Cie. Yet hereis Lazard, the Agnellis' oldest French friend, whose seniorpartner sits on Fiat's board, leading the counterattackagainst them.   The Italians say they are avoiding public comment untilthe fight is over. But privately they aren't hiding theirastonishment and anger. &quot;Of course we are upset,&quot; fumes oneof their top officials. &quot;It is all very, very surprising forus.&quot;   The outcome of the battle, which is being waged as much inthe French courts as on the Paris Bourse, is far fromcertain. One thing, however, is already clear: For all itsrecent liberalization, the French business establishment isstill run by a powerful old-boy network that is hard topenetrate -- and that can blackball would-be members who getuppity.   The Agnellis have stumbled, according to officials fromboth sides, because they tried to circumvent the tight-knitclub. By cutting Lazard and others out of the original Exordeal, they turned allies into enemies. In part because ofstubborn Italian pride, both sides suggest, they then refusedto shift tack and repair the damage.   &quot;The problem is that they managed to alienate a largenumber of important French companies. It wasn't just us,&quot;says Antoine Riboud, the chairman of BSN, an erstwhileAgnelli ally that launched a counter-bid for Exor on Feb. 21.&quot;They made a big mistake.&quot;   The &quot;mistake,&quot; retorts an official close to the Italians,was to believe that Paris is an open market. &quot;The Agnelliswere thinking like Americans and not like Frenchmen,&quot; theofficial says. &quot;They said, what does the book say we shoulddo? Then they went by the book. They didn't consider thepsychological reaction.&quot;   Europe has, in fact, been opening its financial markets inthe drive toward economic union. An Italian-Swiss battle forcontrol of so prestigious a French natural resource wouldhave been unthinkable just a few years ago. But nationalismremains a potent force in mergers and acquisitions, and inpractice Europe-wide regulations still count less than localcustoms.   Italy's gung-ho entrepreneurs have been learning thislesson most painfully. Carlo De Benedetti took on the Belgianestablishment and lost when he tried to wrest control ofSociete Generale de Belgique in 1988. More recently, LeopoldoPirelli ran into fierce German resistance when he bid fortire maker Continental AG. The botched hostile effort costPirelli S.p.A. tens of millions of dollars -- and led to Mr.Pirelli's relinquishing executive control.   The Agnellis thought they were on safer ground in Francebecause they had painstakingly forged a relationship with thefinancial establishment, especially Lazard. That bank, housedin an unmarked and unflashy building on Boulevard Haussmann,prides itself on discretion. &quot;We are a little like a maitred'hotel who serves a meal,&quot; Michel David-Weill, its leadpartner, once remarked. &quot;The mistress of the house doesn'tparticularly want you to congratulate the maitre d'hotel forthe dinner.&quot;   The modest veneer, however, belies financial clout -- andmore than a dash of arrogance. Lazard, its critics say, likesto think that no major deals are done in France without itsapproval. It also has influential branches in New York andLondon.   Mindful of its power, Mr. Agnelli took pains to cultivateLazard over the years. When he had business to do in France,he asked its advice. Associates say he fostered a personalfriendship with Andre Meyer, an autocratic partner who didmuch to establish Lazard's international reputation before hedied in 1979.   The Agnellis' troubles trace back to the fall of 1990,when they decided they didn't need their hand held any morein the French business world. They had Fiat swap some sharesand assets with French telephone giant Alcatel Alsthom S.A.-- without involving Lazard. Lazard was snubbed again whenthe Agnellis bought into Exor, a $1 billion holding companythat includes some swank Paris real estate, the prestigiousChateau Margaux Bordeaux vineyard and a 35% controllingminority interest in Perrier.   The Agnellis first bought a 13.5% stake in Exor in January1991. They slowly raised it to 34% and then, last November,made a takeover bid. (The Agnellis have since raised theirExor stake to nearly 40%.) The transactions culminated monthsof patient negotiations with Exor's founders, theFranco-Greek Mentzelopoulos family, and with Exor management.   Agnelli officials say they saw no need to retain Lazard toassist with what was supposed to be a friendly acquisition.By then, Gianluigi Gabetti, the head of the Agnelli family'smain Italian holding company, had developed a strong personalrelationship with the Mentzelopoulos family and with Exor'schairman, Jacques Vincent, the officials say. Indeed, theyhad every reason not to bring in Lazard: Mr. Vincent is acorporate maverick who doesn't get on well with leaders ofthe Paris financial establishment.   &quot;It was a typical case where no intervention by aninvestment bank was necessary,&quot; says a senior Agnelliofficial.   The transaction, he adds, shouldn't have taken anyone bysurprise. For months the Agnellis had signaled that theywanted to gain control of Exor as part of their strategy forexpanding in France. Lazard's Mr. David-Weill and BSN's Mr.Riboud should have been familiar with these general plans,Agnelli officials say, because both sit on the boards ofAgnelli companies, including the main holding company inItaly and its two investment arms.   For his part, Mr. Agnelli is a board member of Lazard'sparent, while his brother Umberto sits on BSN's board. TheAgnelli group holds 5.8% of BSN stock. The Agnellis and BSNalso have operated several Italian noodle, sauce and cheesejoint ventures, although BSN now is in the process of buyingout the Agnellis' share.   Moreover, Agnelli officials maintain, BSN had indicated tothem that it was prevented by antitrust considerations fromtaking part in the Exor deal even if it had wanted to. BSNholds a large share of the French mineral-water market withits Evian and other brands, and any link with Perrier, themarket leader, risked being vetoed by French authorities.   BSN's Mr. Riboud, however, says he told the Agnellis thatthey were wrong to leave him out of an Exor bid, and warnedthat he might act if a third party entered the scene. &quot;I saidto them, everything that touches mineral water is ourbusiness,&quot; Mr. Riboud recalls.   He had another reason to be nervous about the Agnellis'move into Exor. The Agnellis have made no secret of theirwish for a larger stake in BSN, and some in the Frenchestablishment saw their Exor bid as a prelude to a move forgreater influence at BSN itself.   Whatever the case, the Italians were ill-prepared for thestorm that greeted their Nov. 28 bid for Exor. Within days,they were under fire from the French press and some of thebig guns of the French establishment.   Critics included Cie. de Suez, the powerful investmentgroup, Credit Agricole, a major bank, and the Frenchgovernment's huge investment arm Caisse des Depots andamp;Consignations, all minority Exor shareholders. Theycomplained that the Italian bid of 1,320 francs ($240) perExor share, a 23% premium on its market value before theoffer, was far below the stock's historic high.   There were some efforts to patch things up. Suez, whichboth is a holder of Exor stock and is itself partly owned byExor, tried to persuade the Agnellis to give it a piece ofthe action. So did Mr. Riboud and his banker, Lazard.   The Agnellis, however, declined to include them. Agnelligroup officials say they did so largely in deference to theirpartners, Mr. Vincent and the Mentzelopoulos family, whowanted to proceed as planned. But when the French bourse'smarket watchdog launched an investigation into the deal earlyin December, the Italians sensed that they were running intotrouble. &quot;We already had an indication that there weredifficulties,&quot; says a top Agnelli official.   The trouble was far bigger than they could have imagined.It took the shape of Nestle, the giant food group. Accordingto an official report by the Paris market's regulators, theCommission des Operations de Bourse, a financial arm of Suezcontacted Nestle within days of the Agnelli takeoverannouncement to canvass interest in a rival bid for Perrier.   The Swiss, who had long been interested in Perrier butthought it untouchable, jumped at the chance. Unlike theAgnellis, Nestle was prepared to cooperate with key playersfrom the French establishment. The obvious candidates wereSuez and BSN. When Nestle's chairman phoned Mr. Riboud justbefore Christmas, the BSN chief recalls, &quot;I said, `I'll hopon a plane and be right down to see you.'&quot;   Lazard, turning on the Agnellis, egged Nestle and BSN on.By the end of the month, the Swiss company had started buyingstock in both Exor and Perrier.   Two key meetings then followed, and Lazard helped to setup both. On Jan. 3, it was host of a meeting between Nestle'sfinance chief, Reto Domeniconi, and BSN's Mr. Riboud. Theydiscussed various options for gaining control of Perrier,with the aim of dividing it between them. Before launching arival bid, however, they decided to give Mr. Agnelli a lastchance to settle the matter on friendly terms.   That evening, Lazard's Mr. David-Weill telephoned Mr.Agnelli, who was on a mountain vacation, and asked for ameeting the following Sunday, Jan. 5. He informed Mr. Agnellithat Nestle would also be attending, leaving little doubtthat the Swiss company was interested in Perrier. Accordingto testimony Mr. David-Weill gave to Paris Bourse regulators,Mr. Agnelli agreed to meet but described his associates as&quot;not flexible and rather difficult.&quot;   At 3 p.m. that Sunday, Mr. David-Weill, Mr. Riboud of BSNand Nestle's Mr. Domeniconi met in Turin, the Agnelli group'sheadquarters, with Mr. Agnelli, his brother Umberto and Mr.Gabetti of the Agnelli holding company. The Franco-Swissmessage was clear: You can keep Chateau Margaux and the Parisreal estate, but let us have Perrier, or we will take it witha hostile bid. Although he could have made a significantcapital gain by selling out to the Nestle group, Mr.Agnelli's reply was equally clear: Exor and Perrier are notto be divided up.   Why Mr. Agnelli rejected these overtures is unclear. Butofficials on both sides say Latin pride and loyalty played arole. Having developed a strong relationship with Mr.Vincent, Exor's chairman, the Agnellis were reluctant torenege on their deal with him and the Mentzelopouloses.   The Italians struck back. The day after the Turin meeting,an Agnelli ally, food and paper concern Saint Louis S.A.,acquired a 13.8% Perrier stake. This gave the Agnellis andtheir allies control of a seemingly untoppable 49.3% ofPerrier stock. But it also left them open to charges thatthey had misused inside knowledge of Nestle's intentions.French regulators said they didn't find evidence ofwrongdoing, but Nestle has brought the case before a Pariscommercial court. And the regulators nonetheless ruled thatbecause of the sharp increase in their Perrier stake, theAgnelli-led group must bid for Perrier as well as Exor. Theydid so last Thursday.   No one knows how or when all of this will end. Feelingsnow may be running too high for a friendly solution.&quot;Confrontation doesn't frighten us,&quot; Giovanni Agnelli saidlast week in a rare public comment, adding that &quot;the warcould be long.&quot;   Regardless of who wins, the battle will leave scars bothfor the French establishment and for the Agnellis. &quot;TheAgnellis thought it was like buying a cigarette pack at thetobacconist,&quot; says one member of the French establishment.&quot;Then someone comes in with a gun. It's a holdup and there'sblood all over the floor.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>