<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900423-0144</DOCNO><DOCID>900423-0144.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:   Iran's Revenge: The Lockerbie Bombing   ----   By William M. Carley</HL><DATE>04/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><LP>   For many years the U.S. government has lavished foreignaid and military hardware on Israel. A good deal of thathardware has been used against Arab Palestinians. On July 3,1988, the U.S. did something else. U.S. Navy Capt. WillRogers ordered his ship to fire missiles at what turned outto be an Iranian airliner on a routine passenger flight. Themissiles blew the plane apart, killing 290 men, women andchildren aboard.   One result, not surprisingly, was an act of revenge: thedowning of Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, on Dec. 21,1988. It is the investigation of this terrorist act that isthe subject of &quot;The Fall of Pan Am 103: Inside the LockerbieInvestigation&quot; (Putnam, 304 pages, $21.95), by Steven Emersonand Brian Duffy. Mr. Emerson has written books and articlesdealing with national-security issues; Mr. Duffy is an editorat U.S. News andamp; World Report.</LP><TEXT>   As chronicled by the authors, the Iranians contracted outtheir revenge to a hit squad, also known as the Popular Frontfor the Liberation of Palestine-General Command. Based inDamascus, this group has long fought Israel, and apparentlywas more than happy to attack Israel's major ally and armssupplier, the U.S. The man who played the pivotal role inarranging the retaliatory bombing was Hafez Dalkamouni, aone-legged veteran of attacks aimed at Israel. It wasDalkamouni's European network, say the authors, thatconcealed the bomb in a Toshiba radio and put it aboard PanAm 103 in Frankfurt.   The investigation of the resulting explosion turned out tobe a combination of basic police work by Scottish police, theFBI and West German authorities, supported by esotericintelligence analyses done at a variety of agencies. As theauthors put it, to solve this one &quot;the cops needed the spies,and the spies needed the cops.&quot; The book chronicles how bothcops and spies have moved around Europe during the past year,chasing bits of clothes and matching up batches of plasticexplosives, all with the aim of unraveling Dalkamouni'sorganization and accumulating enough evidence to prosecutethe bombers. Dalkamouni himself, now jailed in West Germanyon other charges -- conspiring to blow up U.S. troop trains-- almost surely will be indicted for the bombing.   Though the basic facts in the case have been printed invarious publications and aired on some TV documentaries, theauthors provide a greater depth of detail as they skillfullyweave together a massive collection of facts and theories.Unfortunately, the book also shows some signs of haste. Onpage 106 Mohammed Rashid, a terrorist who placed a bombaboard another Pan Am jet in 1982, is killed off; on page 272we find he is still alive, residing in a Greek jail. Inanother instance, the sequence in which bombs were placed ontwo Pan Am jets in 1982 is reversed, disrupting thechronology of these incidents.   The most controversial aspect of the book is likely tostem from the charge that West German authorities botched aninvestigation of the PFLP-GC in fall 1988, unwittinglyallowing the bomb and the bomber to slip through theirclutches. The West Germans did arrest Dalkamouni and anotherterrorist, but a West German judge freed others in the gangfor lack of evidence. The West Germans then tried to cover uptheir mistakes by refusing to cooperate with the FBI, theauthors say. There is even a suggestion, attributed tounnamed Israeli and Western officials, that the West Germanswere more or less willing to tolerate PFLP-GC terrorism solong as the group didn't strike West German targets.   But if the West Germans did botch some aspects of theinvestigation, that surely was not by intent -- one of theirown men was killed trying to disarm another bomb secretedinside one of Dalkamouni's radio tuners. Were the WestGermans misled by some of their own informants? Did the WestGerman law enforcement and intelligence apparatus fail tocoordinate sufficiently, as U.S. agencies often fail to do?Did personalities play a part in West German reluctance tocooperate with the FBI? (The irascible FBI man whoeffectively ran the agency's investigation of Pan Am 103 hasantagonized more than one official in recent years.) Is theresome other explanation for flaws in the West Germans' work?   The answer is, we don't know. The authors, who seem tohave gotten much of their story from the angry FBI official(and almost none of it from the West Germans), don't seem toknow either. The West Germans may well be getting hit withsome unfair criticism.   There is another piece of unfinished business in thisaffair. When Capt. Rogers shot the Iranian airliner down, thejet was on a scheduled flight, it was flying in the propercivilian air corridor and its radio was squawking itsidentity on the correct civilian frequency (despite storiesto the contrary initially put out by Washington). On the faceof it, Capt. Rogers negligently failed to take proper care inidentifying his target, and so wrongly concluded it was amilitary jet trying to bomb his ship. The question is whetherhe should be court-martialed. Would there be a court-martialif that jet had been a Pan Am plane full of Americans?   ---   Mr. Carley is an investigative reporter for the Journal.</TEXT></DOC>