<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900606-0009</DOCNO><DOCID>900606-0009.</DOCID><HL>   Rival Operations --   Competitive Anomaly:   Consumers Pay More   In 2-Hospital Towns   ---   In Kalamazoo, a Nasty War   Means Duplicated Efforts;   Big Business Gets Fed Up   ---   A Dogfight Over Helicopters   ----   By Ron Winslow   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/06/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   UPJ</CO><IN>HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)MEDICAL SUPPLIES (MDS)</IN><LP>   KALAMAZOO, Mich. -- When the two archrival hospitals herefound out that both planned to launch helicopter ambulanceservices, they flew into action. Borgess Medical Centerquickly found a copter, called photographers and was first toget pictures in the local paper.   But Bronson Methodist Hospital struck back, getting itschopper into the air first and proudly proclaiming a nurseaboard every flight.</LP><TEXT>   Borgess retaliated three months later, boasting a doctoron every trip. Within a year, each hospital had upgraded totwin-engine choppers -- making the announcement the sameweek. &quot;There are only 90 helicopter ambulances in the wholecountry,&quot; an exasperated executive of Upjohn Co., the city'slargest employer, said at the time, &quot;and two of them arehere.&quot;   Not to mention two heart programs, two maternity wards,two state-of-the-art emergency rooms, and two radiologyservices. There were even two billboard campaigns. RobertFabi, a respected neurologist who has practiced here for morethan 20 years, describes the situation in verse: &quot;Given thehistory of Kalamazoo, if there is one, there will be two.&quot;   In most businesses, competition cuts prices. But hospitalbills in Kalamazoo, a metropolitan area of 200,000 betweenDetroit and Chicago, are the second highest in Michigan andamong the highest in the nation. In general, hospital costsin two-hospital towns like Kalamazoo are 30% higher than inone-hospital communities, according to a survey by Booz-Allenandamp; Hamilton, Chicago consultants. &quot;Kalamazoo is a microcosm ofthe national environment,&quot; says Gary Alquist, a Booz-Allenvice president and health-care specialist.   Charges per admission in 1988 averaged $6,112, 55% higherthan in nearby Grand Rapids and 34% above the nationalaverage for metropolitan areas. Health costs at James RiverCorp.'s Kalamazoo paper packaging operations rank in the topthree of the company's 15 similar units nationwide. When itcomes to further expansion, health costs put the area &quot;at acompetitive disadvantage versus some of the other communitieswe do business in,&quot; says Norman Ryan, a James Riverexecutive.   The costs are a threat to both corporate profits and theregion's economic growth. Total medical costs here rosenearly 15% last year at Upjohn, a pharmaceutical concern, and20% at both Stryker Corp., a medical equipment company, andFabriKal, a plastic products maker. First of America Corp., abank holding company, budgeted a 45% increase in costs thisyear from 1989. &quot;We have good medical care,&quot; says TheodoreCooper, chairman, president and chief executive of Upjohn.&quot;We need it to be priced right.&quot;   As a result, Upjohn and other major businesses here havetried hard to get the hospitals to cooperate. But nearly allthe efforts have failed. Last fall, the most ambitious -- atwo-year effort to merge the hospitals, one Catholic and oneMethodist -- collapsed over the issue of abortion.   Bronson and Borgess haven't gotten along since the turn ofthe century, when a group of doctors left Borgess, which hadbeen founded by the Sisters of St. Joseph, to start their ownhospital. Each hospital, of course, has its own version ofthat.   Borgess says the doctors were kicked out in aphilosophical tiff with a nun about, among other things,religious influence over medical care. Bronson says thephysicians left after the nuns refused to shorten theirhabits, which the doctors believed swept up germ-laden dustas they swished along the floor.   Over the next several decades, the hospitals divided uppatients along religious and ethnic lines. &quot;If your name wasKelly, you went to Borgess,&quot; says Dan Ryan, retired editor ofthe Kalamazoo Gazette, himself a Borgess baby.   In the 1950s, Bronson was the first to add a wing andlease space to physicians, drawing first blood in the war forsupremacy. &quot;You began having guys who were Bronson doctorsand Borgess doctors,&quot; says Mr. Ryan.   In the 1960s and 1970s, Borgess was particularlysuccessful at recruiting physicians highly trained in suchemerging areas as heart surgery and neurology. With the helpof an infusion of Medicare and other federal health funds,both institutions established centers for a variety ofmedical specialties.   Bronson has a burn unit, a neonatal intensive care wardand strong pediatric and women's services. Borgess stressescardiology and neurosurgery and does kidney transplants.   Bronson is a sprawling 442-bed facility crammed into adowntown city block. Borgess is a 458-bed hospital on 40acres just two miles away. Both reported revenues of about$140 million in 1988; both offer comprehensive services forthe treatment of critically ill patients.   Between 1970 and 1980, the number of physicians inKalamazoo doubled, intensifying the use of medical resources-- and competition. Doctors, with power to refer and admitpatients, are catalysts in hospital battles. When Bronsonrefused to purchase expensive surgical tables for someorthopedic surgeons a few years ago, &quot;they picked up theirscalpels and went across town,&quot; says Russell Kneen, formerchief executive at Bronson.   Regulation plays a crucial role as well. In the early1980s, the U.S. instituted a program to control Medicare andMedicaid costs by reducing hospital admissions and shorteningstays. Meantime, Michigan was one of many states that enactedso-called certificate-of-need laws that require hospitals toprove the need for expensive new technology and services.   The result: Between 1984 and 1988, the Kalamazooin-patient market shrank by 10%. But certificate-of-needrules meant that being second with new technology necessaryto compete for the dwindling supply of patients could meannot getting the technology at all. Competition, alreadyfierce, turned nasty.   One early battle was over a $2 million magnetic resonanceimaging machine, the state of the art in diagnostictechnology. At first, the hospitals planned to acquire onejointly. But when a group of doctors allied with Borgess (andunaffected by certificate-of-need requirements) bought theirown MRI, Borgess acquired a half interest in the doctors'machine instead.   Despite agreements to assure Bronson doctors access to theMRI, &quot;it's turned out that we've been at a disadvantage,&quot;says Patric E. Ludwig, Bronson's chief executive officer. NowBronson intends to acquire its own MRI, a mobile version thatcan be hauled from hospital to hospital. But the Borgessphysicians recently won approval for a mobile unit of theirown.   Bronson added open-heart surgery to its fledglingcardiology service in 1987. That nettled Borgess, which hasdone 7,000 open-heart operations.   State health officials ordered Bronson to shut down theservice, on the ground that it lacked a permit. Bronson saysBorgess provoked the action, something Borgess denies. In anyevent, Bronson says the order forced one patient, on the eveof his scheduled surgery, to be transferred -- to Borgess --for the operation.   Then the state decided it lacked authority to stop Bronsonfrom doing open-heart surgery and permitted the procedures toresume. But Borgess challenged that decision with a pendinglawsuit.   &quot;You have a hard time convincing me that you need twoheart programs in this town,&quot; says R. Timothy Stack,president of Borgess.   &quot;They wanted to maintain a monopoly on that service,&quot;replies Mr. Ludwig.   Finally, local businesses just couldn't take it anymore --and not only because of increased costs resulting fromduplicated services. Because reimbursements from Medicaid andMedicare don't keep pace with costs, both Borgess and Bronson(as well as hospitals around the country) shift a portion ofthose costs to their paying customers, effectively chargingthem extra.   Upjohn and other leading companies, many of which haveexecutives on the boards of both hospitals, began demandingsome sort of cooperation. In mid-1987, the chief executivesof the two hospitals began merger talks. That led to theformation of First Health Development Corp., a companycomprising board members and doctors from both institutions.   &quot;The joke in town is that they took the guns off thehelicopters during merger negotiations,&quot; says KevinFickenscher, an assistant dean at Michigan State.   First Health's plan wasn't to eliminate competition but toredefine it so the combined hospital would compete with otherhospitals in the region. In October 1988, after over a yearof courtship, Bronson and Borgess announced intentions toconsolidate.   Almost immediately, the romance turned rocky. In December,Bronson won its fight to resume open-heart surgery andrefused to delay the service until negotiations werecompleted. In January, First Health decided to name a chiefexecutive. The candidates: Borgess's Mr. Stack and Bronson'sMr. Ludwig. The result: a 4-4 vote, deadlocked along loyaltylines. First Health decided to leave the decision up to theboard of the combined hospital.   Then came the religious issues. Bronson's Methodistaffiliation is little more than a formality, but at Borgess,each day begins with a prayer over the hospital intercom.While neither side retained counsel who specialized inmergers and acquisitions for the talks, Borgess hired a canonlawyer to protect its religious interests.   Borgess insisted Bronson agree to bar abortion. Bronsonsaid abortions had to be available, even though the hospitalhad performed just four in 1988. Finally, Bronson agreed todo no abortions except in cases of anencephaly, in which thebrain fails to develop, or other rare instances when theprognosis for the fetus is hopeless.   That wasn't good enough. Last October, talks collapsed.And this spring, a new front in the war opened: lasersurgery.   Borgess announced in March it intended to triple itsannual volume of 500 laser procedures. In April, Bronson,which says it already does 1,500 a year, trumped the plans byperforming the region's first laser gallbladder surgery --and trumpeting the feat in newspaper ads.   &quot;They're trying a pre-emptive thing to minimize the impactof our program,&quot; charges J. Patrick Dyson, a Borgess seniorvice president. &quot;One of the surgeons flew in from out oftown,&quot; he adds. &quot;It's what we call itinerant surgery.&quot;Bronson concedes the out-of-town surgeon trained the Bronsondoctors in the procedure, but he merely watched &quot;to make sureeverything went fine,&quot; says James B. Falahee Jr., Bronson'sgeneral counsel.   In this environment, businesses are looking at other waysto keep costs down. Upjohn and other companies areconsidering negotiating discount rates in return for aguaranteed flow of patients. &quot;We've never tried to bid oneagainst the other,&quot; says Upjohn's Dr. Cooper. &quot;But we do haveother responsibilities,&quot; including assuring &quot;a fair return toshareholders.&quot;   The pressure is having some effect. Since 1985, Bronsonhas trimmed staff by 9%. It didn't raise rates last year, andlast month announced a 5% across-the-board price cut. Itpledges to cut the difference between Bronson and GrandRapids hospitals by half this year. Borgess has reduced itswork force as well and plans package rates for cardiology andother specialties.   One important cooperative effort is making headway. InFebruary, the hospitals announced plans to build a joint $10million outpatient cancer treatment center downtown. Amongother things, it would mean the purchase of just onemillion-dollar linear accelerator (used in radiationtreatment) instead of two.   A group of local executives called the CEO Council isprodding the hospitals to consolidate other services. Oneprime candidate: the helicopters. The hospitals say eachchopper makes more than 600 flights a year, enough to justifytwo. They often back each other up, and it isn't unusual tosee the Bronson helicopter deliver a patient to Borgess andvice versa.   Operating both units costs a total of $5 million a year,says Dave Kovacs, medical director of Borgess InflightMedical Services, and combining their operations would saveat least $1 million, even while keeping both choppersrunning.   But the helicopters are objects of intense pride. &quot;We feelours has been successful because we are the major traumacenter,&quot; Bronson's Mr. Ludwig says. It plays an importantrole in Bronson's emergency service, which generates 30% ofpatient admissions, he adds.   Borgess, on the other hand, even distributes postcards andcalendars with pictures of its chopper in flight. And Borgessproudly says that its was the first to rack up 3,000 trips.Told that Bronson considers its own service the leader, Mr.Stack shrugs and says: &quot;It's a popular misconception on theirpart.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>