<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910325-0081</DOCNO><DOCID>910325-0081.</DOCID><HL>   International:   Dutch Firm Used Subterfuge to Continue   Shipping Sensitive Technology to Iraq   ----   By Frederick Kempe and Roy J. Harris Jr.   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A7</SO><CO>   EUROP MDEST N.DLI GM GMH</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><GV>STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)COMMERCE DEPARTMENT (COM)</GV><LP>   DELFT, the Netherlands -- Using deception to dodgeinternational restrictions, Delft Instruments N.V. for adecade shipped sensitive night-vision technology to Iraq'smilitary that was used against U.S. troops in the Gulfconflict.   Holland banned the sales after Iraq launched its war withIran in 1980, but Delft developed at least three backchannels to Baghdad -- apparently with some Dutch governmentcomplicity. The Dutch company found partners, sometimes withthe help of Iraqi Embassy officials, that included a Germanbusinessman with Mideast connections, a Portuguese armyofficial, a Swiss front company, a British trading firm and,most recently, a Belgian subsidiary brought out ofbankruptcy.</LP><TEXT>   Despite Delft's 1988 conviction for illegally exporting toIraq -- and investigations dating back to a seizure of Delftdocuments in 1983 -- Hughes Aircraft Co. of Los Angeles, adivision of General Motors Corp., continued providing thecompany advanced components and know-how until the U.S. StateDepartment ordered it to stop in January.   U.S. government officials, who are enraged by the Delftcase, say they are convinced that Hughes components were usedin Delft night-vision equipment that was used by Iraqi troopsin Kuwait, including nightscopes for tanks and perhapsunmanned border sentry devices.   Officials have ordered customs to stop for review allexports, including nonsensitive items, to Delft from Americancompanies. One U.S. official likens the ban to one in 1987that followed the transfer of advanced propeller-millingtechnology by the Norwegian company Kongsberg VaapenfabrikkAS and Japan's Toshiba Corp. that enabled Soviet submarinesto better evade detection underwater. Though the Hughestechnology is less sensitive, the official says the ban couldhave a similarly negative effect on Delft by cutting offPentagon and North Atlantic Treaty Organization contracts, onwhich Delft relies.   &quot;We can't do anything with existing contracts but we canput a stop to coming contracts,&quot; says one official.   Delft Instruments, which was known as the Oldelft Groupuntil a merger last year, concedes that it shipped at leasttwo night-vision systems to Iraq in the past two years thatincluded Hughes components, thus violating U.S. law and anagreement with the Los Angeles company, which provided thatAmerican parts wouldn't be transferred to a third partywithout Washington's approval. Delft also says that evenafter Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait, it shipped a thirdsystem to Jordan, which U.S. officials suspect was passed onto Iraq. Delft says it has tightened controls, and islobbying energetically in Washington to regain access toAmerican supplies.   U.S. officials believe the violations are greater than thecompany has admitted. Dutch officials are also cracking downon what they allege is &quot;a pattern&quot; of illegal exports. Lastweek, after a lengthy investigation, authorities seized 50crates of documents and other potential evidence incoordinated searches at three Delft facilities in Holland andBelgium.   &quot;They did it {illegal exports} and they did it to a lot ofcountries,&quot; says Hans Vos, a spokesman for the JusticeMinistry.   So the question is why the U.S. and Hughes have continueddealing with a company whose transgressions date back to1981, when Dutch legislators first questioned the governmentabout allegedly improper exports to Iraq. Governmentofficials say they didn't think the Dutch company would riskits contacts to the U.S. and the Pentagon by violating itsagreements. A Hughes spokesman says a company review hasn'tshown that any of its officials knew of Delft's previousproblems.   Hughes officials, who say their company isn't a target ofU.S. investigators, believe they have been unfairly singledout for their dealings with Delft. (Indeed, Hughes says ithasn't even been told officially whether Delft night sensorsfound by U.S. troops during fighting with Iraqis near theSaudi town of Khafji actually contained Hughes parts. In aprevious edition, a Hughes spokesman was erroneously quotedas saying it had such information.) Hughes argues that onlythe U.S. government has the capability to determine whichforeign companies American companies shouldn't deal with.   &quot;We are not an investigative agency,&quot; says Hughesspokesman Richard Dore, who says Hughes has supplied Delftsensor components for night-vision instruments, which formimages by detecting body heat, since 1982. Hughes alsotransferred to Delft data on how to build the tank-borneinstruments and on how to use the sensors in SAMTOR systems,used to monitor border areas.   The U.S. government didn't attempt to stop the deliveries.Indeed, former Pentagon officials confirm that as late asJanuary they promoted the Hughes-Delft relationship aswelcome cooperation between two important NATO suppliers. YetU.S. officials say they were investigating Delft even beforeits night-vision systems showed up in Khafji, where, theysay, the battle was prolonged by Iraq's unexpectednight-fighting capability.   Mr. Dore says his company shipped to Delft &quot;fewer than1,000&quot; of the infrared thermal detectors, designed primarilyfor use in Dutch-made Leopard tanks, before deliveries weresuspended. The cost of the night vision system containingHughes parts is estimated at between $80,000 to $100,000each.   Delft's response came late and without remorse. CompanyChairman Rinze Kingma refused all phone calls. A pressspokeswoman wouldn't answer even basic questions about thecompany.   A terse company statement finally conceded that itsBelgian subsidiary violated Delft's agreement to gain a U.S.government license for any shipment to a third country. &quot;Inconflict with explicit company guidelines, no such licensewas applied for,&quot; a press statement said. However, it citedonly two such shipments, in 1989 and 1990, each time of asingle night-vision prototype.   Delft insists that every shipment was sent with a properBelgian license. Delft founded its Instrubel trading companyin Belgium in 1981 specifically to transship its goods,according to a letter Delft officials sent to Dutch taxauthorities at the time.   Paul Rusman, a political scientist, and Ko Colijn, whoco-wrote the definitive book on the Dutch weapons trade,revealed details of the Belgian subsidiary's Iraq link in anAugust 11 article in the Dutch press, days after the Iraqiinvasion. But at the time, Economics Ministry officials,answering parliamentary queries, denied the allegations.Government officials now explain that Delft wasn't requiredto inform it of shipments to Belgium, a NATO partner.   Yet the government had long known Delft used thirdcountries to get its goods to Iraq. During the Iran-Iraq war,Delft technicians -- with government approval -- set up shopin Iraqi tank-repair facilities near the front lines to mountnight-vision scopes on Iraqi tanks. Dutch intelligence eventried to recruit a Delft employee in Iraq, says one companymemo from among the many court records and company paperscollected by Messrs. Rusman and Colijn. Moreover, Delfttrained Iraqis in the Netherlands and Belgium in the early1980s, with government knowledge.   In a &quot;strictly confidential&quot; 1983 memo, a company directorat the time, Simon Duinker, reported that he told Dutchinvestigators that Oldelft &quot;hasn't hidden the fact&quot; that itused foreign companies to take advantage of more liberalexport rules in other NATO countries. The governmentofficials were aware of the need for the circuitous trade &quot;aslong as it is done in a discreet fashion,&quot; he wrote.   Even during the Iran-Iraq war, the Economics Ministryprovided licenses for Delft to show advanced systems atBaghdad's 1984 military trade fair. &quot;The company convinced usthat the whole Dutch trade with Iraq would suffer if wedidn't approve their participation at the trade fair, soEconomics Ministry officials swallowed hard and okayed it,&quot;says one official, who notes that the Foreign Ministry wasn'teven informed.   Economics Ministry officials often help Dutch companiesfind and keep foreign markets. &quot;The amount of weaponspurchased by the Dutch state isn't enough to keep a companyhealthy, so that it can develop new products and expandmarkets,&quot; says Fred van der Spek, who raised questions aboutDelft's activities regarding Iraq as far back as 1981. &quot;Sothe government actively helps companies like Delft find andkeep Third World markets.&quot;   The Belgian route was merely the last of several channelsto Iraq that Delft had used. The company had gone to greatlengths to win a competition with more than a dozen othercompanies to gain Iraqi orders for night-vision systems in1974. Delft's link at the time was a West German businessman,Rolf Buschmann, said to have close personal relationshipswith prominent Arab leaders.   &quot;He made the right friends and greased the right palms,&quot;says a former company official. Between 1976 and 1980, courtdocuments show, Mr. Buschmann and a colleague received 23.6million guilders ($12.8 million) in commissions for Delft'sIraqi deals.   Iraq placed its first order for 10 million guilders inDelft systems in 1974, and it promised to buy 200 millionguilders of goods in future years. The business was a majorcoup for the company. When war broke out in 1980, the companywas negotiating a further 70 million guilders in Iraqicontracts, says a 1983 memo by Mr. Duinker.   When the Dutch rejected the company's application for newlicenses in April 1981, it found new delivery routes withhelp from Iraqi Embassy officials in the Hague and in Bonn.The first route was set up by Seaking Engineering A.G. ofZug, Switzerland, a Dutch-owned company that had triedwithout success to do business with Delft. But now Delftneeded Seaking's owner, Frans Dumee, and his contacts withthe Iraq military. Mr. Dumee set up a channel for Delftthrough a one-man trading company in England, Flear Optics andamp;Instruments.   The company's owner, Albert Flearmoy, provided Oldelftwith an end-user certificate for Tanzania, which he latertold police was actually for a cancelled order. But theorders grew so large that Dutch authorities becamesuspicious. So Mr. Flearmoy provided a letter stating that hewas buying the goods for sale to a dozen countries that helisted -- not including Iraq. The shipments were sent throughParis's Orly airport, and the funds were transferred throughthe account of the Iraqi Airways manager at the BanqueLibanaise pour le Commerce in Paris.   That satisfied Dutch officials, and the shipmentscontinued until British authorities seized one of Mr.Flearmoy's shipments at London's Heathrow airport that wasillegally en route to Iran. This seizure, combined with theBuschmann investigation in Germany, resulted in the 1983 raidof Delft's headquarters.   But a far more important channel to Iraq ran through thePortuguese army and its chief of weapons acquisition, J.M. deCosta Alvarez. According to Dutch police records and courtdocuments in The Hague, the Iraqi Embassy in the Dutchcapital suggested the route, and the Portuguese military setthe terms: a commission of 1% of the contract value to begiven to the Portuguese army in the form of night-visionsystems. Mr. de Costa Alvarez provided an end-usercertificate to satisfy Dutch authorities that read simply:&quot;To be used exclusively by armed forces.&quot; It didn't say whosearmed forces.   The size of the contracts to Portugal raised suspicion,however, and Dutch parliament member Harry van den Berghasked questions. So Oldelft transferred some shipments to thenew trading company it had established in Belgium.   Oldelft's President, Mr. Duinker, was surprised by the1983 raid and investigation; he thought governmentauthorities knew of the company's activities. Mr. Duinkersaid in an internal company memo that &quot;different officialsand possibly also members of the government and economicaffairs as well as Foreign Ministry could be brought backinto the discussion again.&quot; He pointed a finger at theminister of finance of the time, who had been a director atAmsterdam-Rotterdam Bank N.V. when it financed much of thetrade.   A lower court cleared Delft because of technical problemswith the case. On appeal, the Justice Ministry got aconviction in November 1988. The company was fined 25,000guilders, a small price for Delft to pay for a business thatbrought in many millions in profits.   &quot;It was more a fee than a fine,&quot; says Mr. van der Spek,who says his questions about Delft in the early 1980s wereshrugged off by the government.</TEXT></DOC>