<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911218-0041</DOCNO><DOCID>911218-0041.</DOCID><HL>   Help Vietnam and Ourselves: Normalize Ties   ----   By Karen Elliott House</HL><DATE>12/18/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)VIETNAM (VM)</RE><LP>   HANOI -- A distinguished developmental economist fromHarvard has just left. Coming soon to provide economic adviceis Asia's most venerable anti-communist, Singaporean Lee KuanYew.   Over at the government's best guest house a tradedelegation from Australia and a like-minded group of Germansare whisked to and from meetings with top officials. In oneof the city's few Western restaurants, a trio of Indonesianbusinessmen swig Heineken and urge Japanese investors tohurry here. &quot;Vietnam is the last frontier,&quot; roars aninebriated Indonesian.</LP><TEXT>   Certainly there is a frontier atmosphere here with Asiansand Europeans combing the country for future businessopportunities. Indeed, the mood is of pent-up anticipationlike the excitement before a big race. Yet one nation isvisibly missing from the starting blocks. That is America.The U.S. continues to resist restoration of normal relationswith Vietnam, denies Hanoi access to international lendinginstitutions and insists its allies honor a trade embargoagainst Vietnam.   It is one of many ironies that this communist nation thatfor nearly two decades fought to evict U.S. soldiers nowpleads for the arrival of U.S. businessmen. It is a furtherirony that this nation where America made its stand againstcommunism now is so visibly a monument to the workings ofmarket economics and, of course, to indigenous ingenuity andenterprise.   Vietnam is being transformed. Among water-filled cratersleft by American bombs, Vietnamese tend private plots ofrice, corn, potatoes, cauliflower and fruits. From the air,this countryside resembles a giant golf course with greenfairways graced by an occasional circular pond. On theground, the results are equally pleasing. When it privatizedagriculture two years ago, Vietnam went from rice-importer toexporter in one growing season.   The cities, too, teem with commerce. Private shopkeepersoffer hand embroidery and family heirlooms (or cheap copies).You can get a wash and blow dry for $1. Thanks to theefficiency of smugglers, it's possible to buy Coca-Cola fromThailand, Tiger beer from Singapore, champagne and vodka fromRussia, and even electronic products from Japan.   &quot;The only queue in Vietnam is for theater tickets,&quot; saysformer Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, who is reading PaulSamuelson's texts to master market economics. Adds Le DangDoanh, an economic adviser to the Communist Party, &quot;We'vediscovered that market economics isn't a Loch Ness monster.&quot;   The goal of America and the free world should be toencourage Vietnam to stay on this road of economic reform andget moving on the road to political reform. Whether this isbest done by engaging or isolating Vietnam is a fairquestion.   The Bush administration, largely for domestic politicalreasons, has preferred isolation as this satisfies thesentiments of those Americans still bitter at losing theVietnam War. The most often cited obstacle to normalrelations is the need to resolve the cases of all 2,273American servicemen unaccounted for in Indochina. Thus anadministration that prided itself on not allowing living U.S.hostages to shape its Mideast policy has allowed the absentremains of dead servicemen in Vietnam to warp its Indochinapolicy.   The U.S. still holds the starting gun for the race intoIndochina, as its allies are reluctantly honoring theembargo. But, unless Washington ends the embargo soon, othernations that have been scouting the track for years will jumpthe gun, leaving America behind.   While America can credibly claim that isolating Vietnamhas helped force economic reform and some easing ofrepression here in recent years, that policy now iscounterproductive to America's economic, security and evenpolitical goals.   Economically, it makes no sense to let Japan develop anddominate yet another emerging market of 67 millionindustrious and enterprising Asians. American businessmen,like their counterparts in Japan and Europe, want to dobusiness in and with Vietnam, which they see as a significantmarket as well as a gateway to the rest of Indochina. In thesecurity realm, after a decade of war with China and a bitterpostwar experience with Soviet domination and abandonment,Vietnam seeks to avoid dependence on any one nation. Thisprovides an opening for America.   Politically, Vietnam's rulers undeniably have littlerespect for human rights and no intention of yielding power.Asia Watch's latest report lists 47 political prisonersdetained in the past two years simply for expressing views atodds with the government. Often people are held in miserableconditions without charges. Clearly control remains thegovernment's goal.   In private conversations, officials speak of reform as the&quot;unavoidable trend of history.&quot; But in the same breath, theystress the need to &quot;assure stability,&quot; a euphemism forcontinued communist control. &quot;We have to accelerate economicreform but allow no Yeltsin,&quot; says one official. Addsanother, &quot;The debate here is over how to reform economicallybut avoid a Tiananmen or an Eastern Europe.&quot;   In short, Vietnam seeks to raise living standards withoutraising expectations for democracy. But history indicatesthat's very unlikely.   Economic progress tends to raise demands for politicalpluralism, whether in South Korea, Taiwan, China, Chile orVietnam. If America's goal is to undermine Vietnam'sautocrats and encourage political pluralism, the mosteffective method is a quick resumption of normal economicrelations. This will bring foreign capital and ideas thatwill simultaneously raise living standards and demands fordemocracy.   In the meantime, Vietnam's rulers are certainly no moredespotic than those of China, with whom the U.S. retainsrelations. And they've taken economic reform further thanChina, Eastern Europe or the Soviet Union. What istranspiring in Vietnam is nothing short of amazing --especially when Vietnam is compared with its communistcontemporaries.   North Korea, for instance, remains determined to resistreform. A visitor to Pyongyang sees streets devoid of cars orbicycles, shops empty of food or consumer goods, androbotlike citizens denied any individual expression orcontact with the outside world. China, a self-proclaimedreformer, retains huge subsidies to state enterprises andmaintains multiple and often meaningless exchange rates.Since the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, it has cracked downon mixing with foreigners.   Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland all struggle to replacestate-run economies with free markets, but their reformsremain tentative and fragile. East Europeans increasinglycomplain that the deprivations of socialism are preferable tothe painful uncertainty of market capitalism. As for theformer Soviet Union, economic reform has been mostly loudtalk and little action.   By contrast, Vietnam has said little and done much.Watching the collapse of the Berlin Wall and events in Chinaand the Soviet Union, Vietnam's Politburo, running scared,began quietly yielding its most visible privileges. Beachdachas once reserved for the Politburo are now rented toanyone. Economic liberalization, proclaimed in 1986, alsotook a great leap forward in 1989 when Soviet aid dried up,depriving Vietnam of external financial resources. Tooversimplify slightly, a government suddenly unable to affordsocialism pragmatically placed the burden of survival on itscitizens. It freed agriculture, commerce and all but a fewstate-owned enterprises. Perhaps because the society had solittle left to lose, it was willing and able to risk so much.   The Vietnamese people are the beneficiaries. They arebetter dressed and better fed, though the country remainspoor even by Third World standards. A capitalist class isemerging. By government estimates, at least 10,000 of Hanoi's1.5 million citizens earn as much as $10,000 a year smugglingembargoed goods to market here. Brick homes are underconstruction everywhere. The city even boasts 4,000 privatecars -- about 4,000 more than a few years ago.   In Saigon, small boys hawk Time and the Far EasternEconomic Review, magazines that only a year ago werecontraband available only to government cadres. Goldmerchants in Cholon, the Chinese-dominated business districtof Saigon, set the exchange rate daily. The governmentlargely acquiesces by keeping the official exchange rateclose enough to reality, all but eliminating the blackmarket.   Americans and all things American are popular. A compactdisk featuring American singer Whitney Houston sells for $16.Vietnamese-dubbed videos of &quot;Sleeping Beauty,&quot; &quot;Dumbo&quot; and&quot;Robin Hood&quot; are only $8. T-shirts with Vietnamese andAmerican flags abound, as do children's clothes sportingMickey Mouse and Donald Duck. Pith helmets, once the headgearof choice in Vietnam, are giving way to caps adorned withlogos like &quot;The Party's at Harry's. Lake Tahoe&quot; or &quot;JohnsonCounty Construction. Greenwood, Indiana.&quot;   With the passage of time there's less reason for Americansto view their sacrifices in Vietnam as a failure. It wasprecisely U.S. intervention that bought the rest of Asia timeto develop a stability that has led to the economic andpolitical liberalization that Vietnam now tentatively seeksto emulate.   To those Americans who still seek to punish Vietnam, theextent to which Vietnamese seek a U.S. presence merelyreinforces the rectitude of America's policy of isolation. Tothose Americans who seek perfection abroad, Vietnam clearlyremains far short of any vision of a free and open society.But for those who no longer seek to punish and who judge byprogress rather than perfection, this is a society that atleast is moving in the right directions and whose evolutioncan be accelerated by modest American initiatives that wouldbenefit both the Vietnamese people and America's own economicand political interests in Asia.   ---   Ms. House is vice president, international, of Dow Jones.</TEXT></DOC>