<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910612-0115</DOCNO><DOCID>910612-0115.</DOCID><HL>   Let The Poor Redesign Welfare   ----   By Arthur Schiff</HL><DATE>06/12/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><GV>HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES (HHS)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   To understand the current welfare mess, you have tounderstand people like Rose Johnson. Ms. Johnson (her namehas been changed) loves training programs. A mother of twoboys, four and six years old, Ms. Johnson has been on publicassistance five out of the past seven years. This is thefourth time she has trained for a career as a word processor.Ms. Johnson is no fool. She knows training programs can be alot better than most jobs, and with the two kids to take careof, she has more than a day's work at home. Besides, she hasmoney problems. Unexpectedly, she had to go to North Carolinato visit her ailing mother. She was unable to pay the rentthat month, so to keep her from being evicted, the welfaredepartment paid it and is now recouping it from her check.   Ms. Johnson is a smart consumer. Most training programswill pay stipends for transportation, lunch, child care andeven give a one-time grant for new clothes. The one Ms.Johnson has just joined is a gold-plater. She has arrangedchild care for her boys with a neighbor whose kids shesometimes baby-sits in the evening. The welfare departmentwill pay for the baby-sitting services; as part of her dealwith Ms. Johnson, the neighbor will split the payments. Ms.Johnson is bringing lunch from home and keeping the lunchmoney. She used the clothing grant for necessities and hasmanaged to convince the department that she lives two faresaway from the training sites. When she finishes the program,she will go back to staying home with the kids.</LP><TEXT>   All of our diverse social programs have one thing incommon: They are based on a particular idea of what poorpeople are like -- passive, helpless, dependent and easilymanipulated. This view is wrong. Rather, most low-incomepeople are, like Rose Johnson, resourceful consumers ofwelfare and other social services.   For those truly interested in the welfare of the poor,this is good news, because it suggests that the poor areinclined to run their own lives and are mostly capable ofdoing so. The bad news is that social service programselaborately designed to make the poor behave in certain ways,don't.   A recent, and very rare, in-depth study of the income andexpenditures of 25 welfare mothers published in the AmericanProspect painted quite a different picture. The study, byChristopher Jencks and Kathryn Edin, found that nearly allthe mothers supplemented their welfare checks with incomefrom other sources, including work. National studies of theexpenditures of welfare families, which turn out to be farhigher than their supposed income, confirm this finding.   However, poor people operate in their own special economy.And unlike the rest of the economy, the poverty economy isnot accountable to its customers. Reforming welfare does notrequire the abandonment of society's collectiveresponsibility to the poor. Rather, the way out of thewelfare mess begins by recognizing that the demand forwelfare and other social services is the basis for a market.   The trouble with welfare is not that policymakers do nottry to find out whether or how welfare programs &quot;work.&quot; Theydo. The problem is that the social science methodspolicymakers use do not gather information as accurately asthe market.   In the social science laboratory, Rose Johnson wants towork, and only lacks the panoply of child care, counseling,financial supports, training and job placement needed toachieve economic independence. These premises are wrong. WhatMs. Johnson wants is to stay home with her young children.She is in the program, essentially, because she was paid toenter it. But by paying her to enter the program, the welfareauthorities deprive themselves of the answer to one crucialquestion: If Ms. Johnson really wanted a job, is this thesort of training program she would have entered andcompleted? If they had charged her $10 for the program, wouldshe have signed up?   Market researchers would never bribe Ms. Johnson to buy aproduct, because they want to know if she wants the productitself. But under the current approach to social services, nostone is left unturned, no carrot withheld or stick unused,no rule unwritten, in an attempt to redirect the lives of thepoor. Inevitably the system encourages clients to play gameswith it, as Ms. Johnson did.   All of the successive waves of welfare reform -- fromprograms that pay people to train to programs that force themto work -- amount to little more than failed attempts to dothe hardest thing in the world: To make people behave&quot;better.&quot; Market research is more modest: It seeks to observehow people behave and then find ways to accommodate thatbehavior. That is why it is easier to sell a car than to turna criminal into a law-abiding citizen.   We want the poor to run their own lives and do it better.And we want the system to offer services that might actuallyhelp the poor do this, and to shut down programs that do notwork. To accomplish this, we must do two things: First,summon the humility to acknowledge that society cannot directthe lives of the poor in any detailed way; second, designprograms that respond to the people who use them, and shutdown programs that fail to attract consumers.   The principal task is to eliminate welfare and replace itwith a national income-support system. The most obvious wayto do this is to expand the existing earned-income taxcredit. The credit rewards people for having income, not forlacking it. An expanded version would say to potentialrecipients: As long as you get a job and keep it, we willmake sure you have enough money to live on. Just do thatmuch, just do your fair share according to your abilities,and we'll help you out. Of course, the credit might givemoney to some people who do not need it. So does welfare.   Support programs for the disabled would continue. Someother nonwelfare programs, such as unemployment insurance,should also continue, as should a streamlined food-stampprogram. Most important, once welfare is got rid of, the U.S.will need a new program to help parents of young children. Itshould do what many European countries do -- pay parents achild allowance, regardless of need. Parents would not haveto remain poor in order to qualify, but benefits would begradually taxed away as incomes rose.   These reforms would shift responsibility from planners toindividuals. The incentive to stay poor would disappear.   ---   Mr. Schiff is a research consultant who recentlyparticipated in an evaluation of several training programsfor the state of New York. This is excerpted from the springissue of the Manhattan Institute's journal, NY.</TEXT></DOC>