<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900802-0167</DOCNO><DOCID>900802-0167.</DOCID><HL>   Viewpoint:   Racial Demagogues: Old as America, Ever the Same   ----   By Hodding Carter III</HL><DATE>08/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A11</SO><LP>   When you pull back from the particulars of dailyjournalism, from the diet of new sensations fed up on themorning and evening cycles, you begin to discern familiarpatterns. Disparate events and separate strands take on acoherence that may be more apparent than real, but that atleast offer the possibility of intelligent response ratherthan reflexive reaction. Think about the names Marion Barry,David Duke, Louis Farrakhan, Jesse Helms and Jesse Jackson,think about what each conjures up, then think again. Ithelps, if only to put them in perspective.   For the longest time now, it has been virtually impossibleto have a conversation in Washington, D.C., without talkingabout Mayor Barry. The outcome of his trial will not changethat situation. In fact, it will probably exacerbate it.While it would be a mistake to say that all reactions to theman and his troubles are based on race, it would be true tosay that most whites think he is a charlatan and felon andmost blacks think he is a victim.</LP><TEXT>   For an even longer time, many white Democrats haveregarded Jesse Jackson with fascinated horror. They know theydon't like him, know that millions of voters essential toDemocratic Party success wildly admire him, and don't have aclue about how to keep his supporters in the fold whiledepriving him not only of the presidential nomination hecovets but also of veto power at the next nationalconvention. The mainstreamers say Mr. Jackson's race hasnothing to do with their concerns, except insofar as it isobvious that what they regard as his demagoguery emits from ablack man. Vast numbers of his supporters are convincedbeyond the shadow of a doubt that Mr. Jackson's race is theonly reason he has been denied the nomination twice already.   Louis Farrakhan, Nation of Islam leader and sometime buddyof both Jesse Jackson and Marion Barry, preaches a brand ofcarefully orchestrated anti-Semitism that carries the whiffof the gas chamber for many American Jews, and many otherAmericans who are not Jews as well. His admirers andfollowers, some from within the black mainstream, tend toconcentrate on other features of his message. They dismissthe charges of anti-Semitism as so many smokescreens designedto obscure the validity of his indictments of white bigotryand black dependency.   Over in that journalistic corner reserved for what aremistakenly considered regional phenomena, there is David Dukeof Louisiana. The born-again Louisiana politician, who was aKu Klux Klansman only yesterday and consorts with haterstoday, has learned to package himself as a modern-day HueyLong. Running for the U.S. Senate after winning an upsetelection to the Louisiana legislature several years ago, heoffers a white populism tailored to the resentments ofworking whites and the troubled middle class in a state whoseeconomy has been in recession for most of the past decade.His racism is in code these days, but it's not hard to break.His supporters think they've met the political Deliverer.Some of his opponents profess to see in Duke a warning ofthings to come, the failed beer hall putschtist re-emergingas potent political leader.   Finally, there is Jesse Helms, whose coded racism is noless obvious than Mr. Duke's and whose uncoded segregationistpast is all laid out on the public record. The North Carolinasenator has far more real, rather than symbolic, power thanany of the others, but his core constituency is no lessalienated from mainstream America than theirs. Small-townmerchants, farmers, fundamental religionists affronted by theerosion of old values in the nation's daily life, theyrepeatedly place their hopes for political salvation in thehands of a man whose economic positions are as damaging totheir actual interests as his rhetoric is reassuring to theiremotions.   What all of these men have in common is that they aren'tgoing much further politically and were never going muchfurther politically. Each has a limited base. What they alsohave in common is that all are able to pull the dominantmajority's chain with what is, for their followers,satisfying ease. Nothing so validates their true believers'faith than the rage and fear their champions seem to inspire.   In the most basic sense, it hardly matters what objectiveanalyses Messrs. Farrakhan, Duke, Helms, Jackson or Barrymight reveal. Whether these men are wise or dumb -- and noneis dumb -- demagogues or saints, arrogant criminals orpersecuted prophets, each has tapped a deep well of grievanceand despair. Whatever the validity of their particularmessages, whatever their character defects, they fill a needwithin disaffected communities that orthodox politicians haveleft untouched.   It is an old story in American politics. Racism has been aconstant in this heterogeneous society for two centuries.Nativism has sparked new parties and regenerated Klansrepeatedly. Black nationalism as a reaction to whiteoppression crests and falls with regularity. The politics ofparanoia has been practiced by men with Irish names, Anglonames, black faces and red necks. Irrationalism apparentlycomes with the territory.   But words such as &quot;paranoid,&quot; &quot;racist&quot; and &quot;irrational&quot;make for better categorization than they do for solution. Thedivides are made no more bridgeable when opposing forces lineup on either side to shake their fists and scream epithets.It is the task of intelligent politics to separate thelegitimate from the unacceptable among the messages, toconfront the latter and redress the former. Behaving likeChicken Little is no answer at all.   Neither, however, is the tendency in several quarters totry to adapt to the messengers, to rationalize the irrationaland explain away the unacceptable. It is nauseating to watchintelligent black leaders making common cause with aFarrakhan, or drawing careful distinctions to justify theirfailure to repudiate his vile anti-Semitism. It is equallyunacceptable for a decent, thoughtful Republican such as Sen.Nancy Kassenbaum to make a campaign spot for Jesse Helms, orfor several major corporations with reputations for socialconcern to contribute big bucks to his library, revealingcynical self-interest.   What is needed is a political system that reflects thelegitimate concerns of the economically and culturallydispossessed and tries to remedy them. There must be aresponsive hearing for those who believe their race orbeliefs or economic condition have rendered them irrelevantin their own country. Instead of two parties fighting for thesame narrow middle ground, for the attention of the 50% ofadult Americans who are currently political participants,there should be at least one party that will provide a homeand a megaphone for those who aren't making it and be amediating center for their competitive claims.   Without one, the names will change and the faces will comeand go, but the disaffection, hatred and despair will remain,ready to be tapped by new demagogues promising new forms ofsalvation. Talking about Marion Barry or David Duke passesthe time, but it misses the point. Doing something about thewelling frustrations that such men represent and articulateis the task at hand.   ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads atelevision production firm.</TEXT></DOC>