<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911223-0078</DOCNO><DOCID>911223-0078.</DOCID><HL>   Giant Step:   Changing Its Course,   The Fed Boldly Tries   To Bolster Economy   ---   Gradual Interest-Rate Cuts   Weren't Doing Enough --   For Recession or for Bush   ---   How Greenspan Turned Tide   ----   By Alan Murray and David Wessel   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>12/23/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CDS, INTEREST RATES, COMMERCIAL PAPER (FIN)</IN><NS>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   It was a Christmas Eve conversion to rival that ofEbenezer Scrooge.   Abandoning his long-cherished gradualism, Alan Greenspan,chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Friday presented thenation with a surprisingly large interest-rate reduction.</LP><TEXT>   Seventeen months after the beginning of the recession --and less than a year from the presidential election -- theFed cut the discount rate it charges on loans to banks by afull percentage point, to 3.5%. The first full-point cutsince 1981, it brought the highly visible rate to its lowestlevel in 27 years. The Fed also lowered its target for thecritical federal funds interest rate to 4% from 4.5%   The dramatic move quickly reverberated through thefinancial system. Within 90 minutes of the Fed'sannouncement, Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. cut its prime lendingrate to 6.5% from 7.5% -- an unexpectedly large move, giventhat bank borrowing costs (reflected in the federal fundsrate that banks charge on loans to one another) fell onlyhalf as much. Many large banks followed Morgan's lead. Thebond market, meanwhile, brought long-term rates down tolevels not seen since 1987.   Lower rates will almost immediately cut the interestpayments of many heavily indebted businesses and homeowners.A new flood of home mortgage refinancings alone will injectbillions of dollars into consumers' pockets, as swiftly andsurely as a tax cut. &quot;There are an awful lot of peopleincreasing their cash flow by $150, $200, $250 a month byrefinancing,&quot; says Rick McGuire, senior vice president ofInland Mortgage Corp., an Indianapolis mortgage banker.   Although it may take time, lower rates should alsoencourage business borrowing for investment, provide new lifeto the housing market and help exporters by bringing down thedollar and making U.S. goods less costly overseas.   While some Fed officials had worried the move might beviewed as a sign of panic, the response was generallypositive. &quot;Will lower interest rates work?&quot; saidNobel-winning economist James Tobin. &quot;I'm 90% sure they'll doit.&quot; Former Fed Governor Lyle Gramley left a one-word phonemessage for Mr. Greenspan: &quot;Hooray]&quot;   But the loudest hoorays came from the White House.Conventional economic wisdom holds that changes in monetarypolicy take about six months to work their way into theeconomy. For President Bush, the timing couldn't be better,helping to lift the economy just as the general electioncampaign gets underway. The Fed's action &quot;will significantlyhelp our efforts to turn the economy around and get Americaback to work,&quot; Mr. Bush said in a statement.   In fact, it was Mr. Bush's quiet reshaping of theseven-member Federal Reserve Board that made Friday'sconversion possible. Fed Vice Chairman David Mullins, analumnus of the Bush Treasury, laid the intellectualgroundwork for the change. And two new Bush appointees,Lawrence Lindsey and Susan Phillips, provided the criticalsupport needed to overcome the resistance of three ReaganappointeesWayne Angell, John LaWare and Edward Kelley.   For four years, the hallmark of the Fed under Mr.Greenspan has been small, cautious changes in monetary policy-- quarterpoint increments that former Fed Governor MarthaSeger once referred to as &quot;baby steps.&quot; That strategy, aimedpartly at convincing financial markets of the Fed'scommitment to fighting inflation, was designed to make thecentral bank as unobtrusive as possible.   But in recent weeks, the Fed has come under criticism fromthe White House and many economists for worrying too muchabout bond-market psychology and too little about the rapidlydeteriorating psychology of business executives andconsumers. The Fed needed to make bigger, bolder moves,critics argued, in order to convince Americans that it wasdetermined to get the economy growing again.   In private meetings of the Federal Reserve, that argumentwas pushed aggressively by the vice chairman, Mr. Mullins. Henoted that in past recessions, the Fed had pushed the key fedfunds rate below the inflation rate, while this time thefunds rate remained significantly higher. And Mr. Mullins'sarguments found increasing sympathy among many of the 12district Federal Reserve presidents -- who had put up themost resistance to interest-rate cuts last year. SanFrancisco Fed President Robert Parry, for instance, was amongthe central bank's most outspoken anti-inflation hawks lastyear. But in recent weeks, as the West Coast economydeclined, he became an important advocate of bolder ratecuts. Philadelphia Fed President Edward Boehne and Boston FedPresident Richard Syron, whose local economies have also beenhit hard, pushed for the change as well.   The arguments first surfaced at the Nov. 5 meeting of theFed's open market committee, which is attended by the sevenFed governors in Washington as well as the 12 districtpresidents. At that meeting, &quot;There was considerablediscussion regarding the possible advantages of a somewhatstronger move,&quot; according to a summary of that meetingreleased Friday. &quot;A number of members expressed concern thatfurther small moves would lack the visibility that was neededin present circumstances.&quot;   The call for bold action reached a peak at last Tuesday'smeeting of the committee. The economic forecast presented bythe Fed staff, no longer as confident about the recovery asit had been earlier in the year, showed an economy dead inthe water. There would be no growth to speak of in either thefourth quarter of 1991 or the first quarter of 1992; and bothquarters could easily be negative. In addition, Mr. Boehnehad in hand the stunning results of a survey -- made publicFriday -- of manufacturers in the Philadelphia region showingmanufacturing activity at its lowest level since February.   Still, there was resistance to a big move, people at themeeting say. Mr. LaWare noted that money supply growth hadimproved in recent weeks. Mr. Angell focused on the risingprice of gold and other commodities. Mr. Kelley, who joinedthe Fed in 1987 and was reappointed by Mr. Bush in 1990, wasreluctant. So was St. Louis Fed President Thomas Melzer. Asat the November meeting, there was substantial support forcutting the federal funds rate another quarter point rightaway, then waiting before making further moves.   But Mr. Mullins interceded. The economy needed a biggermove by the Fed, he argued. If the committee wasn't ready tomake such a move, it should wait until it was. The meetingbroke up with an agreement to give Mr. Greenspan authorityfor further easing interest rates, but with no clear sense ofwhen to do it or exactly how big the cut should be.   In testimony to the House Ways and Means Committee onWednesday, the Fed chairman even delivered a spirited defenseof his gradualist policies. &quot;It is true that we have chosento go down in small increments,&quot; he said when asked about Mr.Tobin's published criticism that the Fed had been &quot;hesitantlynibbling&quot; at the nation's economic problems. &quot;But we do itvery often, and have moved the rate down very considerablysince when we started in the spring of 1989.&quot;   But while he was outwardly defending his earlier strategy,Mr. Greenspan had privately decided that the time had come tomake a decisive move. He and Mr. Mullins were already workingbehind the scenes to engineer the large discount rate cut. Bylaw, changes in the discount rate must be initiated by theboards of directors of one or more district Fed banks, andthen approved by the Fed Board of Governors. While severaldistrict banks had requested half-point rate cuts, as ofTuesday, none had requested a full-point cut.   Shortly after his testimony, Mr. Greenspan flew to Chicagoto attend a meeting of the board of the Chicago Fed, whichwas held Wednesday night and Thursday morning. When hereturned at about 5 p.m. Thursday, he had Chicago's requestfor a full percentage point cut in hand. The New York Fed'sboard also met Thursday afternoon and requested the same.   Mr. Mullins meanwhile had worked to shore up support amongthe other five board governors, which was no easy task. Mr.Angell was adamantly opposed, and refused to be swayed.Messrs. LaWare and Kelley were likewise reluctant. Along withMr. Angell, Mr. Kelley had dissented from the move towardeasing at the Nov. 5 meeting, arguing there were&quot;considerable risks in further easing at this time,&quot;according to the meeting summary. And on Dec. 13, Mr. LaWarehad publicly noted that the money supply &quot;shows signs ofgrowing at a more acceptable rate,&quot; and &quot;that's a good thingfor the economy.&quot;   But Mr. Mullins already had the support of the two newboard members, Mr. Lindsey and Mrs. Phillips. Both had beenadvised to maintain a low profile at their first Federal OpenMarket Committee meeting, and both had followed that advice.But it was clear, especially in Mr. Lindsey's case, that theyfavored more forceful action to cut rates. And their votestransformed the trio of Messrs. Angell, LaWare and Kelleyfrom a majority of the Board of Governors to a minority.   At 7 p.m. Thursday evening -- just two hours after Mr.Greenspan's return from Chicago -- the governors gathered intheir wood-paneled conference room. The meeting was held thatnight because many of the governors had plans to leave townfor the holidays the next morning. Mr. Kelley, who hadalready left town, participated by telephone. When themeeting was over, they had agreed by a vote of six to one,with only Mr. Angell dissenting, to make theuncharacteristically bold move of cutting the discount rate afull percentage point. Had Mr. Kelley and Mr. LaWare joinedMr. Angell, Mr. Greenspan likely would have backed down.   Early the next morning, Mr. Greenspan held a telephoneconference with the district Fed presidents and informed themof the Board's move. He said he also planned to cut the fedfunds rate a half percentage point, using the authority givento him by the open market committee on Tuesday. There waslittle dissent. (Changes in the fed funds rate target must beapproved by the full Federal Open Market Committee; changesin the discount rate are approved by the board of governorsalone.)   After the move was announced, Senate Banking CommitteeChairman Don Riegle chided the Fed for not acting sooner,saying, &quot;It's been late all through this thing.&quot; Butironically, Mr. Riegle himself may have been partlyresponsible for the delay. He and Democratic Sen. TerrySanford of North Carolina held up Senate approval of thenomination of Mr. Lindsey for months, in part because theysaid he wasn't truly a native of Virginia, the state in whichhe now lives and which he is supposed to represent on theboard. Mr. Lindsey is a former professor at HarvardUniversity and moved to Virginia three years ago to take ajob in the White House.   At the committee meeting on Tuesday, Mr. Lindsey wore atie adorned with pictures of Thomas Jefferson; Richmond FedPresident Robert Black jokingly praised the tie as the signof a true Virginian. When it was his turn to speak, Mr.Lindsey affected a Southern drawl, and talked of &quot;my briefsojourn&quot; at Harvard.   The Fed's action was praised by Michael Boskin, thepresident's chief economist, who said the move, &quot;followedimmediately by the banks' reduction in their prime lendingrates, will help a struggling economy grow and create jobs aswe move through 1992.&quot;   Many private economists and some deficit-fearing membersof Congress are certain to argue that the Fed's big movesubstantially weakens the case for a stimulative tax cut.Harvard University economist Martin Feldstein called it &quot;apre-emptive strike so that Congress doesn't feel called uponto enact mischievous tax cuts.&quot;   But both the president and Congress are being driven bypolitical pressures to do something for the economy, andthose pressures remain strong. &quot;The Fed's action doesn'trelieve the need for aggressive action by theadministration,&quot; one senior administration official said overthe weekend.   The unanswerable question is whether the Fed's latestaction will be sufficient to get the economy moving again.Noting widespread public pessimism about the economy, Mr.Greenspan told Congress last week that he sensed &quot;adeep-seated concern out there which I must say to you I havenot seen in my lifetime.&quot;   This lack of business and consumer confidence in theeconomy muffles the favorable effects of lower interestrates. If &quot;people are just so pessimistic about the future ofdemand that they won't borrow and invest or buy houses at anyinterest rate,&quot; then monetary policy won't work, says Mr.Tobin, the economist.   And while lower interest rates put money into the hands ofborrowers with adjustable-rate loans, they also take incomeaway from those Americans, many of them elderly, who live offinterest on bonds and bank accounts. Overall, U.S. householdsthis year will receive $76 billion more in interest incomethan they pay out in interest expense.   While this tends to restrain the favorable effects oflower rates, it isn't likely to overwhelm them. For onething, this $76 billion margin amounts to less than 2% of allpersonal income. For another, many of those with substantialinterest income are wealthy and their week-to-week spendingdoesn't reflect their investment income; in contrast, many ofthose benefiting from lower interest payments are familieswho spend nearly everything they take in.   But one thing seems clear: The Fed is finally bringing outthe heavy artillery. Until recently, it hadn't cut interestrates as much as it did in past recessions. It shunnedheadline-making moves in favor of predictability. And, moresignificantly, it hadn't brought interest rates as low asthey look because the inflation rate has receded. The lasttime banks' prime interest rate was at 6.5% was in 1977, wheninflation exceeded 6%; currently, inflation is running closerto 3 1/2% to 4%.   &quot;Although they've come down a number of times, interestrates are still very high in real {inflation-adjusted} terms,relative to where they've been in previous business cycles,&quot;says Mr. Feldstein, the Harvard University economist andformer Reagan adviser.   &quot;People think monetary policy has been used and it's noteffective,&quot; says economist Robert Brusca of Nikko SecuritiesInternational Inc., who has been criticizing the Fed formonths for not doing more. &quot;Monetary policy works. It's notbeen used to fight the recession.&quot;   In other words, if Friday's aggressive move by the Feddoesn't work, economists say, the Fed still has room to cutthem further.</TEXT></DOC>