<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920306-0150</DOCNO><DOCID>920306-0150.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Florida Primary Race May Provide   No Democrat With a Decisive Win   ----   By David Shribman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>03/06/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><RE>FLORIDA (FL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   ORLANDO, Fla. -- The Democrats' problems in this year'spresidential race come into sharp focus here in centralFlorida.   Former Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts is strong inthis part of the state, where the citrus trees and cattlefarms have been replaced by tract housing and spinoffs fromthe tourist industry. Fifty-five miles to the southwest,among the phosphate mines and orange groves of Lakeland, Gov.Bill Clinton of Arkansas has solid support.</LP><TEXT>   Tuesday's primary here is likely to produce just such apatchwork -- pockets of Tsongas strength alternating withpatches of Clinton support all across Florida, with thefrustrating result that both men may depart the nation'sfourth-biggest state with substantial pools of conventiondelegates. With a rough split of the state's 19 congressionaldistricts, Florida's primary may produce no decisive victor.   In this political season of uncertainty, no stateunderlines more clearly than Florida the importance thatparty rules play in shaping the nomination struggle -- and nostate illustrates as vividly how this year's nominationbattle differs from 1988.   &quot;The delegates are going to be divided, and this race willgo the distance,&quot; says Democratic state Rep. Michael Abrams,who headed the Florida campaign of Sen. Bob Kerrey, whowithdrew yesterday. &quot;The Republicans know who their nomineeis, we won't know for a long time, and so we're giving theRepublicans a big advantage.&quot;   Indeed, in the past several decades, the party that hassettled its nomination fight first has won the White House.As President Bush looks increasingly weaker, the Democratslook increasingly less likely to reach a swift conclusion totheir nomination battle. And with former Gov. Jerry Brown ofCalifornia still a potent force of protest, it's possible thenational convention could begin without any contender holdinga delegate majority.   The situation here helps explain why.   Four years ago, Michael Dukakis swept into Florida with acampaign team steeped in the fine print of party rules andalert to the demographic details that make Florida one of themost politically complex states in the union. TheMassachusetts governor targeted the condo counties of SouthFlorida -- in one coastal swath he outdistanced his nearestrival by a 5-1 margin -- and the retirement colonies of St.Petersburg. He won 41% of the vote -- and the bonus effect ofthe old rules gave him 66% of the delegates.   But the rules have changed as much as the politicallandscape has. The Democrats, in a bow to demands from theRev. Jesse Jackson, this year instituted aproportional-representation scheme that makes a sweep likeMr. Dukakis's extremely unlikely and sets the groundwork fora split verdict. In short, in Florida and elsewhere, thenotion of a state &quot;victory&quot; is deceiving and the race isstructured for inconclusive results, if not for an impasse.   Under the new Democratic rules, delegates are awarded indirect proportion to the percentage of votes the candidatesreceive. In Florida, for example, delegates are awarded onthe basis of both the statewide vote and the vote in each ofthe 19 congressional districts.   That means 97 delegates will be awarded in 19 separatecontests, one in each congressional district in the state;only candidates who win at least 15% in a district areeligible for delegates. At the same time, the candidates arecompeting in a parallel contest for statewide delegates -- 51of them, also distributed in direct proportion to thestatewide votes won by candidates who receive 15% or more ofthe tally.   The Republicans, by contrast, operate with a system thatin many places give statewide winners all of the delegates.This winner-take-all system gave Mr. Bush all 52 delegates inGeorgia this week even though Patrick Buchanan won 36% of thevote.   In Democratic races like the Florida primary, smallinvestments of time and money in carefully targeted areas canreap big harvests of delegates. But this time, second-placeand even third-place finishers can win more delegates thanthey previously could, prolonging the national race evenmore.   &quot;In all the Super Tuesday states, targeting makes adifference,&quot; says George Stephanopoulos, Mr. Clinton's deputycampaign manager. &quot;You just have to make sure that you playwhere it pays and win where it counts.&quot;   The 148 delegates being distributed here next week makeFlorida one of the jewels of Super Tuesday, which alsoincludes contests in six other Southern and Border states(Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, Tennessee andTexas), three Eastern states (Delaware, Massachusetts andRhode Island) and Hawaii. In all, 783 pledged delegates willbe distributed Tuesday, more than a fifth of all the pledgeddelegates to the convention.   One place where Mr. Clinton is likely to sweep thedelegates next Tuesday is Oklahoma, where Mr. Tsongas is noton the ballot.   Here in Florida, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Tsongas are runningstrong -- and close. Mr. Clinton has support in the panhandleand in South Florida. Mr. Tsongas has pockets of strengthamong northern emigres on the east coast and in the Greekcolony on the west coast.   While Mr. Clinton has the support of the politicalestablishment, Mr. Tsongas's strategists know that in thelast two primaries here it has been the suburban andwell-educated voters -- the backbone of the Tsongas support-- that have decided late and swung the election.   American Demographics, for example, has found that Orlandohas by far the highest rate of population growth amongbabyboomers in the country, more than 50 times the nationalaverage, making it prime Tsongas territory. Though he is onthe defensive for proposals for means tests for wealthySocial Security recipients, the profile of the state'sundecideds is nearly ideal for Mr. Tsongas.   &quot;There's a lot of South Florida that isn't afraid ofsomeone from Massachusetts,&quot; says Jon Mills, former speakerof the state House. &quot;And if he's looking for suburban voters-- upper middle class, socially liberal, business-oriented --that's a pretty good description of a lot of this state.&quot;   But those voters are not the only staging area in abattleground that's defined by population patterns andcongressional-district lines.   In the Gold Coast region of Florida's east coast, forexample -- which spans six congressional districts in about50 miles -- 29 delegates are at stake, making the area animportant testing ground. By contrast, a huge geographicalarea running from Naples on the west coast to Palm Beach onthe east coast -- and touched on by the Fort Myers, West PalmBeach and Miami media markets -- offers only five delegates.   The east-coast areas are the most heavily contested rightnow. &quot;It's nice to win a state, but the name of the game hereis to win delegates,&quot; says Jeffrey Eller, who is directingMr. Clinton's efforts here. &quot;The goal is to win thenomination, not to get distracted over who wins how manystates.&quot;   Mr. Clinton mobilized in the state early, putting togethera formidable organization to dominate the state convention inDecember, win a bellwether straw poll and attract theendorsement of leading political figures in the state.   These established politicians, including Lt. Gov. BuddyMacKay, flocked to Mr. Clinton's side, in part in a gestureof self-interest. President Bush scored better in Floridathan in any of the biggest 10 states in 1988, and this year,when Florida adds four new congressional seats and when thepublic is antagonistic toward politicians, leading Democratsare worried about their own survival.   &quot;We want someone on the ticket who can sell well inFlorida,&quot; says Linda Hennessee, a veteran Democraticorganizer in central Florida. &quot;This is serious business topoliticians here.&quot;   Endorsements, however, may be of limited value in a statethat has grown so fast that it has added the equivalent ofthe population of Connecticut in the past dozen years,changing the profile of the electorate.   &quot;Outside their very close friends, these politiciansaren't known by anyone,&quot; says Allan Katz, a Democratprominent in Tallahassee political circles. &quot;This is a statewhere there aren't established traditions -- very few peoplego to the church their father did -- and so establishedpoliticians can deliver about seven votes.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>