<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910924-0075</DOCNO><DOCID>910924-0075.</DOCID><HL>   China's Conundrum:   Old Guard in Beijing   Finds Itself Trapped   By Its Own Ideology   ---   Hard-Pressed Hard-Liners   Limit Economic Reform,   But Need It to Keep Power   ---   When a Deer Is a Horse   ----   By James McGregor   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/24/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND STATISTICS (IEN)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)</IN><NS>INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NEWS AND ANALYSIS (IEN)STOCK andamp; OTHER MARKET NEWS (STK)TRADE ISSUES (TRD)</NS><RE>CHINA (CH)FAR EAST (FE)NORTH AMERICA (NME)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   BEIJING -- Sitting in a squalid dormitory room with aportrait of Mao peering over his shoulder, a politicalscience professor explains China's chances for quickpolitical change by scribbling two Chinese characters: tong,which means togetherness and harmony, and an, which meanspeace and security.   &quot;These are the most important concepts to Chinese people,&quot;says the professor. &quot;We are still a feudal society, and theparty has replaced the emperors and mandarins, so we've got along way to go before there will be political change.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   The same day, at the opulent Palace Hotel a few milesaway, manicured men in tailored suits sit under crystalchandeliers discussing China's future. These Chinesefinancial officials and Hong Kong brokers are hoping toexpand China's nascent stock markets. &quot;Of course, this may bepossible only because our economy has undergone 10 years ofreform,&quot; says a Chinese participant.   These two scenes illustrate the main forces behind thecontinued survival of China's Communist Party: ancientbehavior patterns and modern business practices. China'spopulation of 1.13 billion still carries the Confucianinstinct of yielding to authority. And with 10 years ofeconomic reform under its belt, China has an economic systemthat is light years ahead of Eastern Europe or the SovietUnion.   China's grizzled old-guard Communists are clearly shakenby the sudden collapse of communism in the Soviet Union andelsewhere. But they are betting that full stomachs,well-stocked department stores, iron-fisted security and theChinese people's fear of chaos will keep the party in powerhere. And there's little doubt, for the immediate future atleast, that this is going to be the case.   But in the long run -- which in China means afterparamount leader Deng Xiaoping, age 87, and his few remainingrevolutionary contemporaries pass on -- the party's survivalis in real peril. The reason is simple. Unless it changescourse, China's Communist Party is poised to be destroyed bythe very forces that keep it in power today.   China is now locked into contradictory patterns: 1980seconomics and 1940s politics. A decade of economic evolutionhas left the country dependent on foreign investment, privateenterprise and exports for almost all of its growth. But theTiananmen Square massacre has saddled even practical-mindedparty leaders with a damaging paranoia and hard-line Marxistpublic stance that impedes the innovations needed to ensurelong-term economic progress.   In the 1980s, China was moving from doctrinaire Marxisminto a sort of market-oriented, soft-authoritarian systemthat could have evolved into a distinct ideology of its own-- call it Chinaism. But since the June 1989 Tiananmenkillings, the party has been painting itself into a corner bybelligerently defending Marxism and Maoism while limiting neweconomic reforms to a few that fit within a narrowideological framework.   &quot;Since Tiananmen, the party has reverted to all this heavyideological propaganda that has nothing to do with thereality of life here today,&quot; says a Hong Kong businessmanwith almost two decades of experience in China. &quot;So I thinkit is no longer possible for them to make a quiet transitionaway from communism.&quot;   People with party connections say the failure of thehard-liners' coup in the Soviet Union has served to heightenthe post-Tiananmen paranoia of China's leaders. Awell-connected party historian says Chinese leaders werefrightened by the fact that the Soviet plotters all had beenhandpicked for their posts by President Gorbachev. After thecoup failed, the historian says, China's leaders launched acampaign to test the loyalty of senior cadres in 16 centralgovernment and party departments.   When asked what kind of test is involved, the historianthrows his hands in the air, flips his head back and burstsinto loud laughter. &quot;They're being told to point at a deerand call it a horse,&quot; he says. His allusion is to a Chineseparable about a Qin Dynasty prime minister two millenia agowho tested the loyalty of subordinates by showing them a deerand calling it a horse. Anybody who called the deer a deerwas put to death.   &quot;It is as if they are all in a big stage play, wearingmasks and playing roles,&quot; says the historian. &quot;Everybody hasto have this public face of praising Marxism-Leninism and MaoTse-tung thought. Hardly anyone believes it, but the partydoesn't want to give anybody a chance to admit to each otherwhat everybody is thinking.&quot;   While the rhetoric rings hollow, especially the regularreferences to the inevitable victory of communism overcapitalism, it is affecting the country's economic course.During the 1980s, China had no trouble talking communismwhile moving toward capitalism. And in many areas outsideBeijing, especially the freewheeling south, that is still thecase. But Beijing policy makers planning the direction of thenational economy are now hamstrung by the old-guard'sideology.   During the days of Zhao Ziyang, the moderate party chiefdeposed after Tiananmen, China explored financial innovationswith a helter-skelter style and enthusiasm that led torampant corruption and boom-bust cycles. Certain sectors ofthe economy were virtually unregulated. Some peasants becameprosperous as communes disbanded and farmers leased plots ofland. Non-state factories and service companies, nominallyrun by collectives but often as fronts for entrepreneurs,sprang up all over.   These companies, as well as enterprises with foreigninvestment, are the only dynamic part of China's economy.Official statistics show that 70% of 1990 industrial growthcame from joint ventures and collective factories.   While Russians waited in food lines, China's citizens inthe 1980s enjoyed economic growth that averaged 9% a year.The wages of urban workers tripled. But today's leaders seemdetermined to build ideological dams that hold entrepreneursback.   Premier Li Peng can be credited with reining in anoverheated economy, bringing down inflation and adjustingcurrency exchange rates to realistic levels. But hisideological views threaten further growth. Mr. Li, aRussian-trained hydrologic engineer, vows to save stateindustry as the core of China's system. He views privateenterprise as a kind of financial lubricant that can betolerated only to help the state sector function.   Since Tiananmen, the government has directed its resourcesinto trying to revive wheezing state factories. In 1990alone, it pumped $11 billion, some 17% of central governmentspending, into money-losing state factories just to keepworker paychecks flowing. It also spent about $5 billion amonth on loans to state factories, some two-thirds of whichare believed to lose money.   Meanwhile, the shoddy output of state factories piles upin warehouses, unwanted by Chinese consumers. Workers saved40 cents of every dollar earned last year. Chinese banks haveabout $190 billion in savings deposits, a sum equal to 15months' salary for each person of working age in China.Instead of putting this money to use by lending it toentrepreneurs, the government runs ever-larger deficits as itsubsidizes state industry.   One of the few signs of vitality in Beijing these days isan emerging rivalry between Mr. Li and Vice Premier ZhuRongji. Mr. Zhu, a Shanghai mayor who was called to Beijingin March, is considered a possible replacement for Mr. Liwhen the unpopular premier's term ends in 1993. But Mr. Limay be trying to keep his job by saddling Mr. Zhu with animpossible mission. In mid-July, Mr. Zhu was told to form anew organization called the Production Office and use it torevamp state industry. But he was given an empty tool box towork with.   Mr. Zhu is criss-crossing China making speeches about howstate-owned factories, which employ about one-third ofChina's 150 million urban workers, must turn a profit or shutdown. But he has no authority to close plants, and none haveshut.   Since Tiananmen, the party has lived in fear of joblessworkers. But the government has done little to create asocial safety net of unemployment and retirement benefitsthat would allow factory closures. So far, Mr. Zhu's maintask appears to be figuring out how to spend $105 billionthat Mr. Li has earmarked for upgrading equipment in statefactories over the next five years.   When criticized for continued political repression sinceTiananmen, China's leaders suggest they are following themodel of Taiwan, South Korea and Singapore by keeping a tightrein on politics while relaxing economic policies. But thegovernment has shown few signs of a willingness to relinquisheconomic control, much less permit the dynamic capitalism ofAsia's little dragons.   During the recent stock market conference at the PalaceHotel, for example, the participants were discussing thepossibility of allowing foreigners to buy shares on China'stwo legal stock markets, in Shanghai and Shenzhen. Despite agreat demand for stocks, however, and the desire of manystate companies to raise capital by listing, China still hasfewer than two dozen listed shares. When China's leaders talkof stock markets nowadays, they describe &quot;socialist&quot; ones inwhich state companies would trade shares of one another andsomehow use that momentum to force efficiency.   &quot;The Chinese political elite have yet to reach the kind ofinformal historical compact that was reached in South Koreaand Taiwan between the government and private entrepreneurs,&quot;says Michel Oksenberg, a University of Michigan China scholarwho talked with China's senior leaders this month. &quot;Thatcompact gave each a sphere of autonomy in which neitherchallenged the other. We don't even have the bare outlines ofsuch an arrangement in China.&quot;   Indeed, while China is willing to allow almost anybody tobecome a street vendor selling vegetables or clothes, anysizable business has to be under some form of state control.Often this results in the sons and daughters of China'selderly revolutionaries being given a stake. The stock marketconference was put together by organizations involving one ofDeng Xiaoping's sons and the daughter of Chen Yun, China'soctogenarian guru of central planning. Sitting at the headtable was the son-in-law of Yao Yilin, a vice premier knownfor inflexible Marxist economics.   Judging by recent rhetoric, China's leaders are quiteworried about their country's economic dependence on theoutside world. U.S.-Soviet tension had provided China withlots of running room in world affairs, but China's role nowis murkier. Hardly a day goes by without a diatribe about&quot;peaceful evolution,&quot; meaning a Western plot to subvertsocialism by infusing China with capitalism. Analysts sayChina would like nothing more than to hunker down and avoidthe rest of the world for a while. The problem is, itseconomy depends heavily on foreign trade. Exports now accountfor about 20% of gross national product, compared to 4% in1978 when economic reforms began.   Foreign profits carry with them demands for politicalchange. This can be seen in the bruising battle in the U.S.Congress each summer over continuing to givemost-favored-nation status to China. China's uneasiness withthe U.S. was apparent at what was called a &quot;New InternationalOrder&quot; seminar held in Beijing early this month. An Americanparticipant, David Scheffer of the Carnegie Endowment forInternational Peace, said the conference involved &quot;atremendous amount of confrontational rhetoric&quot; aimed at theU.S.   &quot;They simply feel that there is lurking outside theirborders a threat now that didn't exist before, and thatthreat is intervention by the United States and other bigpowers into their internal affairs,&quot; says Mr. Scheffer. &quot;Theysee this new world order as a real threat to their perceptionof how they can achieve modernity.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>