<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911113-0036</DOCNO><DOCID>911113-0036.</DOCID><HL>   Street Fight:   J.P. Morgan Expands   Role in Underwriting,   Irking Securities Firms   ---   It Brings Huge Advantages   To U.S. Corporate Deals,   Denies Any Arm-Twisting   ---   A Question About `Firewalls'   ----   By Fred R. Bleakley   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>11/13/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   JPM EK S CLX BT PEP SWY</CO><MS>FINANCIAL (FIN)</MS><IN>MAJOR MONEY CENTER BANKS (BAN)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><GV>FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   When the lobbying on a sweeping bank-deregulation billpeaked last week in Washington, J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. was out inforce. Instead of pushing for the bill, which would haverepealed the law banning banks from corporate-securitiesunderwriting, Morgan's bankers were out to kill it.   They got their way. Now, J.P. Morgan Securities Inc. cankeep climbing the ladder of major corporate stock and bondunderwriters without burdensome new restraints. JPMS is oneof only three bank holding-company affiliates already allowedby the Federal Reserve to compete with Wall Street onvirtually all fronts, and Wall Street is worried and angered.</LP><TEXT>   Since entering U.S. corporate-debt underwriting in 1989,JPMS has risen rapidly to seventh place behind such majorsecurities firms as Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs and MorganStanley.   This year, through last Friday, JPMS managed the books --quarterbacked the underwriting and selling effort of a WallStreet syndicate -- on 23 offerings, including ones forClorox, PepsiCo, McDonald's, American Brands, SonocoProducts, Procter andamp; Gamble and Federal Paper Board. Includingco-managerships, its corporate-bond deal tally is 95. For allof last year, it managed the books on just six deals andco-managed another 35.   JPMS is &quot;doing significantly better than we would haveexpected,&quot; says Jerome Kenney, an executive vice president atMerrill Lynch.   When not disparaging JPMS's ability to sell securities,the Street's investment bankers are complaining about banks'unfair competitive advantages -- for example, the way federaldeposit insurance enables them to raise funds more cheaplythan securities firms can.   Even worse, Wall Streeters contend, is the perhaps-illegalstrong-arm that some banking companies put on corporateborrowers to lead and co-manage their stock and bond issues.They say they know of implicit, and sometimes explicit,suggestions that a company wanting consideration of a loan orbetter terms should give the bank's securities affiliate amanager role in underwriting deals.   There is a &quot;quid pro quo&quot; practice in which a corporationreceives &quot;more flexibility on the part of the bank in tendingto the banking relationship&quot; in return for purchasinginvestment-banking and finance services, John Tamagni,chairman of the Securities Industry Association's InvestmentBanking Committee, testified before a congressional committeein September.   The controversy centers on the often complex, indefinablereasons why a chief financial officer may choose one firmover another for plum assignments. Long before commercialbanks arrived on the scene, competitors have read unprovablemotives, such as paying back or currying favors, intounderwriting decisions.   Officials at J.P. Morgan and other banking companies withsecurities affiliates deny any arm-twisting. &quot;If I wereprotecting my turf against the competition, I would makethose arguments, too. But there's no truth to these vagueallegations,&quot; says Michael Patterson, Morgan's generalcounsel. Similarly, a spokesman for Bankers Trust Co., thesecond-most-active banking company in corporate underwriting,denies such arrangements.   Mr. Tamagni said in his testimony that investment bankingfirms are afraid to come forward because they &quot;are toodependent upon continued access to credit from the very samebanks who may be violating the law.&quot;   The Fed says it considers adequate the competitive andbank-risk protections it has built into the &quot;firewalls&quot;separating banks and their securities units. In the past,whenever the Fed or the Securities and Exchange Commissionhas investigated so-called pressure tactics by banks seekingto win business from insurance or securities firms, they'vedrawn a blank. For now, Richard Ashton, the Fed's associategeneral counsel, says, &quot;I don't want to comment on anythingunder investigation or on complaints lodged with us.&quot;   In J.P. Morgan's case, practically all its banking clientsare large corporations not very susceptible to pressure.Indeed, the coercion charge doesn't hold up in a spot checkof about a dozen large corporations using JPMS either as alead manager or co-manager on a recent deal. &quot;There was noteven a hint of lending implications,&quot; says William Ausfahl,chief financial officer of Clorox Co., which has J.P.Morgan's Morgan Guaranty Trust subsidiary as its lead bankand hired its JPMS subsidiary to lead a syndicate offering$200 million of 10-year notes in July.   Similarly, PepsiCo Inc. let Morgan lead a $250 millionoffering of seven-year notes last month because &quot;theirability to distribute paper has been proven in othermarkets,&quot; says Claudia Morf, a vice president and assistanttreasurer. PepsiCo's relationship with J.P. Morgan stretchesover commercial banking, interest-rate and currency swaps andEurobond offerings.   Even if &quot;there are some episodes {of arm-twisting}, it'snot the pattern,&quot; says Robert Tortoriello, a securities-lawspecialist at Cleary, Gottleib, Steen andamp; Hamilton in New York.John Murphy, the law firm's Washington expert on bankunderwriting, adds, &quot;You would expect that in this day ofdisclosure, some agreements would surface. I have yet to seethem.&quot;   Yet competitors remain suspicious that banks are actingunfairly. At the September hearing, the SIA's Mr. Tamagnitestified that some securities affiliates of bankingcompanies have violated Section 106 of the Bank HoldingCompany Act Amendments of 1970, which bars a banking companyfrom tying the extension of a loan to any other business withthe company. Mr. Tamagni, who is a partner at Lazard, Freresandamp; Co., cited several explicit violations without disclosingany names.   One had a bank conditioning its participation in arevolving line of credit on inclusion of the bank'ssecurities affiliate as a co-manager on a major corporation'snext debt issue. He added that the company, which was havingtrouble arranging the credit, agreed, and it included thebank's affiliate as co-manager on a debt issue that topped$700 million. The company is Eastman Kodak Co., people closeto the SIA contend. J.P. Morgan's securities unit wasco-manager of a $750 million five-year note issue in January1990, soon after Kodak took a big restructuring charge.   A spokesman for Kodak says it won't comment on any creditlines existing at that time or its choice of managers in thator any other securities offering. At JPMS, Joseph MacHale, amanaging director, says: &quot;We work with {Kodak} on all kindsof things. I don't think that any client's including us inour domestic underwritings is anything more than a gradualextension of an overall strong relationship.&quot;   In another case, Mr. Tamagni testified, the corporatedirector of financing at a service-industry giant said he wastold by the same commercial bank of a similar lendingprovision. &quot;The company's ability to access its revolvingcredit line was vitally important,&quot; Mr. Tamagni said,&quot;because the company, with approximately $10 billion incommercial paper outstanding, believed it would be unable toroll over all of its commercial paper if its rating dipped byeven a single rank.&quot; The bank's affiliate was to be includedas comanager on future issues, he added.   Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. is the service company Mr. Tamagnihad in mind, a person close to the SIA says. According tofilings with the SEC, Sears had about $14.3 billion ofshort-term borrowings outstanding at midyear. Last month,Morgan Guaranty led a bank syndicate in agreeing to a $4.2billion credit facility that replaced one of $3 billion,according to Loan Pricing Corp., which tracks syndicatedloans.   A spokesman for Sears says its chief financial officer,James Denny, &quot;categorically denies&quot; any quid pro quoarrangement. JPMS's Mr. MacHale says Sears has just completeda $900 million bond deal for which JPMS isn't a co-manager.His firm is participating, however, with an allotment of $11million of bonds. &quot;That's really only a bit player,&quot; he says,and he denies any tie-in deal on the credit line.   Mr. Tamagni also cited a corporation that allegedly hadconducted a &quot;bake-off among five to 10 investment andcommercial banks&quot; to choose which would help it in bondholdernegotiations to pave the way for redemption of approximately$500 million in subordinated debt. The adviser chosen wasaffiliated with the company's lead commercial bank, whichalso happened to be in a position to refuse permission for aredemption of debt subordinate to bank credit and to helpfinance such a deal as well. That gave the bank &quot;enormousleverage and tremendous competitive advantage,&quot; Mr. Tamagnitestified.   Safeway Inc. was the company involved, according to thesame observers. The supermarket chain announced in June thatit had hired BT Securities Corp., Bankers Trust'sinvestment-banking arm, to help it seek bondholder consent toredeem $565 million of high-yield subordinated debentures. BTSecurities is serving as a co-manager on a Safeway debtoffering currently in the market. A Safeway spokesman saysthe company is restricted from commenting during thenew-issue registration period. The Bankers Trust spokesmandeclined to comment.   To reduce the chance of linked transactions, the bankingbill voted down in the House last week would have forbiddenbank lending arrangements 60 days before or 90 days after asecurities offering managed by the bank's affiliate unlessrigorous provisions were met, including a written statementfrom the company that it was not coerced. J.P. Morganofficials were joined by executives of other major banks andthe American Bankers Association in lobbying against thebill. They prefer the Fed's less restrictive approach.   Now, with the broad banking bill defeated and one in theSenate likely to die, too, the Federal Reserve Board is freeto continue granting securities powers to strong bankingcompanies. So far, it has authorized three U.S. bank holdingcompanies, J.P. Morgan, Bankers Trust and the relativelysmall Dauphin Deposit Corp. in Harrisburg, Pa., to underwritebond and equity offerings. More than a dozen others,including Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp., can underwritecorporate debt issues but not stock deals.   Apart from its favored status, why is Morgan doing sowell? One reason is its heavy investment in the business.Another is a return to relationship banking, in whichcorporate clients give financial-service firms that have longserved them in some fields additional work in others.   &quot;In the 1980s, relationships were largely eclipsed bytransactions,&quot; says George Salem, a Prudential Securitiesanalyst who recently published a 120-page report on J.P.Morgan. &quot;Now relationships again play a more meaningful andgrowing role in determining which financial institution getsthe business.&quot;   Chief financial officers are &quot;fed up with too manyunfocused pitches&quot; by a variety of firms seeking to handlesingle transactions, says Jay Bennett, a principal atGreenwich Associates, which annually interviews theexecutives at 1,200 large corporations. The latest surveyfound that 78% of the corporations say they would favor aninstitution with which they have a strong relationship.   At Morgan, which never stopped emphasizing relationships,Douglas &quot;Sandy&quot; Warner III, the president, says, &quot;Ourobjective is to do as much business with a client across ourspectrum of services as we can.&quot; Adds Ramon de Oliveira, whoruns JPMS's high-yield and equities group, &quot;We're obsessedwith relationships.&quot;   But the officials deny taking that obsession too far. Asfor giving preference on a loan to an underwriting client,Mr. Warner says, &quot;A loan is judged just the same as a bondissue. Does it make sense? It is absolutely not judged onwhat business we do elsewhere with the client.&quot; Onerelationship can lead to another, he adds, because Morganbecomes a trusted confidant, possessed of information thatcan help it offer better advice on all sorts of financings.   Thus, American Brands Corp. tapped JPMS to lead-manage arecent $200 million 12-year note issue because a long-termrelationship, in banking and financial advisory, had keptJ.P. Morgan &quot;in constant dialogue with us,&quot; says DudleyBauerlein, the food company's treasurer. The company istraditionally an underwriting client of Morgan Stanley (whichwas split off from the Morgan bank in the wake of theGlass-Steagall Act). But &quot;that particular week, thediscussions focused on doing a financing, and J.P. Morgan bidthe deal very attractively,&quot; Mr. Bauerlein adds.   But such relationships at least gave Morgan, the newplayer, a foot in the door. Mr. Ausfahl of Clorox says, &quot;Wefelt they could do as good a job as anyone else and, becauseof the rest of the relationship, we wanted to give them atry.&quot; At Allied-Signal Corp., Roger Matthews, assistanttreasurer, says JPMS was selected as a co-manager on $100million of 10-year notes last February because &quot;we felt asthe new kid in town they might try harder.&quot;   The trouble with banking relationships, Wall Streeterssay, is that federal deposit insurance and the &quot;too big tofail&quot; doctrine give banks an unfair pricing edge in creditextensions. That is because even large depositors feel surethat their money is safe in big banks, and thus the banks canraise funds relatively cheaply. And the federal backup, alongwith Morgan Guaranty's sterling AAA credit rating, gives JPMSa greater aura of safety when corporations want hedgingdevices such as interest-rate and currency swaps. All of thisstrengthens the relationships with corporations.   In the 1980s, investment banks conditioned temporary,&quot;bridge&quot; loans for corporate acquisitions on their handlingsubsequent financings and asset sales, but Gedale Horowitz,chairman of the SIA and senior executive director of SalomonBrothers, notes a big difference: Their tactics weren'tillegal. He adds, &quot;If an investment bank fails, there's nocost to the taxpayer.&quot; Indeed, several large firms sustainedlosses of hundreds of millions of dollars on bridge loansthat soured.   Unlike other major banks, which extended risky loans, J.P.Morgan early on emphasized fee-based investment banking. Ascommercial paper -- corporate IOUs -- ate into more and moreof its lending business with large corporations, Morganplotted a new strategy in the late 1970s.   &quot;The first decision we had to make grew out of having aninvestment-grade client base where the relationship waslending money. You could either change the clients so thelending would be profitable, or keep the clients and changethe products,&quot; Mr. Warner says. He now views Morgan as &quot;afinancier, able to deal in all of these markets and come upwith the most effective solution to a problem.&quot;   It has refined the relationship strategy to a degreerivaled only by Goldman Sachs. J.P. Morgan's push into U.S.underwriting began in mid-1989 when the Fed decided to openthe business to commercial banks. Morgan was ready, havingalready lent money or done global security offerings for manyof America's large corporations. It had started underwritingin Europe, where it is legal for banks, in 1979.   There wasn't a lot of agonizing about &quot;how do we get intothis,&quot; says Mr. MacHale, who was brought back from London tohead the unit's corporate-bond origination effort in the U.S.&quot;It was simply adding another product to the privateplacements, Eurobond business and interestrate and currencyswaps we were already doing.&quot;   To coordinate its commercial and investment bankingservices, J.P. Morgan turned its senior commercial bankersinto relationship officers. Although relationship officersare supposed to serve only as playmakers, passing the clientoff to the appropriate product group, the fact that they workfor Morgan Guaranty Trust in the first place could confuseclients about the separateness of underwriting decisions.   Morgan has 70 relationship officers in the U.S. who workwith 400 to 500 corporate clients and a target list twicethat size, says John &quot;Tony&quot; Mayer Jr., the head of corporatefinance. He also has an equal force of relationship officersoverseas.   On the selling side, J.P. Morgan had a bigger challenge.Few of the 250 U.S. institutional investors that counted themost had bought Eurobonds (bonds issued outside a borrower'sown country). Morgan added a nine-person corporate-bondtrading desk, built an investment-grade bond-research team of20 analysts and expanded the Treasury and government-agencysecurities sales force to about 60 people -- still less thanthe 70 or more at Wall Street's top six firms.   To break into equities and junk bonds, JPMS has built asales and trading team of 21 people and plans to raise thatto more than 30 next year. It hopes to have 30 analysts incoming years, up from 19 now.   Although JPMS has yet to manage a junk-bond offering, ithas been a co-manager on six stock offerings, after gettingthe go-ahead from the Fed only a year ago. &quot;All of us knewthat the biggest market -- equities -- was at the end of therainbow,&quot; says Brian Watson, JPMS managing director of equityorigination.   Wall Street rivals say JPMS doesn't now have theinstitutional contacts to lead an equity offering. And theGreenwich Associates survey found that only 5% of the 1,200financial officers said they would use JPMS to manage orco-manage a common-stock offering. The figures for the sixtop firms ranged from 12% to 34%. The gap with regard to achoice of underwriting management for domestic bonds wasnarrower but still showed JPMS lagging. There, 10% of thecorporate officers said they would use JPMS; the top sixfirms received grades of 13% to 37%. Greenwich Associatesdeclines to confirm the numbers, which were supplied by aperson familiar with the survey.   Despite such numbers, Mr. Salem believes that, sooner orlater in the 1990s, JPMS will join the elite six firms.However, he notes, &quot;The corporate culture of JPMS needs sometransformation. It's more genteel than Wall Street firms,where the hearts beat faster and the elbows are sharper.&quot;   Morgan officials say they are in no hurry to change, butthey aren't so patient with the carping from rivals. &quot;Thebottom line is, in their heart of hearts, the rest of WallStreet is terrified,&quot; says John Mullen, a JPMS managingdirector who had been at Goldman Sachs for nine years.   &quot;Here is an entity more global than any of them, with lotsmore capital and with a reputation for its ethics and ways ofdoing business that exceeds their standards,&quot; he adds.&quot;They're saying to themselves, `If we can't slow these guysdown, by the year 2000 they will have eaten our lunch.'&quot;</TEXT></DOC>