<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910821-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>910821-0084.</DOCID><HL>   How Many Divisions Has the Coup?   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>08/21/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><RE>EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)FAR EAST (FE)SOVIET UNION (UR)</RE><LP>   When Boris Yeltsin defied the coup masters of the &quot;StateCommittee on the State of Emergency in the U.S.S.R.&quot;yesterday, a puzzling question arose: Where did Mr. Yeltsinget his tanks?   Even though he is the popularly elected president of thehuge Russian Federation, he theoretically commands no armedforces. All fighting troops, including militias, aretechnically under the command of either the minister ofdefense, the chief of the KGB or the minister of theinterior, all of whom were part of the committee that hadjust ousted Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev. No doubt thecoup masters themselves were among those most surprised bythe sudden arrival of Red Army tanks to defend the Russianpresident.</LP><TEXT>   In simplest terms, the answer to that question was thatsome soldiers decided they would rather fight for Mr. Yeltsinthan for Gennady Yanayev, the former Soviet vice presidentinstalled as president by the conspirators. But why such athing could happen in a military system once thought to bepart of a political monolith requires more complexexplanations. Fundamentally, the seeds for these militaryuprisings against men who were trying to roll back the clockto Stalinism were sown years ago by Stalin and his fellowBolsheviks themselves.   From the earliest days of the Communist Party, after itsoverthrow of an elected provisional government, party leadersfashioned means to ensure that the party always would be incontrol of the military and hence not vulnerable to amilitary coup. Since they themselves had seized power withoutbenefit of election, they were well aware of the possibilitythat someone else might attempt the same thing. A politicaldirectorate, responsible directly to the party's CentralCommittee and Politburo, evolved. Political commissars wereplaced in all important military units to ensure thatsoldiers maintained politically correct attitudes and that noofficers were conspiring against the party.   But the result of this, in effect, was to politicize themilitary. In the multi-party systems of the Westerndemocracies, military officers are barred from overtpolitical activities and are expected to take their ordersfrom elected officials of whatever party is in power. In theone-party Soviet system, however, military officers wereexpected to be a part of the party apparatus, participatingin its decisions and implementing the party's will.   That has meant that many of today's Soviet militaryofficers are &quot;politically aware,&quot; as the Soviets put it, andpolitically active. Some hold elective or appointivepolitical offices, such as seats in the Congress of People'sDeputies. But when Communist ideology began losing its gripon Soviet elites -- it had far earlier lost any credibilitywith the people themselves -- it started losing favor withmilitary officers as well, in particular the younger, moreintelligent officers most likely to be assigned to commandsin elite units.   Military officers began making speeches in parliamentarybodies that reflected differing political tendencies,including some that sounded suspiciously like defiance of theparty leadership. Some of these speeches, such as those fromthe two &quot;black colonels&quot; of the Soyuz party faction, werereactionary; others displayed hints that some officers inwhat had been a conservative institution had developedsympathies for democratic reform.   Mr. Gorbachev earlier this year set out ostensibly todepoliticize the military by making the political directorateresponsible solely to the state -- not to the party as well.But at the same time, the party attempted to purge officersthat it felt were disloyal. That had the effect of onlyfurther alienating talented officers who were in the processof resisting party control. Mr. Yeltsin wants to go evenfurther, banning party cells from all state institutions,reducing the size of the Soviet military and endingconscription, turning the Soviet military into a professionalfighting force responsible only to the government. This isone of the most important ways the Russian president has beenjarring the teeth of party hardliners.   What this week's events suggest, however, is that theparty hardliners are not having great success in theirefforts to maintain a grip on the military. It is interestingto note who were the first military men to side with the Mr.Yeltsin. Among them were three Moscow-based units of theomon, or &quot;black berets,&quot; an anti-riot force that the InteriorMinistry formed a few years ago when it became apparent thatMoscow would have to deal with a rising anti-government,anti-party sentiment.   Paul Beaver, publisher of Jane's Defense Weekly in London,says that these were the same troops who were ordered to fireon unarmed civilians in Lithuania last winter. Although hecannot know their minds, it is his belief that their supportfor Mr. Yeltsin grew out of their distaste for this kind ofassignment and their dislike for their own boss, Boris Pugo,who is minister of interior and one of the members of thecoup committee.   Another unit, says Mr. Beaver, was from the TamanskayaGuards Division, an elite unit based 45 miles from Moscow.These troops, hand-picked and often used for ceremonialmarches in the capital, arrived with 10 front-line T-72 tanksto assist Mr. Yeltsin. It was their tanks that were deployednear the Russian Federation headquarters during the openinghours of yesterday's stand-off and their presence may wellhave been one reason the coup leaders quickly adopted acautious approach, even though they themselves had mustered amuch larger tank force. They no doubt had some well-foundeddoubts whether the soldiers nominally under their commandwould attack another Red Army unit, not to mention all of theunarmed civilians surrounding Mr. Yeltsin's headquarters.   Adding further to their doubts, one suspects, was thearrival of several hundred paratroopers from the 106thAirborne division, which also came to Mr. Yeltsin's aid.These troops drove their trucks to Moscow from their base atTula, some 100 miles to the south, says Mr. Beaver.   While these were token forces compared with the massiveforces theoretically under the command of the coup masters,their psychological importance had to be enormous, in partbecause of their elite status. They no doubt emboldened Mr.Yeltsin to issue a stirring plea to other Soviet soldiers,telling them that the coup was doomed to failure and thatthey had no duty to obey the orders of anyone commanding themto fire on Russian people.   Missing from the list of units swinging over to Mr.Yeltsin were any that are part of the KGB military apparatus.This is significant, in that the KGB guards all importantinstitutions and had its origins as the &quot;shield and sword&quot; ofthe Communist Party. Stephen Foye of Radio Liberty observesthat its members are carefully vetted for party loyalty.   But while the KGB has some highly trained andwell-equipped fighting troops at its command, it too has aproblem in trying to pierce Mr. Yeltsin's redoubt. Itsproblem is that its people are roundly hated by the regulararmy forces. They are associated with secret police dirtytricks and their better pay and perquisites are resented bythe officers of other services. If KGB forces should launchan attack on, for example, a paratroop regiment, it would bean open invitation for other paratroop regiments to wade inagainst the KGB. There could be a goodsized civil war, but itwould be one that the KGB would most likely lose. There wereunconfirmed reports late yesterday that Vladimir Kryuchkov,head of the KGB, had stepped down.   Indeed, the strange news coming out of Moscow lateyesterday makes one wonder whether the coup leaders alreadyhave serious doubts about their ability to succeed. Suddenly,one of the principal plotters, Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov,is listed as ill, and Chief of Staff Mikhail Moiseyev is inhis place. Gen. Moiseyev is regarded as more moderate thanMr. Yazov. Another conspirator, Prime Minister ValentinPavlov, is also having health problems.   Of course, no one really knows how this drama will playout. All that one knows from what has happened so far is thatthe Soviet military, like the Soviet Communist Party, is nolonger the cohesive power base it once was. That will remainimportant for the Soviets and world long after the presentstruggle ends.   ---   Mr. Melloan is the Journal's deputy editor, international.</TEXT></DOC>