<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ920210-0010</DOCNO><DOCID>920210-0010.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Television:   Pundits Avert Gaze From Flowers Show   ----   By Dorothy Rabinowitz</HL><DATE>02/10/92</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><LP>   About two weeks ago the nation's press, in the grip of oneof its periodic fits of righteousness, began flogging itselfinto the conviction that the Clinton-Flowers affair was asubject beyond the pale. By now that opinion seems to havehardened into a religious belief, from the evidence of thehandwringing and calls for &quot;substantive&quot; issues emanatingfrom &quot;The Washington Week In Review,&quot; &quot;The Group&quot; and otherillustrious centers of TV punditry. That seizure ofrighteousness was inevitable after a week of recriminationsand hair tearing in which journalists accused one another --and on rare occasions, themelves -- of pursuing scandalrather than what have come to be known as substantive issues.They drove themselves into this fit with abandon, on air andin print, as they denounced tabloid journalism, andthemselves for imitating it.   That this fever was entering a critical phase was alreadyclear two weekends ago. That Sunday, all the roisterers on&quot;The McLaughlin Group&quot; joined in bemoaning the depths towhich political discourse had sunk as a result of the Flowersaffair. During a prior week, a McLaughlin regular raisedhackles when he interrupted the host's scathing reference totabloid journalism, to point out that here they all wereanyway, giving credence to the tabloid story by talking aboutit. The entire weekend after the Flowers press conference,television panelists delivered a mighty flow of pulpitoratory directed against all who had allowed the allegationsabout Clinton's alleged 12-year adulterous affair to divertthe body politic from serious issues in the campaign. TedKoppel -- who some days earlier asked hard questions of anassortment of &quot;Nightline&quot; guests outdoing one another intheir outrage over the Flowers' charges -- was one of the fewtelevision journalists not caught up in the week's generalweeping and sermonizing. Most everywhere else, TV punditsvied with one another to express the depths of their contemptfor Gennifer Flowers, and that excessively reviled tabloid&quot;The Star,&quot; which carried her story.</LP><TEXT>   It's clear that fashions in virtue have changed a lot,when journalists compete publicly to see who can exhibit thepurest attitude of indifference to moral questions including,especially, the question of whether a candidate for thepresidency lied to a national television audience.   Fashions in virtue have also changed a lot from the onesevident just a few months ago, during the Thomas-Hillimbroglio. Recall the deep respectfulness with which most ofthis same press corps took up Anita Hill's 10-year-oldrecollections about a sexually charged atmosphere andsuggestive conversations. Remember the near reverentialsympathy with which so many journalists received Ms. Hill'sintricate rationale for why she waited so long to publicizedetails of the new Supreme Court candidate's allegedsalacious speech.   Think, too, of the acceptance and understanding so manymembers of the elite press displayed on hearing her no lesscomplicated explanations about why she followed her allegedharasser from one job to another. Compare all this with theimmoderate scorn and detestation directed at GenniferFlowers, a far sorrier victim by her own account than Ms.Hill by hers, but lacking the advantage of an unpopularSupreme Court candidate as her abuser.   Yes, the cases are different, but in one central matterthey are the same: Both pose the question of whom the worldshould believe, an accusing woman or the important man whostands accused? Throughout the Thomas-Hill affair there werea great many reporters -- notably Nina Totenberg on PBS --ever ready to instruct us in the evil of a system stackedagainst women, and to tell us that society traditionallyprotected the man accused and discredited any female accuser.   To raise serious doubts about Anita Hill's decade-oldmemory of a conversation was, members of the investigatingcommittee discovered, to assure another round of tiradescharging that the good old boy network was at work, circlingthe accused with its protective wagons. Gennifer Flowerstells a story about a candidate for the highest office in theland, a story that is a thousandfold better substantiatedthan the Hill bill of particulars. The Clinton-Flowersconnection, as alleged, concerns a relationship of far moresignificant dimension than the one Clarence Thomas allegedlystrove to initiate, and what happens? Ms. Flowers isdismissed, by men and woman reporters alike, exactly the wayfeminists say women are always dismissed in these matters.   Clinton strategists put together a diction cribsheet ofsorts for use by spin controllers. Instead of referring tothe &quot;story&quot; they were to say, &quot;cash for trash&quot; and were neverto mention &quot;tabloid&quot; without the word &quot;sleazy.&quot; Soon afterGennifer Flowers and the managers of &quot;The Star&quot; played thetapes of conversations between Governor Clinton and Ms.Flowers, the Clinton team was on the job.   A good thing too. CNN fastidiously refused to air thetapes at first, on the grounds they might not be legitimate.To see just how legitimate they were, we only had to tuneinto programs where the spinsters were busy explaining whatthe governor had meant by saying this or that.   For days after, as the fevers of virtue began carrying ourjournalists off, we heard complaints that the tapes had beenedited. The Star representative explained at the pressconference that what had been deleted was extraneous chatter.Nevertheless, journalists who night after night select out ofa half hour interview whatever two line soundbite they wantto air, continued to behave as though they had never heard ofediting. Soon we began to hear that these extremely tellingtapes were &quot;inconclusive.&quot; After days of apologies from thecandidate, about his remarks about Governor Cuomo, HillaryClinton still suggested on &quot;Prime Time Live&quot; that the tapemight be a fake. Sam Donaldson, tireless terrier of theairwaves, gallantly neglected to pursue the matter.   Now Gennifer Flowers is no demure political heroine nordoes she present herself as a member of the oppressed gender,a la Anita Hill. At the press conference, a wild affair, thisformer TV journalist faced the howling mob with unshakableaplomb and gave them the fixed gaze of someone accustomed tostaring into Teleprompters. It was an impressive performance-- and conveyed an entirely credible description of herliaison with the governor.   But she is not the issue. The issue is the solemnjournalistic breastbeating now going on about the need toconcentrate on subjects of substance. As though questionsabout lying and truth aren't issues of substance in apresidential campaign. Time and again, we've heard that thepolls show that the character questions aren't a centralconcern to voters in New Hampshire. Perhaps so. Voters knowthe idealistic and enlightened answers to give this question.They know because they heard the pundits. What voters sayisn't always what they feel, or express in the voting booth,as our TV sages ought to know by now.</TEXT></DOC>