<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900813-0014</DOCNO><DOCID>900813-0014.</DOCID><HL>   LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Television:   L.A. Lawless: Watts Riots Docudrama   ----   By Dorothy Rabinowitz</HL><DATE>08/13/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A8</SO><LP>   The 1965 Watts riots that left 35 people dead began withthe arrest of a black motorist. Such was the rage against thepolice, the grievances over joblessness and discriminationwithin this large black Los Angeles neighborhood, that itrequired only the sight of a white policeman arresting anintoxicated black driver to start the Molotov cocktailsflying. That, at any rate, is the premise of &quot;Heat Wave,&quot;airing tonight on TNT (8-10 p.m. EDT).   This dramatization of the riots was written by MichaelLazarou and produced by Jon Avnet and Jordan Kerner. Theydeserve notice, first of all, for having produced one of themost simple-minded sociopolitical tracts seen on a TV screenin recent years, which is saying a lot. Second, their show isunremittingly silly, when it is not vicious, in itsstereotyping of whites.</LP><TEXT>   One learns something about the mindset of this movie fromits efforts to portray a sympathetic white. The only whiteuppermiddle-class resident of Los Angeles not represented assome sort of murderous yahoo, for example, is one Mrs.Canfield, a spacey, childlike character portrayed by SallyKirkland with, it should be said, a certain whinyeffectiveness. If this is what &quot;Heat Wave's&quot; creative mindshave brought forth by way of a token &quot;good&quot; white, you canimagine the others.   Based loosely -- one hopes -- on the recollections of theblack Los Angeles Times reporter Bob Richardson, the moviechronicles a black family's struggles in Los Angeles, themecca to which they migrated with high hopes several yearsbefore the riots. They discovered that in the California ofthe early '60s, as in the South, facilities for blacks wereseparate but not equal, that the police could be abusive andthat good jobs for blacks were rare.   The family's head, known as Mother-Dear if you should needa hint as to her character, is the cook, housekeeper andsurrogate grandmother to the wealthy Canfields to whom shealso dispenses spiritual and psychological guidance.Mother-Dear, (Cicely Tyson) is concerned only with church,family and with the Canfields, who sorely need her patientwisdom and care. You get the picture.   Mother-Dear sees her unemployed son turn to drinking,along with her grandson who, we are informed, burned withambition to be a jet pilot until discouraged by a guidancecounselor. It takes just one session with a high-schoolguidance counselor, according to this film, to turn azealous, open-hearted, sky's-the-limit ambitious youth into asnarling ne'er-do-well. Pop into the guidance counselor'soffice a few minutes and out comes a criminal. Such is themagic of character development in our times.   But even though afflicted by alcoholism and lack ofopportunity, Mother-Dear's own family is an admirable bunchcompared with the unhappy and strife-ridden Canfields.Insistently and crudely, the stereotypes of the sterile,loveless, cowardly and materialistic whites are juxtaposedwith portrayals of universally loving, loyal and devotedblack couples. Any failures of character among these blacks,we are regularly reminded, derive solely from discrimination.Nevertheless, virtually every black in evidence is a hero ofone kind or another. Every white person in evidence, exceptfor the childlike Mrs. Canfield, and briefly, a policeman notmuch less childlike, is either a redneck thug, a hypocrite orworse.   After the Watts uproar begins, and there are attacks onmotorists, rioters announce plans to attack whiteneighborhoods, and that threat inspires some whites in thethreatened neighborhoods to try to arm themselves. Anunpleasant-looking crowd of white males in a gun store standsaround looking for all the world like a mob gathered for alynching, which is, of course, precisely the way they wereintended to look. Notwithstanding who is threatening whom, itis clear the film means to portray these weapons-seekers asthe immoral ones.   In the meantime, the Molotov cocktails are flyingpell-mell through Watts. But these deadly weapons areevidently to be judged on another scale of morality from theweapons purchased by whites in self-defense. For in thiscase, we are clearly supposed to view the improvised missilesas political symbols, emblems of rebellion. Lest anyone beconfused over the moral difference, the film makers haveprovided an instructive scene, played out at the Canfieldresidence. None other than Mother-Dear's employer, the surlyand dyspeptic Mr. Canfield, stands waiting by the window, gunin hand. Horrified, Mother-Dear offers to pray for him.   Watts burned for six days thanks to the Molotov cocktailsthat helped take out 600 buildings. It can be said of thisfilm, at least, that it is straightforward about the riot'sugliness and violence. Still, it manages to glorify thisevent in which 30 blacks and five whites died, and torepresent it as a kind of important political act.   Certain aspects of these events, of course, are harder topass off as political activism than others. Representing thelarge-scale looting of stores as an act of politicalexpression, for example, has always been a questionableproposition, and that applies no less to the Watts riots.Still, there can be no doubt that the residents of Watts felttheir deprivations keenly, and that their rage fueled theexplosion.   Watts was a complex tragedy, meriting better than thishash of politically progressive cliches and stereotypes. Theworst thing about the film's portrayal of blacks is that itrepresents them -- with but few exceptions -- as victimswholly without inner resources, people whose lives andcharacter are shaped exclusively by their helplessness, lackof initiative, lack of any focus except resentment againstwhites.   In the '70s there was a great to-do about violent,so-called black-exploitation films such as &quot;Superfly.&quot; Thisis another, far more insidious kind of exploitation of blacksin film. It is also guilty, in its treatment of whites, ofsomething normally called racism when such stuff is directedat blacks.</TEXT></DOC>