<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900720-0128</DOCNO><DOCID>900720-0128.</DOCID><HL>   Gaining Speed:   Toyota Is Gearing Up   To Expand Output,   Extend Global Reach   ---   It Plans to Add Operations   In the European Market,   Rolls Out New Products   ---   Handling a Recall With Style   ----   By Kathryn Graven and Bradley A. Stertz   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/20/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   TOYOY EUROP GM JAPAN</CO><IN>AUTOMOBILES (AUT)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)</IN><LP>   TOYOTA CITY, Japan -- A couple of years ago, flush withthe success of its extraordinary two-decade climb, Toyota wasbeginning to get just a wee bit fat and happy.   &quot;We had become a bit self-satisfied,&quot; says ShoichiroToyoda, president of Toyota Motor Corp. &quot;Perhaps arrogant.&quot;Other auto companies, adds the 65-year-old grandson ofToyota's founder, &quot;were trying hard.&quot; So, Mr. Toyoda says,Toyota decided &quot;we had to try harder.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   That isn't good news for the competition.   Now, a rededicated Toyota is preparing to launch afull-scale attack on one of Detroit's biggest money-makers:the booming European market. There, Toyota is spending morethan $1.5 billion, setting up an assembly plant and an enginefactory in the United Kingdom and a European design center inBelgium.   Toyota also has set its sights on the U.S. market forfull-sized pickups. This, too, is a Big Three cash cow, and asegment the Japanese have so far never cracked.   Meanwhile, on Toyota's hotly competitive home front, it isriding a wave of new products. With 13 new car and truckmodels rolled out in the past 18 months, it has managed tohold onto a commanding 40% of the Japanese market despitegains from a resurgent Nissan Motor Co.   Toyota's factory workers seem to have caught the spirit.Plant workers in Japan wear heart-shaped badges reading: &quot;Areyou satisfying the customer?&quot; Banners stretching across thefactory walls shout such slogans as &quot;Good Thinking, GoodProducts.&quot;   As Toyota redoubles its efforts, increasing numbers ofauto-industry analysts, including executives of No. 1 automaker General Motors Corp., are convinced that the Japanesecompany has set its sights on the ultimate industry goal:world pre-eminence in automobiles.   Toyota executives haven't stated such a goal publicly.And, today, they remain a long way from it.   General Motors continues to produce far more vehicles. GMbuilt 7.6 million cars, trucks and vans world-wide last year.Toyota built 4.6 million. Toyota's stated production aim isto hit six million vehicles late in the 1990s.   As for market share, GM now holds 16% of global car andtruck sales. Toyota has about 9% and is aiming for 10% by themid-1990s.   More significantly, over the past five years Toyota'sglobal vehicle production has surged 16.7% while GM's hasslipped 16.9%. In the U.S., Japan's largest auto maker hasmoved into a virtual tie for third place in car sales withChrysler Corp. and Honda Motor Co.   If dominance is indeed Toyota's goal, says GM PresidentLloyd E. Reuss, his company &quot;is prepared to meet allchallengers as we enter the '90s.&quot; But GM no longer has thefull confidence of industry experts in this regard. AnalystNeal Doying, of Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd., looks at whatthe Japanese company is doing these days and declares:&quot;Toyota is destined to become the world's leading autocompany.&quot;   Toyota's new Lexus luxury car is a smash hit. Its restyledPrevia minivans and sporty Celica compacts are overcoming areputation for stodgy styling. And it is building a radicallynew sports car called the Sera, with &quot;gull-wing&quot; doors thatfold up instead of out.   Now, Toyota makes three of the four cars with the fewestdefects sold in the U.S., says a study released early thismonth by J.D. Power andamp; Associates of Agoura Hills, Calif. TheCressida was first, the Kentucky-built Camry third and theLexus LS400 fourth.   Moreover, Toyota holds $15.62 billion in cash, more thanfour times the liquidity that once-cash-heavy Ford Motor Co.now enjoys. As a result, it can get ultra-low-interest loansand reinvest the proceeds at higher rates. Toyota had globalsales of $55.7 billion and earned $2.4 billion in the yearended June 30, 1989; fiscal 1990 results aren't out yet.   Even as Toyota is bursting on the world auto market, theworld is intruding on Toyota's cozy cocoon. Toyota's biggestproblem, in fact, may be a fondness for its parochial,oft-stifling traditions.   When Fujio Cho agreed to head Toyota's new assembly plantin Georgetown, Ky., he expected culture shock, but not tostay awake all night. Fretting executives 13 hours away inToyota City repeatedly telephoned him during their officehours -- his sleeping hours. They questioned the need forcommunity donations, second-guessed dealings with Americanparts-suppliers and even rebuked him for not using a Shintopriest to dedicate the plant.   They &quot;didn't understand this country,&quot; says Mr. Cho, thepresident of Toyota Motor Manufacturing U.S.A. &quot;They demandedto do everything the Toyota way.&quot; Now, the nitpicking hasstopped. &quot;Things aren't so new and foreign,&quot; he explains.   Toyota remains a corpocracy, though, conservative andreluctant to innovate. Honda, Nissan and Mazda Motor Co. allbuilt U.S. plants before Toyota did. And only now, after longresistance, are Toyota plants beginning to use &quot;doors-offassembly,&quot; in which a car's doors are removed while thevehicle moves down the assembly line. This technique letsworkers install interior parts more easily and withoutscratching the doors. Although several other auto makers,including Ford and Honda, have used the technique for severalyears, Toyota held back, fearing that the fit of the doorsmight be compromised.   Executives at the Kentucky plant, and at the joint venturewith GM in California, proudly note that they park their carsin the same lots as all workers, and whoever arrives firstgets the best space. Back at Toyota City, though, parkingspaces still are assigned according to rank.   What's more, as Mr. Cho's experience shows, Toyotaexecutives are most comfortable managing things they can seefrom their Toyota City windows. As the company grew, itclustered most of its facilities around Toyota City inJapan's Aichi Prefecture to ensure prompt delivery ofmaterials and equipment. This allowed the company to perfect&quot;kanban,&quot; or just-in-time inventory delivery, especiallybecause hundreds of auto-parts suppliers also located there.   In the process, Toyota City has become more than just aplace; it's a state of mind as well. More than half thepopulation has some connection to Toyota or a supplier.Employees and their families still shop at company-sponsoredstores and relax at the company's huge sports center. Andmembers of the founding Toyoda family (the spelling of thecompany name was changed in 1936 because it sounded clearerin Japanese) command the respect normally accorded royalty.The top floor of the Toyota City Hospital, for example, has aspecial wing for senior executives.   But now, Toyota City is a jam-packed boom town with anacute labor shortage, and major expansion there has becomeimpractical. Moreover, the all-embracing conformity of ToyotaCity doesn't appeal to today's young Japanese recruits.Despite the company's stellar profits and stability, theyprefer the bright lights of Tokyo.   Toyota executives recognize these problems. They'redrawing up blueprints for new plants in Hokkaido and Kyushu,Japan's northernmost and southernmost major islands, mostlyto supply the domestic market. The step was onceunimaginable, but &quot;we have reached the limits&quot; in ToyotaCity, says Tadaaki Jagawa, who oversees production.   Besides, the Kentucky plant's success has eased manyfears. &quot;We aren't so worried,&quot; President Toyoda says, &quot;aboutproducing cars far away now.&quot;   Increasingly, this means very far away. Overseas plantswill spearhead Toyota's program to expand its overallproduction. Besides the new British facilities, Toyota plansfactories in such places as Turkey and Pakistan in itscampaign to push its production into areas where it has hadlittle presence.   In the U.S., Toyota, which has been selling about 950,000vehicles a year, expects to push U.S. sales to 1.5 millioncars and trucks by 1995. It also expects to build about halfof those vehicles, or about 750,000, in the U.S. and Canada.   Meanwhile, Iwao Isomura, managing director for personnel,is trying to eliminate what he calls &quot;big corporationdisease.&quot; Last year, Toyota wiped out a layer of middlemanagement, mostly by eliminating titles and cutting back thesignatures needed for decisions. Employees no longer mustaddress superiors by titles. The Japanese characters on allbusiness cards are now written horizontally instead ofvertically -- a symbol of the effort to create a lesshierarchical environment.   All this is radical stuff for Japanese executives who tooktwo years before agreeing with their U.S. subordinates thatthe leather interior in the Lexus LS400 should be wrinkledinstead of smooth. But global growth is forcing Toyota todecentralize, albeit in ever-so-methodical fashion.   Working at Calty Design Research, Toyota's SouthernCalifornia design center, used to mean little clout and lotsof frustration. In 17 years, Calty had fully designed onlyone car. Designers fought with head-office officials aboutwhether to paint sports cars black. The Japanese insistedblack was strictly for limousines and big executive cars; theAmericans argued it could also be sporty. Eventually, ToyotaCity gave in.   &quot;Six years ago, after I got here, I pushed the messagethat our styling had to improve,&quot; says Robert McCurry, theaggressive executive vice president of Toyota's U.S. salesoperations. &quot;Americans have long bought Toyotas for theirquality, but now they want more. After all these years,they're listening in Japan.&quot;   Now, Calty can boast that it designed Toyota's futuristicPrevia minivan, which is already a hit in the U.S. and Japan.&quot;If we'd done the Previa 10 years ago, it wouldn't have beenaccepted,&quot; says David Hackett, Calty's director. &quot;The companywasn't ready for that sort of thing to come out of America.&quot;   Calty also is helping design the next generation of thefamily-sized Camry, expected to be a 1992 model. The versionsold in the U.S. will be wider and longer than the Japaneseone, with sportier performance, handling and appearance. Sodifferent will it be that Toyota is considering shipping itto Japan and selling it as a car distinct from the JapaneseCamry.   Besides expanding Calty and building in Brussels, Toyotahas just opened a new design center in Tokyo. &quot;We have todevelop cars for each region using the talents of the peoplethere,&quot; Mr. Toyoda says. &quot;They know what's best for theirmarket.&quot;   The Tokyo design center is a more radical step, in a way,than the ones overseas. To spur creativity, the 30 designerswho work there are encouraged to take in concerts or just goexploring. Working hours are flexible, and the dress iscasual. &quot;The values and life styles are completely differentin Tokyo,&quot; says Kazuo Morohoshi, a Calty alumnus who now isthe general manager of the Tokyo center. To many executivesat Toyota City, he adds, &quot;Tokyo is another foreign place justlike California or Europe.&quot; Yet Mr. Morohoshi's team claimsmuch of the credit for the Sera, the new gull-wing sportscar, which is to be sold only in Japan.   While Toyota struggles with global expansion, rival automakers are puzzling over how to compete with the company. Notonly is Toyota's market share rebounding in Japan; it'ssurging in the U.S. Toyota captured 8.8% of U.S. car sales inthe 1990 first half, up from just 6.4% a year before. WithCamrys pouring out of Kentucky, Toyota is discounting pricesand invading markets it long ignored, notably rental fleets.Lexus nearly outsold BMW in the first half and beat Porsche,Jaguar, Audi and Sterling combined.   The Lexus experience illustrates that although Toyota canstumble, it isn't afraid to address problems head-on. LastDecember, Toyota had to recall the LS400 to fix threedifferent defects, including one that could cause thecruise-control system to stay on after the driver tried toturn it off. The defects were dismaying in a just-launchedsedan costing $38,000 or more.   Each owner, though, got a personal phone call, and twochoices: Bring the car in yourself to be fixed on the spot,or have Lexus pick it up at night and return it ready-to-gothe next morning. Either way, Lexus not only fixed the defectbut also washed the car, cleaned the inside and filled itwith gasoline. Some dealers even placed a small gift, such asan ice scraper, on the front seat. Owners were mollified, andmany were impressed.   &quot;They went the extra mile, more than any othermanufacturer, to make sure I was completely taken care of,&quot;says William Beatty, a St. Louis doctor whose family ownsthree Lexus cars. &quot;I mean, nobody has ever washed my car orfilled my tank when it was taken in for repairs.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>