<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900827-0066</DOCNO><DOCID>900827-0066.</DOCID><HL>   Wielding Power:   Family Ties and Fear   Keep Saddam Hussein   In Firm Control of Iraq   ---   Within the Nation, Any Voice   That Doesn't Echo His Is   Usually Quickly Silenced   ---   A Minister's Sudden Death   ----   By Tony Horwitz and Geraldine Brooks   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><LP>   Early in 1989, Iraq's defense minister fell out with hiscousin, Saddam Hussein. In May, during a tour of northernIraq, his helicopter fell out of the sky.   In Baghdad, asked about the death of Iraq's leadingmilitary mind, a senior government official respondeddefensively: &quot;There was a sandstorm. Ask anyone in thenorth.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Sandstorm or foul play, the rise and fall of DefenseMinister Adnan Khairallah reveals much about the way SaddamHussein wields power, and how he protects it. The Iraqipresident sits at the center of a web of power so carefullyspun that a twitch at the periphery triggers a swift anddeadly strike. Around him are only those with whom he hasblood ties -- of relationship, or of shared killings.   With the defense minister, he had both. Mr. Khairallah'sfather was uncle and foster-parent to Saddam Hussein, and hissister was the wife of the Iraqi president. He also was theenforcer of almost annual military purges that may haveclaimed more senior officers than the eight-year war withIran. But Baghdad rumors say that when Saddam Hussein decidedto take a second wife, Mr. Khairallah's rage over the slightto his sister snapped the family bond. At the same time, thedefense minister, prominent and popular, was emerging as apotential rival to the president. Being the heir apparent inBaghdad, says a Jordanian official, &quot;is the most dangerousjob in Iraq.&quot;   Being number one in Baghdad also isn't a job likely to endwith a gold watch and a quiet retirement. The modern historyof Iraq reads like Macbeth, only bloodier. In 1958, soldiersgunned down King Feisal II while a mob dismembered his primeminister's corpse and dragged it through the streets. Sixcoups and revolts marked the decade between the monarchy'sfall and the Baath Party's final seizure of power. Extensivepurges followed. Since then, Saddam Hussein has surviveddozens of plots.   Now, those near the top of the Iraqi pyramid either aregenerals, carefully kept anonymous and without publicfollowing, or well-known political figures whose fates are sofirmly fused with Saddam Hussein's as to render them impotentto act against him. &quot;All of them know that if they don'tdefend him, they will fall with him, because he has made surethey have shared in the killings,&quot; says Sahib al-Hakim, aLondon-based Iraqi dissident. He believes that any Westerndream of a one-bullet solution to the Gulf crisis -- aninternal assassination -- is simplistic. Changing the Iraqiregime is more like coring an apple -- the whole center mayhave to go.   When Saddam Hussein appears on Iraqi television, thegreen-uniformed men standing at his elbow are part of thatcenter: ministers and members of the Revolutionary CommandCouncil, Iraq's foremost governing body. Most share theSaddam Hussein look: middle-aged, military, mustachioed. Mostalso share a common past, often beginning in the president'shometown of Tikrit and passing through the violence, exileand revolution that brought their Baath Party to power in1968.   The Iraqis &quot;are the Prussians of the Arab world,&quot; says aJordanian who has made high-level visits to Baghdad. When theEgyptian cabinet meets, he says, it is &quot;very informal, witheveryone shouting their opinions, joking and making fun ofeach other.&quot; But the tone in Baghdad is that of a militaryparade. As ministers enter cabinet meetings, they saluteSaddam Hussein. As they leave, they click their boots andbow. No one jokes. No one speaks without asking permission,or unless called upon. &quot;They may speak their mind, but theirmind is always the same as Saddam's,&quot; says the Jordanian.   Years of living dangerously as an assassin andrevolutionary have taught Iraq's leader a thing or two aboutwatching his own back. Among the lessons:   -- Eschew routine. When Saddam Hussein, at the age of 22,tried to assassinate Abdul Karim Qassem, Iraq's leader at thetime, his hit squad had an advantage: It knew the exact routeof the presidential motorcade, thanks to lax security. Now,the president keeps his schedule unpredictable and his innersanctum guarded. When a reporter with this newspaper arrivedfor an interview in June, even her ballpoint pen wascarefully examined.   -- Public trials make heros of your foes. When the Qassemassassination attempt failed, Iraq put 78 of the plotters ontrial. Their courage and defiance on the stand won newrecruits to the Baathist cause. Now, enemies are dispatchedby summary execution or after swift, closed militaryhearings.   -- Exile and imprisonment don't neutralize enemies. SaddamHussein escaped Iraq after the Qassem assassination attemptand continued plotting from exile in Egypt and, later, froman Iraqi jail. Now, he quickly answers dissidence. At a 1982cabinet meeting, the health minister, Riyadh Ibrahim,suggested Saddam Hussein step down temporarily as a way toend the war with Iran. The president, according to acolleague of Mr. Ibrahim, took the health minister into aside room and shot him. (Iraq said Mr. Ibrahim was executedbecause tainted medicine got through to troops.) The sameyear, he confirmed for Germany's Stern magazine that Iraq hadrecently executed three senior officers. This, he said, was&quot;something very normal in all wars,&quot; because they &quot;did notundertake their responsibilities&quot; in battle. There have beenreports that officers who refused to take part in the Kuwaitinvasion have also been executed.   -- Don't let a potential successor grab the spotlight.Between 1968 and 1979, Saddam Hussein was technically numbertwo in Iraq to Ahmad Hassan Bakr, but he was given plenty ofbilling: His portraits frequently hung beside those of theleader. Mr. Bakr ended up under house arrest. SaddamHussein's are the only portraits displayed in Baghdad today.   Fear isn't the only cement holding Iraq's leadershiptogether. The men surrounding Saddam Hussein began theirpolitical lives linked by the powerful ideology of&quot;al-Baath,&quot; Arabic for &quot;the Renaissance.&quot; Founded in the1930s by Western-educated intellectuals, Baathism is asecular, socialist creed devoted to Arab unity. But just asMarxism in Russia begat the horrors of Stalinism, Baathistswho once espoused parliamentary democracy now rule two of theMideast's most repressive states, Iraq and Syria.   Saddam Hussein also draws a deep personal response fromsome Arabs. Those who admire him often use two Arabic termsto describe their feelings. Saddam Hussein, they say,represents &quot;nakwa,&quot; the ancient Bedouin code of chivalroushonor by which you starve yourself to feed a friend. He alsoinspires &quot;hayba,&quot; a mixture of fear and reverence.   To many Iraqis, the rule of Saddam Hussein has a piercinghistorical precedent. In the year 694, Iraq got a governornamed al-Hadjadj who brought stability, prosperity and terrorto the fractious land. Upon assuming power, he assembled thepeople and gave the following speech, which Iraqi childrentoday learn by heart: &quot;I see heads before me that are ripeand ready for the plucking, and I am the one to pluck them,and I see blood glistening between the turbans and thebeards. By God, oh people of Iraq, people of discord anddissembling and evil character] . . . I swear by God that youwill keep strictly to the true path, or I shall punish everyman of you in his body.&quot; Legend says the crowd had gatheredrocks to hurl at al-Hadjadj, but the blood-curdling speechwas punctuated by the the plink of stones falling fromfrightened fingers.   The men around Saddam Hussein also probably dropped theirstones a long time ago. And, like him, they watch theirbacks. One revolutionary hard-liner accessible to Westernvisitors is Latif Jasim, a longtime Revolutionary CommandCouncil member and the current minister for information andculture. A visitor to his office learns little of thesubstance but much of the style of the Iraqi regime.   When the elevator door swishes open, visitors findthemselves staring down the barrel of a guard's submachinegun. A journalist, settling into one of a pair of identicalcouches, is swiftly ejected from &quot;the minister's seat.&quot; Mr.Jasim, it seems, has an aversion to sitting with his back tothe door. The information minister arrives armed with apistol, but little information. Asked about his career before1968, he replies: &quot;I was a party member.&quot; At university? &quot;Notnecessarily.&quot;   The toughest among the inner circle reputedly is51-year-old Taha Yassin Ramadan, a one-time bank clerk whohas had a seat on the Revolutionary Command Council since1969.   Jamal Sha'ir, a longtime Baath Party official now inJordan, describes Mr. Ramadan as the only political figurewith the stature to fill Saddam Hussein's shoes. &quot;He has ameasure of charisma and all the right credentials,&quot; says Dr.Sha'ir. &quot;He is looked on as honest and nationalistic. And heis certainly brutal.&quot; He recalls Mr. Ramadan giving a speechin Amman, during which Moslem fundamentalists asked about theBaath Party's attitude toward Islam. Mr. Ramadan respondedthat Moslems could pray as much as they liked, &quot;but if theytried to harm a Baathist regime . . . the regime would breaktheir necks,&quot; Dr. Sha'ir recalls.   But even the tough knuckle under when the edict comes fromSaddam Hussein. Just before the end of the war, the presidentdecided that all fat Iraqis should diet. Cabinet ministershad their actual weights and target weights published in thepress, with exhortations to measure up -- and fast. Thecorpulent Mr. Ramadan had to lose more than 60 pounds -- andhe did. &quot;For someone that high up to starve himself sayssomething about the level of fear and discipline in Iraq,&quot;says a Jordanian analyst.   Izzat Ibrahim, Iraq's official number two, is anothertough Tikriti-born revolutionary who demonstrated hisfearlessness of the previous regime by opening a coffee shopfor Baathist plotters. Now in failing health, Mr. Ibrahim hasnever been allowed to develop to anything more than aceremonial deputy leader. But his daughter is married to onepossible successor, Saddam Hussein's son, Uday.   Uday is the eldest son of the Iraqi president and his wifeSajida. While in exile after the 1958 assassination attempton Qassem, Saddam Hussein proposed to his cousin Sajidathrough a letter to his uncle. Later, imprisoned in Iraq, hesmuggled revolutionary messages to his followers hidden inUday's diapers. Until two years ago, his dynastic ambitionswere clear enough: Uday, with only a minor position as headof a sports federation, was pictured in the newspapers almostevery day.   But Uday's brutality exceeded even Iraqi bounds. One nightin October 1988, he bludgeoned to death the president's foodtaster and bodyguard, Kamal Hana Gegeo, whose father was thepresident's chef. The killing, though unpunished, slowedUday's fast-track rise to prominence.   Right now, the rising star is not a son, but a son-in-law.Hussein Kamel, minister for military industrialization, haspresided over Iraq's rapid and enormous acquisition ofmissile technology and conventional weaponry and itsclandestine nuclear program. He also has close ties to thearmy and the internal-security forces, forged duringBaghdad's successful campaign to crush Kurdish resistance innorthern Iraq.   To replace Adnan Khairallah as defense minister, SaddamHussein moved to appease an army uneasy about the helicoptercrash. Abdel Jabber Shanshal is a career military man who hasstayed very much in the background.   To find the regime's least-vicious face it is necessary tolook in the foreign ministry, a center of influence butlittle power. Tariq Aziz, the white-haired foreign minister,is a Christian who never would be accepted to lead MoslemIraq.   A deputy foreign minister, Nizar Hamdoon, Iraq'srepresentative in Washington from 1983 to 1987, may be one ofthe most effective envoys in modern diplomatic history. Hearrived just before the U.S. restored long-severed diplomaticrelations with Iraq and crisscrossed the country, speaking atany public forum that would have him, from trade groups inSun Valley, Idaho, to college classes in Santa Cruz, Calif.In Washington, he cultivated the State Department from deskofficers on upward and invited prominent pro-Israel lobbyiststo embassy dinners.   The result was a sharp tilt in U.S. policy toward Iraq'sside in the Gulf war and a view of Iraq as a country withwhich the U.S. could work.   Just before the ceasefire with Iran in 1988, Mr. Hamdoonpreached of a post-war Iraq that &quot;desperately needs peace andsecurity. It can't be a country that looks for troubles.&quot; Hewasn't the only official to have such a vision. SadunHammadi, a more senior figure, also talked about an Iraq busyreviving its economy, seeking &quot;much more cooperation&quot; withother Arab countries and becoming &quot;much more democratic thanit is now.&quot;   Whether those dreams were genuine or merely bromides forthe West raises interesting questions about the existence ofalternative opinion close to Saddam Hussein. Mr. Hammadi, aShiite, is one of the founders of Iraq's Baathist revolution.While studying business administration at the AmericanUniversity in Beirut, he recruited travelers to smuggleBaathist literature into Iraq. Later, studying agriculturaleconomics at the University of Wisconsin, he absorbed acommitment to democratic ideals that makes him unique inIraq's top echelon.   But no one from that circle could dream of moving againstSaddam Hussein without the support of the army, the BaathParty or the vast internal-security network. A Romania-stylepopular outburst also is unlikely since centers of unrest inthe country have been smashed. The two best-organizedresistance groups, the Kurds in the north and the radicalShiites, have been all but vanquished: the Kurds by chemicalwarfare and resettlement, and the radical Shiites byexecution and mass deportation to Iran. Iraq is a majorityShiite country, led chiefly by a Sunni minority, whichincludes Saddam Hussein.   Unlike last year's revolutionaries in Eastern Europe,Iraqis have little information to fan the sparks ofresistance. Shortwave broadcasts into the country are jammed,Western publications are unavailable and photocopy centerskeep copies of customers' copies. A move that stuns theoutside world, such as Iraq's sudden capitulation to Iran'speace terms, can be sold at home in whatever packaging thegovernment cares to design.   In the end, Arab analysts insist that Saddam Hussein's&quot;nakwa&quot; -- his Bedouin honor -- won't allow him to back downin the crisis. They believe that, if defeated, he likelywould choose death by his own hand, after unleashing as muchdestruction as possible on his enemies.   However his end comes, Saddam Hussein's legacy is likelyto make a mockery of the Baathist dream of Arab unity towhich he has dedicated his life. Just as his occupation ofKuwait has split the Arab world, his failure to anoint asuccessor could tear Iraq apart: With no Saddam Hussein tofear, his tough, ruthless underlings would battle each otherfor power.   That scenario recalls the epilogue of another warlord whoperished on Iraqi soil. Alexander the Great dreamed ofuniting his conquests, from Athens to Persia. As he lay dyingof fever in Babylon, his generals gathered to ask to whom hiscrown should pass. His whispered reply -- &quot;To the strongest&quot;-- set off a series of wars and feuds that, within a fewyears, had reduced his dream of unity to dust and rubble.   ---   Robert S. Greenberger contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>