<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900716-0141</DOCNO><DOCID>900716-0141.</DOCID><HL>   Manager's Journal:   The Techies' Challenge to the Bean Counters   ----   By Donald N. Frey</HL><DATE>07/16/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   LABOR</CO><LP>   World technological competition in both manufacturing andservices is increasing rapidly, requiring a high level oftechnical sophistication on the part of companies' seniormanagement. However, we in the U.S. have a competitivedisadvantage in having fewer technologically oriented chiefexecutives than our principle trading competitors, Japan andGermany.   The U.S. selection process for CEOs is different fromthose in either Japan or Germany. As a result, Americancompanies end up with more financially oriented types. Thiscountry's universities turn out proportionately fewerengineers -- and many more MBAs than either competitor.</LP><TEXT>   What to do?   On occasion drastic action is required. As a board memberof a heavy machinery company, I watched a non-technical CEO,with no competent technical advisers, almost put the companyunder with over-cost and under-featured products made withobsolete manufacturing processes. It took forever (or so itseemed) for the board to handle the issue because many of theboard members were buddies of the chief executive. Otherswere non-technical types who had difficulty understanding theproblem. But after some false starts, we miraculously foundwithin the company a technically competent engineer, who wasfast becoming an excellent businessman and made him CEO. Infour years he has turned the company around in spectacularfashion.   This approach is not commonly taken because identificationof potential CEOs within the technical ranks of a company israrely done. It is also of little use to hope that Americanculture will suddenly begin to require increased technicalcapabilities from CEOs. Nor is it feasible for thenon-technical CEO to go to a few seminars and master thesubject.   A more practical solution to the technology-managementproblem is for the non-technical chief executive to get oneor more trusted advisers (at senior staff or preferablysenior operating levels) who are technically competent --particularly in application.   I served in such a role at Ford Motor Co., from the late1950s into the late '60s. I started as a translator oftechnical terms at senior executive meetings. Surrounded bythe then-ubiquitous financial-control types (we called them&quot;bean counters&quot; or &quot;beanies&quot;), I decided to learn how todiscuss technical issues such as product features, quality ormanufacturing issues in financial terms.   The beanies had enormous political power at Ford, and soit was the better part of valor to join them rather thanconstantly fight. Of course it didn't hurt that my team putsome useful customer features in our products -- disc brakesand radial ply tires among them. We also cleaned up someserious product quality problems: leaking windows, powersteering pumps and transmissions. But these advances mighthave been less appreciated had I not learned to express theirimportance in language the beanies could understand.   I was also interested in getting the support of sales andmanufacturing types to get my ideas sold (sometimes againstresistance to change), but this meant learning to translatemy technical message into yet another language. I wellremember being asked in the seemingly endless efforts to getapproval for the original &quot;Mustang&quot; (for which I was projectmanager, and Lee Iacocca the sponsor) what the net,&quot;non-substitutional&quot; increase in vehicle sales volume wouldbe with the car -- that is, the number of cars that could besold without cannibalizing our existing market. Since theMustang was a completely new vehicle concept, no one reallyknew.   One of the corporate market research types was given thequestion of substitution to answer. He knew from me that thestand-alone break even volume was about 84,000 units. A weeklater he reported that the increased volume, net ofsubstitution, would be 86,000 units. I called and asked himhow he got the number. He said he liked the car and itsconcept. Networking worked]   We sold well over 400,000 units the first year, and tothis day I really don't know what the net volume was. Butsince the gross margin on the Mustang was so high, we made aton of money in total.   The trusted technical advisers should have the followingessential characteristics:   -- The ability to understand and explain in simple, clearlanguage the latest technologies;   -- The ability to translate relevant technology intocompany-relevant business objectives;   -- The ability to network widely into non-technicalcompany sectors (i.e. sales, manufacturing, finance);   -- A strong track record of putting new technologysuccessfully into practice.   The latter point is crucial. A track record of success inthe marketplace with a new technological innovation is amust. Too many non-technical CEOs turn to their heads of Randamp;Dfor technical advice. If the head of Randamp;D has not had theexperience of working in the marketplace, his or her advicewill not be peppered with the patience and appreciation ofcomplexities one develops through real marketing experience.New technology in use involves many more issues than Randamp;D]   Identification of technical advisers is itself an art.CEOs looking for such advisers must take the time to pinpointthose in the company who actually drive new technology intopractice and who can explain the innovation to non-technicaltypes. If the CEO spots such people among the company'syounger engineers, he should help to get them started up theranks.   Having dealt with a never-ending series of financial typesin my own life, I eventually concluded that they do have thecompany's best interests at heart and are well meaning. Theirproblem is that financial control and measurement is all theyknow. But important measures of customer satisfaction ormarket share are not quantifiable before a new product goesto market; too often the financial types do not realize thatbeans must be earned before they are counted.   That's where the technological advisers should come in.The technologists can straighten out the bean counters beforethey undercut a new product. But the technologists can do soonly if they are either operating at the top levels ofmanagement or are directly advising at that level -- with atleast as much influence as the beanies. That's where theJapanese and Germans have America beat. Proven technologyadvisers can help the U.S. get ahead of its competitors'power curve.   ---   Mr. Frey, former CEO and chairman of Bell andamp; Howell, isprofessor of industrial engineering and management science atNorthwestern University's department of industrialengineering.</TEXT></DOC>