<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911009-0034</DOCNO><DOCID>911009-0034.</DOCID><HL>   High Court Drama:   Sex Harassment Furor   Jeopardizes Thomas,   Embarrasses Politicians   ---   GOP Could Find Its Problems   With Women Worsened;   Capital Is Scene of Protests   ---   Vote Is Put Off for a Week   ----   By Jill Abramson and David Shribman   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>10/09/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><NS>POLITICS (PLT)</NS><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   WASHINGTON -- The U.S. Senate got a crash seminar insexual harassment yesterday, leaving Clarence Thomas'snomination to the Supreme Court in jeopardy.   Whether the conservative Judge Thomas actually madeunwelcome advances to one of his staff members may never beknown for sure. But the unanticipated outpouring of rage thaterupted over the Senate's hesitation to air the allegation ofsexual harassment prompted an embarrassing and painfulabout-face on Capitol Hill and left the Bush White House witha black eye.</LP><TEXT>   The furor exacerbates political problems Republicans havewith some women, including those who are otherwiseideologically committed to the GOP but who have been put offby the party's anti-abortion position. Some Republicanleaders worry that the uproar over the Thomas nomination willopen new fissures within the GOP as it prepares for the 1992elections. &quot;This only goes further to invoke the idea thatthe party is controlled by good ol' boys who don't give adamn about us,&quot; said Ann Stone, who leads Republicans forChoice.   As senators agonized about whether to delay Mr. Thomas'sconfirmation vote, which had been scheduled for last night,the congressional switchboard was jammed with calls. FemaleHouse members marched to the Senate to vent their outrage,and women's groups staged demonstrations outside the Capitol.These actions played a central role in the Senate's stunningdecision to delay the vote until next Tuesday.   &quot;They tried every way to gag us but we were heard,&quot; saidDemocratic Rep. Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, who led thewomen lawmakers' highly unusual demonstration in thecorridors of Capitol Hill.   From the beginning, the Senate -- especially JudiciaryCommittee Chairman Joseph Biden, Democrat of Delaware --bungled the matter, seemingly hoping it would simplydisappear. To some, its response to the potentially explosivecharges seemed a textbook example of how male-dominatedinstitutions are often paralyzed by allegations of sexualharassment in the workplace and how ill-informed evenlawmakers are about the sensitive subject.   &quot;The Senate's reaction is fairly typical of organizationsthat are run by men,&quot; said Claudia Withers, deputy directorfor employment programs at the Women's Legal Defense Fund, aWashington-based group that opposes Mr. Thomas's nomination.&quot;They just don't get it.&quot;   Even as the chances of his confirmation were clouded,Judge Thomas issued a sworn affidavit &quot;totally andunequivocally&quot; denying the allegations and saying he was&quot;terribly saddened and deeply offended.&quot; As the White Housemounted a counteroffensive, Judge Thomas's friends and alliesrushed to his defense, trying to undermine the credibility ofhis accuser, Anita Hill, a professor at the University ofOklahoma Law School who was once his personal assistant.   Clint Bolick, a lawyer who worked at the Equal EmploymentOpportunity Commission with Mr. Thomas and chose him as hisson's godfather, said everyone who knows the Supreme Courtnominee &quot;is incredulous, and knows first-hand that ClarenceThomas conducts himself in a very proper manner with hisemployees. He keeps his distance.&quot;   Republican Sen. John Danforth of Missouri, who is leadingthe drive to confirm Judge Thomas, released telephone logspurporting to show continuing, friendly communicationsbetween Mr. Thomas and Ms. Hill, including a telephone callof congratulations on Mr. Thomas's wedding and a note readingthat she &quot;just called to say hello. Sorry {she} didn't get tosee you last week.&quot;   Mr. Thomas's allies assailed Ms. Hill's credibility,saying she hadn't lodged any formal complaints at the time ofthe alleged incidents a decade ago. &quot;If she believed thesecharges amounted to sexual harassment, the fact she didn'tfile a charge suggests to me that it didn't happen or thatshe didn't think it was sexual harassment,&quot; said Mr. Bolick.   But experts on sexual harassment say such behavior on thepart of victims is not unusual. Many victims fear that ifthey come forward, their own lives and behavior will beexamined in public and that, in a phrase that often recurs,the accuser will be penalized. &quot;A woman doesn't want to makewaves,&quot; said Amy Wind, a Washington lawyer who hasrepresented many plaintiffs in sexual harassment suits. Sheadded that it isn't uncommon for victims of sexual harassmentto delay pressing charges.   As the attacks on Ms. Hill multiplied, so did publicdefenses of her. Among others, her colleagues at theUniversity of Oklahoma Law School defended Ms. Hill as atruthful person acting without political motivations. So didStephen Carter, a black professor at Yale Law School who knewMs. Hill in law school and who, like Mr. Thomas, hasexpressed reservations about affirmative action.   Although Mr. Thomas's backers sought to portray the sexualharassment allegations as an eleventh-hour tactic, thecharges actually arrived on the Senate's doorstep two monthsago.   The Alliance for Justice, a liberal organization that wasone of the first to publicly oppose Mr. Thomas's nomination,was contacted in late July by a Yale Law School classmate ofMs. Hill's to whom she had confided the purported advancesmade by the Supreme Court nominee, according to activistsopposed to the nomination. The group immediately turned overthe potentially explosive information to the office of Sen.Howard Metzenbaum, the liberal Ohio Democrat who was mostlikely to oppose the nominee in the Senate JudiciaryCommittee.   Sen. Metzenbaum's press secretary, Nancy Coffey, said thesenator's office &quot;received lots of tips and rumors aroundthat time,&quot; including allegations of sexual harassment byJudge Thomas. Ms. Coffey said Ms. Hill was asked about therumors on Sept. 3, but didn't mention that she herself hadbeen harassed. She later called back and volunteered herstory to a member of the Metzenbaum staff.   From there, the matter unraveled into a comedy of errorsand misunderstandings. Staffers of both Sen. Metzenbaum andhis liberal Democratic colleague, Sen. Edward Kennedy ofMassachusetts, contacted Ms. Hill, who was still reluctant togo public with her story. In addition to Ms. Hill'sreticence, Sen. Metzenbaum hesitated to make the matterpublic because he knew Sen. Biden was reluctant to pursue anyallegations relating to Judge Thomas's personal behavior andhesitant to make his character a focus of the confirmationhearings.   In a floor speech last night, Sen. Biden defended hishandling of the matter. &quot;I took her charges seriously,&quot; hesaid. However, he contended, Ms. Hill's insistence onconfidentiality stymied the committee.   Sen. Kennedy, meanwhile, was derailed by his own familyproblems dealing with allegations of sexual misconduct. Sothe issue remained dormant.   &quot;For a lot of women, this confirms a lot of the bad thingsabout being represented only by men,&quot; said Celinda Lake, aDemocratic political consultant. &quot;It says that a lot of thesemen had only a theoretical commitment to dealing with sexualharassment. If there had been a Judiciary Committee filledonly with women, it would have been impossible that thiswould not have received more serious attention.&quot;   The Senate's code of silence was shattered when Ms. Hill'sstory leaked to the media over the weekend. &quot;The ground ruleshave changed,&quot; said Sen. Biden. &quot;Prof. Hill has changedthem.&quot;   Despite the anger that began to mount, Senate MajorityLeader George Mitchell of Maine at first held fast to thenotion that Senate rules required a vote on the Thomasnomination be held last night. But behind the scenes, he wasgroping for a way to put off the vote. By midafternoonyesterday, as the Senate Reception Room began to fill withwomen lobbyists expressing their anger, even Republicansconceded that a swift vote might be unwise.   &quot;Fourteen men don't understand how serious are theallegations,&quot; said Anne Bryant, executive director of theAmerican Association of University Women, as she stood behindrestraining ropes put up by Capitol police trying to controlthe overflow crowd of protesting women.   The fury reached the campaign trail. &quot;She's a crediblewitness, and the public wants to hear her out,&quot; said Sen. BobKerrey of Nebraska, who was campaigning in New Hampshire forthe Democratic presidential nomination.   Throughout the last several days, Republicans sought toundermine Ms. Hill's credibility. Republicans claimed Ms.Hill had sought job recommendations from Mr. Thomas,something she denied at the news conference she held onMonday in Oklahoma. Other Republicans raised questions aboutthe fact that she followed Mr. Thomas to the EEOC after thealleged harassment of her at the Department of Education.(Ms. Hill said she was fearful of not finding otheremployment.)   But in this case, because of pressure from women, it's thejury as much as the victim or the accused that's on thedefensive. Even Beltway insiders seem utterly disgusted withthe whole incident.   &quot;This is a rotten bunch of scum up there,&quot; said DavidKeene, president of the American Conservative Union. &quot;Thepublic ought to toss all these people out -- Republicans andDemocrats.&quot; Former Democratic vice presidential nomineeGeraldine Ferraro added: &quot;We can't walk around saying theDemocrats are terrific on these issues. There is a real needfor consciousness-raising in a predominantly male world.&quot;   The controversy also spilled over into the House, whichhas no role in confirming judicial candidates. When a groupof Democratic women sought to make speeches against JudgeThomas, Republicans lodged parliamentary objections. A numberof women House Democrats came to the Senate throughout theday to lobby against the nominee.   With both parties bloodied by the affair, activists onwomen's issues were hoping to capitalize on heightenedattention to sexual harassment.   &quot;There is a scandalously low level of understanding aboutsexual harassment in this country,&quot; said Estelle Rogers, aWashington lawyer active in women's issues. Ms. Rogers saidmost men think &quot;what sexual harassment means is someonephysically hitting on a woman,&quot; but the legal definition doesnot say that touching another person is required forharassment.   The laws governing sexual harassment, which were in effectwhen Mr. Thomas served as head of the EEOC, address&quot;unwelcome&quot; physical or verbal contact that focuses on theemployee's sexuality or gender. In at least one recent case,a finding that an employer had created a hostile environmentby letting employees post sexually explicit photographs hasbeen enough to substantiate a sexual harassment charge.</TEXT></DOC>