<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900824-0099</DOCNO><DOCID>900824-0099.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Time Is Crucial Factor in Persian Gulf Crisis,   But Whose Ally It Will Be Remains a Mystery   ----   By Gerald F. Seib   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>08/24/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   MDEST</CO><IN>PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)</GV><LP>   Of all the burning questions confronting President Bushand Saddam Hussein, the most searing is this: Whose side istime on?   How the two leaders answer that may be the crucial factorin determining whether the current confrontation leads to aquick war or evolves into a long-term siege. If PresidentBush, in particular, decides that time works against him, hewill be far more likely to seek a rationale for strikingquickly against Iraq.</LP><TEXT>   Yet the question is an agonizing one, for there is noclear answer. Some powerful American voices are arguing thata prolonged showdown would clearly benefit Saddam Hussein anderode the U.S. position. As this argument goes, support willerode for the international economic blockade of Iraq,Western hostages will be maneuvered into position as shieldsagainst attack, Saddam Hussein's anti-Western rhetoric willwin converts around the Arab world and America's politicaland economic standing will erode.   &quot;Time is not on our side,&quot; declares former Secretary ofState Henry Kissinger, one of the most forceful advocates ofthe view that the U.S. shouldn't allow a prolonged stalemate.&quot;The United States stands to lose most from a long siege,&quot; hewrote several days ago.   But in recent days, other voices have emerged, arguingthat time actually works to America's benefit -- and that theU.S. therefore needn't seek a pretext for a quick militarystrike. As this argument goes, the international tradeembargo will rapidly choke off Iraq's one-commodity oileconomy, Iraq's international isolation is growing ratherthan easing, the Western military force facing Iraq isbuilding, and the West won't go wanting for oil so long asSaudi Arabia and other producers make up for the loss ofIraqi crude.   &quot;Every day brings more good news for the U.S. and more badnews for Iraq,&quot; says Barry Rubin, a senior fellow at theWashington Institute for Near East Policy. &quot;The embargo istaking hold.&quot; He adds: Saddam Hussein &quot;is the one surroundedand suffering from political isolation and an embargo. He'svery nervous facing an overwhelming force.&quot;   So far the Bush administration has avoided answering thecrucial question, but the Gulf crisis now has evolved to apoint where the president must choose in order to set hislong-term strategy. If he decides time isn't on his side andwants a pretext for military action, he could get one asearly as today, when the U.S. plans to defy an Iraqi orderthat foreign embassies in occupied Kuwait be closed. It seemslikely that Iraq will forcibly remove diplomats who don'tleave voluntarily.   But privately, administration officials suggest theyaren't looking to use today's embassy-shutdown order as apretext for military action -- and that they now are willingto spend some time looking for a diplomatic solution thatwould avoid bloodshed.   &quot;Time's on everybody's side if it reduces tension andthere can be a diplomatic way out,&quot; says Judith Kipper, aMiddle East analyst at the Brookings Institution. &quot;And in thelast few days, there are a few clumsy signs that {the Iraqis}are looking for a way to talk.&quot;   Still, some administration officials argue that the onlyway the U.S. can lose in the standoff is if it gets locked ina long stalemate -- an argument that seems to favor lookingfor such a pretext to launch quick military action.   If it allows the situation to drag on, the danger for theadministration lies in the simple fact that the West has alousy track record at maintaining concerted internationalpressure against anybody. For now, the U.S. has helpedorganize a generally tight embargo against Iraq and seems onthe verge of winning some kind of United Nations' approvalfor using force to police it. But it's far from clear howlong the U.S. or its allies can stick with it.   &quot;In a sense, we can afford to wait longer, but publicopinion in this country and in the West generally hasn't beenwilling to sustain long embargoes,&quot; says Robert Hormats, vicechairman of Goldman Sachs International. &quot;In a democracy, youcan't keep people enthusiastic for an action as big as thisfor very long. They get impatient for results. I'm sure theWhite House is aware of that.&quot;   Within the Bush administration, a task force has been setup under Deputy Treasury Secretary John Robson to evaluatethe economic sanctions, and so far administration officialsare pleased with the compliance.   The sanctions, of course, are designed to deliver aone-two punch to Iraq, depriving it of oil revenues bykeeping Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude from going out and keepingarms and food from going in, even if Iraq has money to payfor them. Iraq is estimated to have on hand atwo-to-three-month supply of food grains -- wheat and rice --and other commodities. Rationing and belt-tightening couldstretch those stocks for another month or longer, estimatesAndrew Bellingham, an agricultural analyst for WorldPerspectives Inc., a Washington-based consulting firm.   But, paradoxically, the more effective the sanctions, themore likely some Westerners may be to break them. If reportsof serious deprivation emerge from Iraq, support for theinternational embargo could quickly erode. The U.N.resolution imposing a trade embargo allows food to be shippedto Iraq for &quot;humanitarian&quot; reasons, and other nations mightquickly start to call for using that loophole. Iraq'sneighbors may also lose their resolve to support thesanctions if Iraqis are starving.   Moreover, administration officials acknowledge that theIraqi government has the ability to ensure that whatever foodbecomes available goes to Saddam Hussein's army, whilecivilians starve.   And Saddam Hussein may even be able to turn a successfulfood embargo against the U.S. by making American hostages thechief victims of food shortages. &quot;That would put the WhiteHouse in the position of being seen as starving hostages todeath,&quot; says Lester Brown, president of Worldwatch Institute.&quot;I think that's where the crunch will come.&quot;   Even without such stressful developments, political trendsat home and in the Middle East could work against the Bushadministration. Since the end of the Vietnam War, Congresshas grown antsy about any prolonged military deployment andis likely to raise more and more questions about the cost ofthe American commitment over time.   Public disenchantment could grow as well, particularly asmore Americans realize that the countries the U.S. isdefending aren't democracies but monarchies run by wealthyfamilies. And there could even be some friction between theU.S. and Saudi Arabia over the big American deploymentbecause &quot;the social environment {of Saudi Arabia} is hardlythe most attractive in the world for wandering GIs,&quot; says Mr.Brown.   Perhaps more worrisome, it's possible that Saddam Husseinmay be able to steadily build popular support for his defiantstand around the Arab world. Saddam Hussein is craftilytrying to portray himself not as the invader of Kuwait but asa kind of Arab Robin Hood, promising to take petrodollarsaway from a few wealthy sheiks and restore them to theimpoverished Arab masses. And he is also pledging to use hisoccupation of Kuwait as a lever to end Israeli control overPalestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.   &quot;I think that the longer Saddam Hussein can confront theworld, the more I think he'll be the recipient of support inthe Arab street because he shows the other {Arab leaders} tobe impotent -- that somehow right is on his side,&quot; says Ms.Kipper of the Brookings Institution.   Yet such problems might actually be outweighed by theadvantages the U.S. would have in a prolonged standoff --advantages such as Iraq's weak and narrow economic base, thesurprising isolation it is feeling, the growing clout ofAmerican military forces in the region and the unattractivenature of Saddam Hussein's options for breaking out of hispredicament.   The very strength of Iraq's economy in normal times -- theluxury to rely on enormous oil payments -- may be the reasonit is easier to squeeze in an embargo than other countriesthe West has tried to hurt with economic sanctions. &quot;Theeconomic aspects in this situation are unique,&quot; says a senioradministration official. &quot;Look at Iraq. To oversimplify, it'soil-out and food-in.&quot; And American officials considershutting down both oil exports and food imports to berelatively easy, since both oil and food are big, bulky itemsthat can't be &quot;tucked away under your shirt as you go throughcustoms,&quot; the official says.   Retired Admiral Thomas Moorer, former chairman of theJoint Chiefs of Staff, also says that time helps theblockade. &quot;I don't think he can last out a blockade,&quot; Adm.Moorer says. &quot;He has a single product economy.&quot;   There also is reason to believe that, contrary to initialskepticism, the international coalition against Iraq couldgrow stronger over time rather than weaker. Syria now hasforces in the Gulf aligned against fellow Arab Iraq, andFrance seems ready to participate not just in sanctions butin a naval blockade to enforce them. Japan has begun addingits financial clout to the effort by offering aid to Jordanif that strategically located neighbor of Iraq will agree tocut off trade with Baghdad. Even the Palestine LiberationOrganization, which was among the staunchest officialsupporters of Iraq in the Arab world, is showing some signsof waivering.   Time also may make Iraq's military options less palatable.The U.S. force in Saudi Arabia is growing rapidly. It stillcould take several months, though, to build up enough forceto successfully attack Iraq on land in the conventionalmanner. U.S. commanders say they would like to have somethinglike a two-to-one superiority over Saddam Hussein's 170,000troops in Kuwait to feel confident about a ground attack.   But it may be that the military odds shift sharply inAmerica's favor after a wait of just a few more weeks, notmonths. Elmer Pendleton, a retired major general who was thesenior Pentagon officer in Turkey, says that it should takeonly a month more for the U.S. to field a force that couldstorm Kuwait. With U.S. air superiority, spy satellites andelectronic warfare capabilities, he says, the U.S. coulddislodge Iraq with a force equal to Iraq's 170,000 or sosoldiers.   It has also been widely speculated that Saddam Husseinmight choose in the short term to ease his plight by drawingIsrael into the fight, thereby switching the confrontationfrom one pitting Iraq against the world to one pitting allArabs against Israel and its American friends. One way hemight draw Israel into the fight would be by sending troopsinto Jordan, a neighbor of Israel, hoping to provoke aresponse from Israeli officials who have long said thepresence of Iraqi troops in Jordan is unacceptable to them.   But that option may be growing less and less attractive asit becomes clear Israel would hit back with might. OneIsraeli diplomat says such a move by Saddam Hussein would be&quot;suicidal;&quot; Israel would launch an immediate, massive attack.Even Jordan's army -- man for man probably the best in theArab world -- might fight fiercely if Jordan were attacked,despite Jordan's coziness with Iraq so far in the currentcrisis. The army is made up largely of Bedouins fiercelyloyal to Jordan's King Hussein, not Palestinians more drawnto Iraq's hard-nosed rhetoric.   And it may be that assumptions about American stayingpower and restlessness among American troops stuck on alertin Saudi Arabia may be wrong. Unlike in Vietnam, when manysoldiers were draftees, the American soldiers now rushed tothe Gulf &quot;are all volunteers, even the reservists,&quot; saysLawrence Korb, a Pentagon aide in the Reagan administrationand now with the Brookings Institution. He concludes: &quot;Timeis on our side.&quot;   ---   Bruce Ingersoll and Bob Davis contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>