<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911203-0143</DOCNO><DOCID>911203-0143.</DOCID><HL>   A Son's Death in East Timor   ----   By Helen Todd</HL><DATE>12/03/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><NS>UNITED NATIONS (UNN)</NS><RE>FAR EAST (FE)INDONESIA (IO)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)</RE><LP>   My son, Kamal Bamadhaj, a 20-year-old student, was fatallyshot by Indonesian soldiers on Tuesday, Nov. 12, in EastTimor. Indonesia admits another 18 people were killed by itstroops the same morning, when they opened fire on aprocession in Dili, the capital of the former Portuguesecolony that Jakarta annexed in 1976.   Witnesses to the shootings tell another story. Theyestimate 50 or more Timorese, mainly young people calling forTimor's independence, were killed. My experience in trying tofind out what happened to my son, and why, has given me afirst-hand glimpse of the misinformation, stonewalling and,on occasion, outright lying that has characterizedIndonesia's initial efforts to play down the killings, andthe disastrous impact they may have on Jakarta's world image.</LP><TEXT>   I was holidaying in London when I first heard that Kamalhad been shot. Throughout the flight to Singapore the nextday, I hung on to the thinnest thread of hope. When I arrivedin Singapore on Nov. 14, I called the New Zealand ambassadorin Jakarta and that thread broke. He said that the Indonesianmilitary command had just confirmed that Kamal, a New Zealandcitizen of Malaysian origin, had died in Dili on Tuesdaymorning, and had been buried there the same day.   The last time I saw Kamal was in mid-October, on a fewhours' stopover in Sydney on my way to New Zealand. It wasthe day before he left for East Timor. Kamal had justcompleted his second year at the University of New SouthWales. He and fellow Indonesia enthusiasts had founded agroup to support student organizations and human-rightsworkers in Indonesia. He told me his group had heard fromTimorese students that the military in East Timor wasrounding up any one who might present a dissident view to aPortuguese parliamentary fact-finding mission due to visitEast Timor on Nov. 4. The mission, brokered by the UnitedNations, would have been the first by Portuguese officialssince the Indonesian annexation, which was condemned inseveral U.N. resolutions in the 1970s and early 1980s. (Thevisit was subsequently canceled.)   The Indonesians have Timor sewn up, Kamal told me. The bigpowers had turned a blind eye to Indonesia's annexation ofthe territory and have blocked discussion of it in the U.N.since 1982. For much of the past 16 years, East Timor hasbeen closed to outside visitors, while the military tried toend armed resistance and terrorize the general populationinto silence.   With the jaded &quot;realism&quot; of a 48-year-old, I thought myson was a bit carried away. But I have since read an AmnestyInternational report that estimates that as many as 200,000Timorese have been killed or have died of hunger and diseasesince December 1975, one-third of the population at the timeIndonesia invaded.   Kamal, whose Indonesian was fluent, hoped to offer hisservices as an interpreter to those journalists with thedelegation who wanted to step outside the official itinerary.I'll be careful, he said as he hugged me goodbye.   Two weeks later Kamal wrote to friends in Sydney that themilitary were rounding up people for public lectures, wherethey were threatened with imprisonment or worse if they spoketo the Portuguese delegation. He commented on the heavysurveillance surrounding Roman Catholic churches and he wroteabout an attack on the Motael church in Dili on Oct. 28, inwhich a young Timorese, Sebastio Gomes, had been killed.   The official version of the events of Nov. 12 I havereceived came from Indonesian Security Minister Sudomo. Hesaid that on that morning members of a processioncommemorating Sebastio Gomes's death were armed with&quot;hundreds of long knives&quot; as they marched toward the cemeterywhere he was buried. He also said that a grenade was thrownat Indonesian soldiers and that a deputy battalion commanderwas slashed by the Timorese. &quot;It was a mob. The soldiersfired in fear of their lives,&quot; he said.   My family and I have spoken to three people who were withKamal in the procession. I have talked to Bob Muntz, anofficial with a private Australian organization, CommunityAid Abroad. My stepdaughter has talked to Amy Goodman andAlan Nairn, American journalists on the scene who walkedbetween the crowd and the soldiers in an attempt to preventviolence and were badly beaten.   Each of these eyewitnesses independently said that theprocession had stopped along a road hemmed in on both sidesby high walls. They said there was about a 100-yard gapbetween the front of the procession and a line of troops thatmoved forward and opened fire on the Timorese. Mr. Muntz sawno grenade thrown and no &quot;long knives.&quot; &quot;It was an unarmedcrowd of mostly young people,&quot; he told me. &quot;I saw no militarycontact or even presence during the three- to four-kilometermarch from the church to the cemetery.&quot;   Just before the shooting began, however, Mr. Muntz saw amilitary truck drive up, soldiers jump down and line upfacing the crowd. Then the soldiers raised their rifles andshot into the crowd. If the deputy battalion commander wasslashed in the cemetery as reported, it could not have beenbefore the firing started, Mr. Muntz said. But it might haveoccurred later, when soldiers went into the cemetery inpursuit of those who had taken refuge there.   Kamal, shot through the chest, was found half a kilometeraway from the site of the massacre by Anton Marti, Dilirepresentative of the International Committee of the RedCross. He was lying on a deserted road, still conscious,desperately waving his New Zealand passport. Mr. Marti drovehim toward the Dili general hospital, but was stopped by amilitary roadblock.   Although his vehicle had Red Cross markings, when Mr.Marti identified himself and said he had a wounded man withhim, the soldiers threatened to shoot him and yelled at himto &quot;get out of here.&quot; He drove in the opposite direction andwas again stopped by police. After a long wait, he wasdirected to a military hospital. The delay was fatal.   Why did Kamal join the procession that cost him his life?Mr. Muntz told me that a handful of foreigners staying inDili met on Monday night to discuss whether they should go tothe next morning's procession. Although the situation in Diliwas tense and all of them said they were &quot;scared,&quot; theyreasoned that a foreign presence might restrain the military.   Kamal argued strongly for going. He explained theatmosphere in notes he wrote on Nov. 3: &quot;Timorese of all agesand walks of life have been signing up to be on the list ofinterviewees for this Portuguese fact-finding mission. . . .However, less than a week before the delegation was supposedto arrive, news started filtering in that the Portuguese werenot coming. Hearts sank. People could not believe it. Thedisappointment here today is not only the deflating of manyhigh expectations, but, more worrying still, the indefinitedelay gives the Indonesian military the perfect opportunityto eliminate all those Timorese who had exposed theiridentity while preparing for the visit.&quot;   I think that it was this desperation that lay behind theNov. 12 procession. As people who believed they were already&quot;marked&quot; by the military, they made a last-ditch attempt toattract world attention through the United Nations Rapporteuron Torture, who was visiting Dili. During the procession theyunfurled banners supporting Fretilin, the left-wing guerrillaindependence movement resisting Indonesia, and its leaderXanana Gusmao. They shouted &quot;Viva Timor Eoeste.&quot; I believethat the shooting was a deliberate act by the armed forces inresponse to this political provocation.   The &quot;Realpolitik&quot; view of East Timor is that one might aswell accept Indonesian control -- at least the Indonesianscan bring Timor more development than Portugal ever managedto do. Indonesia has persuaded much of the world to acceptthis kind of realism. But the events of the past few monthshave made it clear that they have not persuaded the EastTimorese.   In his last notes, Kamal predicted &quot;another wave ofgenocide against the Timorese people.&quot; He wrote: &quot;Whethertotal genocide occurs in East Timor or not depends not onlyon the (remarkably powerful) will of the East Timoresepeople, but also on the will of humanity, of us all.&quot;   ---   Ms. Todd is a Malaysia-based journalist.</TEXT></DOC>