<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900402-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>900402-0084.</DOCID><HL>   All in the Family:   Closest Marcos Crony   Is Favorite to Succeed   Aquino in Philippines   ---   `Danding' Cojuangco Returns   From Exile and Disgrace   To Spook Cousin Cory   ---   Coconuts vs. `People Power'   ----   By Peter Waldman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>04/02/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   MANILA, the Philippines -- Nobody was closer to FerdinandMarcos than Eduardo &quot;Danding&quot; Cojuangco Jr.   Given monopoly control of the nation's biggest industry,coconuts, he built a patronage base for his boss thatpermeated every level of Philippine society. Mr. Marcos namedDanding the godfather of his son, &quot;Bong Bong.&quot; Danding namedhis own boy &quot;Marcos.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Now, nobody is closer to becoming this nation's next chiefof state than Danding Cojuangco. Even the strenuousopposition of President Corazon Aquino seems unlikely toderail his attempt to succeed her.   The comeback of this crony king, a feared hatchet man whohas been charged by the Aquino government with stealingcontrol of more than $1.5 billion of corporate assets, castsa dark cloud over democracy in the Philippines. In threedecades of public service, Mr. Cojuangco has never shown anydesire to share power with anyone but Mr. Marcos. And he'sdead.   &quot;There's no way Danding could lead within a pluralisticsystem that held him accountable,&quot; says Stephen Bosworth,U.S. ambassador to the Philippines from 1984 to 1987. &quot;Heoperates best in the netherworld.&quot;   Two currents are pushing a back-slide in the Philippines:Mr. Cojuangco's own enduring power and the chronic weaknessof his first cousin and political enemy, Cory Aquino. Withshortages of rice, water, electricity, transportation andother necessities growing, a drumbeat is building here for anautocrat to take charge again. Mr. Cojuangco, who adroitlybuilt his own political base to weather Mr. Marcos'sdownfall, is emerging as the leading candidate for the job.Even if Mrs. Aquino survives the military discontent that hasbred six coup attempts in her four years of power, she or achosen successor will have difficulty beating a Cojuangco-ledticket in elections set for 1992.   &quot;Danding is more ruthless, more cunning than the rest&quot; ofMrs. Aquino's opponents, says Bren Guiao, governor ofPampanga province and a close Aquino ally. &quot;He has betterpolitical acumen, but more importantly, he has moreresources.&quot;   Other likely presidential candidates include VicePresident Salvador Laurel and Sen. Juan Ponce Enrile. Bothare better known abroad than Danding, but neither enjoys hisstature in the Philippines.   Though well aware that Washington loathes him, Danding andhis supporters insist that as president he would make everyattempt to maintain strong relations with the U.S. Dandinghimself hasn't taken a public position on the U.S. militarybases in the Philippines -- a perennial source of controversybetween the two countries. But some of his supporters soundas if they are bending over backwards to accommodate theAmericans. &quot;If we have our way, they can have the baseswithout any rent,&quot; says Eliodoro Castro, one of Danding'soldest allies in his home province of Tarlac.   The rehabilitation of &quot;Boss&quot; Danding could only happen inone of the most peculiar political cultures in the world.While U.S. officials exult over the restoration of democracyunder Mrs. Aquino, Philippine politics remains much the sametoday as during Mr. Marcos's 20-year rule and prior regimes.It is a system rooted in the ancient ways of clan warfare,molded by four centuries of Spanish feudalism, and coatedwith a thin gloss of U.S.-style democracy.   Issues and ideology mean little. Political parties andplatforms are window dressing for patronage and personalitycults. What counts is who can deliver the favors, who can buythe votes, who can arm the goons.   In these black arts, the 54-year-old Mr. Cojuangco iswithout equal, say friends and foes alike. Danding, who wasinterviewed for this story but wouldn't allow directquotations, says his reputation is exaggerated.   During the Marcos era, he amassed a security force ofthousands, drilled by Israeli mercenaries. But as one friendput it, Danding preferred to &quot;kill with kindness&quot;; hepersonally handed out Christmas bonuses to employees of themany companies he controlled, pretending the money came fromhis own pocket, workers say. His underlings continue toarrange surgery for peasants, loans for teachers andvote-buying funds for ward captains.   Despite his bitter conflicts with the Aquinos, Dandinghelped pay for the Boston home in which they lived duringexile. And while in exile himself a few years ago, Mr.Cojuangco phoned an ally on the island of Negros -- 28 yearsto the day after the two warlords first hooked up.   &quot;How can you turn your back on a guy like that?&quot; remarksAlfonso Lacson, the recipient of the call. &quot;I couldn't doanything but cry.&quot;   Mrs. Aquino, however, despises Danding. While she doesn'tbelieve her cousin actually plotted the 1983 murder of herlate husband, Benigno &quot;Ninoy&quot; Aquino Jr., she is convinced heknew about the plans, confidants say. Danding vehementlydenies any knowledge of the plot to kill Ninoy.   &quot;Danding is capable of taking lives,&quot; says his lawyer,Gabriel Villareal. &quot;But he didn't do that.&quot;   Mrs. Aquino, unimpressed by such denials, canceled thepassports of Danding and his family just after a U.S. jetevacuated the Cojuangcos and Marcoses to Hawaii in 1986. Ofthe nearly $4 billion of corporate assets allegedly stolen bycronies of Mr. Marcos and now sequestered by the Aquinogovernment, Danding controlled roughly half.   Until last fall, Danding lived quietly in exile inRiverside, Calif. But on Nov. 26 -- a few days before thebloodiest coup attempt against the Aquino government -- heslipped back into the Philippines with a passport obtained inLos Angeles through some consular officials, who have sincebeen recalled. Danding announced he had returned to&quot;vindicate my honor and that of my family.&quot;   In a rambling conversation at lunch in his mother'ssuburban Manila home, Mr. Cojuangco fumes over his treatmentby the government. He quips that the next president will beless vindictive than Mrs. Aquino, as a coterie of hisbrother, his lawyer, his public-relations man and severalmaids chuckle nervously. The elegant fish and rice dishescome in waves over a long afternoon. Danding smokes heavilybut avoids fatty foods on doctor's orders.   His homecoming has thrown Philippine politics intodisarray. Most of the same 80 or so powerful clans thatsupported Mr. Marcos, and presidents before him, stillcontrol the provinces for Mrs. Aquino. But many members ofthis political elite resent her advocacy of land reform andfear her inability to control the military and provide basicservices. Moreover, Mrs. Aquino's promise to step down in1992 has sent politicians scurrying for new patrons. Many arelining up behind Danding.   &quot;Those who rode on Cory's popularity are facing a seriousdecision,&quot; says Rafael Coscolluela, vice governor of theprovince of Negros Occidental and an Aquino ally, though nowedging toward the Cojuangco camp. &quot;Danding is the onlyobvious opposition candidate who has a chance of winning. Buthe could be bad for the country in one sense: He'll bring thepolarization to a head.&quot;   He already has. The sharpest reaction to Danding's returnhas come from cousin Cory. A few days after Danding arrived,she ordered Solicitor General Francisco Chavez, a slick,machine-gun-toting prosecutor who likens himself to EliotNess, to take personal charge of the government's legal casesagainst Mr. Cojuangco. And she publicly suggested that hercousin might have been involved in a December putsch thatleft more than 100 people dead, though she presented noevidence. Danding says he had no knowledge that a coup was inpreparation.   He insists he is the victim of political persecution. Hedefends his management of the coconut business and others,convinced that his creation of cartels helped Filipinosextract higher commodity prices from multinationalcorporations. And he says he doesn't understand why hisfamily is forbidden to come home.   &quot;They've taken his passport, his assets and now hisfamily,&quot; says Selen Saguyod, a judge and Danding disciple.   The Cojuangco feud dates back decades. The oldest son of ahalf-American mother and a father who died when the boy was16, Danding became a maverick within the wealthy Cojuangcoclan at an early age. While his more-genteel cousins such asCory earned degrees in the U.S., Danding dropped out of anagricultural college in California and returned home to runhis family's businesses.   He soon angered relatives by leading a strike against oneof their sugar mills by planters demanding more money. Someyears later, Danding was ousted from a family-run bank andforced to sell his shares.   In 1965, he ran for Congress against Mrs. Aquino's youngerbrother, Jose &quot;Peping&quot; Cojuangco Jr., under the banner of anew patron, a presidential challenger named Ferdinand Marcos.In an election marked by violence and record vote-buying,Peping retained his seat, but Danding helped the newpresident carry Tarlac province, northwest of Manila.   Two years later, Danding was elected provincial governorwhen Benigno Aquino, a Marcos enemy, didn't run forre-election. As governor, Danding armed vigilante groups tofight local Communist insurgents with whom Mr. Aquino hadbeen on relatively good terms. The cousins tried to makepeace for a time, but in 1969, the mayors and ward captainsof Tarlac again had to choose sides when Danding challengedPeping for Congress. After some early campaign skirmishes,Peping bowed out and Danding won.   It was during Marcos martial law, 1972 to 1980, thatDanding reached the apex of crony capitalism. In 1975, hegained control of a Cojuangco bank, First United, when Mrs.Aquino's family was forced to sell it because of new capitalrequirements. Danding arranged for the Philippine CoconutProducers Federation to buy the Aquino shares at a 100%premium -- a family favor since forgotten, friends grouse. Hetook a 10% stake in the bank himself as a commission, and acontract to manage it.   The United Coconut Planters Bank, as it was renamed, grewinto one of the most powerful financial institutions inSoutheast Asia, thanks to a series of generous presidentialdecrees. In one, Mr. Marcos extended a levy on the sale ofcoconut products and mandated that the money be depositedinterest-free in the industry's new bank. The levy'sostensible purpose was to back development projects for thecoconut industry. The fund gave Danding control of $500million, which he managed like a personal fortune.   According to government documents, he ingratiated himselfwith Imelda Marcos, the dictator's wife, by doling outcoconut funds to her pet cultural projects and the MissUniverse Pageant (she was once chosen Miss Manila). With levymoney, Danding took a controlling stake in San Miguel Corp.,the Philippines' giant food and beverage conglomerate, andthen bankrolled a new chemical company.   Above all, though, Danding used the levy funds to buy upcoconut-oil mills and create a national milling and tradingcartel that he controlled. His rationale was simple. Althoughthe Philippines supplied 80% of the world's coconut trade,multinational traders bought the coconut meat -- called copra-- from Filipino farmers, waited for prices to rise, and thensold for hefty profits to oil millers overseas.   Under the system Danding created, farmers were forced tosell all copra to his new cartel, which became the soleauthorized exporter of coconut oil. The monopoly increasedhard-currency earnings for millers -- most of whom werepartners or associates of Danding -- but at the expense ofsmall coconut farmers.   &quot;Danding monopolized the whole thing,&quot; says EmmanuelPelaez, then a coconut farmer and now Philippine ambassadorto the U.S. In 1982, Mr. Pelaez was severely wounded in anambush after helping some farmers sell their copra directlyto foreign buyers.   Danding didn't stop with coconuts. Once the bank was upand running, he made loans to partners and friends in avariety of businesses. He grew particularly enamored ofmonopolies. He tried creating cartels in rice, sugar, flour,groceries and soft drinks, but ran out of time when &quot;peoplepower&quot; -- as the popular uprising was called -- overthrew Mr.Marcos in 1986.   The entire coco-fund empire, including the bank, the oilmills and the San Miguel shares, are now under sequestrationby Mrs. Aquino's special anti-crony commission. Thegovernment has asked the courts to declare the coconut levy a&quot;public fund,&quot; which would help clear the way for regulatorsto confiscate the assets. Danding's lawyers counter that thefunds came from &quot;private&quot; contributions by oil millers, andwere invested properly on behalf of the coconut industry.They say the assets belong to farmers, who entrusted themwith Danding to manage.   The Philippine Supreme Court, in ruling on a motionseveral months ago, signaled agreement with the government'sposition. But it may take years for the nation's ploddingjudiciary to determine the fate of the coco-fund empire. Inthe meantime, officials responsible for the sequesteredassets say there is little to prevent Danding from siphoningfunds from the properties to help finance his run for thepresidency. His executives still manage most of thecompanies, under loose supervision from low-paid governmentauditors who have more to gain from helping him than foilinghim.   A Cojuangco reconciliation still isn't out of thequestion. Though Mrs. Aquino isn't likely to make peace withDanding, her brother, Peping, a congressman and leader of theruling party, may. The two cousins, who are about the sameage, were playmates growing up, and have remained on speakingterms over the years despite their political run-ins.   People close to both Cojuangco camps say the male cousinsmay have already agreed to cooperate if Mrs. Aquino doesn'trun for re-election. Danding won't comment on such analliance, but he acknowledges that even while he was inCalifornia exile, Peping flew there to meet with him. Pepingdeclined to be interviewed.   Danding's supporters aren't waiting to find out if thealliance is fact or fiction. Throughout the Philippines, hishenchmen are holding local neighborhood meetings. They aredrumming up sympathy, much as followers of Ninoy Aquino did adecade ago, for their &quot;persecuted&quot; patron. And they arecirculating petitions demanding that the boss run forpresident.   Support is building within the Manila business class aswell. In the Makati financial district, many Filipinoexecutives speak of Danding as the one Marcos crony whoreinvested his money in the Philippines, and whose businessesexpanded. He is particularly admired for his staunchnationalism: the perception that he tried to throw off theyoke of foreign exploitation in the coconut industry.   Mrs. Aquino's strategy for clipping her cousin's wingsrests on the courts. But Danding's people also worry aboutanother force of political suasion: the U.S.   In Washington, where congressional support for Mrs. Aquinoand her &quot;people power&quot; revolution has been almost unanimous,Danding's resurgence is being met with incredulity.   &quot;Given Danding Cojuangco's intimate involvement in theMarcos kleptocracy,&quot; says Rep. Stephen Solarz, the democratwho chairs a key House subcommittee on Asian affairs, &quot;it'shard to believe the Filipino people would willingly turn thereins of government over to him.&quot;   An officer at the U.S. embassy here warns that there-emergence of Marcos cronies would strain relations betweenthe two countries. But Mr. Bosworth, the former ambassador,says that at least initially the U.S. would have to deal withDanding &quot;on a normal and legitimate basis&quot; if he wereconstitutionally elected. &quot;The tone and nature of therelationship would obviously depend on how he governed,&quot; headds.</TEXT></DOC>