<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900625-0123</DOCNO><DOCID>900625-0123.</DOCID><HL>   Global View:   If the Russians Aren't Coming, Who Is?   ----   By George Melloan</HL><DATE>06/25/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A15</SO><CO>   JAPAN EUROP FREST FORGN</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   KNOKKE-HEIST, Belgium -- At a NATO-Japan mutual securitydiscussion in this seaside town a few days ago, an editor ofthe Hokkaido Shinbun Press, sitting beside me at dinner,wondered if I could explain why we were there. He wanted toknow why, if the Soviet Union is falling apart, anyone thinksthere still is a security threat to either Japan or the 16NATO countries.   It is a good question. A lot of people, including some atthis unprecedented NATO-Japan conference, already haveassumed the answer: There is no threat. A few of thoseengaged in the discussion (we journalists were onlyobservers) were even predicating their analysis on &quot;peacedividend&quot; developments that have not yet occurred, such as asuccessful conclusion of the Vienna CFE negotiations that aremeant to bring about sharp reductions in conventional forcesin Europe.</LP><TEXT>   If some of these supposedly hardheaded national-securityspecialists are delirious over the &quot;end of history&quot; and othersuch speculative formulations, it should be no surprise thatpoliticians are even further down that road. ThroughoutEurope and the U.S. there are strong pressures for sharp cutsin defense budgets. By contrast, Japan's defense spendingwill continue to grow at about 3% annually over the next fiveyears, according to an unofficial estimate, but even in Japanthere is rising debate over whether those increments arenecessary. Until now, the defense budget, which is only about1% of Japan's GNP, has not stirred much public emotion.   Objective reality -- an expression favored by Marxistsuntil their own objective reality became so stark -- doesindeed suggest an absence of threat. The Red Army iswithdrawing, albeit slowly, from Central Europe. The WarsawPact has crumbled with the emergence of popular governmentsin Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and East Germany. The riseof nationalism within the Soviet republics themselves hascast doubt on the reliability of the non-Russian troops whoare a major component of the Soviet armed forces. And thereare, of course, expectations that the CFE talks ultimatelywill bring about a major withdrawal of Soviet troops fromCentral Europe.   But therein lies the paradox of the Knokke meeting. Justpossibly, the diminution of the threat is itself the threat.The discussants were not having an easy time trying to copewith the uncertainties of a radical change in the correlationof forces. There were references to Margaret Thatcher'sremark, vis-a-vis the Soviet breakup, that ice is mostdangerous when it is melting, but not much analysis of whythat might be true.   In fact, with all due respect to the perceptiveness ofMrs. Thatcher, it may not be quite on the mark in the Sovietcase. A fragmented Soviet Union, preoccupied with thedisturbed relationships of the Soviet republics, may well beless dangerous to the outside world than was the Soviet Unionwhen it could be called with some justification a monolith.When it had both a central political command and a functionalcommand economy, it could employ significant resources infurtherance of its imperial ambitions, whether they might bethe construction of a Pacific fleet or the support of regimesin Angola and Nicaragua.   But what Mrs. Thatcher really was warning against was notonly what is happening in the Soviet Union but what couldhappen in the Western alliance. In the absence of a clear andpresent danger, the impulse for disarmament in democraticnations becomes powerful. There always are far more claims onnational budgets than can be satisfied. Arguments thatweapons no longer are needed are mother to weapons defunding.The number of people who think of weapons as waste greatlyexpands when the world seems less dangerous. The U.S. alreadyhas scheduled a 10% reduction of its defense forces in thePacific. Its troop presence in Europe will drop sharply if aCFE agreement is reached. Cutbacks in defense procurementbegan in the Reagan administration.   In the Soviet Union, by contrast, the defense productionmills grind on, making ships, tanks and missiles. There arereports that the Soviets are anticipating a CFE agreement,which would call for scrappage of weapons, by shiftingsignificant amounts of equipment out of Europe to Asiandeployments or naval air wings that the agreement will notcover.   So a question arises: Exactly how will the world look fiveyears from now if the Western allies have significantlydisarmed and the Soviet Union has not? More to the point,what if there is a huge Russian Federation still under someform of Communist Party control, with a restored commandeconomy and still sufficiently well armed to intimidate itsneighbors, including those members of the Soviet Union whomight by then have achieved some measure of independence?Empires decline, but they also sometimes rise again in a newguise and with the energy of the imperial power renewed.   But that is only one possibility. Russia is not the onlythreat to world peace. What about the possibility of war overKashmir between India and Pakistan, both presumed to havenuclear weapons? Or what about the danger of thestill-ambitious Saddam Hussein of Iraq deciding to use hisstill-impressive military power to grab more Middle East oil?Or the possibility that he or some other Arab militant willdecide to employ chemical or biological weapons againstIsrael or each other? Or the danger of new adventures byVietnam or North Korea?   Some of those possibilities are fairly remote. But PaulWolfowitz, U.S. undersecretary of defense for policy,reminded the Knokke group of the book &quot;Great Illusion&quot; byNorman Angell, which argued that war was no longer possible.A short while later came the outbreak of World War I. Then,it was the Austro-Hungarian empire that was disintegrating.   So the Knokke meeting was born out of some usefulperceptions. From the U.S. comes a desire to fashion itsseparate alliances with Europe and Japan into what Mr.Wolfowitz called a &quot;new international security framework.&quot;From Japan comes a tentative exploration of the possibilitythat it can play a global political role more in keeping withits economic importance. Japan also has a continuing concernabout Soviet ambitions in the Pacific. And from both Europeand Japan comes a wish not to be abandoned by a United Statesthat is beginning to display once more those old-fashionedisolationism symptoms.   In short, the Knokke gathering was an attempt to prevent abreakup of the Western alliance that would match or surpassthe disintegration of the Soviet empire. Is that a worthwhilepurpose? In this world of brightening prospects for peace butvast uncertainties about the future, yes would seem to be theprudent answer.</TEXT></DOC>