<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900723-0057</DOCNO><DOCID>900723-0057.</DOCID><HL>   Legal Watershed:   High Court Vacancy Is   Threat to Abortion,   Opportunity for Bush   ---   Choice He Makes May Pacify   Right but Split the GOP   And Spark Battle in Senate   ---   Brennan Leaves Giant Legacy   ----   By Stephen Wermiel   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/23/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)</IN><GV>SUPREME COURT (SUP)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- For more than a decade, William Brennan hadflirted with the idea of retiring. Always in the past, hislove for the job of Supreme Court justice and his role as thecourt's most ardent defender of individual rights andliberties finally outweighed all other considerations.   This time was different. In the Newark, N.J., airportthree weeks ago, en route to a North Sea cruise, he hit hishead in a fall that left him periodically disorientedthroughout the trip. Although he didn't know it at the time,he had suffered a minor stroke. Last Tuesday, when Mr.Brennan returned to Washington, he was forced to face medicalreality. He spent the next two days consulting with hisdoctors and family. There was relatively little dissent.</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I had no choice,&quot; Justice Brennan said in a telephoneconversation yesterday, &quot;but to give it all up.&quot;   The 84-year-old justice's resignation on Friday afternearly 34 years gives President Bush his first opportunity toinfluence the character of the Supreme Court. It also giveshim a chance, if he chooses to take it, to assuageconservatives angry with him on other issues by moving thedeeply divided court significantly to the right. At the sametime, though, it raises substantial political risks: of apotentially bruising Senate confirmation fight, and perhapsof deepening the schisms within the Republican coalition onthe explosive issue of abortion -- where a new nominee willbe under enormous pressure from social conservatives to voteto overturn the 1973 Roe vs. Wade ruling.   The effects of the liberal Justice Brennan's departure andhis likely replacement with a conservative will be feltalmost immediately once the court begins its next session onOct. 1. On abortion and issues of separation of church andstate, the conservatives already have a 5-4 edge. Butdifferences among themselves have somewhat slowed theircourse to the right.   On some matters, the court's liberal wing still hasmanaged to muster some major 5-4 victories, particularly onaffirmative action and some other civil-rights issues, onfreedom of expression, and on the rights of accusedcriminals. Justice Brennan's departure is likely to bringthose victories to an abrupt halt. Mr. Bush may get furtherchances to cement the conservative cast of the court, asliberal justices Harry Blackmun and Thurgood Marshall are intheir early 80s.   On abortion, administration officials say, Mr. Bush isvirtually certain to nominate a jurist opposed to Roe vs.Wade. And, although a moderate himself on many domesticissues, the president firmly believes his rhetoric aboutfavoring judges who lean toward strict construction of theConstitution's meaning and who dislike judicial activism.   Some administration aides see a timely opportunity for Mr.Bush to regain ground with conservatives offended by his taxand other positions by doing what he would do naturally --pick someone with generally conservative judicial views.&quot;Just by doing what he wants to do anyway he'll re-energizeconservative support,&quot; says one senior administrationofficial.   But such a nomination also could drive a deeper wedgebetween the social conservatives of the Republican Party andvoters, particularly younger ones, who hold more liberalsocial views but hew to the GOP line on economics andnational security. This rift, already apparent on issues likethe environment and civil rights legislation, has been anundercurrent since the day the party nominated Mr. Bush in1988. But it is a division Mr. Bush's advisers, particularlyGOP National Chairman Lee Atwater, have tried to keep out ofview. The court opening, while not creating the rift, couldserve to bring it into clearer focus.   The administration may try to avoid political divisivenessby looking for a conservative nominee with other attributesthat can be emphasized to moderates -- for instance, bynaming the first Hispanic to the court.   In comments to reporters over the weekend, President Bushsaid he wants a choice &quot;very, very soon,&quot; which aides saymeans later this week or early next. Mr. Bush hopes to win apromise from the Senate Judiciary Committee to holdconfirmation hearings in early September, and then use theAugust congressional recess to drum up support for thecandidate. Conservatives are still smarting from what theyconsider President Reagan's failure during a similar recessin 1987 to rally support for former Judge Robert Bork, whoseSupreme Court nomination was defeated.   The administration hopes such a schedule will either winMr. Bush a successful vote before November's mid-termelections, or else allow the Republicans to turn a Senaterejection into an issue to attack Democrats.   Among lists of candidates for the high court vacancy,Solicitor General Kenneth Starr and federal appeals courtjudge Patrick Higginbotham of Dallas are favorites of someBush aides. Others outside the administration are urging thepresident to be more venturesome and appoint a Hispanic(possibilities include district judge Ricardo Hinojosa ofBrownsville, Texas, and appellate judge Ferdinand Fernandezof Los Angeles) or a second woman justice (possibly appellatejudges Edith Jones of Houston or Cynthia Hall or PamelaRymer, both of Los Angeles).   Other potential nominees include David Souter, a formerNew Hampshire Supreme Court justice recently appointed to thefederal appeals court in Boston; J. Harvie Wilkinson, afederal appeals court judge in Charlottesville, Va.; RalphWinter, a federal appeals court judge in New Haven, Conn.;and Laurence Silberman, an appeals court judge in Washington,D.C.   Assuming Mr. Bush names a staunch conservative, it ispossible that Senate Democrats will try to block thenomination, and it is assured that abortion-rights activistswill. In doing so, opponents are likely to focus on thelegacy built by Justice Brennan, who since being appointed tothe court by President Eisenhower in 1956 has played asignificant role in virtually every major constitutionaldecision affecting modern society.   When he arrived on the high court at age 50, the alwayscheery and congenial Mr. Brennan brought with him an uncannyability to befriend and work with his colleagues, even thosewith whom he disagreed. Former law clerks recount seeing himpause in the hallway en route to the court's secretconferences to await fellow liberal Blackmun or former swingvote Lewis Powell, who is now retired. They would then walkoff arm in arm.   But Mr. Brennan has long bridled at his public image --that of an affable Irish politician glad-handing fellowjustices and cajoling them to join him.   Rather, one thing that made him so effective, liberaladmirers and conservative critics alike concede, was anunusually pragmatic approach to the job. He loved to teasehis law clerks year after year by asking them what was themost important principle of constitutional law. When theywere stumped, he would hold up five fingers. &quot;You can't doanything around here without five votes,&quot; he would say. Hewasn't saying that anything the majority did was right, hewould explain, but rather that in his view of the job thepoint was to win majorities.   That pragmatic approach always dictated his handling ofcourt opinions, say former clerks and some justices. Morethan most, Justice Brennan would go to great lengths to makechanges in opinions, reword arguments and otherwiseaccommodate colleagues to obtain and keep a majority.   He also had an unwavering view of the role of the court ininterpreting federal laws and the Constitution. A few yearsago he wrote to a law professor that he struggled daily as ajudge with whether to rely simply on &quot;reason&quot; or to &quot;gobeyond sterile rationability and have government treat itscitizens with dignity.&quot; He added, &quot;A judge who operates onthe basis of reason alone risks cutting himself off from thewellspring from which concepts such as dignity, decency andfairness flow.&quot;   Conservative critics have long attacked this approach asjudicial activism, leading judges to legislate their personalviews from the bench. More recently, conservatives havecalled for a return to emphasis on the intent of those whoratified the Constitution.   Justice Brennan shrugged off such criticism, declaring ina 1985 speech, &quot;We current justices read the Constitution inthe only way we can: as 20th Century Americans. . . . Theultimate question must be, what do the words of the text meanin our time?&quot;   His effectiveness within the institution is documented inthe opinions that bear his name -- and in some that don't.Public and private court records show that he wrote most ofthe 1958 decision requiring the Little Rock, Ark., schools todesegregate, although it was signed by all nine justices foremphasis. This included the still-controversial assertionthat it is not only the Constitution that is the &quot;supreme lawof the land&quot; and must be obeyed, but the Supreme Court'sinterpretation of it as well.   Justice Brennan also played a major part behind the scenesin reshaping both Justice William Douglas's 1965 decisionfirst recognizing a constitutional right of privacy andJustice Blackmun's 1973 decision recognizing a right toabortion.   His concern for the individual has dominated not only hisopinions but his personal style. Court employees stop in tosay hello to him regularly, and he knows dozens of them bytheir first names. Last Friday, he wanted badly to delay hisannouncement so he could first meet this morning with fournew law clerks who were scheduled to begin work for himtoday. But word of his decision leaked out and forced theFriday announcement.   Mr. Brennan's legal legacy is sweeping. Among otherthings, his opinions chased from the scene the old notionthat you can't fight city hall: A series of decisions made itpossible to sue state and local governments for damages forviolating the civil rights of individuals, and in somecircumstances even to sue members of Congress or otherfederal officials over civil liberties.   Perhaps the most significant change in the legal landscapecame during his tenure under Chief Justice Earl Warren, whenthe court made most of the guarantees of the Bill of Rightsapplicable to the actions of state and local governmentrather than just to the federal government. Justice Brennanwas the chief advocate of the incremental approach, selectingonly those constitutional protections that seemed mostimportant, such as the Fifth Amendment privilege againstself-incrimination.   Other significant aspects of his legacy include most ofthe major decisions upholding affirmative action; a losingfight to have the death penalty declared unconstitutional;and decisions broadening free speech and free pressguarantees, including protecting the news media against libelsuits by public figures and, most recently, protectingflag-burning as a form of expression. He also wrote the 1962opinion that led to the principle of &quot;one person, one vote&quot;by finding that federal courts had the authority to requirevoting reapportionment.   Still another area in which Mr. Brennan had a significantimpact was in expanding the 14th Amendment guarantee of &quot;dueprocess&quot; to require that welfare recipients receive hearingsbefore benefits are cut off. The decision was the first stepin a virtual due-process revolution that was later expandedto, among other things, increase the protections ofgovernment employees.   It is typical of Justice Brennan, given his concern withthe effects of constitutional law on the individual, that hehas come to see this last area as possibly &quot;my most importantdecision in its practical significance.&quot;   ---   Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>