<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900905-0041</DOCNO><DOCID>900905-0041.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Arbitration in Commercial Cases   Found to Save Money, Not Time   ----   By Arthur S. Hayes and Ann Hagedorn   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>09/05/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B10</SO><CO>   GAF WNEWS LABOR</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES (SCR)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)</GV><LP>   Arbitration in high-stakes commercial cases generallysaves companies money in legal fees but, surprisingly,doesn't speed the process of resolving disputes.   That's the conclusion of a four-year study by the RandCorp.'s Institute for Civil Justice of cases arbitrated inNorth Carolina federal court.</LP><TEXT>   The study indicated that cases bound for trial -- ratherthan arbitration -- are resolved just as quickly asarbitrated cases because the trial-bound cases often aresettled before reaching the courtroom. In contrast, whilearbitration is a faster process than trial, arbitrated casesmore often run their course and don't result in priorsettlements.   The study also showed that arbitration doesn't reduce thecourt system's costs in disposing of civil disputes.   In recent years, arbitration and other forms ofalternative dispute resolution have been touted as solutionsto a host of problems that plague the civil justice system,including crowded dockets, slow administration of justice andthe high costs of litigation.   But, concludes Deborah Hensler, research director forRand's Institute for Civil Justice, &quot;Arbitration is not anefficiency tool.&quot; Ms. Hensler adds that arbitrationnonetheless improves the quality of justice because &quot;theparties believe they get something out of a hearing&quot; beforean impartial body.   The institute studied the arbitration program in the U.S.District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina. Asin most state and federal courts, the North Carolina systemprovided mandatory referral of civil cases to nonbindingarbitration before a lawyer. The district was unusual,however, in that it applied the arbitration program todisputes with as much as $150,000 at stake, instead of justto smaller claims.   The study's author, E. Allan Lind, looked at corporate andindividual contract and civil injury cases. Of the 350 caseshe tracked, 210 went through arbitration. The arbitratedcases took an average of 285 days to be concluded;nonarbitrated cases took an average of 282 days. Many of thenonarbitrated cases were resolved in out-of-courtsettlements.   The study estimated that litigants in arbitrated casespaid an average of $19,972 in total legal fees and costs, andlitigants in nonarbitrated cases paid $25,047. The amount ofdamages provided in arbitration was roughly equivalent tothat in cases originally slated for trial.   Civil litigators for both plaintiffs and defendants saythe Rand study seems to parallel their experience.   And Robert Coulson, president of the American ArbitrationAssociation, said the Rand study is &quot;generally consistent&quot;with other studies of similar nonbinding arbitration systems.   ---   GAF CORP.'S BATTLE with estate of former chairman JesseWerner is revived.   Justice Harold Baer Jr. ruled last week in Manhattan statecourt that a fight between GAF and the estate of Mr. Werner,who was GAF chairman for 18 years, may go to trial despite a1987 arbitration ruling that appeared to have ended thedispute.   The battle centers on what GAF owed Mr. Werner, nowdeceased, when he was ousted in 1983 after he lost a proxyfight to a shareholder group led by current chairman SamuelJ. Heyman.   Among other things, Mr. Werner, who died in April 1986,claimed that the new board had illegally cut off his salaryand benefits and had denied him stock options. An arbitrationpanel in 1987 awarded Mr. Werner's estate $2.8 million plusinterest out of the $7.6 million sought for the allegedviolations of his 1981 employment contract. Further, thearbitration panel dismissed counterclaims filed by GAF.   But both GAF and the Werner estate had also filed suitsagainst each other in state court. In its suit, GAF alleged,among other things, that the former chairman and his boardhad wasted corporate funds through excessive stock optionsand prodigious pension and salary payments to Mr. Werner.Meanwhile, the Werner estate alleged that GAF had improperlyinterfered with Mr. Werner's stock options.   Justice Baer ordered both sides to meet next Monday todiscuss a settlement or set a trial date. If there is atrial, the justice is expected to combine the two pendingsuits.   ---   DAVID SOUTER gets top American Bar Associationendorsement.   The ABA's judicial selection panel rated Mr. Souter, theSupreme Court nominee, &quot;well qualified,&quot; the legalorganization's highest endorsement.   The ABA's 15-member Standing Committee on the FederalJudiciary voted unanimously for the certification. Mr.Souter, a former member of the New Hampshire Supreme Court,was nominated by President Bush in July to fill the vacancycreated by the retirement of Justice William Brennan. Mr.Souter received a similar &quot;well-qualified&quot; rating from theABA earlier this year when he was nominated for a seat on theFirst U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Boston.   Republicans are likely to stress the ABA endorsement inpushing for Mr. Souter's confirmation by the Senate. Someliberal Democrats may use the occasion to question thecriteria the ABA uses in its judicial evaluation process. TheSenate Judiciary Committee is scheduled to begin hearings onthe Souter nomination Sept. 13.   One member of the ABA panel is William Brennan III, alawyer in Princeton, N.J., who is Justice Brennan's son.   ---   IRAN-CONTRA prosecutor Lawrence Walsh asked a federalappeals court panel to reconsider its 2-1 decision that setaside the three felony convictions of former White House aideOliver North. Mr. Walsh addressed his petition to thethree-judge panel but suggested a rehearing by the full12-member U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia. In its July 20 ruling, the three-judge panelordered a witness-by-witness examination of the testimonyagainst Mr. North to determine whether the trial was unfairlytainted by references to testimony the retired Marinelieutenant colonel gave Congress under a limited grant ofimmunity. Chief Judge Patricia Wald dissented, saying thatMr. North received a fair, though not a perfect, trial.   ---   A FORMER TAKEOVER LAWYER at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagherandamp; Flom and a former money manager pleaded innocent to insidertrading charges. But lawyers involved in the case said thatboth defendants could change their pleas to guilty later thismonth if an appropriate plea bargain is worked out. Thegovernment filed the criminal charges last month againstSteven L. Glauberman, a former Skadden Arps associate, andPeter H. Jeffer, who headed Jeffer Management Corp. EugenePropper, who is representing Mr. Jeffer, said the partiesneed more time to work out an acceptable plea bargain. MartinPerschetz, an attorney for Mr. Glauberman, declined tocomment.   ---   MCKENNA, CONNER andamp; CUNEO announced that it split into twofirms effective Sept 1. McKenna andamp; Fitting, with 65 attorneysin Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington, D.C., willemphasize its financial institutions and business litigationpractices. McKenna andamp; Cuneo, with 201 lawyers in Washington,Los Angeles, San Francisco and Denver, will concentrate onregulatory and government contracts work, as well asenvironmental and international law. McKenna Conner wasformed in a merger of Los Angeles and Washington firms in1980. The current division back into two firms &quot;is basedprimarily on practice specialties and not along geographiclines,&quot; said Charles E. Yonkers, managing partner of McKennaandamp; Cuneo.   ---   ALSTON andamp; BIRD said it is opening an office in Washington.The Atlanta law firm, which has 225 attorneys, said thecapital office will focus its practice on financialinstitutions. The office is headed by Frank M. Conner, apartner. John Buchman, currently assistant chief counsel forpolicy development in the Office of Thrift Supervision, joinsthe firm Oct. 1 as counsel.   ---   TERMINATION CASE DISMISSED: A federal judge threw out asuit brought by an ex-partner of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby andamp;MacRae, a New York law firm. In the suit filed last year infederal court in Manhattan, Alison Clapp, 38 years old,accused the firm of violating federal employee-benefit lawsas well as the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizationslaw by terminating her as a partner in 1989. In courtdocuments, the law firm said it dismissed Ms. Clapp becauseit was dissatisfied with her work in its tax department. Ms.Clapp's lawyer, Daniel J. O'Callaghan, said she will appeal.   ---   Paul M. Barrett and Laurie P. Cohen contributed to thisarticle.</TEXT></DOC>