<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910515-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>910515-0095.</DOCID><HL>   Politics andamp; Policy:   Bush Nominates   Gates for Head   Of Intelligence   ---   Role in Iran-Contra Scandal   Is Likely to Come Under   Scrutiny From Senate   ----   By Gerald F. Seib and Walter S. Mossberg   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A16</SO><GV>CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   WASHINGTON -- President Bush, showing he is willing torisk another congressional look into the Iran-Contra scandal,nominated Deputy National Security Adviser Robert Gates tobecome director of central intelligence.   Mr. Gates, a 47-year-old Kansas native, is a careerintelligence officer who has become one of Mr. Bush's closestaides. As the No. 2 official on the National Security Councilstaff, he also is one of the administration's most skepticalanalysts of the Soviet Union. Administration officials hadlong considered him the logical choice to succeed WilliamWebster, who announced last week that he is resigning.</LP><TEXT>   The only apparent doubt about whether Mr. Bush wouldchoose Mr. Gates arose from lingering concerns about theaide's conduct during the Iran-Contra affair, when he wasdeputy to Central Intelligence Director William Casey. Mr.Casey was one of the main architects of that secretoperation. Persistent congressional questioning about thatissue compelled Mr. Gates to withdraw his name fromconsideration for the top CIA job four years ago, whenPresident Reagan nominated him for the post.   But after making soundings in Congress in the past fewdays, White House officials are confident Mr. Gates can beconfirmed this time. Some key senators openly advocatedmoving Mr. Gates into the nation's top intelligence job now,when he could use his experience to steer the intelligencecommunity into a broad overhaul the lawmakers desire.   Administration aides suspect Mr. Gates will be questionedextensively about why he didn't do more to ferret out anddisclose Mr. Casey's role in selling arms to Iran anddiverting proceeds to Nicaragua's Contra rebels. But theydon't expect him to face much hostility.   Significantly, Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Pa.), who was oneof the principal opponents when Mr. Gates previously wasnominated for the top CIA job, declared: &quot;I believe theIran-Contra {affair} has been investigated enough.&quot; Sen.Specter indicated that he still wants to discuss the affairat confirmation hearings, but more as a vehicle to explorehow Mr. Gates would cooperate with Congress and to uncoverhis attitude toward overhauling the intelligence system.   Administration aides also suspect Mr. Gates's confirmationhearings will veer into recently revived allegations that Mr.Casey and some CIA officers, acting without agency sanction,negotiated a secret deal with Iran to delay freeing U.S.hostages until after the 1980 presidential election, in whichRonald Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter. Mr. Gates, who workedfor three years on the Carter National Security Councilstaff, was in a senior CIA post at the time.   About two weeks ago, Mr. Gates was called to testify as awitness before a federal grand jury that continues toinvestigate the Iran-Contra affair, according to officials.But they said Mr. Gates isn't a target of the grand jury. Andadministration aides believe that neither the Iran-Contraquestioning nor the inquiries about the alleged hostage dealwill capture the public's attention -- partly because theydon't expect much new information to emerge. Moreover, theadministration thinks Mr. Gates has proven himself to somecongressional skeptics with his performance in Mr. Bush'sinner circle.   When asked about the risk of resurrecting the Iran-Contraaffair, Mr. Bush declared, &quot;These matters have been discussedand I have absolutely no qualms whatsoever.&quot;   Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman David Boren (D.,Okla.) called Mr. Gates an &quot;extremely able and nonpartisanprofessional in the intelligence field.&quot; Sen. Warren Rudman(R., N.H.), who is expected to be the most influentialRepublican on the panel in the debate, said that &quot;unlessthere's something I don't know about, I don't think there'llbe much of a problem. Barring something unexpected, I wouldexpect to support him.&quot;   Mr. Gates was never accused of being a major figure in theIran-Contra affair. However, he acknowledged being told inOctober 1986 that funds may have been diverted to theContras, while another CIA official claimed he mentioned thepossible Contra connection to Mr. Gates two months earlier.Mr. Gates also acknowledged a role in preparing November 1986congressional testimony by Mr. Casey that turned out to bemisleading. Mr. Gates said he closely read only early drafts.   In general, Mr. Gates described himself as unaware of manyaspects of the secret Contra program, even though he wasrunning the CIA on a day-to-day basis.   Mr. Gates, who has studied Russian history extensively andhas a working knowledge of the Russian language, has becomenoteworthy for his pessimistic appraisals of the chances thatMikhail Gorbachev's reforms can succeed in transforming theSoviet Union. He has asserted that Mr. Gorbachev has sown theseeds for chronic unrest by failing to make economic reformsfast enough to match the political reforms he has allowed.   Another major interest to the Senate will be Mr. Gates'views on reorganizing the huge, unwieldy intelligencecommunity, which hasn't had a fundamental overhaul since itwas established in the late 1940s. Though most Americansthink of the CIA as the sole intelligence agency, it is onlyone of a dozen government intelligence organizations.   Technically, the director of central intelligence overseesall these agencies, but they often feud and overlap, and mostrespond more readily to the wishes of the secretary ofdefense, because they are technically arms of the Pentagon.   The two congressional intelligence panels have begun workon reorganization bills that would streamline the structureand try to put the director on an equal footing with thedefense secretary. But Mr. Gates is expected to move quicklyto come up with his own plan.</TEXT></DOC>