<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910710-0077</DOCNO><DOCID>910710-0077.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   U.S. Conflict Claimed in Waste Cleanup   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus and Susan C. Faludi   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B2</SO><CO>   CNA FBD LTR</CO><MS>BASIC MATERIALS (BSC)FINANCIAL (FIN)INDUSTRIAL (IDU)</MS><IN>ACCOUNTING (ACC)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)ALL BANKS, BANKING NEWS AND ISSUES (BNK)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)CONTAINERS andamp; PACKAGING, BAGS, CANS, BOXES (CTR)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)FULL LINE INSURANCE (INF)PROPERTY andamp; CASUALTY INSURANCE (INP)INSURANCE (INS)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)OIL-INTEGRATED MAJORS (OIL)PETROLEUM (PET)POLLUTION CONTROL, WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES (POL)RAILROADS (RAI)SECURITIES (SCR)INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (SVC)</IN><NS>ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING NEWS andamp; ISSUES (ACC)BANKRUPTCY DECLARATIONS AND PROCEEDINGS (BCY)ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (ENV)LAW andamp; LEGAL ISSUES, HEARINGS, RULINGS, LEGISLATION (LAW)</NS><GV>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG)</GV><RE>CALIFORNIA (CA)COLORADO (CO)EASTERN EUROPE (EEU)EUROPE (EU)ILLINOIS (IL)NORTH AMERICA (NME)NEW YORK (NY)PACIFIC RIM (PRM)TEXAS (TX)UNITED STATES (US)YUGOSLAVIA (YO)</RE><LP>   The former owner of a toxic-waste site claims that theU.S. Department of Energy has a financial stake in the methodof waste cleanup the government has ordered the company touse.   The company, Southern Pacific Transportation Co., SanFrancisco, has accused the government of a conflict ofinterest and has asked the Energy Department to relinquishits stake, thus clearing the way for the company to seek touse a less expensive cleanup method.</LP><TEXT>   The controversy stems from a dispute over how to removearsenic contamination from a Houston site, formerly apesticide plant, once owned by Southern Pacific. TheEnvironmental Protection Agency has ordered the company topay for a cleanup using an innovative technology known as insitu vitrification.   The process uses electricity to melt the contaminatedsoil. When the soil cools, it turns into a glasslikematerial, which is then covered with clean soil. Thetechnology is owned by the Department of Energy, which gaveBattelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, Ohio, the right tomarket it in exchange for an annual royalty payment based onthe megawatts of electricity used in the process, accordingto the licensing agreement. The amount of the royalty isn'tspecified and couldn't immediately be determined.   The company has argued that the licensing arrangementplaces it in an untenable situation. Under the federalSuperfund law, the EPA has the right to select the methodthat will be used to clean a site. But because of thelicensing agreement, only one supplier of the technologyexists, making the process far more costly than othermethods, the company claims.   In a petition filed this week, Southern Pacific, arailroad company, asked the Energy Department to cancel thelicense. The combination &quot;of government control overselection of the remedy and control over who may implement{the technology} has created artificial barriers to entry bypotential competitors who seek to produce and markethazardous waste technologies,&quot; the petition alleges.   Richard Constant, a lawyer for the Energy Department, saidhe could not comment on the case because he had not seenSouthern Pacific's petition. He said the Energy Departmenthas developed other technologies related to hazardous wasteremoval, but he said he didn't know whether the departmenthas licensing agreements for those technologies.   Edward McGrath, a Denver lawyer representing SouthernPacific, says the EPA has estimated that cleaning the Houstonsite using the designated technology will cost $13.8 million.He says the company wants to use a different treatment thatwould cost about $8.3 million.   Disputes between the EPA and companies over the costs andmethods for cleaning up waste sites are common in Superfundlitigation. But &quot;the fact that the government is not onlyrecommending a technology but also benefiting from itsselection is quite shocking and raises a troubling legalissue,&quot; said Walter Pozen, an administrative law specialistin Washington, D.C., who is not involved in the case.   A spokesman for the EPA said the regional office wasunaware that the Energy Department would receive royaltieswhen it selected the process. &quot;We're not concerned with thesubject of royalties but exclusively with the remediation ofthis particular site,&quot; he said.   ---   HUGE ASBESTOS CASE to be settled by Fibreboard for about$185 million.   Fibreboard Corp., Concord, Calif., said it has agreed tosettle a consolidated asbestos suit in Texas involving about2,300 workers, with the intention that its insurer,Continental Casualty Co., will pay the full amount.   The agreement pre-empts a November 1990 court ruling thatinstructed Fibreboard to pay these workers $500 million plusinterest. At the time, Fibreboard had vowed to appeal thedecision.   The company's insurer, Continental Casualty, a unit of CNAInsurance Cos., is currently appealing a separate court orderin California that compelled it to cover Fibreboard'sliability in the litigation, which is known as Cimino vs.Raymark et. al. Continental Casualty disputed the court'sfinding that the policy it issued Fibreboard provides nolimit to the number of claims that can be brought.   If Continental Casualty's appeal succeeds, a Fibreboardspokesman said, the company will have to pay the $185 millionsettlement itself. But, the spokesman said, the company willprobably first resort to additional legal challenges to forceContinental Casualty to cover the damages. &quot;Much hinges onthe result of the insurance-coverage case,&quot; the spokesmansaid.   A spokesman for Continental Casualty said the companywouldn't comment while the litigation was pending.Continental &quot;believes that there are substantial issues oflaw and fact that can only be resolved upon appeal,&quot; he said,and it intends &quot;to vigorously pursue these issues.&quot;   The settlement still must get approval from the trialjudge, who must determine whether the agreement was reachedin good faith.   Fibreboard, which makes lumber, insulation andfireproofing materials, faces more than 70,000 claimsoutstanding involving exposure to asbestos products that itno longer makes. In the Cimino suit, oil refinery-workerscharged that their exposure led to more than 1,000 cases ofasbestosis, more than 100 cases of lung cancer and more than50 other forms of cancer.   ---   DEATH-PENALTY statute in Colorado rejected by state'ssupreme court.   The court, in a 4-3 decision, said yesterday that a 1988amendment to the state statute unfairly increased thelikelihood that a Colorado murder defendant would receive thedeath penalty.   Lawyers familiar with the ruling, which affects only theColorado death-penalty statute, stressed that the court basedits decision on the Colorado state constitution, rather thanthe U.S. Constitution. The U.S. Supreme Court has saidrepeatedly that capital punishment is permissible under theU.S. Constitution, but individual states are free to applytheir own standards.   In Colorado, the state's highest court upheld a trialcourt's ruling last year that the death-penalty statute, asamended, was unconstitutional and couldn't be applied tothree defendants awaiting trial for a 1989 killing.   The high court held that the 1988 amendment to theColorado statute improperly required jurors to issue thedeath penalty when matters that would mitigate a defendant'scrime, such as mental health and a lack of prior criminalrecord, were found to equal matters that aggravated thecrime, such as depravity or prior convictions.   &quot;We hold that a sentence to death under thosecircumstances does not reflect the degree of certainty andreliability that the Colorado constitution requires tosupport the imposition of the uniquely severe and irrevocablesentence of death,&quot; the court wrote.   ---   ACCOUNTANT CHALLENGES continuing education requirements.   Paul L. Black, a certified public accountant and lawyer,has filed a complaint against the New Jersey State Board ofAccountancy, alleging that the state's two-year-oldcontinuing education requirements forced him to withdraw as alicensed accountant.   To retain their licenses, all New Jersey-based CPAs mustcomplete 48 hours of professional education every two years.Mr. Black, 73 years old, says the requirements are&quot;unreasonable, unduly oppressive, {and} devoid of justice andcommon sense.&quot; He especially objects to a stipulation that hemust spend 16 hours studying auditing, review orcompilation-specialties he has not practiced for 20 years.   Every state except Wisconsin mandates continuing educationfor accountants, and courts have consistently upheld thelegality of such requirements. Challenges of continuingeducation in law and medicine have also failed.   Mr. Black plans to argue that the requirements areunconstitutional because they represent &quot;an unreasonableexercise of the state's police power.&quot; Furthermore, he said,the courses are irrelevent, timeconsuming, andexpensive-prices range from $50 to $250 for eight credithours. Trade associations, however, insist that accountantsneed continuing education to stay abreast of changes in thefield.   &quot;All the state has to show is that there's a rationalbasis for the requirements,&quot; said John Jeffries Jr., aprofessor of constitutional law at the University ofVirginia. &quot;That's a test that's hard to flunk.&quot;   ---   YUGOSLAVIA CLEARED to pursue securities claims againstDrexel officials.   A federal judge in Manhattan ruled that the central bankof Yugoslavia can sue under U.S. securities laws to recover$71 million that it invested with Drexel Burnham LambertGroup Inc.   The central bank claimed that it was duped into turningthe money over to Drexel to invest in what it thought wouldbe conservative securities. Instead, the bank claimed in itslawsuit, Drexel used the money to alleviate its cash crunchin the months before the company filed for bankruptcy-lawprotection in February 1990.   Judge Louis Stanton rejected the Drexel officials'argument that the transactions were loans rather thansecurities investments. Finding that the transactions fallunder the securities laws enables the bank to seek damagesfrom Drexel officials -- including the former chief executiveofficer, Frederick Joseph -- as &quot;controlling persons.&quot; Thedecision doesn't affect the company directly because it is inbankruptcy-law proceedings. The central bank has filed claimsagainst the company in the bankruptcy-court case as well.   William Pratt, an attorney for the Yugoslavia central bankat the firm Kirkland andamp; Ellis in New York, said the decisionmakes it more likely that the bank will get all its moneyback. &quot;We are going after every Drexel entity and everyindividual we can to get the full amount that is owed,&quot; hesaid.   Attorneys for Mr. Joseph and the other individualdefendants couldn't be reached for comment. A Drexelspokesman said, &quot;The decision will have no effect on thebankruptcy case and the plan of reorganization goingforward.&quot;   ---   ASPIRING ATTORNEY can apply to state bar 27 years afterpassing exam.   Stanley Shuman, an investment banker who has decided hewants to practice law more than 30 years after graduatingfrom Harvard Law School, cannot be denied admission to theNew York state bar simply because he has waited almost threedecades to apply, the New York Court of Appeals ruledyesterday.   After passing the bar exam, anyone who wishes to practicelaw in New York must apply to the Appellate Division'scommittee on character and fitness. Committee members -- allattorneys themselves -- then interview all candidates.   When Mr. Shuman, an investment banker at Allen andamp; Co.,applied for admission to the New York bar in October 1989,the committee rejected his application, arguing that thepublic interest would not be served by admitting an attorneyto the bar so many years after he had taken the exam.   The court of appeals overturned that judgment, noting thatMr. Shuman had proved his analytical ability and knowledge ofthe law by passing the bar in 1962 and only needed todemonstrate his general fitness to practice. Mr. Shuman hasbeen a member of the Massachusetts bar since graduating fromHarvard, but has never practiced in that state.</TEXT></DOC>