<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900727-0001</DOCNO><DOCID>900727-0001.</DOCID><HL>   Arms Test:   Doubts Are Raised   About the Reliability   Of the Cruise Missile   ---   Northrop's Navigation Unit   May Balk in Deep Cold,   Internal Documents Show   ---   Air Force Sheds Little Light   ----   By Rick Wartzman and Andy Pasztor   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/27/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   NOC BA DOW GLW</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   The Air Force likes to boast of the years of &quot;rigorous andredundant testing&quot; done to ensure the pinpoint accuracy ofits 1,715 nuclear-tipped cruise missiles.   Maintaining such high standards is essential, of course,given that each of the weapons carries a 200-kiloton warhead,10 times more powerful than the bomb that exploded overHiroshima.</LP><TEXT>   But heretofore secret Pentagon and corporate documentsraise disturbing questions about whether the cruise missile,a mainstay of America's nuclear arsenal, is reliable whenexposed to the prolonged sub-zero temperatures at which itwas designed to operate. A fluid inside the weapon'shigh-tech navigational system, these papers indicate, mayfreeze long before it is supposed to.   The Air Force and Northrop Corp., which supplied thenavigational system to prime contractor Boeing Co., have goneto great lengths to mask the problem. A Boeing internalreport from January 1989, for example, shows that when thesuspect system was exposed to extremely low temperatures fora prolonged period, its failure rate increased to the pointof being &quot;unacceptable.&quot; But instead of fixing the part, theAir Force simply decided to make the test less stringent&quot;until the cold-temperature behavior . . . was more fullyunderstood.&quot;   The Justice Department has looked into aspects of theproblem in the past, and Northrop even pleaded guilty tocriminal charges of falsifying test results on the cruisemissile. But a decade of foot-dragging by the Pentagon andNorthrop has prevented Justice Department investigators andlawmakers from fully understanding the low-temperature issue.The air-launched cruise missile has become a glaring exampleof how the military and its suppliers frequently worktogether to keep vital but embarrassing information out ofthe public eye.   &quot;It can only be called a cover-up,&quot; charges Rep. JohnDingell, chairman of a House Energy and Commercesubcommittee, which will hold a hearing today delving intothe cold problem and other Northrop dealings with thePentagon. &quot;I can't think of another word to apply to it.&quot;   The Justice Department is expected to tell the panel thatNorthrop's cozy relationship with Pentagon officials was&quot;highly damaging to our ability to prosecute&quot; the company,and that military officials, by providing Northrop with&quot;formal and informal waivers&quot; of low-temperaturerequirements, allowed the company to reduce its criminalliability. A Northrop spokesman bristles: &quot;They appear,unfairly, to be trying us outside the courtroom.&quot;   Despite the easing of U.S.-Soviet tensions, the cruisemissile remains a central element of what Defense SecretaryDick Cheney calls a &quot;strategy of fostering democracy andpeace . . . by maintaining nuclear deterrence.&quot; It is also animportant potential bargaining chip in arms-control talks.Some argue further that weapons such as the air-launchedcruise missile, commonly called the ALCM, remain powerfuldeterrents to Third World countries developing their ownnuclear weapons.   In case of a crisis, high-flying B-52 bombers might lingerfor hours over frigid terrain before releasing some of the 12cruise missiles that hang under their wings. A militarywidestandard dictates that the missiles must be able to functiondown to 65 degrees below zero Fahrenheit, a temperature oftenencountered as the bombers soar six or seven miles above theearth. Although there are safeguards to prevent a faultylaunch, the glitch with the navigational fluid couldconceivably throw a nuclear weapon off course.   &quot;We conclude that the fluid would not allow properoperation below -35 F for extended periods of time,&quot; an April1990 internal Air Force memo states. The document, which wasreviewed by this newspaper, notes that some Air Force expertsare concerned the missile may not have an adequate &quot;safetymargin&quot; to guarantee dependable operation.   Officially, however, the Air Force insists that the ALCMis &quot;a reliable and fully mission-capable weapons system inwhich we have complete confidence.&quot; According to theStrategic Air Command, typical test flights subject themissile to five hours of &quot;sub-zero degree temperatures priorto launch,&quot; and &quot;as far as we can determine,&quot; there have beenno problems with its operational capability after hundreds offlight tests.   Northrop, which has argued that its manufacturingprocesses were thoroughly checked out and approved by bothBoeing and the Air Force, points to the same numbers. Boeing,though it declines comment, has echoed those statistics, too.   Yet there is no doubt the Justice Department hasencountered opposition when trying to get behind thosefigures.   Northrop was indicted in April 1989 on charges offalsifying test results on two weapons systems, including thecruise. The government also accused the Los Angeles aerospacecompany of providing navigational units for the missile thatdidn't meet the 65-below-zero requirement.   But nine months before those charges were brought, aJustice Department letter to Tinker Air Force Base inOklahoma complained that &quot;affirmative steps were taken&quot; bymilitary officials there &quot;to conceal&quot; from criminalinvestigators damaging information that the Northropnavigational units &quot;may freeze&quot; and become &quot;inoperative&quot;under certain conditions.   A second Justice Department letter, written in November1988 to the general then in charge of keeping the ALCM fleetin tip-top shape, assailed the Air Force for ignoringwarnings that the missile could fail to function under&quot;likely combat conditions.&quot;   A Los Angeles assistant U.S. Attorney, William Fahey,wrote that some Air Force personnel seemed to believe thatbecause the Northrop-made parts &quot;function well at roomtemperature . . . therefore there is no need for concernabout performance in cold temperature.&quot; Such a stance, Mr.Fahey added, &quot;could undercut our legal position&quot; inprosecuting Northrop.   Even after Northrop's indictment, Mr. Fahey was stillcomplaining to the Pentagon that if the Air Force wasn't morecareful in how it dealt with the company's requests forwaivers from cold standards and other requirements, it risked&quot;undermining our case.&quot; (The letters were obtained by Mr.Dingell, who agreed to answer questions about them. Mr. Faheyhas been unreachable this week, his office said.)   The prosecutor also accused Boeing, Northrop and Air Forceofficials of negotiating a &quot;confidence building&quot; test planthat &quot;would not subject the {navigational units} tocold-temperature testing under realistic conditions.&quot; Stungby the criticism, the Air Force responded at the time thatits testing procedures &quot;should be viewed as neutral,independent assessments . . . made without reference to anypending legal proceeding.&quot;   Pentagon acquisition chief John Betti acknowledges thatover the years &quot;there may have been isolated problems&quot; whendefense officials hampered Justice Department investigators.   &quot;Our people aren't there only to help Justice make acase,&quot; Mr. Betti says. He adds that the two agencies are nowdetermined to find &quot;how we can work better together.&quot;   Although Northrop eventually pleaded guilty to falsifyingcertain tests on the cruise and the Navy's Harrier jet andcoughed up $17 million in penalties, the government signed asettlement that dropped all the cold-temperature-relatedcharges. At the time, Mr. Fahey said abandoning thecold-temperature allegation was simply a matter of &quot;how muchyou really need to squeeze out of a corporation before you'vemade your point.&quot;   Still, the haze surrounding the missile program leaves themost important question of all unanswered: How well does theair-launched cruise work in the real world?   The cold-temperature standard seeks simply to assure thatthe missile will work right at 65 below zero. But there hasbeen much dispute among Northrop, the Pentagon and theJustice Department over how that temperature should bemeasured, how long the parts need to be subjected to cold intesting, and whether there should be a brief warm-up beforethe navigational system has to perform. Northrop hasmaintained that its scientists believe that the 65-below-zerospecification is meaningless because the navigational fluidnever gets anywhere near that cold, regardless of thealtitude or duration of a bomber flight.   Yet the internal Boeing report, which reviews 41 bombermissions, lists a dozen instances during the 1980s where thetemperature outside the aircraft was measured or estimated tobe lower than 65 below zero.   The standard is &quot;based on a world climatological study,&quot;explains Air Force Gen. Charles Franklin, who is in charge ofanother project, the Amraam missile. Even Thomas V. Jones,Northrop's chairman, conceded in a sworn deposition takenlast December: &quot;I have seen 87 degrees minus {outside} ourown airplane.&quot;   How much warmer it might be inside the missile, where theNorthrop navigational unit controls the autopilot, has beenthe subject of intense debate. Congressional investigatorssay the Air Force has told them heat generated by themissile's electronic inner workings raises the internaltemperature at least 20 degrees.   But in light of the temperatures recorded by Boeing, evena 20-degree differential means the fluid in the ALCM'snavigational unit still could freeze, considering the35-below-zero threshold that the Air Force documentidentifies.   The cruise missile, which weighs 3,000 pounds and isnearly 21 feet long, is designed to drop down and hug theground as it speeds toward its target. The Northorp-builtnavigational unit, formally called a flight-data transmitter,helps keep the missile on a stable pre-planned path. Itconsists of several gyroscopes surrounded by the viscousfluid, known as DC-200.   This silicone damping fluid sells for $3.40 a pound. Buton it center doubts about a $1.7 billion weapons program.   Produced by Dow Corning, a joint venture of Dow ChemicalCo. and Corning Inc., DC-200 comes in many versions and hasthousands of military and industrial uses, from clocks andtimers to transformers and switches. The manufacturercontends Northrop was warned when it ordered the fluid thatit wouldn't function properly at colder than minus-40. &quot;Weprovided these specs to Northrop,&quot; says a Dow Corningspokesman. &quot;They took it from there.&quot;   Northrop disputes that. In an internal report three yearsago, it said Dow Corning &quot;has always provided our engineeringpersonnel with the assurance that our gyros wouldsuccessfully meet operating requirements at -65 F.&quot; A letterfrom Dow Corning to Northrop, written years beforecruise-missile production even began, supports thiscontention. It says data collected by Dow Corning showedDC-200 to have &quot;a freeze point of -67 F,&quot; adding that &quot;thismaterial, if cooled rapidly, will remain liquid attemperatures as low as -85 F due to supercooling.&quot;   In any case, somewhere along the line, Northrop came torealize it had a problem. Although the company insists thatits navigational unit meets all the tests required by thegovernment, Northrop's 1987 internal report, which has beenfiled in U.S. district court in Los Angeles, states flatly:&quot;DC-200 does not meet the -65 F requirement and never did.&quot;   Later tests provided corroboration. The January 1989Boeing study, obtained by The Wall Street Journal, shows thatsix out of nine gyroscopes failed after being kept atminus-65 degrees for up to two hours; technicians at theSeattle company had to raise the temperature to minus-40before the DC-200 would thaw enough for all the gyros to spinfreely.   Boeing, Northrop and the Air Force all discount thesignificance of cold-temperature tests conducted in thelaboratory. Instead, the companies emphasize that frigid airhas triggered only two failures during hundreds of actualtest flights.   But some wonder how valid the test flights have been.Congressional investigators say the Air Force, apparentlywary of colder temperatures at higher altitudes, has urgedthat the bombers carrying cruise missiles fly at a ceiling ofroughly 32,000 feet. Before the cold-temperature issueerupted, Strategic Air Command crews were authorized to taketheir planes to 50,000 feet.   Further fallout from the cruise-missile imbroglio isimminent. The House Government Operations Committee isplanning its own hearings this fall, examining the missile'scold-temperature track record and whether the Air Forceshould continue to provide new contracts to some Northropdivisions. To continue things as usual with Northrop &quot;createsthe spectacle of the government doing business with the verysame {individuals} who mugged the taxpayers in the firstplace,&quot; says Rep. Frank Horton of New York, the rankingRepublican on the committee.   The General Accounting Office is beginning to try todetermine whether other weapons that use DC-200 mightpossibly be impaired, such as the B-1 bomber and the Harpoonmissile. Significantly, the nextgeneration air-launchedcruise missile doesn't include any fluid in its flight-datatransmitter.   But the most serious repercussion could be on Northrop'sbottom line. Air Force Secretary Donald Rice is currentlyweighing Justice Department suggestions to bar the subsidiarythat made the navigational components from new federalcontracts, say congressional investigators; the unit has beensuspended for the past year. Some prosecutors take theextreme position that the entire corporation should bebarred.   The strangest consequence of all, though, may stem from arecommendation that some midlevel Air Force officials are nowpassing up the chain of command. They want Northrop toreplace the DC-200 fluid in every air-launched cruisemissile. The company has balked, arguing that although thereare lots of fluids on the market that can better withstandcold, such a switch might force other, more complex changesto the missile.   The Air Force, after long dancing around the problem, hastold the General Accounting Office that the move could costas little as $10 million.</TEXT></DOC>