<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900717-0084</DOCNO><DOCID>900717-0084.</DOCID><HL>   Law:   Revco Examiner Appears to Find   Some Basis for Suits by Creditors   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/17/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B6</SO><CO>   RDS</CO><IN>BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)</IN><LP>   Creditors of Revco D.S. Inc. may have grounds to sueformer shareholders and others responsible for Revco's failed$1.25 billion leveraged buy-out, according to a preliminaryreport by a court-appointed special examiner.   In the report filed late yesterday in federal court inAkron, Ohio, Barry L. Zaretsky, the Revco examiner, said itappears the management-led buy-out left the company withinsufficient working capital to continue as a going concern.</LP><TEXT>   Therefore, Mr. Zaretsky wrote, creditors of the company,now in bankruptcy court proceedings, have grounds to sue theselling shareholders, investment bankers and others fordefrauding creditors through a so-called fraudulentconveyance. But he recommended that any such suit bepostponed in hope that a voluntary reorganization plan can beagreed on.   Mr. Zaretsky preliminarily found that projections used tosupport the buy-out group's analysis of the viability of thedeal may not have been properly prepared. And while Mr.Zaretsky wrote that it was still too early to determinewhether Revco was essentially bankrupt immediately after thebuy-out, he said certain indications of insolvency werepresent.   A lawyer for Revco said he couldn't comment because hehadn't yet read the report. Creditors' lawyers couldn't bereached.   Under fraudulent-conveyance law, creditors must prove thatthe selling shareholders or others involved in thetransaction intended to defraud creditors or that the effectof the deal was to leave the company insolvent, unable to payits debt or without enough capital to conduct its business.In some states, a suit can be brought as many as six yearsafter the buy-out occurs. Under the law, anyone involved inthe fraudulent transfer can be held liable.   Fraudulent conveyance laws can be used to attacktransactions of any size, but many bankruptcy lawyers haveargued that the law, which was first adopted by some statesin the U.S. in 1918 and is based on 16th-century Englishcommon law, should not apply to modern business transactionssuch as leveraged buy-outs. In a leveraged buy-out, thepurchase of the company is financed largely by debt that isto be repaid with funds generated by the acquired company'soperations or the sale of its assets. Bankruptcy lawyers saythe law was never intended for such complex transactions.   Mr. Zaretsky's findings may therefore be controversial.&quot;My research suggests that fraudulent conveyance applies toleveraged buy-out deals, that highly aggressiveleveraged-buy-out deals may create significant fraudulentconveyance risks,&quot; Mr. Zaretsky said.   As a result, the report may play a role in how future LBOsare structured. Particularly if the report triggers asuccessful fraudulent conveyance suit in the Revco case,financial institutions may decide to write down loans made tocompanies that took on huge amounts of debt during WallStreet's go-go 1980s.   In many cases corporations financed their own buy-outswith so-called junk or high-yield bonds. As the economy hascooled, or the LBO company hasn't been able to generateenough cash to meet interest payments and other obligations,more and more have sought protection from creditors underChapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code.   Such was the case in July 1988 when Revco, then a2,000-store drugstore chain based in Twinsburg, Ohio, becamethe largest junk bond-financed leveraged buy-out to file forprotection from creditors. Since then Revco hasn't been ableto put together a plan to re-emerge from bankruptcy thatsuits its various debtholders and creditors.   Nonetheless, the report recommends that no litigation becommenced immediately, in hope of stimulating the parties toreach agreement on a reorganization plan. If the debtors donot reach such a plan by November, the report advocatesbringing litigation to avoid the risk of losing the right todo so. According to the report, other actions underconsideration that would have to be brought by the end of1990 include negligence, breach of duties owed to the debtorsand breach of contract. Mr. Zaretsky indicated in the reportthat he is still investigating these issues but that hispreliminary analysis suggests that those actions alone couldreturn millions of dollars to the estates.   In addition, the report determined that the buy-out itselfis not the only fraudulent conveyance action available. Atthe time of the buy-out, nearly $80 million in fees was paidto various professionals and the banks, and, the reportstates, &quot;these may have been grossly disproportionate to thebenefit, if any, received by the debtors.&quot; Mr. Zaretsky saidthat among the professionals who may be liable are lawyers,investment bankers, accountants and appraisers who worked onthe deal, but he said his investigation was not far enoughalong to determine precisely who might be sued.   The report said legal action could be filed against theseparties for recovery of the fees, whether or not the buy-outis attacked. And Mr. Zaretsky wrote that he would considerfiling litigation concerning paydowns, extra interest andsecurity interests granted on the notes and debentures tofacilitate the buy-out even if a reorganization plan isultimately reached.   Under fraudulent-conveyance law, former shareholders ofthe company could be ordered to return the cash they receivedfor their shares. But Mr. Zaretsky indicated in the reportthat he hoped to find a remedy that would not involve suchdisgorgement.   Because the fraudulent conveyance field is stillrelatively new territory in terms of LBOs, Mr. Zaretsky saidhe was still exploring possible remedies. But he said that hehoped to develop theories that, in essence, would reorder thepriority of the estate's debts and make the estate solvent.   Under these theories, unsecured general creditors would bepaid in full with interest, at the expense of parties whocontributed to the fraudulent conveyance.   The report also indicated that liability may extend tocertain members of Revco's former senior management,including Sidney Dworkin, Mark Dworkin and William Edwards,who may have received payments disproportionate to theirstock when they left the company. The report estimated thatthe estate could recover $8 million to $12 million if actionsagainst the men were pursued.   &quot;The report will fuel the flames and induce otherparticipants in LBOs to seek to reverse them,&quot; said JoelWolosky, a lawyer with the New York law firm of Parker ChapinFlattau andamp; Klimpl, who represents a shareholder and twodirectors of Wieboldt Stores Inc. in a fraudulent conveyancesuit involving the store's buy-out.   Mr. Zaretsky, who is a Brooklyn Law School professor andcounsel at the New York law firm of Kelley Drye andamp; Warren,said his report indicates that &quot;in the long run, lenders tohighly aggressive LBO deals will be hurt.&quot;   A lawyer for the banks said he could not comment on thereport because he hadn't yet read it. Lawyers for the tradecreditors and noteholders couldn't be reached for comment.   ---   Gregory Stricharchuk contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>