<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900801-0145</DOCNO><DOCID>900801-0145.</DOCID><HL>   Boat People Prove Their Worth   ----   By Nathan Caplan</HL><DATE>08/01/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   It's that time of year again. The boat people are headingout of Vietnam and putting their lives at risk in hope offinding a safe haven.   But even if they escape the pirates and the perils ofocean travel in unseaworthy vessels, there is no assurancethey will reach their goal. If picked up at sea by merchantor naval vessels, they may not be allowed to disembarkbecause Indonesia, Macao and Singapore will not allow themfirst asylum. If they reach Malaysia or Thailand, they arelikely to be turned away and pushed back to the open sea. Ifthey reach Hong Kong, they face the arbitrary distinctionbetween economic and political deprivation; 90% will be&quot;screened out&quot; as people &quot;merely seeking a better life,&quot; asone British official put it. In consequence, they may be sentback forcibly to Vietnam, a fate many view as worse thandeath.</LP><TEXT>   This pathetic human drama continues, along with theattendant juridical and political nonsense that keepsdesperate people from finding safe harbor. About 194,000Indochinese refugees are languishing in camps in SoutheastAsia because no one will give them a home. Some of them havebeen interned for as long as 10 years.   It is this situation that the U.N.-sponsored conference onrefugees -- a rite of summer as sure as waves of boats fromVietnam -- is considering this week in Geneva. The favored&quot;solution&quot; of many of the convention's participants is toship the boat people back, mostly to Vietnam and againsttheir will if necessary, and to pretend that they are not&quot;real&quot; refugees.   The irony is that just as it has become much moredifficult for boat people to resettle because countrieseverywhere -- including the U.S. -- are cutting their refugeequotas, the boat people who made it have proved their worthas immigrants.   From 1981 to 1986, my colleagues and I conducted alarge-scale study of the economic and social adaptation ofnearly 7,000 boat people, constituting nearly 1,400households across the U.S. The refugees were predominatelyVietnamese and ethnic Chinese from Vietnam; the remainderwere Lao. All had been allowed into the U.S. during the late1970s.   Unlike those airlifted out of Vietnam after the fall ofSaigon in April 1975, this wave of refugees had limitededucation and occupational skills, little or no prior contactwith the West, and endured greater hardship in their effortto flee -- in short, they were much like today's boat people.Only one in 10 knew enough English on arrival to be able tocount or to read street signs and, in terms of materialbelongings, they arrived with nothing. In addition, theyentered the U.S. during its worst recession since the GreatDepression.   Nonetheless, in a few years the adults had foundemployment and climbed out of poverty, while their childrensurprised even experts in refugee resettlement with theirremarkable academic progress. Indeed, little in theirbackgrounds prepared us to expect the great leaps that gavethem parity or better with other Americans in such a briefperiod.   According to our studies, unemployment dropped sharplyfrom almost 90% during the first months of resettlement toabout 15% for those in the U.S. for 3 1/2 years or more. (Thenationwide unemployment rate at the time ran as high as 11%.)According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, today theunemployment rate among all Indochinese -- including theHmong and Cambodians, who have not been as economicallysuccessful as the Vietnamese -- is 8%, against a nationalaverage of 5.3%.   When the unit of analysis is the household instead of theindividual, an even more encouraging picture emerges. Thenumber of jobs per household increased the longer therefugees were in the U.S. By the end of three years, therewere about as many -- 42% -- two-job households as one-jobhomes. After three years, almost 85% of all households had atleast one person working, and half of those had two. This wasbecause with few exceptions, the first parent who could finda job took it and the other spouse entered the labor force assoon as the youngest child reached school age. The steadyincrease in the percentage of multiple-job households is themain reason for the boat people's consistent economicimprovement.   The boat people in the U.S. for four months or less earnedonly 46% of the poverty-level standard. By their 40th month,however, the 1,400 households studied were earning an averageof 171% of the poverty standard, or about $1,400 per monthper household ($16,800 a year). That still falls short ofmiddle-class comfort, but it is adequate to meet basic needsand to attain a reasonable standard of living.   And remember, the boat people achieved this during thelate 1970s and early 1980s, when the U.S. was in a recession,and unemployment and poverty levels were rising. During thesehard times, the boat people not only survived, but improvedtheir economic status.   Equally remarkable is the scholastic achievement of therefugee children. Although in the U.S. for an average of lessthan three years at the time of our study, and with virtuallyno English skills upon arrival, four out of five of thechildren attained a very high (A or B) overall grade-pointaverage, compared with about 27% of American children as awhole. In general, the school grades for the Indochineserefugee children were highest in courses with no languagecomponent. For example, almost half -- 47% -- earned an A inmath.   School administrators across the country reported that therefugee children excelled in their schoolwork not only in anabsolute sense, but also when compared to their non-refugeecohorts. Said one superintendent of a city school system,&quot;These children are hard-striving and eager to learn.Teachers feel rewarded to have them, even in overcrowdedclassrooms.&quot;   The administrators often referred to the boat children'soverrepresentation among valedictorians to underscore thepoint. For example, in Garden Grove, Calif., in 1985 theIndochinese refugee community made up less than 20% of theschool population, yet 12 of the 14 high schoolvaledictorians were of Indochinese refugee background.Finally, conversations with administrators and examination oftranscripts revealed virtually no suspensions, drug use, orserious misconduct among the children of the boat people.   In view of the time the boat people spent in refugeecamps, the disruption of life, and their lack of English andtransferable job skills, their economic and educationalattainments are stunning. To a surprising degree the boatpeople have achieved a high level of control over theirdestiny -- something that cannot be said of their compatriotsin Vietnam.   What is done about a problem depends on how it is defined.In Hong Kong, which suffers both a labor shortage and a braindrain, the boat people themselves -- not the country theyhave fled -- have been fingered as the problem. That was theprinciple behind the June 1988 decision by Hong Kong'sBritish authorities to institute a screening process thatcould discern the supposed difference between &quot;economicmigrants&quot; and &quot;political refugees.&quot;   Screening has changed the way refugees are treated notonly in Southeast Asia, but world-wide. Refugees are becomingregarded as a social malignancy, instead of as victims. Inregard to the boat people, it seems paradoxical that suchgross injustice should be applied at a time when many nationscould take them in. The U.S. and much of Western Europe, forexample, bemoan the shortage of labor and the failure oftheir own citizenry to show the energy and dedication neededfor an achieving society -- the very attributes that the boatpeople have demonstrated by their success in the U.S.   The boat people have proved that they are solid,productive citizens, even under difficult circumstances. TheGeneva conference should note that the way to solve the&quot;problem&quot; of the boat people is to get them out of the campsand into societies where they can get on with their lives.   ---   Mr. Caplan, a professor of psychology at the University ofMichigan, is co-author of &quot;The Boat People and Achievement inAmerica&quot; (University of Michigan Press, 1989).</TEXT></DOC>