<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910725-0126</DOCNO><DOCID>910725-0126.</DOCID><HL>   No Exit:   Saddam's Popularity   Reaches Rock Bottom   As Iraq's Woes Grow   ---   In Baghdad, Jokes Are Heard   About Ruler's Manhood;   Some Ask One More Bomb   ---   Still, No One to Oust Him   ----   By Tony Horwitz   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/25/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><IN>ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><NS>NUCLEAR POWER, ENERGY (NUK)</NS><RE>IRAQ (IZ)MIDDLE EAST (ML)NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   BAGHDAD, Iraq -- The hottest video in town this week is achoppy pirate called &quot;Asifat al-Sah'ra&quot; -- Arabic for &quot;DesertStorm.&quot; Smuggled from Saudi Arabia and spread quietly amongfriends, the video replays Western news footage of thebombing of Baghdad, the abbreviated ground campaign and Gen.Norman Schwarzkopf's press briefings.   For Iraqis, it's a melancholy show, especially the ending.&quot;America came all this way to liberate Kuwait,&quot; a collegestudent laments, &quot;but did nothing to liberate us.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Postwar Iraq has the trapped, anguished air of a ruinedmarriage that one partner refuses to end. Many Iraqis havestopped watching television because they can no longer bearSaddam Hussein's face. They curse him as &quot;muka'ab shaytan,&quot; aphrase meaning &quot;triple devil.&quot; And they seize on wild rumorsof deliverance: Saddam Hussein has fled to Brazil, SaddamHussein has brain cancer.   But one savior always is absent from Iraqis' wishfulthinking: the Iraqis themselves. While the West may hope thatsanctions will force President Hussein from power, Iraqisaren't sanguine. The army has been purged of suspecteddissidents, the regime pumped full of loyalists. And one sidestill has almost all the guns.   Nonetheless, the Baghdad rumor mill shows how shallow theIraqi ruler's power base has become. With the economy inruins, he has no carrot to offer his people, only his stick;even his Sunni Arab clansmen are deserting him. Traditionalmalcontents, the Kurds and Shiites, are seething. And thefear of allied attack remains. Besieged from without, androtting from within, Saddam Hussein's regime has nowhere togo but down.   The past week's events underscore its insecurity. OnFriday, taxis with flagdraped coffins on their roofs spedsouth from Kurdistan, bearing Iraqi soldiers. Kurds seizedthe city of Suleimaniya and took 2,000 prisoners, a toll thathints at low army morale.   Headed north to join the fray, a young Republican Guardstops to sip tea at a roadside stall. &quot;We are tired andpoor,&quot; he confides. &quot;And for what? So I can be killed bycrazy Kurds?&quot;   The Shiite south also was tense last weekend as the armybraced for unrest at the end of a religious holiday. Roadsinto Baghdad were closed at midnight, machine gunemplacements sprouted atop government buildings and pricestripled as panicked citizens hoarded food. Talk of renewedallied military action has added to the tension, withthousands fleeing to Jordan.   Saddam Hussein appears able to weather this latest crisis.But each flare-up punctures his already-riddled image as theeternal and omnipotent leader. For a reporter on his seventhvisit to Baghdad, the irreverence of Iraqis is astonishing.In a land where insulting the president is a capital offense,Iraqis now tell what they call &quot;hanging jokes&quot; about SaddamHussein's vanity, mother and manhood.   At a Tigris-side teahouse, TV viewers chortle as SaddamHussein threatens to repel any Western attack. &quot;What will heshoot with?&quot; one quips. &quot;A squirt pistol?&quot; While remainingfearful of secret police (critics of the regime still askthat their names not be used), Iraqis &quot;don't glance into thebushes for hidden microphones anymore,&quot; says a Baghdadengineer. &quot;We are too fed up to keep quiet.&quot;   Despite 43 days of allied air attack, Iraqis aresurprisingly welcoming to Americans. At one crowded shop, theproprietor yells, &quot;Tell Mr. Bush to come back and finish hisbusiness]&quot; At another, a merchant proudly displays anAmerican ration called a meal-ready-to-eat, a fond memento ofhis capture by Marines in Kuwait. Even in the homes ringingthe Baghdad bomb shelter where 300 civilians died in an airraid, the mood is subdued. &quot;I am bitter at Bush for makingthis mistake,&quot; says one man, whose two siblings were trappedin the shelter. &quot;But I am angrier at Saddam for giving theU.S. an excuse to bomb us.&quot;   Such views mark a dramatic shift for Sunni Arabs, roughly15% of Iraq's people and the ruling clique to which SaddamHussein belongs. Sunnis have long supported the regime, or atleast tolerated it, because President Hussein deliveredprosperity, and protection from a much-feared Shiitemajority. Many Sunnis also rallied to his call for a strongIraq heading a revivified Arab nation.   But with the Kuwait debacle, Saddam Hussein has buriedboth dreams -- of power and prosperity -- and many Sunnis noware turning against him as if they were personally betrayed.Typical is a wounded war veteran who says he used to hang onthe president's every word. Now he feels mocked whenever hehears Saddam Hussein. &quot;It is all lies,&quot; he says, angrilyturning off his car radio. &quot;It reminds me what a fool I wasto ever support this man.&quot;   Before the invasion of Kuwait, Saddam Hussein managed toinsulate Iraq's middle class from his military adventures.His regime employed roughly a third of the work force inundemanding state jobs and showered the families of war&quot;martyrs&quot; with free cars and plots of land. Now, inflationforces state workers to seek other jobs. Families of thosekilled in Kuwait say they get only 60 dinars a month incompensation, enough to buy a few kilos of beef. Even ifsanctions are eased, Iraq faces a dire economic future: anestimated $80 billion in foreign debt, war reparations toKuwait totaling perhaps 30% of its oil earnings, and amassive reconstruction bill.   &quot;We have oil, we have the Fertile Crescent,&quot; says agovernment clerk, peddling vegetables at night to supplementhis salary. &quot;So why are we living like dogs?&quot;   Many Sunnis also are demoralized by the prospect ofunending civil strife. In March, revolt flared in 12 ofIraq's 18 provinces. Beyond Baghdad and the surrounding smallSunni heartland, Iraq remains a garrison state. The roadsouth, to the holy Shiite cities of Kerbala and Najaf, is aheavily guarded wasteland.   Peasants forage for date fronds among miles of blastedpalm groves, felled by the army to deny cover to fleeingrebels. Kerbala is filled with shattered homes, scorchedoffices, and shops peppered with gunfire. All the Saddamportraits here are new, as are the city officials -- grimevidence of the savage revenge taken by rebels, who hangedofficials four by four in the central mosque, where nooses ofelectrical cord still dangle from the ceiling and bloody palmprints still decorate the walls.   The army was equally brutal in suppressing the revolt,scarring a community that was already the most put-upon inIraq. While Sunnis often can buy their way out of front-lineduty, Shiites have been cannon fodder in two wars that manydidn't support. Thousands more have been executed orimprisoned for opposing the regime. Now, Shiites speak darklyof mass graves into which the army bulldozed thousands ofcivilians killed in March.   These days, the south is sullen and silent, bruised by theboot of the Baghdad regime. Released Shiite prisonersdescribe grisly scenes of execution and torture, with badlybeaten men made to lick their own blood from prison walls.   The regime remains fearful of revolt. In Shiite areas ofBaghdad, where riots flared in March, residents have beenordered to take down mourning flags. During the recent Shiiteholiday of Ashura, the state banned any mention in Najaf orKerbala mosques of the 7th-century martyr Hussein, whomShiites revere as a symbol of struggle against authority. Thearmy also has encircled the southern marshlands, wherethousands of rebels and refugees still are believed to behiding out.   Shiites say it's unlikely they can mount much oppositionsoon; most of those inclined to rebel have fled or beenkilled, and house-to-house searches have cleared the south ofguns.   But few doubt the region will eventually explode. Wageshere are half what they are in Baghdad, and war damage muchmore severe. In March, army tanks ripped holes in Shiites'holiest mosques -- an act roughly akin to Italian tanksshelling the Vatican. They also leveled some of the Najafcemetery where most Shiite war dead are buried. In apparentrepentance, Saddam Hussein is rapidly refurbishing themosques and their shattered gold domes. But even secularShiites in Baghdad say he has ruined any hope of winningShiite allegiance. &quot;Every Shiite family in Iraq now has abill to settle with Saddam,&quot; says a doctor whose uncle andcousins, killed in the Iran-Iraq war, have had their gravesbulldozed.   Shiites also will be slow to forgive America. One Najafman tells of listening nonstop to the Voice of America, whichhe felt urged Iraqis to wage an &quot;intifada&quot; against theregime. But when the uprising came, U.S. troops in the southstood by as the army &quot;mowed us down like wheat.&quot; Like manyIraqis, he believes America is &quot;master of the world,&quot; able tokill Saddam Hussein any time it wishes. The only reason ithasn't, he and most Iraqis believe, is that there is aconspiracy between George Bush and Saddam Hussein: the latterleft free to oppress Iraqis in exchange for abandoning hisregional ambitions. &quot;How else can we explain what happened?&quot;he asks.   Shiites also feel betrayed by the Kurds. Before the war,leaders of the two groups pledged cooperation. Now, Kurdshave cut a separate peace with Baghdad, even supporting newlaws that exclude Shiites -- 60% of Iraqis -- from formingpolitical parties. The reason, Kurdish leaders say, is thatthey suspect Shiites want an Islamic Iraq, linked to Iran,rather than democracy.   Kurds already are reaping the fruits of their oddbedfellowship with Baghdad. While Iraqi tanks line roads andfields in the north, as in the south, it is the Kurds whohave de facto control in the towns. In Irbil, Kurdistan'scapital, Pesh Merga fighters patrol the streets, rifles ontheir shoulders and grenades on their belts. The souk is acurious orgy of formerly forbidden items. There are no Saddampictures here, only photocopied death notices of Kurdishmartyrs plastered on every wall. Vendors peddle smuggledgoods from Iran and Turkey, including contraceptive pills,banned by Baghdad.   At his tape shop, Ihsan Rahman shows the crude tatoo hecarved on his arm while awaiting execution in prison forpolitical crimes. He wrote his name and that of his brother,so his sibling could identify his body if his face wasmangled. Instead, he is now free, selling Kurdish protesttapes. On the wall of his shop, he has replaced theonce-obligatory Saddam photo with one of the Kurdish leader,Masoud Barzani.   But like many Kurds, he fears this freedom won't last. Along-awaited formal pact with Baghdad, giving Kurds autonomy,still hasn't been signed. &quot;Saddam will say wait and wait, andthen bring his soldiers again,&quot; he says. A few blocks fromhis shop, the street is blanketed with bullet shells. The daybefore, a protest by Kurds impatient for change escalatedinto a shootout with Iraqi soldiers, leaving 33 dead. Muchfiercer fighting erupted the next day in Suleimaniya, whereKurdish guerrillas remain in control.   Most Kurds are weary of war, and even a full-scale revoltin the north wouldn't be likely to threaten Baghdad. SaddamHussein survived a two-front civil war in March, when hisarmy was in disarray, in part because he is deft at usingcivil strife to rally his dwindling supporters. Many SunniArabs, as well as Christians (who number about 600,000), feara Lebanon-style bloodbath if the Baghdad regime unravels. Thekilling of officials by Kurds and Shiites in March was astark reminder to party and army insiders that if SaddamHussein goes, they go with him.   Iraqis also don't put much faith in a palace coup. Even ifa senior general or party official managed to seize power,Saddam Hussein has so molded the state in his image that asuccessor would have trouble filling his shoes. &quot;There is noreal Baath Party, there is no real government,&quot; says aBaghdad academic. &quot;There is only one man.&quot;   That man could be the likeliest agent of his own demise.Saddam Hussein shows every sign of remaining recklessly outof touch with reality. His hide-and-seek game with Iraq'snuclear materials has been eerily reminiscent of the longrun-up to the Gulf War. He has delayed and dissembled, andcalled on a now-deaf Arab nation to rally behind him.   Foreign diplomats had assumed that he would cede somepower to placate Iraqis. But apart from a few hollowgestures, Saddam Hussein has only drawn the reins tighter. Hedismayed Iraqis last week with a Revolution Day speech thatmerely rehashed Zionist and imperialist conspiracies.   In Baghdad, meanwhile, the airwaves are filled with stockpropaganda that even many government officials now findembarrassing: singers and poets praising Saddam Hussein asthe &quot;sun and the moon, the water of the two rivers.&quot; TheKuwait conflict -- now known in newspapers as the &quot;Attack onIraq by America and its criminal gang&quot; -- has been recast asa victory in which &quot;Iraq foiled the U.S.-led aggression.&quot;   &quot;It's as if the Gulf War never happened,&quot; says one foreignambassador. &quot;We've got the same old Saddam -- arrogant,ambitious and inflexible.&quot;   With so many issues still unresolved, the Iraqi ruler hasample chance to misplay his cards, provoking a coup,insurrection or renewal of Western military action. Iraqisexpect the latter, with a mix of hope and dread. Recallingthe air war, a Baghdad merchant says, &quot;we were bombed but wewere happy. We thought it would be an end to our misery.&quot;   It wasn't, but the merchant remains optimistic. Drawingthe shutters on his shop, he takes out a video of DesertStorm and shares the newest Baghdad rumor: Allied planes arecoming at the end of the week, this time to take out SaddamHussein.</TEXT></DOC>