<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900726-0071</DOCNO><DOCID>900726-0071.</DOCID><HL>   Computer Glitch:   Venture-Capital Star,   Kleiner Perkins, Flops   As a Maker of Laptops   ---   It Raised Cash for Dynabook   But Made a Host of Errors   In Trying to Operate It   ---   The `Rent-a-Company' Image   ----   By G. Pascal Zachary   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>07/26/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   UIS</CO><IN>COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><LP>   PALO ALTO, Calif. -- Kleiner Perkins Caufield andamp; Byers,perhaps the nation's most prestigious high-techventure-capital group, is being haunted by the ghost of a newmachine.   Kleiner Perkins isn't a likely victim. It has helpedlaunch scores of high-tech companies, including such majornames as Genentech, Tandem, Lotus, Compaq and Sun, and hasflouted venture-capital conventions. Unlike most investingoutfits, which finance ideas brought to them, Kleiner Perkinsis an entrepreneur factory. It often finances its partners'own ideas and then lets them staff the new companies.</LP><TEXT>   One of those ideas developed into Dynabook TechnologiesCorp., a laptop-computer maker. Founded in 1987 by VinodKhosla and L. John Doerr, Dynabook had all the makings of aclassic Kleiner Perkins triumph.   The two Kleiner Perkins partners are among the savviesthigh-tech risktakers. Mr. Khosla, 35, co-founded two sizablehigh-tech companies before turning 30; one was SunMicrosystems Inc., now the world's largest maker of computerworkstations. Mr. Doerr, 39, helped finance and plot strategyfor both Sun and Compaq Computer Corp., another runaway hit.He also helped stitch together Symantec Corp., now a largesoftware company.   &quot;They are the supermen of Silicon Valley,&quot; says DaveWiner, a Menlo Park, Calif., software entrepreneur.   And Dynabook's new machine was their brainchild. It was tobe a slim, stylish but powerful laptop computer that theyhoped would help them create another big company. Mr. Khoslaand Mr. Doerr, both with advanced degrees in engineering andcomputer science, conceived of the machine themselves. Then,they hired outsiders to design it, a contractor to make itand managers to sell it. They also raised $37 million overthree years, making Dynabook one of the best-financedcomputer start-ups.   Also top-drawer were the investors. They included PierreLamond, who has backed many successful chip companies, andMarc Rossi, a Prudential Insurance unit's venture capitalistwho financed the extraordinarily fast-growing ConnerPeripherals Inc. Mr. Khosla invested $3 million of his ownmoney, plus $8 million from Kleiner Perkins.   Despite this endowment, Dynabook has staggered along,crippled by a remarkable string of mistakes. Its originaldesign flopped. Its manufacture was botched. And itsmanagement was fragmented and confused even though led by DanH. Wilkie, who helped to launch International BusinessMachines Corp.'s original personal computer. For nearly twoyears, for instance, Dynabook relied on consultants andoutside contractors rather than hiring a full-timeengineering chief. The temporaries hampered recruiting bymaking Dynabook look like &quot;a rent-a-company,&quot; says Russ Bik,a former Dynabook executive.   In the months before Dynabook's problems came to a head,it pulled some questionable stunts. Its board fired Mr.Wilkie just before the official product roll-out but, for theevent, had him masquerade as chief executive. By early thisyear, Dynabook could keep going only with the help of$500,000 from a landlord so eager to fill an empty buildingthat he didn't notice his tenant was crumbling.   Today, Dynabook is a shell, its staff reduced to about 28from a high of 140. Its assets -- including a fresh designfor a laptop with a color screen -- are on the selling block,with Unisys Corp. the most likely buyer at the moment. &quot;Ourgoal is to get a substantial portion of the investors' moneyback,&quot; says a chastened Mr. Khosla. But people close to thedeal with Unisys, which confirms it has struck &quot;an agreementof intention to purchase&quot; Dynabook, say the sale will yieldonly about $5 million.   Kleiner Perkins's mishandling of Dynabook lends ammunitionto critics of its practice -- avoided by many venturepartnerships -- of hiring professional managers for venturesdreamed up by its partners. Even Eugene Kleiner, itsnow-retired co-founder, agrees it is hard to tell when hiredmanagers have the requisite passion for a venture because &quot;ifyou make {it} tempting enough, everyone becomes anentrepreneur.&quot;   Dynabook's fall also suggests that, with high techincreasingly dominated by global companies, venturecapitalists probably won't, anytime soon, reap the bonanzascommon a decade ago. And it makes it clear thatentrepreneurs, not venture capitalists, are crucial toforging companies. Dynabook got into trouble because &quot;itdidn't have {that} entrepreneur,&quot; says Scott Metcalf, now itspresident. &quot;It relied on a professional team that came in toexecute someone else's ideas.&quot;   Mr. Doerr insists, however, that some of Dynabook's hiredmanagers did have an entrepreneurial stake, and he doesn'tsee any special lessons in its problems. &quot;This is the one infour deals that fails,&quot; he simply declares.   From the start, the Achilles' heel of Dynabook was itstechnology. Mr. Doerr struck a deal with Nara TechnologiesCorp., a San Jose, Calif., firm, to design the laptop. ToddMorgenthaler, Nara's president, told Mr. Doerr that he hadfigured out a way to produce on a single piece of silicon themain circuitry of IBM's PC AT, then its flagship personalcomputer. Even today, producing such a design is difficult,but the benefits are lower manufacturing costs and lowerpower consumption, both big pluses for a new laptop.Impressed, Mr. Doerr made Mr. Morgenthaler an offer: BuildDynabook's laptop and receive continuing fees from afive-year development contract, a seat on the company's boardand a roughly 25% stake in the company.   Mr. Morgenthaler accepted. In the spring of 1987, Naralaunched into the electronics. By year end, Dynabook wantedto have a working prototype by mid-May 1988, with theproduct's introduction at the mammoth Comdex trade show inLas Vegas that fall.   But the plan unraveled. Mr. Morgenthaler became distractedby a brother dying of cancer. Nara couldn't complete avideo-graphics device that controls the laptop's displayscreen; Dynabook had to buy it elsewhere. Nara's single-chipdesign and a so-called glue chip that was to hold togetherthe circuitry never worked, either. Dynabook scrappedvirtually all of the work Nara did during some 18 months.   In the end, &quot;everything {Nara supplied} had to be redone,&quot;says Joseph Sarubbi, who designed IBM's highly successful PCXT and joined Dynabook full time in January 1989 as chiefengineer.   Although Mr. Morgenthaler concedes he faced unexpecteddifficulties, he says Nara's designs would have worked ifonly Mr. Doerr had given him more time. But in early 1989,Nara was essentially dismissed, he says, adding: &quot;I wastreated like hired help.&quot;   That wasn't the end of Dynabook's design troubles,however. After introducing the laptop in July 1989, Dynabookdiscovered a problem with the power supply. Then, aftermanufacturing began, scores of small but irritating designerrors turned up, forcing many revisions. &quot;The number ofchanges was far greater at that point in the productionprocess than you would have expected,&quot; says Mr. Bik, whooversaw Dynabook's materials and facilities for eight monthsin 1989.   The final blow came last fall. After the computer had beenshipped to dealers, its Japanese-made screen proveddefective. &quot;Customers didn't see a perfect display -- theysaw problems,&quot; says Mr. Khosla, who calls these defects&quot;pivotal.&quot;   Besides the technical glitches, the company's topexecutives, hand-picked by Mr. Doerr and Mr. Khosla, failedto deliver.   At the heart of the team was Mr. Wilkie, famous for thesuccess of IBM's PC. After leaving IBM, he oversaw TandonCorp.'s entry into the PC field but left Tandon when thatbusiness hit the skids. To Mr. Wilkie, Dynabook was a chanceto run another fast-growing computer company. Mr. Doerr andMr. Khosla talked of first-year sales reaching $100 million,and they told him not to worry about engineering, that Narawas handling it. In late 1987, he joined Dynabook as chiefexecutive.   For four or five months, Mr. Wilkie worked alone. He thenhired a half-dozen consultants, mainly former Tandonexecutives, and opened an office near his home in SouthernCalifornia, an hour's flight from Nara's offices. By then,Dynabook still hadn't hired its first engineer, but Mr.Wilkie was relying on Nara and, anyway, he was busy trying toraise money. That &quot;took away my attention from the business,&quot;he recalls.   Dynabook was initially funded in September 1987 with $1.8million, mostly from Kleiner Perkins. The next June, SequoiaCapital, Mr. Lamond's firm, led a $9 million round offinancing, but the money was contingent upon Mr. Wilkie'smeeting certain milestones every six weeks. It wasnerve-racking. &quot;I was within one to two weeks of not meetingpayroll four times,&quot; Mr. Wilkie recalls. &quot;You slept with youreyeballs open a great deal.&quot;   Meanwhile, Mr. Wilkie argued regularly over thequalifications for Dynabook's first senior engineeringexecutive. Mr. Wilkie wanted an expert in systems; Mr. Doerrfought for a specialist in chips. &quot;For about six months, wewent through an exasperating search,&quot; Mr. Wilkie says.   Company directors say such issues exaggerated the weakpoints of Mr. Wilkie, who they say is more comfortablerunning a large organization and delegating sticky problemsto others. &quot;He's the type of manager who feels spending moneyis the way to solve a problem,&quot; Mr. Lamond, a director, says.   For instance, Mr. Wilkie funded numerous duplicateprojects, particularly in engineering. He argues that theprojects were needed as &quot;backups&quot; to Nara's work, but Mr.Lamond insists that a cannier executive would have conservedcash by sorting out Nara's problems.   Another alleged shortcoming: Mr. Wilkie gave in tooreadily to his executives' whims. He allowed MichaelShabazian, who persuaded ComputerLand Corp. to sell theuntested Dynabook laptop, to work out of an office near hishome in Pleasonton, Calif., an hour from Dynabook'sheadquarters. He also allowed Mr. Sarubbi to maintain hisprimary residence in Florida even after becoming permanentengineering chief. (Mr. Wilkie says the only way to hire thetwo men was to permit such arrangements. He adds that heplanned to consolidate Dynabook's operations &quot;at somepoint.&quot;)   Even in the area of manufacturing, his specialty at IBM,Mr. Wilkie slipped. To build Dynabook, he hired SCI SystemsInc., a contract manufacturer in Huntsville, Ala., that hehad worked with while at Big Blue. Besides trusting SCI'sexecutives, Mr. Wilkie says he chose SCI because it advancedDynabook a multimillion-dollar credit line.   But relying on a distant manufacturer proved troublesomewhen the laptop's design was being revised. Strangely, SCIhad a plant near San Jose, but Mr. Wilkie didn't use itbecause it was too small to handle anticipated volumes.   That arrangement, which SCI won't discuss, later hurtDynabook. SCI had such a hard time building the computer,partly because of numerous design changes, that &quot;we were notconfident enough in SCI's outgoing quality to send theproducts directly to customers,&quot; Mr. Bik says. &quot;So, all unitswere coming to California, and we were testing them again.&quot;   While SCI was ramping up production, Mr. Wilkie, everhedging his bets, was paying a consultant $20,000 todetermine the best location to build the product.   Mr. Wilkie also signed a contract giving SCI the right totack its profit margin on top of its costs. Dynabookexecutives say the deal gave SCI little incentive to holddown costs. But Eugene Sapp, SCI's president disagrees,saying he insisted on the proviso because he anticipated someof the production snafus that lay ahead. From the beginning,he says, &quot;the product was not mass-producible&quot; becauseDynabook tried to pack &quot;too many technical innovations&quot; intoit.   In the midst of all this, Mr. Wilkie's spirit wasflagging. In March 1989 -- just as Dynabook was about toclose on $11 million in new venture money -- he wasapproached by an executive recruiter seeking to interest himin a position at Apple Computer Inc. Mr. Wilkie was curious,but before pursuing the post he went to Mr. Khosla and Mr.Doerr. &quot;They both, without exception, indicated how thecompany would fall apart if I left,&quot; says Mr. Wilkie, whodecided to stay put. (Mr. Khosla denies this. &quot;I neverencouraged Dan to stay. That's nonsense,&quot; he says.)   Three months later, Mr. Wilkie was out of a job. At aboard meeting June 8, Mr. Khosla was installed as president,though Mr. Wilkie got until July 15 to arrange his departureterms. Indeed, his exit was a condition of further venturefunding; the directors even turned down his offer to go toHuntsville for three months to sort out manufacturingglitches. &quot;We invested in Dan Wilkie, and we made a mistake,a terrible mistake,&quot; Mr. Lamond says.   In his defense, Mr. Wilkie insists he was betrayed byMessrs. Khosla and Doerr, saddled with a botched product andforced to embrace a series of quick fixes, rather thanfundamental changes, to keep Dynabook's doors open. Afterhitting serious problems, &quot;we continued to measure progressin six-week increments . . . instead of saying what can bedone in six months,&quot; Mr. Wilkie says. &quot;But each time I saidthat, Khosla and Doerr said, `In that case, Dynabook is goingto crash and burn.'&quot;   The timing of Mr. Wilkie's departure was bad, however.With Dynabook planning to introduce its long-delayed computerin less than two weeks, news that he had been fired couldonly detract from its debut. So, Mr. Khosla, Mr. Doerr andDynabook's other directors decided to lie about Mr. Wilkie'sstatus to the press, industry analysts and Dynabook's ownemployees. And Mr. Wilkie played along, portraying his roleat Dynabook as important and touting the company's prospects.   As Mr. Wilkie's fate was being decided, Mr. Shabazian,Dynabook's second-ranking executive, flew to Philadelphia.The next day, Mr. Shabazian accepted a job as chief operatingofficer of Intelligent Electronics, a national computerretailer. &quot;John {Doerr} was trying to put the squeeze on meto stay,&quot; Mr. Shabazian says. &quot;He didn't need two of his keyguys to leave at once.&quot; Mr. Shabazian announced his ownresignation at Dynabook's product introduction on June 20 inNew York.   Mr. Wilkie says he kept quiet about his firing to spareDynabook further embarrassment -- and to help him obtain aseverance package that would pay him $15,000 a month fornearly a year. He also says he thought he could persuadeDynabook's board to reverse its decision or at least make hisexit &quot;more controlled.&quot;   That was wishful thinking. Soon, Dynabook's employeeslearned of the situation. &quot;I found out at the {product}announcement that they'd let Dan go -- I was shocked,&quot; Mr.Sarubbi says. &quot;In my mind, you don't wait until announcementtime to terminate somebody.&quot;   Mr. Khosla admits Dynabook's board erred in not disclosingMr. Wilkie's departure straightaway. &quot;That's probably ourmistake,&quot; he says. But &quot;it should have been clear to people,&quot;he argues, that Mr. Wilkie's days were numbered when he, Mr.Khosla, assumed the presidency.   With Mr. Wilkie gone -- he now is president of SolbourneComputer Inc., a private company in Longmont, Colo. -- Mr.Doerr and Mr. Khosla felt the full weight of Dynabook'sproblems. They hustled in a new cast of executives, but eventhe new people were mystified as to how the two renownedventure capitalists could have let Dynabook slip so badly.&quot;Because I had worked with Doerr and Khosla at othercompanies, I was amazed that they would allow this to occur,&quot;Mr. Bik says.   Even worse, the company was again running out of money.Mr. Doerr and Mr. Khosla were hunting for prospectiveinvestors as well as employees. In September, they collected$7 million from a half-dozen venture firms, including $3million from Prudential's venture arm. Montgomery Securitieskicked in $1 million; so did Goldman Sachs, which only sixmonths earlier had invested $4 million in Dynabook.   None of the September investors would comment on theirdecision to invest in Dynabook, but people familiar withtheir thinking say they were swayed by Mr. Khosla's and Mr.Doerr's optimism. That wasn't idle chatter. Kleiner Perkinsadded $3 million to the deal, and Mr. Khosla personallyplunked down $1.1 million.   Investors also were influenced by the involvement of JamesLally, who was known for his ability to turn aroundcompanies. Mr. Lally became Dynabook's chief operatingofficer in June.   But to the investors' disappointment, Mr. Lally was activein Dynabook for only a short time after the financing wasclosed. (He couldn't be reached for comment.) Mr. Khosladecided to ship Dynabook's laptop in November, but by thenCompaq had unveiled a new portable that was winning raves.   The ComputerLand dealers, who had signed on months earlierto sell Dynabooks, were gloomy. &quot;All of our {salespeople}were trained, but by the time we got the product, people hadlost interest in it,&quot; says Jeffrey Inwood, who has fourComputerLand stores in Michigan.   And then Mr. Khosla left the daily running of the companyin order to attend to other investments. Replacing him wasBernard Lacroute, another Kleiner Perkins staffer who hadrecently left Sun, where he had been the second-rankingexecutive. Mr. Lacroute, himself a temporary, hired Harold L.&quot;Sparky&quot; Sparks, also between jobs, to launch a new marketingcampaign. Mr. Sparks spent much of Dynabook's remaining cashon a blitz of television commercials.   It was Dynabook's last gasp. Few customers wanted thelaptop; those that did were put off by the newly discovereddefects in its screen. Mr. Lacroute decided to stop sellingthe laptop and concentrate on designing future machines fromscratch.   Even then, however, Mr. Khosla and Mr. Doerr were able toraise more money for Dynabook. On Dec. 7, they obtained $3million from the Economic Development Board of Singapore.Though Dynabook was within days of missing its payroll, theSingaporeans believed their involvement &quot;would enableDynabook to have access to cost-competitive manufacturing inSingapore and to expand its marketing into Europe and the FarEast,&quot; says Kris Leong, an executive at the agency.   Although some observers think the Singaporeans weremisled, Mr. Khosla says they &quot;were given a clear indicationof Dynabook's condition.&quot; Ms. Leong agrees, saying her agencywas well aware of Dynabook's &quot;high risks.&quot;   Yet when the agency's representative discovered just howhigh those risks were, he wasn't amused. Attending his firstboard meeting Dec. 19, Lit-Cheong Chong snapped, &quot;We Far EastAsian investors aren't here to be milked.&quot;   And in January, Dynabook's future landlord forked over$500,000 in much-needed cash -- not as an investment but asan inducement for Dynabook to move into a new office (whichit vacated July 1). On Feb. 13, Mr. Lacroute laid off most ofDynabook's workers. Then, in May, Unisys, which wants tobuild Dynabook's color laptop, advanced the company enoughmoney to meet its payroll, and it chipped in further cash inJuly when it agreed to consider buying the company. Now, ateam of Unisys executives are deciding whether to complete apurchase of Dynabook, scutinizing the company's operationsand, says a Unisys spokesman, &quot;looking for any skeletons inthe closets.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>