<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ911015-0122</DOCNO><DOCID>911015-0122.</DOCID><HL>   Letters to the Editor:   Call to Glory Answered in Tears</HL><DATE>10/15/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A23</SO><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><RE>NORTH AMERICA (NME)UNITED STATES (US)</RE><LP>   This is in response to &quot;Gulf War Casualty&quot; (page one,Sept. 10, by Robert Johnson and Caleb Solomon), about ArmyLt. Col. Ralph Hayles, who was disciplined for killing twoAmerican soldiers with a missile during a night engagement inDesert Storm. Twenty years ago in Tay Ninh Province, Vietnam,a young artillery forward observer made, like Col. Hayles,the best decision he could under the circumstances of themoment. Within seconds a platoon of American infantrymen weredead or dying. I was 1,000 meters away, thank God, with myown platoon, but arrived minutes later. West Point hadneglected to prepare me for what I found.   Messrs. Johnson and Solomon brought the scene back for metonight -- the shock was still fresh.</LP><TEXT>   We are all victimized by Hollywood's concept of war. Eventhe professional warriors among us find it difficult toignore the sirens' song of glory and honor. Georgians livingin Sherman's path 130 years ago knew war firsthand, butAmericans as a nation have been protected by geography,strength and luck from experiencing war's reality. Millionshave worn uniforms and served with distinction in manycritically important ways, but only a small portion of thoseuniforms ever reeked of gunpowder or were splattered byfriends' gore. And combat veterans from every war are alwaysthe last to voluntarily discuss the subject. So how is thepublic to know about real war?   I wept while reading of Col. Hayle's terrible mistake. Iwept for the men he killed, for the men I watched dying anddead that morning so long ago, and for Ralph Hayles. There isnothing about war that isn't connected to tears and sorrow;but there remain things worse than war and sorrow, and if wedon't keep that fact in mind then we are reacting wrongly andmaking this tragedy even worse.   If Col. Hayles, a professional warrior, the pride of themost demanding military training system on earth, fired thoseHellfires trying to kill what he thought was his enemy beforethe enemy killed him or other Americans nearby, then he isblameless. He is blameless because he erred while trying todo what we sent him to do, and that is part of war's terriblecalculus. If you truly hate it, America, figure out analternative then sell the idea to the rest of the world. Butuntil you do, don't allow fratricide to persuade you thatthere is something inherently wrong with your fighting men.   There is exquisite, agonizing irony in the horror thatseems to increase geometrically as we equip ourselves betterand become more proficient at warfare. Some would saybroadcasting the horror as you did in your story ispointless. I think it was proper because it glossed overaccusations and, rather, dwelt on the sheer, unalterablesadness.   Jeffery Donaldson   Fayetteville, N.C.   ---   In the Army there are fighters and there are bureaucrats.Like any big organization, the Army is mostly bureaucrats.But it also has a few fighters, who are born to the callingand win our wars for us.   It's clear from your well-reported story that Col. Hayesis a fighter. It's equally clear that Maj. Gen. Thomas Thame,who chose to punish Col. Hayes for fighting, is a bureaucrat.Bureaucrats hide behind doctrine (&quot;We don't pay . . .commanders to be in direct-fire situations&quot;). Fighters leadtheir men into battle.   The parents of Cpl. Jeffery Middleton and other Americanskilled by friendly fire must take pride in the honorabledeaths of their sons, who volunteered for the risks, and mustlearn not to blame the Army's fighters for the inevitableself-inflicted casualties that war occasions.   Doctrinaire bureaucrats will continue to run the Army,tolerating fighters only in the extremes of war. And motherson this earth will ever find it hard to forgive those whokill their sons, friend or foe.   But the rest of us should keep a clear head on thismatter, according our few fighters the honor and gratitude weowe them, and our Army bureaucrats the esteem we reserve forall our politicians.   Our great commanders have understood the uncompromisingnature of war. &quot;War means fighting and fighting meanskilling,&quot; said Confederate Gen. Bedford Forrest. &quot;War iscruel and you cannot refine it,&quot; said his great opponent Gen.William Tecumseh Sherman.   Lee Braddock   St. Paul, Minn.   ---   Reading this article, I was reminded of my AFROTC class atNorthwestern. The first day we entered the classroom to startour course on Military Justice, we found scrawled on theboard, &quot;There is no justice in the military.&quot; It seems themilitary is carrying on the tradition.   Ronald F. Riba   Arlington Heights, Ill.   ---   Your reporters sold readers a bill of goods. Their premisewas that Col. Hayles understandably got caught up in the heatof the moment and didn't deserve to be stripped of hiscommand. &quot;The lore of commanders firing could fill an Armyhistory book,&quot; they write, citing the behavior of CreightonAbrams and George Patton in tanks during World War II.   Maybe. But the lore of the handful of heliborne commandersgiven to firing indiscriminately in Vietnam, in hopes ofwinning a medal and moving up on the promotion list, couldfill a scandal sheet. Missiles have become more dangeroussince then. This was presumably at least part of themotivation behind the oral orders to senior commanders givenshortly before the incident by Gen. Thomas Rhame to refrainfrom engaging the enemy.   By burying at the end of the story the crucial fact thatCol. Hayles disobeyed a direct order, and by ignoring thefact that U.S. commanders saw to it that news of the incidentquickly made its way onto the front page of the New YorkTimes as a way of emphasizing that their soldiers were undercontrol, I fear your reporters neither got nor conveyed theArmy's point. They had the story upside down.   David Warsh   Somerville, Mass.   ---   The story of Col. Hayles is particularly moving anddisturbing. On the night of Feb. 17, 1991, I was on theground with the Army's First Infantry Division, as a platoonleader with the 972 Military Police Company. We werepatroling on the Saudi/Iraqi border as well as probing intoIraq as a reconnaissance force for follow-on armored units. Iwas leading my platoon directly through the area where theM113 Armored Vehicle was hit by Col. Hayles's missile. Duringan early-morning patrol, we found the M113. We climbed fromour vehicles, speechlessly staring for a few minutes. It wasdeeply sobering to witness the loss of a fellow soldier andknow it was at the hands of our own weapons system. We droveoff in silence and continued the mission.   While the desert taught us to accept quick and violentdeath, nothing can completely prepare you to deal with theemotions of human combat. The particularly disturbing aspectof Col. Hayles's story is the hubris of a man, highly trainedto kill, who is punished for accepting a responsibilitydistasteful to every soldier. Despite his fatal error, heexemplifies the leader all military men turn to in combatsituations. Out of a sense of duty, honor and country, hepreferred to risk his own life rather than the lives of hissoldiers. It angers this soldier to know that the Army nowdisciplines those who accept this awesome responsibility tolead men boldly, fight tenaciously to demand excellence, andpull the trigger in combat.   The &quot;friction of war&quot; will always generate fratricide --especially with our increasingly technical arsenal.Discipline and reprimand by desk-jockey superiors neitheraddresses nor corrects these issues inherent in human combat.&quot;Just like in training&quot; (an often-used assurance by the Armyduring Operation Desert Storm that our training would prevailwhen bullets flew), Col. Hayles made a decision and executedit to protect the lives of others. Standing in the wreckageof the M113 on the morning of Feb. 18, I felt for the mothersof those men and prayed for the man who reacted &quot;just like intraining&quot; by pulling the trigger. The silent lesson learnedthat morning was clearly one that death in the desert will bea lonely experience from both sides of the trigger.   As a soldier and officer myself, I think Col. Hayles willbe seen historically as a man of courage and honor. Thebravado and flash of style that apparently defined him gratedothers. The military educates officers to instill confidencein soldiers to deal with the face of war. Col. Hayles'sstyle, be it flashy or pretentious, put him behind thetrigger when the conditions were at their worst. He rose tothe occasion to lead from the front, behind a trigger, notbehind a flashlight pouring over maps. Such &quot;leadership fromthe front&quot; will forever earn him respect from other soldiers.In the mind of this junior officer, he exemplifies thecourage and spirit that made Desert Storm successful.   David J. Nerrow, Jr.   Second Lt., U.S. Army   Brookline, Mass.   ---   It was a double tragedy, and it did not need to happen.There were available to the Army beacons that were visibleonly through the specialized night-vision equipment used byU.S. troops. We have furnished these specially coded beaconsto the Air Force and Marine Corps for more than eight years.When installed on vehicles they have been seen fromhelicopters flying at 5,000 feet from a distance of 22 miles.   It was unfortunate that Army employees at the Night VisionLaboratory had a proprietary interest in their own products,which at the time did not meet the needs of the Desert Stormfighting force. The scientific adviser to Gen. NormanSchwartzkopf tested our beacons and was impressed with theperformance.   As is often the case, the military developers had toreinvent the beacon and, in the meantime, we and the Britishlost more men to fratricide.   The blame does not belong with the guys doing theshooting. They are limited by the equipment issued to them bya bloated materiel support system with a poor performancerecord.   John Frost   Colonel (Ret.) USAF   Alexandria, Va.</TEXT></DOC>