<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900503-0020</DOCNO><DOCID>900503-0020.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Seal of Disapproval: States Scrutinize Notaries   ----   By Amy Dockser Marcus   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/03/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B1</SO><CO>   OI</CO><IN>LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)AUTOMOBILES (AUT)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)BUILDING MATERIALS (BLD)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   Notaries public, the little-noticed functionaries whoattest to the authenticity of signatures on businessdocuments, are causing big worries.   A study of notaries in New York shows that the vastmajority are performing their official duties improperly.Experts say the study highlights a growing national problem.&quot;You could get substantially similar results in any otherstate,&quot; says Eugene E. Hines, executive director of theAmerican Society of Notaries, a Washington trade group.</LP><TEXT>   Bills to reform guidelines for notaries are pending inCalifornia, Florida and New York. Nearly every other state isconsidering reform measures, according to Carole Irwin-Leal,public records manager in the Oregon secretary of state'soffice. A notary reform law is going into effect in Oregonthis July.   There are about four million notaries in the U.S. Almostanyone who is over the age of 18 and pays the required feesis eligible. Typically appointed by the secretary of state orthe governor, notaries are state officers who are supposed toplay a critical role in protecting the public from fraud andphony documents. Their primary duty is to verify the identityof the signers of business documents such as deeds, wills,mortgages and contracts. They also administer oaths, takeaffidavits and depositions, and attest to the authenticity ofsignatures.   But procedural errors made by notaries could result incountless challenges to legal and business documents or theirpossible invalidation, says Alfred E. Piombino, president ofthe New York State Association of Notaries Public, theAlbany, N.Y., trade group that conducted the survey.   &quot;I've seen people lose their homes and their life savingsbecause a notary was careless and didn't check a person'sproper identification,&quot; says James Randall, chief of thenotary public division in the California secretary of state'soffice.   In the New York study, the first of its kind in thenation, a simple affidavit was presented for &quot;notarization&quot;to 217 randomly selected notaries in New York state.   The study showed that only one of the 217 notariesproperly completed the procedure; 97.7% were unfamiliar withthe authentification procedure that verifies certificatesissued by notaries; 88.5% neglected to administer therequired oath to the affiant, the person seekingnotarization; and 82.5% failed to check the affiant'sidentification.   &quot;We have a class of public officers who act chieflyunsupervised and execute acts of law. The results {of thestudy} are a mockery to the whole system,&quot; says Mr. Piombino.   William F. Brown, a spokesman for the New York secretaryof state's office, says his office is examining the study butthat he is concerned about its accuracy because only a smallpercentage of the state's 251,000 notaries were surveyed.&quot;While there may be a number of administerial errors, wehaven't seen anything that puts the consumers at risk,&quot; hesays.   Nevertheless, New York Assemblymen G. Oliver Koppell andGary Proud have incorporated some of the studies' findingsinto a bill to raise the fees notaries can charge the public.The bill is pending in the Legislature. &quot;People aren't takingthe job as seriously as they should. We want it to be seen asprofessional,&quot; says Maureen Danaher, staff attorney for Mr.Koppell. In New York City, notaries can charge up to $1;elsewhere in the state they can charge 25 cents. The billwould raise the charge to $2 throughout the state.   Only five states -- New York, California, Connecticut,Louisiana and Texas -- require applicants to take a writtenexamination. But some public officials question whether thetests are stringent enough. In California, applicants take a15-item &quot;true or false&quot; open book exam that they have beengiven in advance to study, says Mr. Randall.   &quot;We're in the process of trying to develop a morecomprehensive, proctored exam that will test their knowledgebetter,&quot; Mr. Randall says. &quot;Right now, it's not the mostdifficult test.&quot; Still, 20% fail the exam, he says.   Concerns about notarial abuse in Florida led Gov. BobMartinez to form a study commission on notaries, whichresulted in a bill pending in the state's Legislature. Themeasure would require applicants to pass a writtenexamination, among other things. &quot;We want to make thenotarial process mean something -- or do away with italtogether,&quot; says Ken Rouse, general counsel for the FloridaDepartment of State. &quot;There were large numbers oftransactions done with notarized documents, but it didn'tmean anything anymore.&quot;   That attitude is precisely what concerns the NationalNotary Association about the New York study. &quot;The problemsdescribed in the study happen, but not on the scaleindicated. Every once in a while a legislator suggests doingaway with notaries and could point to a study like this asevidence to do so,&quot; says Charles N. Farber, vice president ofthe Canoga Park, Calif., trade group, which sponsorseducational seminars for notaries.   Still, there is widespread agreement that notaries oftendon't fully understand their duties. Most questions involvereal estate transactions, where signatures are forged orproperty is improperly transferred. Problems sometimes arisewhen notaries fail to follow procedures at the request of afriend, employer or relative.   Sometimes notaries themselves are involved in fraud. &quot;Wehad a case in L.A., where a notary forged deeds of trustagainst people's houses and got away with $1.8 million,&quot; saysMr. Randall, the California notary official. &quot;They caughthim, but he left 21 homeowners with a clouded title on theirproperty and big legal fees.&quot;   Notaries may be suspended or removed for misconduct. Theyalso can be the target of civil or criminal suits. Onlyrarely do they end up in jail. Most states require thatnotaries post bonds of up to $10,000 to compensate citizenswho are injured by misconduct, &quot;but that doesn't go very farwhen you've lost a house worth $100,000,&quot; Mr. Randall says.   Most experts point to an educational program adopted inNorth Carolina in 1983 as a possible model for other states.North Carolina requires prospective notaries to successfullycomplete a three-hour to six-hour course offered through thestate's community colleges.   &quot;The nature of the complaints we had received involvedsimple mistakes made because of the notaries' lack ofknowledge,&quot; says Ludelle Hatley, notary public director ofthe North Carolina secretary of state's office.   The need for some sort of official guidance has evenprompted some notaries to seek out seminars and courses ontheir own. &quot;We're just crying out for education,&quot; says JamesW. Paulus, a notary in Baltimore who regularly attendseducational seminars. &quot;I took some papers for notarization,and the woman didn't even know what to do. She was sorelieved to find out I was a notary.&quot;   ---   FERRARI WINS trademark suit against a Tennessee kit-carmanufacturer.   The U.S. District Court in Tennessee permanently enjoineda manufacturer of kit cars from selling replicas of theDaytona Spyder and Testarossa cars, both made by FerrariS.p.A.   Ferrari sued kit-car maker Carl Roberts, of Greeneville,Tenn., when he began advertising replicas of the two cars.U.S. District Judge Thomas G. Hull said Mr. Roberts can nolonger sell the reproductions because they infringe onFerrari's trademark rights on the designs and appearances ofthe cars. The judge ruled yesterday that by designing hiscars to look like Ferrari's, Mr. Roberts intended tomisappropriate the image and reputation of Ferrari. Thereplicas were called the &quot;Miami Spyder&quot; and the &quot;MiamiCoupe.&quot; A lawyer for Mr. Roberts declined to comment.   Kit cars are do-it-yourself cars usually made up of partsfrom a variety of models. Mr. Roberts' Ferrari look-alikesconsisted of molded fiberglass bodies mounted on ChevroletCorvette and Pontiac Fiero chassis.   The decision was the second by a federal court upholdingFerrari's trademark rights and prohibiting the manufactureand sale of Ferrari replicas, said Jonathan I. Blackman ofCleary, Gottlieb, Steen andamp; Hamilton, an attorney for thecompany.   Last year, the U.S. District Court in San Diego made asimilar ruling against a California seller of Daytona Spyderlookalikes.   ---   LAWYER OVERSEEING effort to settle asbestos cases is askedto step down.   In a motion made last week, Owens-Illinois Inc., a formerasbestos manufacturer, charged that the attorney, Kenneth R.Feinberg, has a conflict of interest because of his previouswork for manufacturers of asbestos, which causes respiratoryailments. In an innovative federal-state arrangement inJanuary, U.S. District Judge Jack B. Weinstein and StateSupreme Court Judge Helen Freedman jointly appointed Mr.Feinberg to oversee efforts to settle hundreds of asbestoscases filed by former Brooklyn Navy Yard workers.   Owens-Illinois said the prior work by Mr. Feinberg and hisfirm, Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays andamp; Handler of New York,&quot;provided him with confidential information going to the veryheart of the litigation he is now entrusted to mediate.&quot; From1980 to 1983, Mr. Feinberg represented the AsbestosCompensation Coalition, a group of asbestos companiesinvolved in litigation across the nation. Mr. Feinberg's workincluded lobbying Congress and drafting legislative proposalson how to compensate victims of asbestos, Owens-Illinoissaid.   In the court documents, written in part by GeoffreyHazard, an ethics professor at Yale Law School,Owens-Illinois claims that the code of judicial conduct barsMr. Feinberg from overseeing the settlement efforts. Thecompany made a similar motion to prevent Mr. Feinberg fromserving as mediator in asbestos settlement efforts inMaryland, but a lower court judge and state appellate courtrejected the motion.   Mr. Feinberg's appointment ends May 31, unless it isextended by the court. &quot;I'm quite optimistic that by the endof the month a settlement will be reached in these cases, andno extension of my mandate will be necessary,&quot; Mr. Feinbergsaid. A hearing on the Owens-Illinois motion is set for May15 in state court in Manhattan, before Judge Weinstein andJudge Freedman.   &quot;Owens-Illinois could not be more cooperative in thisprocess,&quot; Mr. Feinberg said. &quot;They have acted in absolutelythe most good faith. They haven't given me any indicationthat they are anything but eager to see this mediation effortsucceed.&quot;   ---   CONFIDENTIAL MEETINGS by state agency officialsdiscouraged in Texas.   The court's decision endorsed a 1973 Texas law that issimilar to the so-called sunshine statutes passed by moststates in the 1960s and 1970s. Such laws require governmentagencies to conduct their business in public, but they havespawned numerous disputes over whether agency officials mayinformally discuss contested cases among themselves inprivate.   The vital question is whether administrativedecision-making should be done openly or secretly, the Texascourt said in an opinion by Judge Lloyd Doggett. &quot;We believethe law requires openess.&quot;   At issue was a 1986 Texas Water Commission decisiondenying Charles M. Acker's request for a permit for awastewater treatment plant to service his mobile-home park.Mr. Acker had challenged the decision on grounds that twocommission members violated the open meetings law bydiscussing the case in a restroom during a hearing recess. Atrial court upheld his claim.   But in a controversial decision last May, a state appealscourt said the Texas open meetings law was superseded by a1975 statute governing administrative procedures in Texas. Aprovision of that law specifically permits private talksamong state agency members in contested cases. And Texasattorneys argued before the state supreme court thatregulators would be hamstrung unless they could discusspending cases in private.   The Texas Supreme Court disagreed, saying the appealscourt ruling would permit &quot;serious circumvention&quot; of opengovernment. &quot;In administrative review of contested issuesfrom A to Z -- from alcoholic beverages to zoos, secrecywould suddenly be authorized,&quot; the court ruled in overturningthe appeals court decision.   ---   SAN FRANCISCO-BOUND: Latham andamp; Watkins is launching a SanFrancisco office. The Los Angeles law firm, withapproximately 550 lawyers, has six other branches. Twopartners work in the new office but partner Robert Dell saidLatham hopes to have 20 lawyers in San Francisco by the fall.   ---   Krystal Miller in Detroit contributed to this column.</TEXT></DOC>