<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900604-0030</DOCNO><DOCID>900604-0030.</DOCID><HL>   Lost Promise:   How Sen. Durenberger   Went From Mr. Clean   To a Man Under Fire   ---   The Minnesotan's Is a Tale   Of Power, Money and Sex,   With a Tragic Protagonist   ---   A Public Apology for `Lapses'   ----   By Jill Abramson and David Shribman   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>06/04/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><LP>   COLLEGEVILLE, Minn. -- For the first 21 years of his life,Dave Durenberger lived here in the protective shadows of aBenedictine monastery on the shores of Lake Sagatagan.Brother Ed was the plumber, Father Alfred taught him English.He explored Catholic theology and ethics with Father Emeric.   The other morning, Father Vincent Tegeder talked about theyoung man who grew up in the little lay community ofFlynntown on the abbey grounds and then went just up the hillto St. John's University. Thumbing through an old St. John'sannual, Father Vincent found this prediction, both eerie andironic: &quot;Dave intends to put Flynntown on the map byreforming national politics.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   Instead, Mr. Durenberger is living out the final episodesof an agonizing morality tale.   Since early 1989, the Minnesota Republican's personalfinances have been the subject of a Senate Ethics Committeeinquiry into a host of alleged ethical breaches and rulesviolations. Next week, the committee begins two weeks ofpublic hearings -- probably televised in Minnesota -- inwhich the senator faces potentially devastating testimonyfrom former aides and political supporters who helpedstructure his complex and controversial deals.   And even if he manages to settle the case withoutresigning or being expelled from the Senate, his career,based in the clean-government oasis of Minnesota, is intatters. &quot;People here are never going to support a guy who isin the position of trying to cop a plea with the EthicsCommittee,&quot; says Hyman Berman, a University of Minnesotahistorian.   Tall and trim with graying temples, 55-year-old DaveDurenberger is Central Casting's idea of a senator. His fallis like a film noir version of &quot;Mr. Smith Goes toWashington,&quot; with all the familiar ingredients of a politicalcareer gone sour: power, money and sex. But unlike otherWashington scandals, this one has an unlikely, even tragicprotagonist: the first commanding officer of the St. John'sROTC, protege of two reform governors of Minnesota, a manonce regarded as among the most promising Republican senatorsof his generation.   &quot;This,&quot; says former Republican Gov. Elmer L. Andersen, &quot;isthe saddest political story I have ever seen.&quot;   Sen. Durenberger expresses hope that the ordeal will soonbe behind him, but his aides, after promising an interview,decided that he shouldn't talk further about his case at sucha sensitive stage.   The unraveling of Dave Durenberger is the story of a manwhose life, once so pastoral, was roiled by tragedy, thenbeset by inner doubt and finally tainted by scandal.   Mr. Durenberger, the oldest of five children, grew up in awhite clapboard house with olive shutters; his neighbors werethe abbey bus driver, the custodian and the manager of thedairy herd.   His father, known universally as &quot;Big George,&quot; had been arevered St. John's football star, remembered for an 82-yardpunt. But he left his most enduring imprint as a coach andathletic director for more than four decades. Father EmericLawrence calls George Durenberger, who now lives in Florida,&quot;big, deeply Republican and very honest.&quot; The senator'smother, Isabelle, a secretary, was the university's firstfemale employee.   Dave was an important figure on campus himself, a seriousstudent and avid participant in class discussions. FatherEmeric remembers his dissent over an article called &quot;Inroadsof the Bourgeois Spirit,&quot; where the young man argued that thedangers of the acquisitive urge were being overdrawn.   But St. John's and its ethos of work, study and prayerleft its imprint. &quot;He was as much a part of St. John's as youcould be without wearing a habit,&quot; says Albert Eisele, aformer press secretary for Vice President Walter Mondale whoknew Mr. Durenberger at school.   Harold LeVander, a partner in former GOP Gov. HaroldStassen's law firm, hired him right out of law school. &quot;Hewas young, aggressive, full of energy and personality,idealistic -- just the kind of guy I was looking for,&quot; Mr.LeVander says. In short order, Mr. Durenberger establishedhimself as a joiner, becoming a director of the Chamber ofCommerce, legal counsel of the Minnesota Young RepublicanLeague, division chairman of the United Fund, state advocateof the Knights of Columbus and a member of both the Elks andthe Lions.   When Mr. LeVander ran for governor in 1966, Mr.Durenberger, seeking to exploit a contretemps over highwayfunding, helped craft an early negative campaign ad that, inthe middle of the Batman television craze, proclaimed: &quot;Holyscandals, Batman]&quot; When Mr. LeVander won, he took Mr.Durenberger with him as executive secretary. Mr. Durenbergerput together the staff and worked with the legislature.   But his wife, Judy, developed cancer. Gov. LeVander andhis wife, Iantha, were at the hospital when she died in 1970at age 31. Mr. Durenberger, 36, was left the sole parent offour sons, the oldest just seven.   &quot;He was totally devastated,&quot; says U.S. Judge PaulMagnuson, a long-time friend. &quot;It was upwards of a yearbefore he returned back to the normal Dave.&quot;   After Mr. LeVander decided against another term, formerGov. Andersen, then the president of H.B. Fuller Co.,recruited Mr. Durenberger to attend to the philanthropicactivities that that company took so seriously. &quot;He reallycared about people, about being a factor,&quot; Mr. Andersenrecalls.   In 1978, Mr. Durenberger set his sights on winning thegovernorship for himself. But then-Republican NationalChairman Bill Brock and party operative Charles Blackpersuaded him to run instead for the Senate seat left open bythe death of Hubert Humphrey. Mr. Durenberger won his firstbid for office.   In Washington, his Mr. Clean image made him a natural forthe recently formed Senate Ethics Committee -- the very panelthat now is deciding his fate. And after just two years, hebecame chairman of an important Finance subcommittee. Heplunged into Washington life with a relish, taking unusualpleasure in the substance and small print of legislativeissues like Medicare and Social Security.   But the Democrats were gunning for him, their fervorstoked by the conviction that no Republican should sit inHubert Humphrey's seat. In 1982, their candidate was MarkDayton, a department-store heir who spent over $7 million,much of it his own money. In 1988, their candidate was stateAttorney General Hubert Humphrey III. Mr. Durenberger wonboth elections, but they were bruising campaigns.   It was around the time of the first of these re-electionraces that Mr. Durenberger began to depend ever more heavilyon special-interest money. Between 1983 and 1988, hecollected $1.8 million in political-action committeecontributions, more than all other senators but four in thattime.   While he was chairman or ranking Republican on the FinanceCommittee's pivotal health subcommittee, Mr. Durenbergerreceived more medical and health PAC money than any othersenator. Still, contributors often know they are buyingaccess rather than votes from lawmakers, and indeed Mr.Durenberger has bucked the powerful American MedicalAssociation, which has fed him both campaign contributionsand honoraria, on such issues as tighter Medicare costcontrols and physician payments.   Some Durenberger observers say they noticed a politicalcallousness in him after the difficult 1982 campaign. But hewas also capable of great emotional generosity. When hislegislative director, Ralph Neas, was stricken with aparalyzing disease on a Minnesota trip and was hospitalizedfor months, Mr. Durenberger spent hours at his bedside --even though Mr. Neas, on a respirator, couldn't communicate.   &quot;He tried hard to make me feel included in what was goingon back in Washington,&quot; says Mr. Neas, now the executivedirector of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights. &quot;I'llnever forget that.&quot;   Within the Senate, Mr. Durenberger was something of aloner. Some of his colleagues found more than a hint ofarrogance in his introspective, even scholarly demeanor. Evenso, he continued his rise, becoming co-chairman of thepowerful Senate Intelligence Committee. Outside the Senate,Mr. Durenberger's life seemed to be falling apart.   Two of his children developed severe drug problems. Hissecond wife, Penny, a Vietnam-war widow who helped raise thefour Durenberger boys, never took to the rituals of politics.&quot;It was not an easy marriage at any time,&quot; says former Gov.Andersen. The senator's office announced a separation inearly 1985, and he moved into The Cedars, a Christian retreatresidence in Arlington, Va.   At the same time, the newspapers were full of luridstories about Mr. Durenberger, including details of an affairwith a 28-year-old secretary who worked in his office. Mr.Durenberger did not dispute the accounts. There was a pettyincident in which he was charged with disorderly conduct forrefusing to wait in an airport cab line. He publicly admittedthat he was undergoing a midlife crisis. The expense ofseeing a marriage counselor in the Boston area whospecialized in helping Christian couples preoccupied thesenator, as did the financial burden of college costs for hissons.   Just as his personal and family problems were mushrooming,however, his income was coming under pressure. In 1983, Mr.Durenberger had collected a huge $93,750 in honoraria formaking speeches, bringing his total income to $163,550 thatyear. As chairman of the Finance subcommittee on health, hehad a captive, special-interest audience of health careproviders, hospitals, medical groups and pharmaceuticalcompanies.   The next year, however, new Senate ethics rules tookeffect, capping honoraria at 30% of salary. Mr. Durenberger'sincome fell to $92,980 ($72,200 in salary; $20,780 inhonoraria).   In late 1984 Gary Diamond, a member of Mr. Durenberger'shealth subcommittee, offered what must have seemed like aperfect solution to his financial problems: He would publisha book by the senator. Royalties and other income from booksfell outside the new income limits. &quot;My reason for doing thiswas to get a small publishing company off the ground,&quot; saysMr. Diamond. &quot;For the senator, it was a way to get his ideaspublished in book form.&quot;   Although Mr. Diamond's previous book ventures were limitedto sports, including a volume on wrestling holds, he hoped tolure other lawmakers to his new venture.   According to the agreement, Mr. Diamond would bear thecost of publishing Mr. Durenberger's first book, a collectionof speeches and position papers on defense. The senator wouldpromote it before audiences that invited him to makespeeches. But the speaking fees would go to Mr. Diamond'sPiranha Press. Once Mr. Diamond's printing costs and profitmargin were covered, Mr. Durenberger would get a stipend forhelping to sell books.   The plan worked so smoothly at first that Mr.Durenberger's first book, &quot;Neither Madmen nor Messiahs,&quot; wasquickly followed by &quot;Prescription for Change,&quot; on healthpolicy. Mr. Durenberger earned $38,375 from Piranha in 1985and $62,500 in 1986, pushing his income back to its robustpre-1984 level.   Nearly 100 companies, trade associations and lobbyinggroups that invited him to speak in 1985 and 1986 senthonoraria to Piranha Press, including Drexel Burnham Lambert,Salomon Brothers and a host of health-care organizations.Oddly, many of the health groups paid Piranha fees in 1985 --even though the health book wasn't published until thefollowing year.   At some of the book promotion appearances, there weren'teven any books. Mr. Diamond says that his small companywasn't equipped to handle distribution, and that some groupsdidn't want to bother with transporting the volumes. &quot;Icouldn't force them to take books,&quot; he says.   In addition, 40 of the groups that paid honoraria toPiranha also supplied transportation and other services toMr. Durenberger, none of which were listed, as Senate rulesrequire, on his financial disclosure statements for 1985 and1986. (Mr. Durenberger last July amended his disclosures toinclude these gifts.)   He also accepted $5,000 in limousine services during hismany book-promotion speeches in Boston. (The ethics panelinvestigated whether he might have pressured lobbying groupsto offer him speaking engagements in the Boston area as a wayof underwiting the costs of his marriage counseling, butfound insufficient evidence to pursue such charges.) On sixoccasions, Mr. Durenberger made paid appearances on Senategrounds, another apparent violation of the rules.   The ethics committee has also been investigating atransaction involving a Minneapolis condominium Mr.Durenberger owned and stayed in during trips back home. In1984, he sold the condo to a partnership he formed with awealthy political supporter. The partnership agreement wasn'tsigned until mid-1984, but records show that Mr. Durenbergerclaimed rental-expense reimbursement from the Senate forseveral months in 1983. Moreover, the partnership documentswere backdated to 1983 by a notary, a longtime supporter ofthe senator's.   Mr. Durenberger has said that he wasn't aware thedocuments he signed had been backdated, and last January herepaid the Senate $11,005 after the Rules Committee decidedhe wasn't entitled to expenses incurred when he stayed in thecondo during congressional recesses.   Although this isn't yet included in the Ethics Committee'sbill of particulars, the panel has also subpoenaed thefinancial records of a foundation, Americans for GenerationalEquity, that Mr. Durenberger helped create in 1984 andchaired until last December. Also of potential interest tothe panel are nearly $1 million in loans the senator receivedfrom a St. Paul bank over 10 years, some without collateraland some at low interest rates, according to the MinneapolisStar Tribune newspaper, which reported the loans in February.   Mr. Durenberger has admitted paying insufficient attentionto his personal finances. His close friends have differenttheories of how the alleged breaches may have occurred. Someblame his former top aides and attorneys for slipshod advice.Others say he was preoccupied with fundraising for hisre-election campaigns or his personal problems.   Almost everyone who knows him says Mr. Durenberger isn'tmoney-hungry. &quot;Getting rich never concerned him,&quot; says RogerAiles, the senator's media adviser since 1978. &quot;He has thekind of mind {that} he could be making a million a year at alaw firm. But he never wanted that.&quot;   Paul Hewitt, the senator's former aide, believes Mr.Durenberger lost his emotional moorings in Washington.&quot;Everywhere a senator goes, people are giving them things andreinforcing their sense of supreme importance,&quot; Mr. Hewittsays. &quot;For someone with a weak sense of identity, it canchange your personality. His sense of self was not enough towithstand these pressures. He came to believe he was abovethe rules. His own personal needs, wants and desires{overwhelmed} other things.&quot;   But Mr. Durenberger himself said in a Wall Street Journalinterview in 1986: &quot;There's a premise this office, by itsvery nature, destroys people -- but I don't believe that. Theplace and the office are given too much credit for thedeterioration of personal relationships, and the individualis not given enough of the credit or blame.&quot;   Though he and his wife were reconciled in 1986, a frienddescribes their relationship as &quot;legally on&quot; but stilltroubled.   Sen. Durenberger was once formally criticized by theEthics Committee for the appearance of divulging nationalsecurity information at a 1987 Florida fund-raising event.But the current case is much more serious. It is now in theinvestigative trial phase, in which there is an open hearingon the charges, and only two previous Ethics Committeeinquiries have gotten that far. In 1979, Democratic Sen.Herman Talmadge of Georgia was formally denounced forreprehensible handling of government money. Mr. Talmadge losthis bid for reelection in 1980. In 1982, the Ethics Committeerecommended the expulsion of New Jersey Democrat HarrisonWilliams for his role in the Abscam bribery case, but heresigned before he could be kicked out.   As if those weren't bad enough omens, the ethics panel isitself under pressure to look tough in the Durenberger case,the first of an unprecedented seven investigations on itsagenda. After this case is resolved, the panel moves on tothe Keating Five -- the senators accused of improperlyintervening on behalf of savings-and-loan executive CharlesKeating. With so much of the Senate's ethical credibility onthe line, panel members don't want to be accused ofwhitewashing.   According to several people close to the Durenbergerinquiry, the senator has conceded he would handle hisfinancial dealings differently if he could do them again, butsays any rules violations were unintentional. For the lastseveral weeks he and his chief lawyer, James Hamilton, aveteran defense lawyer who was assistant chief counsel to theSenate Watergate committee, have been negotiating a possiblesettlement with the ethics panel.   The sources say that Sen. Warren Rudman of New Hampshire,the Republican co-chairman of the six-member bipartisanpanel, is insisting on stiff terms -- something short ofexpulsion but stronger than a reprimand. Mr. Rudman and othermembers of the panel decline to comment.   Mr. Durenberger's personal problems were generally viewedsympathetically in Minnesota, but the voters apparently arehaving a much more difficult time overlooking the book andreal-estate deals. In January, the Star Tribune newspaperpublished a statewide poll showing his approval ratingplummeting to 41% from 73% last fall. A few local papers havecalled for his resignation.   Mr. Durenberger now is fighting a war on many fronts: inthe Ethics Committee; in his Senate duties, where he iswaging what one aide calls &quot;an effectiveness campaign&quot;; andin Minnesota, where at Christmastime he flew around the stateto apologize publicly for &quot;mistakes and bad lapses injudgment on these matters.&quot;   Even so, he continued last year to accept large amounts ofhonoraria for speaking to special-interest groups. Most ofthe other senators facing ethics inquiries abstained fromtaking honoraria.   Through it all, Mr. Durenberger has sought solace andsolutions in religion. &quot;It doesn't surprise me that he shouldretreat into religion at times of crisis,&quot; says FatherEmeric, his old St. John's religion teacher. &quot;I wouldn't besurprised if he felt more comfortable in that setting than inthe public life.&quot;   Last fall, he went on a Christian fellowship tour of 21countries and met with Mother Teresa and the Dalai Lama. Inbetween meetings on the ethics case, he dashes to prayergroups, sometimes more than once a day.   Former Democratic Gov. Richard Lamm of Colorado, an oldfriend, acknowledges that Mr. Durenberger probably broke somerules, but says, &quot;In a world full of politicians who don'tstick their heads up, he was an exception.&quot;   Then Mr. Lamm adds: &quot;In Washington, there's survival ofthe unfittest.&quot;</TEXT></DOC>