<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910510-0021</DOCNO><DOCID>910510-0021.</DOCID><HL>   To Free the Universities...   ----   By Dinesh D'Souza</HL><DATE>05/10/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A10</SO><LP>   As the classes of 1991 walk down the aisle to accept theirdiplomas, and attention turns to next year's crop ofstudents, it is an appropriate time for the discussion of thefuture of higher education to move to a more mature stage.Rather than exchange heated allegations of &quot;racialinsensitivity&quot; and &quot;political correctness,&quot; we need to begina debate on concrete proposals to remedy the crisis facingour colleges and universities. Toward this end I offer threeproposals.   As the testimony of many voices across the politicalspectrum indicates, liberal education is in danger ofabandoning or even inverting three of its most cherishedprinciples. At most universities, equal opportunity inadmissions policy has given way to preferential treatmentbased on race. The goals of racial integration and the closeinteraction of diverse perspectives have been replaced by anew segregation on campus. Finally, standards, academicfreedom and free speech are under attack at many colleges. Myproposals are intended to reverse these illiberal trends.</LP><TEXT>   In admissions policy: Universities should retain theirpolicies of preferential treatment, but should alter theircriteria from race to socioeconomic disadvantage. This meansthat admissions officers would take into account such factorsas the applicant's family background, financial condition andprimary and secondary school environment, giving preferenceto disadvantaged students so long as it is clear that theycan be reasonably expected to meet the academic challenges ofthe university. Race or ethnicity, however, would cease tocount either for or against any applicant.   Ordinarily the admissions policy of selective collegesshould be based on academic and extracurricular merit.Preferential treatment is justified, however, when it isobvious that measurable indices of merit do not accuratelyreflect a student's learning and growth potential. Everyadmissions officer knows that an SAT score of 1,200 out of1,600 by a student from Harlem or Anacostia, who comes from abroken family and has struggled against negative peerpressure and a terrible school system, means somethingentirely different from the same score from a student fromScarsdale or Georgetown, whose privileges include privatetutors and SAT prep courses.   Universities are entirely justified in giving a break tostudents who may not have registered the highest scores, butwhose record suggests that this failure is not due to lack ofability or application, but rather to demonstrateddisadvantage. Admissions officers are right to see theacademic potential in these students.   Socioeconomically based affirmative action offers manyadvantages over the current race-based approach. No longerwill the children of relatively affluent black and Hispanicfamilies receive preference over the children of lower middleclass and poor white and Asian families. Yet all minoritygroups would disproportionately benefit from such a program,because they are disproportionately represented in the ranksof the disadvantaged.   While it is true that extending affirmative actionbenefits to all groups would somewhat reduce the number ofblacks and Hispanics at the most selective schools, thischange could have the positive effect of placing many ofthese minority students into colleges where they wouldeffectively compete with their peers, and graduate atcomparable rates. Race-based preferences often have theeffect of misplacing black and Hispanic students intoacademic environments where they are dramatically outmatchedby their classmates, and this contributes to extremely highdropout rates among these groups.   Finally socioeconomically based affirmative action wouldnot create the special stigma that is attached to racialpreference. No longer would universities be forced to explainthe anomaly of enforcing racial discrimination as a means tocombat racial discrimination. The euphemism and mendacitycurrently employed to justify ethnic preferences can stop --the new program can be explicitly stated and defended.Students are to be judged as individuals, based on theirability, in the context of their circumstances.   In life on campus: Universities should discourage thepractice of minority self-segregation by refusing torecognize or fund any group that is racially separatist, orthat excludes students based on skin color. Universitiesshould, however, sanction groups based on shared intellectualor cultural interest, even if these groups appealpredominantly or exclusively to minority students.   What this means in practice is that universities would notpermit a Black Students Association, but they would permit aW.E.B. Du Bois Society based on interest in the writings ofthe early 20th century author. Colleges would refuse tosupport a Latino Political Club but they would permit aSandino Club based on interest in the thought of theNicaraguan revolutionary hero. This principle could extendbeyond race, so that universities would decline to fund ahomosexual association but would fund a Sappho Society.   In all cases, university-funded groups should be builtaround intellectual and cultural interests, not skin color orsexual proclivity. Thought and expression are the currency inwhich universities trade and specialize. The consolidation ofidentity based on race or sexuality may be a project thatsome students ardently seek, but it is not always consistentwith the mission of universities.   If this solution is adopted, no longer will universitieshave to justify the double standards that profess allegiancesto cultural exchange, and then foster minority subcultures oncampus; that encourage minority-pride groups and ethnicfraternities while prohibiting white-pride groups andsegregated white fraternities.   There is no reason to think that a Malcolm X Society, forinstance, would not attract any white or Hispanic or Asianstudents, but even if only blacks do happen to join, at leastothers would have been extended the opportunity. In somecases, perhaps, groups will be formed on the mere pretext ofa shared idea, but inevitably this pretense will bechallenged by some persistent outsider who insists on signingup and who cannot be refused membership.   In the curriculum: Universities should retain their corerequirements emphasizing the classics of Western culture, butthey should broaden the reading list to expose students tothe greatest works of other civilizations as well. WhatMatthew Arnold termed the &quot;best that has been thought andsaid&quot; would remain the criterion for selection of books, onlynow the geographical range would not be limited to Europe butwould cover the entire globe. In practice this means thatHomer, the Bible, Shakespeare and Faulkner would be read inconjunction with the Bhagavad Gita, the Koran and &quot;The Taleof Genji.&quot;   Young people must be familiarized with the fundamentaltexts of their own civilizations. Just as it would beembarrassing to encounter an educated Chinese who had neverheard of Confucius, however well versed he might be in MarkTwain, so also it would be a failure of liberal education toteach Americans about Asia without immersing them in theirown philosophical and literary tradition. American studentsof all races should know something about the Constitution andthe Declaration of Independence, and about the civil war andthe civil rights movement.   In fact such self-knowledge can prepare Americans tobetter understand other cultures. And it is useful, as theworld becomes a smaller place and as this country becomesmore diverse, for students to move beyond their own culturalshores. For instance young people should not graduate in theliberal arts without knowing something about the rise ofIslamic fundamentalism, and for this purpose it is helpful toread the Koran. We hear about Max Weber's doctrine about theProtestant ethic and the rise of capitalism; is there a&quot;Confucian ethic&quot; that explains the enormous success of Asianentrepreneurs?   These sorts of questions constitute authenticmulticultural education, which may be contrasted with thebogus multiculturalism currently practiced on many campuses,where texts are selected largely based on the race, gender orsexual habits of the author, and where non-Western studyamounts to little more than ethnic cheerleading or ThirdWorld romanticism, combined with intemperate invectiveleveled against racism, sexism and homophobia in the West. Ifstudents learn to eschew such vulgar reductionism, then thegreatest works of the human mind can help to liberate themfrom their provinciality and prejudice, so that they candevelop stronger rational and moral bases for adopting thenorms of others, or for reaffirming their own.   ---   Mr. D'Souza, a research fellow at the American EnterpriseInstitute, is the author of &quot;Illiberal Education: ThePolitics of Race and Sex on Campus,&quot; recently published bythe Free Press/Macmillan.</TEXT></DOC>