<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910214-0095</DOCNO><DOCID>910214-0095.</DOCID><HL>   Strong Defense:   A Raider Stalks It,   But Leaner Lockheed   Has Begun to Take Off   ---   CEO Tellep Tackles Simmons   By Wooing Big Investors,   Boosting Profits and Stock   ---   Stealth Fighter Scores Big   ----   By Rick Wartzman   Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>02/14/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A1</SO><CO>   NOC JAPNY GD BA LK LABOR NL</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)</GV><LP>   CALABASAS, Calif. -- As a former missile engineer,Lockheed Corp. Chairman Daniel Tellep has long been familiarwith the laws of physics. But about a year ago, Murphy's Law-- what can go wrong will go wrong -- dominated his universe.   Important military programs were awash in red ink, andcompetition for the dwindling pie of defense orders wasgrowing ever fiercer. Lockheed's stock was plummeting. AndDallas billionaire Harold Simmons was gaining such momentumin his attempt to take over Lockheed's board that advisers tothe nation's sixth-largest defense contractor feared that thevote for control would be, in Mr. Tellep's words, &quot;a realsqueaker.&quot;</LP><TEXT>   &quot;I was not a happy camper,&quot; adds Mr. Tellep, who becamechairman only two years ago.   Now, Mr. Simmons is back. He announced plans this week tolaunch another proxy fight unless the company letsshareholders vote on an expanded 17-member board that wouldinclude himself and two associates. But Lockheed, oncevulnerable, now seems nearly invincible.   The main reason it is flying high again appears to be Mr.Tellep himself. The gray-haired executive went on the road,courted and won back many of the large institutionalshareholders who last year felt neglected by the company anddefected to the Simmons camp.   One of those apparently won back was Luther Jones, managerof corporate affairs for the $21 billion Florida State Boardof Administration pension fund. Last year, the fund cast its210,000 Lockheed shares for the Simmons slate, but Mr. Jonesdoesn't seem inclined to do so again. He says Lockheed'scareful attention to its concerns &quot;goes beyond what we'veseen from other major corporations.&quot;   Soft-spoken but tough-minded, Mr. Tellep also hasimplemented a cost-containment strategy that has kept thecompany's books clean after $500 million in write-offs a yearago. Net income soared last year to $335 million from ameager $2 million in 1989. The company's stock has reacted byoutpacing the aerospace-industry average and rising above $40a share since the start of the Gulf war from a 52-week low of$24.75. It closed yesterday in New York Stock Exchangecomposite trading at $39.625, down 87.5 cents on the day.   Mr. Tellep succeeded Lawrence O. Kitchen, a less affable,more introverted executive with closer ties to corporateofficers who have been widely blamed for Lockheed's tarnishedimage in the 1970s. A raft of production problems on majorprograms had forced the company to seek a government loanguarantee to avoid bankruptcy. The &quot;bailout,&quot; as criticscalled it, was followed by a foreign-payments scandal thatrocked several governments and led to the ouster of severalsenior officials.   When Mr. Tellep took over, he &quot;ran straight into abuzzsaw,&quot; says Joseph Twomey, Lockheed's general counsel.&quot;The very survival of the corporation was threatened.&quot;   Mr. Tellep joined Lockheed as a scientist in 1955 and wasquickly pegged as a rising star. He spent most of his careerin splendid, happy isolation at the missiles and spacesubsidiary in Northern California, turning it into Lockheed'sfastest-growing unit. But trying to straighten out the entirecorporation hasn't been as enjoyable.   Under Mr. Tellep, divisions have been merged, resourcespooled and additional reviews instituted to ensure thatLockheed doesn't underprice government contracts. The companyhas cut its work force by 11.5% in the past year, to 73,000currently. Most of the jobs have been lost as it consolidatesits aircraft production lines, all but abandoning theBurbank, Calif., plant where it began building six-seatwooden planes more than 60 years ago.   The final pullout from the Los Angeles suburb, which isexpected to cost 7,000 jobs, has angered the Machinists unionand local politicians. It was, says the 59-year-old Mr.Tellep, &quot;one of the most difficult decisions I've ever had tomake.&quot; He adds: &quot;You really feel a connection to the lineageof chief executives that came before you.&quot; Assembling a slidepresentation for a board meeting earlier this month, Mr.Tellep made sure that it included a photo of Robert Gross,one of Lockheed's Depression-era founders, standing among agroup of Burbank employees working on World War II P-38fighters.   However, Mr. Tellep has proved himself more pragmatistthan sentimentalist. &quot;He has decided not to spend money onthe aircraft business just for the fame and glory of it,&quot;says Howard Rubel, an analyst at C.J. Lawrence Inc. &quot;He wantsa guaranteed reasonable return on his investment. I'm notsure a lot of his predecessors would have done it that way.&quot;   Last year, Mr. Tellep walked away from $5 billion ofpotential business building P-7 maritime patrol planes afterextended one-on-one discussions with Navy Secretary LawrenceGarrett about problems with the program. Even though Lockheedadmitted having botched development of the aircraft --engineers badly miscalculated the cost of meeting the Navy'stough performance requirements -- Mr. Tellep refused to loseany money on production. Lockheed had already taken $300million in write-offs on the project, and that was enough. &quot;Ihad no choice,&quot; he says. &quot;I had to be firm.&quot;   Committed to financial consistency, Mr. Tellep hascontinued Lockheed's transformation from an airplanemanufacturer to a more diversified high-tech company. Much ofthe change has been executed in his own image: analytically,methodically, without fanfare. &quot;We've really done nothing tooprofound here,&quot; he insists. &quot;But, then, most good things arebasic.&quot;   Perhaps few things are more basic for a big corporationthan good relations with its major stockholders. Yet Mr.Tellep didn't immediately realize the importance of embracingthe institutional investors that together control about 45%of Lockheed's stock. &quot;I was not totally in touch withinvestor sentiment,&quot; he acknowledges.   DeWitt Bowman, chief financial officer for the influentialCalifornia Employees' Retirement System, a $56 billionpension fund known as Calpers, is blunt: &quot;There was really noattempt by the company to put its best foot forward. Frankly,it didn't take the institutions very seriously at all.&quot;   It does now. Mr. Simmons struck a chord with portfoliomanagers last year when he focused on a maze of bylaws set upby Lockheed's management allegedly to entrench itself. Somelarge investors, including Calpers and the California StateTeachers Retirement System -- which together hold about onemillion Lockheed shares -- voted for Mr. Simmons's slatelargely because of the way he played this issue.   But Lockheed has worked hard to reverse the perceptionthat it is out of touch with its shareholders. Late lastyear, after a grueling search that began with 120 names,Lockheed appointed to its board four new outside directors,all of whom received the blessing of the top 11 institutionalholders.   The company also knew when to backtrack. To mollify fundmanagers, it modified its &quot;poison pill&quot; anti-takeover measureand revamped its &quot;golden parachute&quot; severance provisions forexecutives. In addition, it opted out of a Delawareanti-takeover statute criticized by Mr. Simmons.   Above all, Lockheed has opened the lines of communication.It has dispatched Vincent Marafino, vice chairman and chieffinancial officer, along with different presidents of thecompany's core operating groups to the East Coast forquarterly presentations to institutions and brokerage firms.And it started a special newsletter for stockholders.   A manager of one big East Coast fund with a lot ofLockheed stock still thinks the company hasn't gone farenough in amending its anti-takeover rules or making itsshareholder voting truly confidential. Moreover, someinstitutions are still irritated about the way Lockheedassumed control of shares in an employee stock-ownership planthat haven't yet been allocated to its participants -- thesubject of a lawsuit brought by Mr. Simmons. The Texasinvestor's strongest argument may simply be that he holdsnearly 20% of Lockheed's shares without any directrepresentation on the board.   Mr. Tellep, however, has apparently proved enough of asalesman to overcome most of these concerns. &quot;He has a clearvision, which is certainly not something that all CEOs have,&quot;says Mr. Bowman of Calpers, which the Lockheed chief hasvisited several times in the past year. &quot;We have a lot moreconfidence in Lockheed than we did last year.&quot;   For Mr. Tellep, the crusade is personal. Last year's proxyfight took a heavy toll on him emotionally. As theannual-meeting crowd poured into one of the company's vastBurbank hangars last March, Mr. Tellep recalls standingalone, pensively, &quot;like a boxer before a big fight.&quot; A friendof his wife's reached out and hugged him. &quot;The Lord be withyou,&quot; she said, and, for a moment, tears filled his eyes.   &quot;My mood is just so much happier now,&quot; Mr. Tellep says. Hehas even found a little time in recent months for a favoritehobby, painting with water colors. He also has resumedplaying tennis -- a game he and Mr. Simmons both like.   It is one of the few things they agree on after the $15million proxy battle and a subsequent Simmons proposal totake Lockheed private at the cost of doubling its debt. &quot;Itjust dismays me to think some corporate raider is going tocome in here and claim he can run Lockheed better than wehave,&quot; Mr. Tellep says, raising his voice in a rare flash ofanger.   Mr. Simmons, for his part, still has &quot;very fundamentaldisagreements with management,&quot; says J. Landis Martin, histop strategist. The two men remain opposed to Lockheed'sdiversification efforts, for example. &quot;We think they shouldconsider selling some of their units and get value toshareholders,&quot; Mr. Martin says.   But a growing number of investors believes that Lockheedcan deliver value -- on its own terms.   Some envision new business springing from the Gulf war.The Air Force already is talking with Lockheed about possiblybuilding more F-117A Stealth fighters, which have been hailedfor their ability to evade radar and swoop in for pinpointbombing of heavily defended Iraqi targets. Although someanalysts say the chance of restarting the line is slim,industry officials suggest that the government may be temptedto expand its F-117 inventory partly because resumingproduction would cost only $15 million to $25 million. At theleast, some anticipate a Lockheed contract to upgradeexisting F-117s.   The Stealth fighter's success also may spark interestamong U.S. allies. Last year, people close to the programsay, the Air Force authorized Lockheed to discuss sellingF-117 airframes to the British, who eventually backed awaybecause of the cost and the need to keep their own defenseplants going.   Also benefiting Lockheed is the revival of interest in&quot;Star Wars&quot; anti-missile technology because of the success ofRaytheon Co.'s Patriot air-defense network. Two weeks ago,Lockheed tested its Exoatmospheric Re-entry VehicleInterceptor System (Eris), which was launched from a U.S.installation in the South Pacific and hurtled toward a mockwarhead that had taken off thousands of miles away. Theresult: a stunning bull's-eye.   Yet Mr. Tellep believes that the broader effects fromDesert Storm could be most important. &quot;I think there will bemore patience with the development of weapons,&quot; he says. &quot;Ifa system is six months late, it isn't a catastrophe as longas it performs once it's fielded.&quot; That's especiallyimportant for a technology-intensive company such asLockheed, whose secrecy-enshrouded &quot;Skunk Works&quot; complex,which made the F-117, is widely considered the nation's topbuilder of advanced aircraft.   Plenty of challenges lie ahead. Despite Lockheed'scost-cutting campaign, which should improve operatingearnings, 1991 net income could be flat as a higher tax ratekicks in. And Wall Street still frets about whether Lockheedcan grow in the face of the shrinking U.S. defense budget,the source of three-quarters of the company's revenue. &quot;Ifyou look ahead, we clearly need to sign up new business,&quot;Vice Chairman Marafino concedes.   Lockheed's future as a warplane maker is now largely tiedto its bid to build the Air Force's next-generation AdvancedTactical Fighter. The company leads a group of contractors,including Boeing Co. and General Dynamics Corp., against ateam led by Northrop Corp. The Air Force is expected toselect a winner by May; as much as $60 billion is at stake,long term.   But Mr. Tellep isn't just counting on defense dollars. Hehas plans for Lockheed to become only 60% dependent on thePentagon by the mid-1990s as he pushes into new areas:development and private operation of airports, environmentalservices and computer-systems integration.   &quot;The whole idea is to diversify into areas where wealready have the skills,&quot; says H.T. Bowling, who heads themove into commercial-aircraft maintenance and modification.Lockheed recently opened a jet-repair facility in Tucson,Ariz., which is currently servicing Alaska Airlines planes.In San Bernardino, Calif., Lockheed is preparing to overhaulBoeing 747 wide-bodies, a job that Boeing itself eschews.(Japan Air Lines is a 15% equity partner.) Mr. Bowling seesas much as $1 billion in business in a few years.   For Mr. Tellep, such moves are part of a plan that shouldimprove Lockheed's financial performance so much that by 1992it can raise its dividend or recapitalize. But he quicklyadds that he already is soliciting advice from theinstitutional holders on what they want Lockheed to do withthe anticipated inflow of money.</TEXT></DOC>