<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ910226-0085</DOCNO><DOCID>910226-0085.</DOCID><HL>   Don't Sell the Patriot to Moscow   ----   By Stephen D. Bryen</HL><DATE>02/26/91</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FREST MDEST EUROP JAPAN DEC</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)INTERNATIONAL TRADE NEWS (TRD)SEMICONDUCTORS, INTEGRATED CHIPS (SEM)COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CPR)</IN><GV>DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES AND INSTITUTIONS (INT)EXECUTIVE (EXE)</GV><LP>   The Patriot missile, an ultra-modern air defense systemthat is a triumph of American technology, has interceptedRussian-built, German-improved Scud missiles fired at SaudiArabia and Israel. Incredibly the U.S., along with its WestEuropean and Japanese allies, is about to sell Patriottechnology to Moscow.   The Patriot depends upon a number of criticaltechnologies, including advanced radar waveguides, microwavedevices, high-speed analog to digital converters,microprocessors, precision gimbals for the missile-seekersystem, highly miniaturized radio-frequency communications,onboard sensors and advanced signal-processing systems. Forthe past decade, sales of such advanced technologies havebeen restricted to friendly countries that promised theywould not resell the high technology to third countries.</LP><TEXT>   The mechanism for controlling the flow of high technologywith military applications (known as &quot;dual-use&quot; technology)is an international body called Cocom, the coordinatingcommittee composed of the advanced industrial nations. Cocomrequires unanimous agreement to license certain technologiesfor export to nations of questionable conduct.   Unless something is done to stop it, later this week Cocomwill hold a high-level meeting in Paris to officially releasean imposing number of technologies that have thus farprovided the U.S. with much of the advantage in militarytechnology that it holds over the Soviets -- and most of therest of the world. Astonishingly, technology ranging fromsilent bearings for submarines to high-temperature furnacesfor nuclear-weapon construction will be decontrolled, andoffered to the Soviet Union.   Among the technologies the Soviets will get ismicroelectronics manufacturing capability, including thelatest equipment to build custom computer chips andsubminiature microwave devices. During the 1980s the U.S.insisted that if the Soviets got access to Westernmicroelectronics manufacturing they would be able tomodernize their weapons systems, increasing their accuracyand lethality. In turn, it was argued, the East-West balanceof power would be shaken and in regions such as the MiddleEast would completely shift toward Soviet client countries.   The U.S. assessment, which was supported by Cocom, led toa nearly total embargo on the export of microelectronicsmanufacturing technology to the Soviet Union. Even non-Cocomcountries were implored to cooperate with the U.S. in haltingthe flow of these sensitive materials -- and nearly all,after hearing the rationale, quietly cooperated. How, then,can it be that the U.S. has agreed to release semiconductortechnology from export controls, especially in the frameworkof a reassertion of military control in the Soviet Union andthe vivid demonstration of superior American technology inthe Gulf War?   Another vital area of U.S. concern during the 1980s washalting the export of sensitive computers to the U.S.S.R.that were going directly into Soviet strategic weaponsprograms. At the core of the concern was the Soviet attemptto acquire powerful VAX computers made by Digital EquipmentCorp. Soviet intelligence agencies did all they could in the1980s and on into the 1990s to lay their hands on VAXcomputers, so essential were they to the Soviet military. Onmany occasions illegal transfers of these machines werestopped by customs officials, and smugglers known as&quot;Techno-bandits&quot; were sent to jail. At the coming Cocommeeting in Paris nearly all the VAX computers will bereleased from export control even as the Air Force purchasesthese same computers to upgrade the strategic U.S. AirDefense Operations Center at Cheyenne Mountain, Colo.   Along with the VAX computers will come a huge array ofmainframe computers and peripherals, including sophisticatedhigh-speed RISC processors. Such processors now are beingused by U.S. naval forces in the Persian Gulf to aim theirPhalanx close-in guns against incoming sea-skimmer missiles.These same RISC processors form the heart of the controlsystem for America's next-generation fighter aircraft, whichwill appear only toward the end of this century.   Some very specialized equipment also is scheduled to betaken off the control lists. One compelling example includesa specialized sensor, called a &quot;gravity meter,&quot; that is a keytool in correctly calculating missile trajectories. Suchmeters can be used for improving the accuracy of Scudmissiles, or for calculating gravity fields around missilesilos. The U.S. Defense Mapping Agency uses gravity meterssimilar to those that are scheduled to be removed from theCocom control lists.   The Cocom proposals even decontrol advanced night-visionequipment and image-intensifier tubes, which form thebackbone of our night-fighting capability. The Iraqi armyillegally got some of this kind of Western night-visionequipment when it was sold to them by a Dutch company in the1980s. The Iraqis used this successfully in the Khafjibattle, giving them the element of surprise over U.S. andSaudi forces. This cost lives on our side that could havebeen spared. Had the Soviets been able to produce suchequipment, Iraq's entire army would be equipped withnight-vision capability, instead of only some of the eliteforces used in Khafji.   Why are we willing, then, to release this technology tothe Soviet Union, knowing full well that it will flowinstantly to Soviet arms makers and thence into weapons thatwill be exported to the Third World? Administration officialssay privately that they are not trying to help the Sovietsimprove their arms industry. Rather, they insist, greatpressure has been brought by foreign governments and byAmerican companies that have insisted that the existingexport controls are &quot;too restrictive.&quot; Administrativeofficials believe that the only way to preserve Cocom is togo along with the demands of America's allies. They point tothe Germans, who appear to be the main political problemwithin Cocom and most want to get rid of Cocom controls asquickly as possible.   The Bush administration's decision to release thistechnology to the Soviet Union was reached more than a yearago -- before the Gulf War started and before the publicknew, in gory detail, how the Germans supplied the Iraqiswith long-range missiles, chemical and biological weapons,and nuclear technology or how the Germans improved the Scudmissiles so they could hit Riyadh and Tel Aviv. Unlesssomething is done at the 11th hour, we can expect that thenext Iraqi dictator or his like will be shooting down ourplanes and sinking our ships with missiles every bit as goodas the Patriot. After all, we will have sold it to Moscow.   ---   Mr. Bryen, president of Delta Tech, a high-tech company inArlington, Va., was a deputy undersecretary of defense in theReagan administration.</TEXT></DOC>