<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900419-0076</DOCNO><DOCID>900419-0076.</DOCID><HL>   REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):   O Holy Day</HL><DATE>04/19/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><IN>ENVIRONMENT (ENV)</IN><LP>   With Easter past and Passover ended, we are left with onlyone remaining spring religious celebration. This Sunday thebishops and cardinals of environmentalism will gather theirflocks for Earth Day.   We do not say this to mock, for in our book the religiousimpulse is commendable. Men and women ennoble themselves byreaching out for contact with the transcendental, theuniverse beyond themselves. We accept the thought that thecurrent wave of concern with the environment started whenastronauts brought back the first photographs of the Earthfrom space, showing a shining jewel against the blackvastness of the cosmos. Surely, the image said, we have beenendowed with something extraordinary, something precious andsomething vulnerable.</LP><TEXT>   We are coming to see environmentalism as a religion,rather, in a quest for understanding. Those of us attunedprimarily to concerns of the secular world have troublefitting the movement into our usual categories. As much asanyone else, we are in favor of clean air, blue water,wholesome food, verdant parks, neat streets, pristinemountains and unspoiled deserts. Having set these ends, weturn to our usual means: cost-benefit analysis, emissionstaxes, economic growth, technology-clean nuclear power, forexample. Yet consensus with environmentalists seems to takeno roots; indeed, our very efforts seem to make it more andmore remote.   So perhaps we could comprehend more by takingenvironmentalism as not at all about this world, but aboutthe next world. Not ultimately about mere material things,but about the cleansing of sins and the saving of souls. Thereligious jargon is a bit disconcerting at first, but it doesseem to explain many puzzles.   The catechism of global warming, for example, is clearlysustained by a leap of faith. Such empirical data as existare inconclusive, in the case of satellite measurements overthe past decade, negative. Scientists agree that other thingsbeing equal increasing carbon dioxide and other greenhousegases will raise the Earth's temperature, but disagree on howmuch, whether the other things are equal and indeed what theymay even be. But even without data, the hypothesis is takenas confirmed by &quot;computer models,&quot; the contemporary world'sfont of pure revelation.   The faith remains undisturbed, too, by the confounding ofpredictions. The world has somehow not yet run out of crudeoil, the Club of Rome notwithstanding. Asbestos confined inwalls is no threat, even the conventional wisdom has come toagree. Acid rain, extensive scientific analysis has nowconcluded, causes isolated problems; the easy answer is todump limestone in acid lakes. Yet the altars of these causesstill bend under the weight of huge sacrifices.   Mysterious hearth rites have arisen; costumed priestsexorcise homes of radon and other evil spirits. Commandmentsare particularly directed at the arrogance of mankind: Thoushall not split the atom, nor touch the forbidden fruit ofthe gene. Certain animals are deemed sacred, thoughnasty-tempered mink seem a curious choice over the Hindu'sgentle cows. Certain foods are non-kosher, particularly palmand coconut oils. The new rabbinate proscribes the mixing ofglass and aluminum with other garbage. The holiest renouncethe carnal altogether for the monkish life of Vermont.   It matters little whether the professed worldly goals arein fact accomplished. If limits on U.S. tuna fishing meanmore dolphins die as tuna is taken by less careful foreignfleets, the American soul is still cleansed. If the end ofDDT deprives impoverished Third World children of cheapprotection against malaria, the return of the peregrinefalcon still uplifts the human spirit. Loggers put out ofjobs find their reward in the immortality of the spotted owl.   All of this is tied together with a chiliastic thread. Asthe second millennium approaches, the apocalypse must be uponus. The devout search frantically to learn which of the sevenends will ensue: The fire of nuclear war. The ice of nuclearwinter. The unseen peril of radiation, or a new plague as ajudgment for genetic tampering. The roast of global warming,or the judgment of a new ice age, the climatological fear ofonly a decade ago. Or merely perhaps terminal boredom in theend of history?   These insights into the environmental creed, admittedly,yield no easy prescription. The methods of secular societyare designed to deal with material impulses, and are oftenconfounded by spiritual ones. Even if it were possible,containing such impulses probably would not be wise.Religions do mobilize people for true progress, andenvironmentalism can claim no little credit for cleaner airand water. Newly born religions often display disagreeabletraits such as excessive evangelism, intolerance of theheathen and the suppression of any deviation as heresy. Butusually, as they mature, they develop the even more sacredtraits of inner peace, forgiveness and humility.</TEXT></DOC>