<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900514-0102</DOCNO><DOCID>900514-0102.</DOCID><HL>   Law -- Legal Beat:   Boesky May Take Center Stage   In Mulheren Insider-Trader Trial   ----   By Laurie P. Cohen and Stephen J. Adler   Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DATE>05/14/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE B4</SO><CO>   CCLR MEA T.TOC</CO><IN>STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)</IN><GV>JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)</GV><LP>   At the trial of John A. Mulheren Jr., scheduled to begintoday, the 40-year-old arbitrager may have to yield centerstage to Ivan F. Boesky.   The convicted former stock speculator is slated to makehis debut as a government witness in the case against Mr.Mulheren. Mr. Mulheren was charged in a 42-count indictmentlast year based largely on information provided to thegovernment by Mr. Boesky, who has completed a three-yearprison term for insider-trading-related crimes.</LP><TEXT>   In June, a federal grand jury in Manhattan, N.Y., chargedMr. Mulheren with manipulating the price of Gulf andamp; WesternInc. shares and with &quot;parking&quot; stock for Mr. Boesky. Parkingoccurs when an investor sells securities with theunderstanding that they will be repurchased, usually at aprearranged time and price.   The government alleged that Mr. Mulheren used the tacticto conceal the true ownership of the parked securities and tohelp Mr. Boesky evade taxes and defeat minimum net capitalrequirements for broker-dealers. Leonard DeStefano, a formertrader for Jamie Securities Co., Mr. Mulheren's defunctsecurities firm, is charged with two counts of conspiracy andfraud. Both have pleaded innocent.   Mr. Boesky is expected to testify before a packedcourtroom as early as this week. But interest in histestimony has waned somewhat since former Drexel BurnhamLambert Inc. junk-bond wizard Michael Milken pleaded guiltyto six felony counts and agreed to pay $650 million in finesand restitution. Mr. Boesky's cooperation led to thegovernment's cases against Mr. Milken and Drexel.   The government is also likely to call Martin Davis, thechairman of Gulf andamp; Western and its successor company,Paramount Communications Inc. as a witness.   Thomas Puccio, the New York lawyer representing Mr.Mulheren, is expected to try to prove that Mr. Boesky isbiased in favor of the government because Mr. Boesky's 1986settlement left him with many millions of dollars.   Mr. Puccio successfully prosecuted U.S. congressmen in thenoted Abscam bribery case. His clients have includedsocialite Claus Von Bulow and former Bronx, N.Y., BoroughPresident Stanley Friedman. Mr. DeStefano, 34, is representedby Thomas Fitzpatrick, a colorful New York lawyer with a wrysense of humor.   Prosecutors in the case are E. Scott Gilbert and AlfredPavlis, neither of whom has ever tried a majorsecurities-fraud case. The two will be assisted by moreexperienced prosecutors during the trial. U.S. District JudgeMiriam Goldman Cedarbaum, appointed to the federal bench in1986, will preside over the trial, which is expected to lasta month.   Mr. Mulheren gained widespread publicity in February 1988when he set out from his Rumson, N.J., home in army fatigueswith a loaded rifle. He told his wife he was going to shootMr. Boesky. Mr. Mulheren is on probation in connection withthat matter.   A self-confessed manic-depressive who takes lithium tocontrol his problem, Mr. Mulheren is well liked by many onWall Street and counts rock star Bruce Springsteen among hisclose friends. Last week Mr. Mulheren, who is 6 feet 2 inchestall, showed up in court in his typical fashion, withstylishly long hair, wearing a purple polo shirt, chinos andbrown moccasins without socks.   ---   JURORS CAN BE IMPARTIAL even if exposed to pre-trialpublicity.   The nation's leading experts on the jury system, includingfederal judges, lawyers and social-science researchers,expressed wide agreement that a defendant can get a fairtrial from jurors who have read or viewed news reports of thecase prior to trial. The experts discussed the issue Fridayat a forum sponsored by the Annenberg Washington Program ofNorthwestern University.   The panelists cited research, as well as personal trialexperience, that indicated jurors aren't as stronglyinfluenced by publicity as some suspect -- and that mostjurors can decide a case based on the evidence despitepreliminary impressions developed from news reports.   The issue has been hotly debated in recent months. Somejudges routinely exclude from juries people who know anythingat all about the matter. In heavily publicized cases, such asthe Iran-contra trial of Oliver North, this means seating ajury of people who have paid no attention to newspapers ortelevision and have little interest in public affairs. Such acourse, argued the Annenberg program's director, lawyerNewton Minow, doesn't serve the interests of justice.   Selection of ill-informed jurors, added Los Angeles lawyerRonald Olson, reduces the likelihood of rational argument attrial and opens the door to emotional appeals.   In cases in which judges have refused to exclude jurorswho were exposed to pretrial publicity, studies show that thejurors have quickly forgotten, or discounted, what they sawon television and concentrated on the testimony at the trialitself, panelists said.   &quot;Jurors who serve should file a class-action suit againstjudges and lawyers and insurance companies on the basis ofslander and libel,&quot; said panelist Neil Vidmar, a professorand jury researcher at Duke Law School, who maintained thatjuries are given too little credit for the quality of theirdecision-making.   The panelists specifically predicted that formerPanamanian leader Manuel Noriega and Washington, D.C., MayorMarion Barry, both facing drug-related charges in highlypublicized cases, will be able to get fair trials.   The key, the panelists said, is finding jurors who cankeep open minds. The panelists said it is up to judges inparticular to question potential jurors carefully to root outthose whose minds are already made up. In addition, thepanelists said, judges must do a better job of instructingjurors on how the process works and what theirresponsibilities are.   The panelists acknowledged that television has exacerbatedthe problem of pre-trial publicity and that most people areinundated with potentially prejudicial visual images ofarrests and arraignments. But, said Mr. Vidmar, &quot;People canput these aside and say, `I can decide this on theevidence.'&quot;   ---   FALSE IMPRESSION LIBEL SUIT reversed by Minnesota SupremeCourt.   The decision by the Minnesota court had been eagerlyawaited by First Amendment experts because the case involvedclaims that a news report created a false impression. Mostplaintiffs in libel cases allege specific factualinaccuracies.   Donald J. Diesen, the former Carlton County attorney,alleged that the Duluth News-Tribune's series concerning hishandling of domestic-abuse cases left the impression hewasn't enforcing the law in assault cases against women. Thejury had awarded Mr. Diesen more than $750,000.   The court late last week reversed a lower court decisionand ruled that public officials can't generally prevail infalse-impression suits. The court found that the articlescontained only true statements or opinions and therefore anyimplication was constitutionally protected criticism of apublic official. The court also found that facts omitted bythe reporter wouldn't have substantially changed the tenor ofthe stories.   &quot;The way this decision is phrased means a newspaper inMinnesota can publish a story that intentionally leads thereader to a defamatory conclusion as long as each sentence isaccurate,&quot; says Patrick T. Tierney of Collins, Buckley,Sauntry andamp; Haugh, a lawyer in St. Paul for Mr. Diesen. Mr.Tierney says he plans to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.   In a lengthy dissent, Justice Lawrence Yetka appeared toinvite the high court to review the case. The decision, hewrote, &quot;virtually closes the door to a public official forany recovery.&quot; He said the U.S. Supreme Court never intendedto protect news organizations that intentionally publish newsreports that leave a false impression.   A lawyer for the newspaper, Thomas R. Thibodeau ofJohnson, Killen, Thibodeau andamp; Seiler in Duluth, said thedecision won't totally bar false impression suits.   But &quot;public officials cannot hope to escape review oftheir official conduct by threatening media defendants withlibel suits,&quot; he said.   ---   APPEALS COURT REJECTS CHANGE in election of Texas trialjudges.   A panel of the Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appealsoverturned a lower court's December ruling that thecountywide election of trial judges improperly dilutesminority representation on the bench.   In a suit brought by the League of United Latin AmericanCitizens and black judicial candidates, U.S. District JudgeLucius D. Bunton ordered that trial judges in Texas's ninelargest counties be elected from sub-districts that wouldensure minority election of at least some of the judges.   But the appeals court on Friday, in a 21 decision writtenby Judge Patrick E. Higginbotham, said the remedy ordered byJudge Bunton &quot;seems to lessen minority influence instead ofincreasing it.&quot;   Judges Higginbotham and Carolyn D. King reasoned that theelection of judges from sub-districts wouldn't guarantee thatminority litigants would appear before the judges theyelected because cases would continue to be randomly assignedto the judges sitting in a particular county. In Houston, forexample, &quot;the minority member would have a 98.3% chance ofappearing before a judge in whose election he had not beenable to vote,&quot; Judge Higginbotham wrote.   &quot;Where judges make their decisions alone, electing judgesfrom single-member districts only ensures that a small numberof governmental decisions will be influenced by minorityinterests, while minority interests will not be representedat all in the majority of judicial decisions,&quot; the judgewrote.   ---   U.S. SUPREME COURT READIES computer release of itsdecisions.   With a startup date scheduled for June 1, the high courtselected 12 companies or organizations that for the firsttime will transmit its opinions by computer to subscribers assoon as the opinions are released by the justices inWashington. The 12 include the Associated Press; United PressInternational; Bureau of National Affairs Inc.; CommerceClearinghouse Inc.; West Publishing Co.; Mead Data CentralInc., a Mead Corp. unit; Thomson Group and the JusticeDepartment.   Each of the 12 will provide a computer connection to thecourt and will pay $500 in the first year for the hookup.Each may, in turn, sell subscriptions for the opinions.   ---   Amy Dockser Marcus contributed to this article.</TEXT></DOC>