<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900711-0157</DOCNO><DOCID>900711-0157.</DOCID><HL>   Class War in the Soviet Army   ----   By Eugene B. Rumer</HL><DATE>07/11/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A14</SO><CO>   FREST</CO><LP>   As Mikhail Gorbachev tries to patch up the cracks in theSoviet Communist Party, another Soviet institution is showingsigns of splitting: the military. A profound schism isdividing junior and mid-level officers from the generals whocommand them. &quot;Glasnost&quot; has shattered the myth that theSoviet military -- the highest ranks apart -- is prosperousand privileged. Inflation has eroded the purchasing power oflower-echelon officers' salaries -- particularly of thoseofficers who serve in remote areas where it is impossible fortheir wives to get jobs. Lower-ranking officers often have tolive with their families in a single room in communalapartments with shared facilities. Some officers areliterally homeless and have to beg their colleagues to putthem up temporarily or sleep in cars or garages on theirbases.   Officers whose units have been withdrawn from EasternEurope find they have no apartments waiting for them backhome. Some send their families to stay with relativeshundreds, even thousands, of miles away. These forcedseparations can last for years. In the meantime, luckyofficers get beds in shared rooms in local officers'dormitories; the unlucky move into tent cities. The situationis even worse for retired officers. The Soviet media lastyear reported that societies of homeless retired officers areappearing in some cities.</LP><TEXT>   Junior and mid-level officers have also begun to complainabout the army's involvement in domestic policing operations.&quot;I am ashamed before my soldiers]&quot; said one battle-hardenedveteran of the Afghan war to a reporter. Officers have beeninvited by their superiors to &quot;volunteer&quot; for policingoperations. Those who refuse are kicked out of the Army inviolation of the existing regulations.   These grievances have triggered an absolutelyunprecedented event in Soviet military history: a wave ofresignations from the armed forces. Some 30,000 letters ofresignation from Soviet officers are currently awaitingaction by the Ministry of Defense.   Unhappy lower-ranking officers have begun to organize indefense of their interests. A group of mid-level and juniorofficers was elected to the Supreme Soviet in the spring of1989. An independent military trade union, Shield, was alsofounded by maverick officers in 1989 to protect the economicand legal rights of active duty military personnel, veteransand their families. Shield is reported to have some 40,000members, but the exact number is unknown. Several of itsmembers have been elected to local and regional soviets.   These new military voices propose far-reaching militaryreforms that would do away with the draft and transform theSoviet military into an organization of well-paid,voluntarily recruited professionals, barred from domesticpolicing operations. This plan has been embraced by BorisYeltsin and other progressive politicians.   By contrast, the High Command of the Soviet Armed Forceshas placed itself firmly at the conservative end of theSoviet political spectrum. The generals have beenincreasingly outspoken in their criticism of PresidentMikhail Gorbachev. Addressing the recent congress of theCommunist Party of the Russian Republic, Albert Makashov,Commander of the Volga-Ural Military District, called Mr.Gorbachev's policies &quot;feeble-minded,&quot; and blamed him for theloss of Eastern Europe.   Top-level military officials have displayed a disturbingeagerness to use force against civilians in domestic crises.A senior General Staff officer, Gen. Grigoriy Krivosheyev,and Chief Military Prosecutor Gen. Aleksandr Katusev havesuggested that Lithuania should be put under militaryoccupation and its president, Vitautas Landsbergis,prosecuted, in order to put a stop to draft resistance inLithuania.   Gen. Igor Rodionov -- the senior regional militarycommander in Tbilisi at the time of the 1989 massacre byparatroopers of unarmed civilian demonstrators, many of themwomen -- justified the use of force as &quot;defense against theaggressiveness of the crowd&quot; and an appropriate reaction tothe protesters' anti-Soviet slogans. Civilians have also beenmassacred in the civil strife of the past two years inAzerbaijan and Armenia.   The bloody-mindedness of the High Command should not,however, be taken as evidence that the military ismonolithically opposed to reform; neither should thehardening of Soviet positions in negotiations over armscontrol and German unification. The military itself isincreasingly polarized and the High Command no longer speaksfor the entire institution.   Since the reformist military deputies in the SupremeSoviet submitted their proposal for military reform to thelegislature, senior military officials have been forced intodiscussions of military reform. The High Command made publicits own counter-proposal for reform in April.   This concession has weakened the High Command's legitimacy-- by conceding that other forces speak for militaryinterests too -- without satisfying the lower echelons. TheHigh Command remains extremely reluctant to deal with thesocio-economic problems of lower-echelon officers.   The generals oppose reallocation of funds from weapons tohousing and other amenities for military personnel-even asthe spotlight of glasnost has been cast on the perks of thehigher-ups.   The High Command has no constructive solutions to offer,either for the military or for Soviet society at large. Allit can do, if it becomes more politically involved, istrigger the final split within the military by attempting todraw lower-ranking officers into a coup against Mr. Gorbachevand Mr. Yeltsin. Such a split would not be in anybody'sinterest. A lot of innocent bystanders could get hurt in aninternal conflict between different factions of a militaryarmed with nuclear, chemical and modern conventional weapons.   The best chance for healing the divisions within themilitary, and avoiding a possibly violent split, lies in areconciliation between Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Yeltsin. Thiswould deprive the hard-liners in the Communist Party of anyrole in the political process. The High Command would be leftwithout coalition partners and with no choice but toacquiesce in the reformers' agenda.   ---   Mr. Rumer is a member of the research staff of the RANDCorporation in Santa Monica, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>