<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO>WSJ900731-0080</DOCNO><DOCID>900731-0080.</DOCID><HL>   Demilitarization Is a One-Way Street   ----   By Gerald Frost</HL><DATE>07/31/90</DATE><SO>WALL STREET JOURNAL (J), PAGE A12</SO><CO>   FREST EUROP</CO><IN>AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)</IN><GV>EXECUTIVE (EXE)STATE DEPARTMENT (STD)</GV><LP>   President Bush and Secretary of State James Baker havegood reason to feel perplexed. At every turn they have soughtto enhance the political life expectancy of MikhailGorbachev, elevating the Soviet leader's survival to thestatus of a major policy goal.   The Soviet response to this highly considerate treatmenthas been schizoid, reflecting a style of political behaviorWestern analysts find difficult to interpret. On the onehand, the Soviet leadership permits a reunified Germany toremain a member of NATO and urges the West not to think ofthe Soviet Union as an adversary; on the other, it goes onimproving the Soviet military machine, lavishly equipping itfor the high-tech battlefield of the future.</LP><TEXT>   Both at the Houston summit and at the London meeting ofNATO ministers, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher madea point of stressing the fact of the continuing Soviet armsmodernization program, something many Western leadersevidently would prefer to overlook. The British defensesecretary, Tom King, also appears puzzled by the disparitybetween the presumed purpose of &quot;perestroika&quot; -- to switchspending from the military to the domestic sector of theeconomy -- and the Soviet military program. On Wednesday, heannounced that British armed forces would be cut by 18%,owing to the apparently diminished Soviet threat.   But earlier this year, he reminded the House of Commons:&quot;It is a staggering thought that even now, in the fifth yearof Mr. Gorbachev's time in office, the figures show that onenew Soviet submarine is being launched every six weeks. Twoaircraft, six tanks and one missile are produced every day.The Soviet defense minister {Marshall Yazov} has said thatthe emphasis is now on quality rather than quantity: that iscertainly borne out by this year's May Day Parade in RedSquare, which revealed one new main battle tank and oneheavily armored infantry vehicle of very high quality. TheSoviet navy recorded a record tonnage of new surface shipsduring 1989. These ships are larger and more powerful thantheir predecessors, have longer range and more accuratemissiles.&quot;   As for arms reductions, of which Soviet spokesmen havemade so much, these seemed largely confined to obsolete oraging weapons and vessels, Mr. King said.   Similar evidence was given to the House Armed ServicesCommittee in February by Undersecretary of Defense PaulWolfowitz. He reported small decreases in the production ofSoviet fighters, fighter bombers and bombers, but increasesin the production of light armored vehicles, artillerymortars, anti-artillery mortars, short-range ballisticmissiles and tanker aircraft. Moreover, in April the DefenseIntelligence Agency reported to Congress that the conversionof military plants to civilian purposes remained virtuallynonexistent. Vigorous, broadly based modernization ofstrategic offensive and defensive forces continued with veryhigh rates of production. No major weapons developmentprogram had been stretched or canceled.   In forming an assessment of the current military balanceit must also be borne in mind that even where there aremeaningful reductions to be found -- as in the case of Soviettank production -- present levels exceed those in the West.The Soviets' relative advantages have either been preservedor enhanced.   The evidence would therefore seem to suggest that theSoviet &quot;peace dividend&quot; -- if it exists at all -- isconsiderably smaller in proportionate terms than that whichmost NATO countries, with the exception of France, havealready spent. This fact does not discourage Westerngovernments from looking for still further cuts.   Most Soviet economic statistics are meaningless orfraudulent; it may be that the Soviets themselves do not knowthe exact cost of their defense program. Several Westernanalysts have suggested the Soviet defense budget was reducedby 4% to 5% during 1989-90, following the completion of thefive-year plan during which spending rose by 25%. But sincethere is little certainty about the level of earlierspending, such calculations may prove to have been worthless.What is clear is that until very recently Western analysts,including those at the CIA, vastly underestimated Sovietmilitary expenditures.   This is apparent from the inclusion in the Soviet militaryinventory of new, highly sophisticated weapons, as well asfrom a remarkable speech by Soviet Foreign Minister EduardShevardnadze to the Party Congress earlier this month: &quot;It isobvious that if we continue as before, comrades -- I statethis with all responsibility -- to spend a quarter, aquarter, of our budget on military expenditure -- we haveruined the country; then we simply won't be needing defense,just as we won't need an army for a ruined country and animpoverished people. There is no sense in protecting a systemwhich has led to economic and social ruin.&quot;   For the first time, Mr. Shevardnadze also gave figures for&quot;ideological confrontation&quot; with the West -- presumably thebill for propaganda -- and &quot;active measures,&quot; i.e.disinformation, forgeries, support to the Soviet fronts andagents of influence. The total is 700 billion rubles over thepast two decades. (At the current exchange rate, that isabout $414 billion.)   There is just one way out of the morass, Mr. Shevardnadzeconcluded: to cut military spending. Taken at face value, hisremarks suggest that reduction of Soviet spending remainsmore a goal than a fact. It would seem that the Sovietleadership either has been unable to severely cut backprograms or, for whatever reason, has chosen not to do so.One possible explanation might be the fear of rebellion bySoviet generals unhappy about the loss of the EasternEuropean empire and the political turbulence caused byperestroika.   Another explanation might be that a deal has been struckbetween the generals and Mr. Gorbachev, with the formerpromising that there would be no military attempt to topplethe Soviet leader provided the military budget is largelypreserved. A further interpretation of the conflictingsignals from Moscow might be that Mr. Gorbachev himself isstill not ready to jettison the single source of possibleinfluence in Europe: Soviet military power. Without it, theSoviet Union would be very much the servant in theincreasingly close relationship with a reunified Germany.   In any event, continued modernization of nuclear andconventional forces (and continued non-compliance with thearms treaties) demonstrates that Soviet talk of &quot;reasonablesufficiency&quot; and &quot;defensive defense&quot; are not matters thatWestern defense ministers should take seriously.   In a message to the Western leaders at Houston, Mr.Gorbachev suggested that they had it in their power to moldSoviet foreign and defense policy. There may be some truth inthis, but the means by which that influence is exercised isevidently a two-way street. Mr. Gorbachev has done far moreto influence Western defense programs than the West has doneto influence those of the Soviet Union. While Western defensebudgets shrink almost without exception, the availableevidence suggests Soviet military spending stays close to 25%of national income and its economy remains on what Sovietdissident Alexander Zinoviev described as being a &quot;permanentwar footing.&quot; Such remarkable levels of expenditureinevitably skew an already skewed economy.   Major cuts in defense spending along with fundamentalreforms to abolish the apparatus of the command economyremain the prerequisites of Soviet economic improvement. Itmay be that the Soviet leadership is incapable ofcountenancing either, in which case the prospect of internalupheaval -- perhaps of civil war -- may loom large.   It is difficult to forecast what political structure willemerge from that chaos. But whatever its politicalcomplexion, the Soviet Union is likely to remain thepre-eminent military power in Europe when U.S. influencelooks certain to diminish.   These are the realities. Neither perestroika nor theWest's pleasure at the disintegration of communism should bepermitted to conceal them.   ---   Mr. Frost is the director of the Institute for EuropeanDefence and Strategic Studies in London.</TEXT></DOC>